

Q&A pages
Starting applications in Windows
Question: I have a number of applications that I use every day in Windows 3.1, and it annoys me to have to start them running ‘by hand’.
I have the clock, so that I know the time, Schedule+ so that I can see my appointments, and Word for Windows for word processing.
Is there any way that I can start these running automatically when I get into Windows?
James Lipman, Glasgow
Answer: You can make all the programs that you always want start automatically by placing them in a special group in the Program Manager called Startup.
If there is not a group called Startup, you need to create one using the command File New Group.
Once the group is there, simply pick up the icon of each of the programs you want to come up automatically, and drop it in the Startup group.
Notice that you can make sure that the clock is always visible, no matter what other applications you are using, by selecting the option ‘Always on top’ from its Control bar menu.
Summing records in Paradox
Question: I want to work out the total on a set of numeric fields in my Paradox data table, so that I can see how much has been made by my sales staff.
Ideally I'd then like to show the results in a graph.
When I try to design a query using the operator SUM>0, I seem to get all the rows pulled out.
What am I doing wrong?
T Peterson, Bath
Answer: While SUM looks as if it is the command that you need, in fact it is just a way of selecting records, as you have discovered.
When you use SUM>0, you are saying those records where the sum is greater than zero.
Rather than using SUM, you need to use CALC SUM.
This is one of a group of commands that work out summaries; others in the group are COUNT, AVERAGE, MAX, and MIN.
To carry out a CALC query, you place checkmarks in the fields you want in the Answer table — the name of the salesperson, in your case.
You do not put a checkmark in the amount column.
Instead, you place the formula CALC SUM.
If you then run the query, you will see an Answer table with two data columns; the name of the salesperson in column 1, and the sum of the sales made by that member of staff in column 2.
Now to produce the graph.
Make sure that your cursor is in the sum column of the answer table, and choose the option Image Graph Viewgraph.
With any luck, you should see a graph of the data appear.
If you do not get a satisfactory graph, try resetting the graph settings to the default.
You should then get an ordinary bar chart, with the names of the sales staff used as the labels for the columns in the chart.
Question: I bought some inexpensive 3.5″ diskettes, but I cannot format them.
The message that I get when I try is Invalid media or Track 0 bad — disk unusable.
Any idea why?
Answer: I suspect that you have bought 720K diskettes.
There are two types of diskette in common use, double density and high density.
The double density diskettes will hold 720K of information, the high density diskettes 1.4M of data.
The MS-DOS command FORMAT tries by default to format to 1.4M, so if you need to format a disk at the lower density you need to tell MS-DOS.
You can format a low density diskette in MS-DOS 4 or 5 using the command FORMAT /F:720
If you are using MS-DOS 5, it will keep the information necessary to un-format the file, regardless of whether you want this or not.
You can make MS-DOS not carry out this step by adding an extra parameter: FORMAT /F:720 /U
The /U tells MS-DOS to carry out an unconditional format, and this reduces the amount of time taken to do the format.
Question: When I used to write batch files under MS-DOS 4 using EDLIN, I used to add ‘beeps’ to alert the user that something had happened by entering the command ECHO ∘VG
This came out as ECHO ∘G which is what I wanted.
I now use DOS 5, and use EDIT rather than EDLIN.
If I try to enter the same thing, it doesn't work.
How can I get around this — I don't want to have to go back to EDLIN!
Answer: I can quite understand your reluctance to return to EDLIN.
The key combination you use with EDIT is Ctrl P Ctrl G. This shows in your file as a little diamond shaped dot, but it produces a beep quite happily.
The startup group contains the programs you want each time you open Windows
To make the clock always appear on the surface, tick the ‘Always on top’ option in the control bar
The CALC SUM query and the Answer table which it produces
The graph produced from the Answer table.
Q and A
I am trying to document a Lotus 1-2-3 Release 2.4 spreadsheet which has many long and complicated formulas using my word processor — Word for Windows 2.0.
Even though I can see both applications on the screen at the same time I am having problems copy typing the formulas.
J. Harper, Worcester
The solution to your problem is to use the Windows Clipboard.
Copy the formula from your spreadsheet and then paste it into Word for Windows.
You do not mention whether you are using Windows 3.0 or 3.1 and the procedure is slightly different in each.
The first point to note is that you need to have your spreadsheet open in a resizable window — in Windows 3.1 simply pressing Alt-Enter will toggle between a full size and a resizable window; in Windows 3.0 you have to minimise the application, then use its Control menu to change the display options in the settings menu to be window rather than full screen.
The other point to note is that you need to have 1-2-3 in text mode.
By default Release 2.4 is in graphics mode and the command needed to switch to text mode is:: Display, Mode, Text
The way to copy the formulas is first to put them on the entry line.
In Windows 3.0 you simply highlight the text with the mouse to mark it.
In Windows 3.1 you have to use Edit Mark in the Windows Control menu box.
So you click on this box far left of the title bar, select Edit from the drop down menu and then choose Mark.
After this you can use the mouse to highlight the formula.
Pressing Enter pastes it to the Clipboard or you can use the Edit, Copy command.
Now switch to Word and simply use Paste — the formula will appear at the position of the cursor.
If you were to use a DOS word processor as well as a DOS spreadsheet in the Windows environment then you can use the same method but in this case you would have to use the Edit, Paste command in the Windows Control menu box.
I wonder whether you can help me with a problem involving WordPerfect 5.1 for Windows and Windows 3.1.
Within WordPerfect there is the ability to select either a WordPerfect or Windows printer driver.
In my case I have a Canon PW1080A dot matrix printer and therefore I have selected an Epson FX80 driver for both WordPerfect and Windows.
With the Windows driver selected, I can take advantage of the Windows fonts which print with very good results.
Unfortunately, if there are any WordPerfect graphics in the document, they do not get printed.
When selecting the WordPerfect driver, the graphics print correctly but I am left with uninteresting fonts.
At present I do not seem able to print out both using the one driver.
The printer is perfectly able to print graphics from other packages such as Corel Draw! etc.
I've tried ATM and softfont downloading but it doesn't seem to work.
Is there any way I can get it going?
Mr M. F Wall Haywards Heath West Sussex
A
The cause of your problem is firstly that WordPerfect 5.1 doesn't fit well with Windows 3.1 — to be honest it's a bit primitive.
Your printer is a bit long in the tooth but, as you say, treated as an FX80 it works well with other Windows applications.
WordPerfect 5.1 doesn't recognise TrueType fonts and doesn't work well with Adobe Type Manager.
An FX80 compatible printer cannot use softfonts — these are supported mainly by laser printers — and so there is no point in trying it.
There is a new version of WordPerfect for Windows (5.2) in Beta test at the moment that does work with ATM and you might consider an upgrade.
The only alternative is a utility called MoreFonts which adds scalable fonts to a variety of Windows and MS-DOS programs and specifically includes WordPerfect 5.1 for Windows.
It includes 28 fonts and you can think of it as a sort of ATM that does work with FX80 (and other) printers and WordPerfect 5.1.
Lyndhurst West Column — November 1992 Edition
Lyndhurst West — Yes Sir!— It's only £599!
One for the road — we road test a GRiD laptop in the US.
And a Double Scotch — First is Scottish Victor, then Scots dots for Europe.
A genuine US-made 40Mb 386SX PC for only £599 plus VAT?— See Yes SIR!.
Life in the fast lane with GRiD's 386NX Notebook in Living with a Notebook.
The latest tips and hints about adding Stars to your Windows 3.10 in When I'm cleaning Windows — Part VI’.
Lastly, but not least — A Double Scotch!
First measure is a new member of the Lyndhurst West Team in Scottish Victor.
Second measure is a visit to OKI's Scottish production plant in Scots dots for Europe.
Yes SIR!
No we haven't gone all ‘Top Gun’ in our approach to PCs.
The SIR in question is Systems Integrated Research which has recently set up shop in the UK.
Any company that can deliver a 40Mb, Super VGA, 25MHz 386SX machine with 4 Megabyte of RAM, MS-DOS 5.0, Windows 3.1 (complete with an on-site warranty and free delivery anywhere in the UK) for only £599 deserves some respect.
The metal CPU case of the SIR is a conventional low-profile design, with a moulded front bezel and a single centrally positioned 3.5inch floppy drive.
There is an option to mount an additional 5.25inch floppy drive in a spare bay to the right.
The front bezel has the usual illuminated indicators showing Power On, Hard Disk Access and Turbo Speed.
There are also two recessed Buttons, one is for Turbo Speed, and the other is a ReSet Button (for when Windows throws a wobbler?).
Moving to the rear of the machine the SIR has the usual collections of Ports; 2 Serial Ports (one 9-pin Mouse port and one 25-pin RS232C port) 1 Parallel Port, 1 Game Port, and 1 VGA Monitor Port.
All the ports are labelled — a simple step but very welcome.
Being a low-profile CPU, the expansion slots are mounted sideways.
With the current configuration the SIR has two free slots for modems etc.
The FCC approved keyboard also deserves some mention.
Each key has a full travel with good cushioning for the heavy handed.
The mouse has a two-position switch that allows this rodent to be switched between its two personalities — Microsoft or Mouse Systems mode.
Performance-wise the SIR is no slouch.
The processor registers 11.8 on the Norton SI rating.
The 40 megabyte hard disk has an average access time of 23.9 milliseconds.
The Trident video card writes to the screen (via the BIOS) at 9423 cps,(characters per second).
A twelve months on-site warranty, with free delivery anywhere in the UK completes the package.
At £599 (+ VAT) would I buy one?
Yes Sir!
One for the Road — Living with a Notebook.
A 12,000 mile return trip to the States, plus another 1,500 miles or road travel dictated a hectic computing schedule.
Obviously the Lyndhurst West team was going to need a rugged and powerful notebook to get the job done.
One of the US pioneers of laptop computers was GRiD.
I don't know why its spelt that way either, perhaps the typist slipped at the US Patent Office!
Either way the GRiD name is synonymous with durable computing.
Some GRiDs are built to ruggedised Military Specifications, or MILSPEC.
Some comply with the lesser known TEMPEST specification which ensures the machine is electronically secure, and almost silent to the ever-present eavesdroppers.
GRiD also holds the Patent on the idea of a fold-up screen which is part of every laptop, or notebook computer.
The GRiD model under test was the 386NX, a 80386SX-25MHz machine, with 2Mb of RAM and a 40Mb hard disk.
This A4 notebook is really meant for life in the air or on the road.
The interchangeable battery can be swapped when the machine is in it's ‘suspend’ or ‘sleep’mode.
There are various power conservancy options like three levels of screen brightness, and variable times for screen and disk power-down.
The 386NX has a multi-voltage charger/power supply, which with the addition of a US-style power lead meant that this notebook can be charged almost everywhere.
US fast food outlets like Wendy's (a burger chain) and Denny's (a regular ‘diner’ in the true sense of the word), were quite happy to let us charge the GRiD as we ate out food!
Try that request at a UK Motorway service station and you'll probably be shown the exit!
For word processing tasks the 386NX was loaded with WordStar.
The main reason is that WordStar supports nearly 300 printers.
This on-line printer library can magic up a driver for any printer you are ever likely to meet in under a couple of minutes.
For navigation we chose AutoRoute Express with a USA map.
This was invaluable, it also aroused the interest of the Californian Highway Patrol!
We were causally checking the route up America's Pacific Coast, with the GRiD perched on the bonnet,(sorry hood) of our somewhat huge Chrysler Imperial when a ‘Black & White’(Police car to you and me) stopped behind.
One officer came up to inquire of our purpose, while the other kept at a respectable distance hand on his holstered gun!
Do laptop users look that suspicious?
After the usual formalities, and the realisation that ‘You're British aren't you?’ the officer's colleague was called up to see AutoRoute do its mapping marvels.
Seeing so much technology in use, the car was ‘looked over’ to see if we had a radar detector — we didn't.
These are quite legal to buy in the States, but the Highway Patrol takes a particularly dim view of their use.
You have been warned!
Overall the GRiD 386NX was a rugged performer, it was noticeably faster than many desktop systems, and never missed a beat in over 12,000 miles of air travel via six airports, and 1,500 miles of travel up and down America's rugged Pacific Coastline.
Most remarkably it continued to function under California's midday sun, when it's slate grey shell was too hot hold!
After all our travels we were sorry to see the trusty GRiD go.
Should another globe-trotting adventure arise, we know what notebook computer we'll be taking along for the ride.
When I'm Cleaning Windows — VI.
If you own a Star printer, but can't find the correct driver in Windows 3.10, read on.
According to the marketing statistics, Star is now the leading volume supplier of printers in the UK market-place.
The first Star printer I owned was a 80-column thermal machine that was connected to an Osborne 01 CP/M machine.
Next was an SG-10, which I still regret parting with.
It's NLQ printing was created in two passes of the printing head, but was still the best that I've ever seen.
It also took typewriter ribbon spools, available everywhere at less than a £1.
But enough of history and on with the present — Windows in particular.
Many Windows users that have bought machines with Windows 3.10 pre-installed may not be able to find the correct Star printer driver in the resident list of printers.
Fear not!
Disk 7 of the 3.5inch set of disks contains a whole host extra printer drivers for Windows.
Put this disk in the A: drive, and select the Control Panel Icon from the Program Manager Group.
Next select the Printer Icon.
Select ‘Add’ a printer in the next menu, and then click on the top line ‘Unlisted Printer’where upon you will prompted for the drive designator where the information is.
Type in the Drive letter, plus colon and backslash, thus ‘A: \’, plus a Carriage Return and a browse menu will display the printer drivers that the disk contains.
Choose the correct driver, make the new selection the default printer and you're a real star!
If you haven't got this disk, maybe your manufacturer only ships Windows on the hard disk, like Ambra and Victor then Microsoft will send you a disk containing a file called STAR.EXE.
Copy this executable file to a separate directory, like \STAR, and then run it.
It will unpack a number of Star printer drivers.
Next run Windows, access the Printers Icon from the Control Panel Group, select ‘Add’ a printer and then select the ‘unlisted’option.
Windows will then prompt you for a disk designator where the new drivers are.
Type in ‘C: \STAR’, or wherever you put the expanded drivers, and you'll find all you Star printers listed.
Just choose the correct printer, and set it as the default printer from the menu option and you, your Star printer, and Windows will all be best of friends.
Scottish Victor.
Say Tandy to the majority of the PC population and they'll probably think of shops that sell electronic goods that are ‘Custom Manufactured for Tandy in—’ almost every country except the US.
Such a retail store is just 600 yards of Lyndhurst West, unfortunately the computing knowledge of the staff could easily be engraved on the reverse side of a Panasonic button battery!
It's not surprising then that the $4.5 billion Tandy empire has bridged this fundamental computing gap by buying Victor Technologies, who date back to the inception of the PC.
Victor was born in Scotts Valley, California.
The first Victor PC came to Britain as the Sirius PC, and was sold and supported by ACT, Applied Computer Techniques of Birmingham.
ACT ‘borrowed’ many ideas of the Sirius and designed the Apricot computer.
ACT is now a separate computer maintenance company that was split off from Apricot before it was bought by Mitsubishi, the Japanese conglomerate that produces everything from the four-wheel Shogun to equally rugged Nikon cameras.
Today ACT is once again linked to Victor hardware, having won the on-site maintenance contract to service Tandy/Victor equipment across the UK.
The Tandy/Victor plant in Glenrothes in Scotland produces a wide range of PCs for the whole of Europe.
The M-Series of mini-tower machines are designed and manufactured in the UK, and even have a British BIOS.
Victor has some 150 dealers across the UK which sell and support the machines.
A Victor V486MX mini-tower has just arrived at Lyndhurst West for a long-term test.
The specification is impressive.
Intel 80486DX 33MHz, 200Mb hard disk, and 4Mb of RAM in a package not much bigger than an 750g corn flake packet.
The V496MX comes fully loaded with MS-DOS 5.0 and Windows 3.1.
This machine is also future-proof, it uses a passive back-plane with slot-in motherboards, an interesting technology that we'll cover next month in Lyndhurst West.
Och Aye — Scots dots for Europe.
Following the ‘OKI's OK’ piece in Lyndhurst West the next contact from the company was even more interesting.
Would we like to see where the printers we made?
After Japanese images of Mount Fuji, the Bullet Train, Geisha Girls and Summo Wrestlers (take your pick!) drifted before the eyes.
It was tactfully explained that the destination was somewhat nearer — Scotland!
The European production centre for all OKI dot-matrix printers is at Cumbernauld, near Glasgow.
So it was off to a wet and windy Heathrow Airport, a BA Super Shuttle to Glasgow, and a twenty minute road journey to the factory.
OKI is a company with a real history in technology.
In 1881 Mr Kibataro Oki produced the first Japanese telephone and created a company that has grown dramatically over the last 110 years.
OKI milestones in technology include; 1915 — Radio Telegraph equipment; 1924 — Radio Broadcast receivers; 1953 — Mobile Radio for taxis; 1973 — Thermal Facsimile (FAX); 1975 — Cellular radio development with Bell Laboratories and the Laser Beam printer.
Today OKI employs 20,000 people in 25 countries worldwide, and has an annual turnover (in 1991) of £2.9 billion.
The OKI plant at Cumbernauld was opened in 1987, employs 100 people, and produces over 400,000 dot-matrix printers per year for Europe.
The factory has been awarded British Standards approval to BS5750/BS5850 and VDE 0860 for its quality system and product safety standards.
The local work force in Cumbernauld is very proud of the fact that it has exceeded the quality standards in OKI's Japanese plants.
A not unassociated reason could be the average age of the Scottish work force in OKI's plant — it's only 23 years old!
Overall the factory tour was an impressive display of quality and pride in the job.
Surface Mount Technology (SMT) robots ‘glue’ electronic components onto printed circuit boards before they are passed through a ‘flow solder’bath.
Each printer is built as the completed boards then join other components via assembly stations on the ever moving conveyer belt.
Next call is the ‘Hot Box’ that simulates several months use.
Then there's the electrical insulation test where 1,500 volts is passed through the printer chassis,(Yes they still work afterwards!).
Lastly the printer serial number is attached to the chassis.
This number is scanned into the factory production computer.
OKI will has production data for every printer they produce, including the eventual customer.
This enabled Police in Finland to reunite several stolen OKI printers with their rightful owners.
Finally a UK-designed packaging plant wraps up palette loads of printers as they come off the production line.
The result is a tried and tested printer in every box.
The return trip to Heathrow by the British Airways Super Shuttle opened up another OKI insight.
Every ticket and every passenger list produced by BA is printed on a OKI dot-matrix printer.
However old airline habits die hard.
BA is no Virgin (if you get the pun) and always reminds others to play by the rules, whilst seeming to ignore its own advice.
The BA printers at Glasgow Airport were made by OKIData in the US.
It appears that BA has been doing a bit of grey-importing!
Do you ever get the ‘Invalid Media or Track 0 bad’ message when you're trying to reformat a floppy?
If so here's some relevant information about the problem.
Data is written to a floppy disk by a double set of heads that pass very, very close to the disk surface.
A magnetic field (the Flux) is generated by these heads in order to write information to the magnetic coating on the floppy disk.
This magnetic coating is different for DD and HD floppy disks.
The HD floppy disk drive hardware can write at two different write currents, high and low.
The HD coating has a higher saturation current value, requiring a higher write current.
So data written at the lower DD rate will not saturate the HD magnetic coating.
Often data written at the lower DD current can't overwrite previous data written on HD disks at the higher HD current rate.
The ‘Invalid Media or Track 0 bad’ message will usually appear when you're trying to reformat a higher density disk at a lower density.
Using a PC with a 1.2Mb High Density disk drive try the following experiment.
Take a clean never before formatted HD disk and format it to 360K with the FORMAT A: /4 DOS Command.
It will format OK.
Now format the same disk to a HD capacity with the FORMAT A: DOS Command.
One again everything should work fine.
Now try to reformat the disk to the DD 360K capacity with the Format A: /4 DOS Command.
Now you should get a Track 0 Bad’ error message.
Similar problems can arise when trying to reformat a 3.5inch 1.44Mb HD disk to 720K DD capacity for instance.
3.5inch disks have an extra mechanical feature over their floppier cousins.
The HD 1.44Mb 3.5inch floppy has two holes in the disk body.
One has sliding door for write enable, or write protected.
The other hole indicates to the disk drive hardware that it is indeed a HD floppy.
720K 3.5inch floppies do not have the second hole in the casing.
Genuine IBM PS/2s that use HD 1.44Mb 3.5inch drives ‘look’ for the presence of the extra HD hole.
Instructing the machine to format a HD disk at the lower DD capacity usually doesn't work.
You can ‘fool’ the drive by covering up the second capacity signalling hole.
But be careful, Write-Protect labels can come off inside the drive an cause a real mess!
The best solution is a bulk eraser that can take both sizes of floppy disk.
This device will rid the disk of all data, including viruses, so it is a worthwhile investment for any organisation that uses plenty of floppies.
Items mentioned in this edition of Lyndhurst West
Practical Shareware brings the latest shareware news to your fingertips every month.
Shareware is rapidly becoming the most effective way to market computer software.
Whether you are a novice or advanced computer user you will find programs and information that will be of use day after day, and at affordable prices.
Shareware is the most modern of all marketing techniques used in the computer industry today.
Authors in countries around the world are constantly releasing software for business and pleasure use.
The most effective way to guarantee rapid distribution is to let people try the program out before asking them for payment.
This is basically the shareware concept.
As one of the U.K's leading shareware distributors we take programs from around the world, assess them for quality and general appeal, and print detailed reviews for you to read.
We bring many new titles into our library every month, so you won't be reading about the same programs every time you pick up your copy of Practical PC.
Generally, the programs are the most up-to-date versions and have been extensively tested.
Transend scan all titles in the library for all known viruses, so you can rest assured that our disks are secure.
To order simply read the reviews and note each of your selections on the order form at the back of this section.
Your disks will be despatched on the day we receive your order and you can start using the programs immediately.
After an assessment period, which is typically ninety days, you must decide if you wish to use the program on a more permanent basis.
If so you must register the package, Transend can help with many popular packages and save you the trouble of sending orders overseas.
PROFESSOR PC LAPTOP
Order Code: 7250 Total Disks: 1
The professor takes you into the world of portable computing explaining how to make the most of your walk-about P.C. The program is basically a collection of text files with an easy to use reader.
All documents are accessed via a simple, yet colourful and uncluttered, menu of topics.
Simply select a topic and up comes a document explaining things like how to make the most of your batteries, caring for your hard disk and simple/advanced MS-DOS commands.
There are many specific texts for portable computer users but the MS-DOS tutor contained within is excellent reading for all novice users.
Requires Hard Disc.
REPERTOIRE
Order Code: 7430 Total Disks: 1
Repertoire is a complete invoicing and stock control program aimed at the small business and will run on virtually any PC compatible machine with any DOS from 3.2 upwards.
Written by a British author with user friendliness at the top of his list.
It has everything you need to control your stock and invoices and is the ideal package for the small business, due to its ease of use, it took me only five minutes to get to grips with the program.
ADDRESS CONTROLLER
Order Code: 7070 Total Disks: 1
There are many address book programs available through the shareware market but many tend to be complex.
Address controller has all the options the novice user would need to store, recall and list addresses.
The screens are well laid out and easy to understand.
The address book stores all the essential name and address details and provides room for telephone numbers and a general comment.
Address controller can print in many formats from name and address book to Roladex/Index card.
LASER PRINTER ENVELOPES
Order Code: 7260 Total Disks: 1
The program helps produce professional looking envelopes and contains some unique features for a program of this type.
A barcoding feature, used for American zip codes, is useful for any companies sending mail to the States.
The program operates with Hewlett Packard lasers and 100% compatibles.
The VGA screens used to operate the program use a beautiful colour scheme and crisp and clear.
L.P.E has many database functions for storing commonly used addresses and can automatically print a return address on each envelope if required.
A highly configurable, professional program which is a must for professional looking mailshot envelopes.
Requires VGA.
OMNIDAY
Order Code: 7030 Total Disks: 1
Omniday is a desk top diary for up to 10 users, ideal for people having to share a computer.
Each users entries are kept separate from the others and can be password protected to prevent anyone else from peeking.
Entering text couldn't be much easier as the program uses common word processing commands.
Help is always on hand at the press of a key anywhere in the program.
all together an easy to use and very handy electronic diary.
123-TALK
Order Code: 7050 Total Disks: 1
The TALKING TEACHER is an extremely impressive education program aimed at all ages from two to seven years old.
The screens are well designed, colourful and easy to understand.
Talking Teacher does talk, albeit with an American accent, and this does add to the fun and help keep a hold of your child's attention.
Lessons include counting, learning your telephone number, simple maths and singing!
Software of this quality is hard to find even in the commercial market so Talking Teacher is sure to prove a popular choice with parents of younger children.
Requires EGA.
ABC FUN KEYS
Order Code: 7060 Total Disks: 1
Using a computer to help in your child's education is fine, providing he or she understands what a keyboard is all about.
ABC Fun Keys is designed to get your child familiar with the computer quickly.
The various lessons involve showing large and colourful letters on the screen, sometimes the float and bounce around.
Your child must press a letter on the keyboard that matches one of the letters shown on the screen.
A wide range of songs are played as a reward for good work.
ABC Fun Keys will certainly hold your child's attention for long periods and this quality program will certainly be a worthwhile addition to your child's education programs.
Requires EGA.
DOS QUIZ
Order Code: 7160 Total Disks: 1
The Dos Quiz is a useful way for beginners to find out just how much they know after reading all the MS-DOS bibles.
The simple 20 question exercise tests your knowledge of basic and advanced dos features.
The quiz sets a task rather than posing a standard question, the task could be format a disk.
Once you have typed the command the quiz displays output as though the command had actually been executed.
Once you have answered all the questions Dos Quiz displays a table of results with a pass or fail message next to each question.
This is an absolute must for beginners as Dos Quiz provides a safe environment in which to practice using MS-DOS.
FUN WITH COLOURS
Order Code: 7110 Total Disks: 3
Children love to draw and colour, but find that their colouring ability is often held back by their lack of drawing skills.
Fun with colours presents your child with a black and white drawing which they can colour in.
The quality of the drawings is absolutely superb and the final result of a coloured picture is breathtaking.
This program will keep children of 4 years upwards amused for hours.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
GOOGOL MATHS GAMES
Order Code: 5650 Total Disks: 1
Although the graphics standard of CGA implies low quality to those with EGA and VGA you would be wrong to expect anything less than excellent, clear and colourful screens.
This educational game surpasses most other maths type tutorials available through shareware or anywhere.
The three themes, climbing, centipede and invaders make the youngster think quickly whilst enjoying the fun side of this learning exercise.
Formulae, such as‘2 + 2 = 6’, are displayed at the bottom of the screen.
The user must decide True or False whilst guiding a Centipede around the screen.
The bug grows longer as more correct answers are entered and excellent rewards are displayed at regular intervals to give the child a boost.
A bonus disk is available when you register the package which adds to the range of educational themes available from this first class author.
Requires CGA.
SENIOR PHYSICS FACTS
Order Code: 7330 Total Disks: 1
This is a Physics tutorial for secondary school students.
Topics include, Sound, Waves, Mechanics, Nuclear Physics and many more physics related topics.
There is a test at the end of each topic for the student to complete and marks in percentage are given upon completion.
On my first attempt of the Sound and Waves test I managed to score 20 percent, I then decided I had better read the tutorial before my second attempt in which I scored 60 percent.
A good tutorial that certainly taught me a thing or two about sound waves, this package is ideal for the student to help with his revision or a school physics department with computer facilities.
ULTIMATE LANGUAGE TUTOR
Order Code: 7370 Total Disks: 1
The Ultimate Language Tutor comes with the French library.
Being menu driven, it is easy for anyone to find their way around.
Up to nine people can be tested with their results stored for later retrieval, results can be shown in numeric or graph form in a choice of categories.
Registered users will be able to build other libraries of french or any other language.
Ideal for schools or the individual wishing to learn various languages.
WORD RESCUE
Order Code: 3000 Total Disks: 1
The mean ol' Gruzzles can't read and they don't want any one else to be able to read so they have stolen all the words out of the books.
You must get them all back, but don't worry your friend Benny Bookworm will help by sliming the Gruzzles and revealing the hidden key for you.
Apogee have made an entry into the educational market with this first high class educational game.
The graphics are excellent and the documentation and playability are as high as any of the Apogee arcade type games.
It is a game for 4–40 year olds with various difficulty levels that can be set by the parent or teacher.
The idea is to join the words from the books with the pictures, although even children who cant read are able to call up a word list so they can join the words and pictures by association.
You collect points on the way by collecting books and letters and have to avoid the Gruzzles by pointing them out to Benny, who then slimes them.
My children said it is the best learning game they have played, and I agree with them even though I still land in the water in level two.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
WORD WHIZ
Order Code: 7390 Total Disks: 1
Word Whiz is a word challenge game that measures your knowledge of the English language.
You are tested on the meaning of up to 100 words, for example, does the word ‘peruse’ mean ‘to skim’or ‘to glance over’?
In actual fact it means ‘to read carefully’!
Most questions focus on one word, all you have to do is to find the correct word or phrase to match it.
You might receive some additional related information if you answer the question correctly — just to further expand your already voluminous knowledge base!
Another great educational game from Apogee.
WUNDER BOOK
Order Code: 7340 Total Disks: 1
Wunder Book is an excellent educational game for children of 3–10 years (fun for adults too!), not just user friendly, but child friendly.
It will teach, how to spell by matching words with pictures, how to type (with graphics to show where to find letters on the keyboard).
It will test your child's memory and ability to recognise objects, animals, houses etc.
All this in a choice of four languages, English, French, German and Spanish, so will teach your child the basic understanding of foreign languages which can't be a bad thing, as every day, we grow closer to our European neighbours.
Registered users will receive an updated library of objects (presently 40) to 200.
Requires EGA.
DTA
Order Code: 7170 Total Disks: 1
DTA a is powerful, but complex, graphics tool aimed at people wishing to construct Autodesk Animator files.
The program can take frames from several drawing programs and read several common formats such as GIF.
The program has intelligent features to re-produce natural colours found in video shots using the VGA colour palette.
DTA can also process 256 colour PCX files so the scope for budding animators is widened still further.
A specialised program but one which is simple to use after a quick read of the detailed manual.
Requires VGA.
FINGER VGA
Order Code: 4300 Total Disks: 1
Finger VGA is a full colour image processing, painting and animation program (mouse required).
Easy to use with the aid of a pull down menu, it offers facilities you would expect in any other drawing package such as the drawing of circles, boxes, lines and curves etc. with various fill patterns.
It also has features similar to those you would find in packages like PC Paintbrush which allow you to change individual pixels of your drawing or any other PCX file.
All this with the animation feature (registered version only) makes this a package worth buying.
Requires VGA.
GRAPHICS WORKSHOP FOR WINDOWS
Order Code: 7380 Total Disks: 1
This is essentially the same package as the DOS version of Graphics Workshop only it designed to run in windows 3.0 or higher.
I found the windows version easier to use, as all the commands are available at the top of the screen in the form of buttons (in true windows format), all you need to do is to click on the required command.
The registered version incorporates a screen capture facility, so you can capture the screen from any windows package and work on it in Graphics Workshop.
Requires Hard Disc.
NIKON 2
Order Code: 7290 Total Disks: 1
The first of our shareware disk specifically designed for use under OS2 version 2.0 or later.
The program captures the current image of the desktop and save it into the clipboard, as a TIFF, GIF, PCX or Windows 3.0 file.
The program can also invoke your favourite bitmap editor as soon as a screen is captured.
Nikon 2 uses multiple-threads so you can capture images even though the program is busy processing other captured images.
As the program is fully 32 bit compatible you will benefit from whatever power your computer has to offer.
An excellent system from a very professional Australian author.
Requires EGA.
WOODPLANK (TT FONT)
Order Code: 5170 Total Disks: 1
The Woodplank True Type Font is designed for use with applications running under Windows 3.1.
More and more fonts are becoming available as time passes and a quick look in our catalogue will show you that the fonts range is currently the most rapidly growing disk range in our library.
These disks will help you in the design of publications or word-processor files under the Windows 3.1.
BOOK BANK
Order Code: 7130 Total Disks: 1
The Book Bank is a complete library management system for use within the home or small organisation.
The details held against books and the people they are on loan to are very detailed.
Not all details need be entered, this fact helps save on set-up time.
Books can be entered and modified as can contact details.
Contacts are the people who borrow the books and a ‘want’ can be logged against a contact.
This means when a book becomes available the person will be contacted.
The screens are very well  laid out which is essential for any database application.
Pull-down menus are used to access the various facilities offered by Book Bank and this makes the program friendly and easy to use.
EXERCAL
Order Code: 7200 Total Disks: 1
ExerCal takes your current body weight and duration of your exercise period and tells you how many calories are being used in that time.
Only the hi-tech gym equipment gives you that information, so even when your simply using bar-bells you will still be able to keep track of energy being used.
ExerCal makes an excellent companion to any training program and can help keep your motivation level up as you balance calories-in with calories-out.
FITNESS MATE
Order Code: 7220 Total Disks: 1
With the Olympics still in mind many athletes will be training hard, a few will have accurate personal performance information.
Fitness Mate is designed to keep track of several athletes participating in many sports, tracking their achievements in each.
Graphs are available and make the data easier to interpret.
The VGA graphics used are colourful and in high resolution as you would expect.
The graphs are un-cluttered and broken down into time, weight and distance categories.
There are a number of print options which complete this professional training aid fit for any professional or amateur team.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
HAVING A BABY
Order Code: 4310 Total Disks: 1
Having a Baby is a program that will aid you in choosing a baby's name.
All you are asked to do is to type in the baby's surname and the computer will display or print a random list of baby's names (girls or boys) with the chosen surname.
You can make a selection of names to be included in the list so the computer will only display combinations of the selected names.
A fun program to play with as the computer will come up with some outrageous names as well as more sensible ones, you may even recognise one or two of them.
HOW TO MAKE YOUR PC PAY
Order Code: 5030 Total Disks: 1
The disc contains a text file reader to enable you to page through the authors text file using indexes, just as you would a book.
The two main areas covered are PC related businesses and Sales.
To be honest, after paying 2.50 for the shareware disc and 10.00 for the registration fee you would save yourself money and disappointment if you went to your local bookshop and bought two books on sales techniques.
This program does however highlight the advantages of Shareware, you find out the value of a program before you part with your hard earned money.
This is of course only my opinion on this particular offering from the author and many book type programs available are worth every penny.
NIGHT SKY
Order Code: 5950 Total Disks: 4
The latest version of this desktop planetarium allows you to view the Night Sky's Constellations and deep sky objects from any place at any time.
It can plot up to 45,000 colour coded stars, show the motion of the Sun, Moon and all the planets.
You can also plot comets and minor planets as well as predict solar and lunar eclipses.
If you are unable to visit ‘The Planetarium’ in London then this is the next best thing.
The program is able to plot to a magnitude of up to +8.49.
PALMISTRY FOR ALL
Order Code: 4320 Total Disks: 2
Palmistry For All is a fun program for anyone who likes to dabble in the art of palm reading, or even for those of us who would like find out a little more about ourselves.
You have the choice of running the program in CGA or EGA, this depends on the command you type to run the program.
After the introduction screens, you will be shown a picture of a palm on the left of your screen whilst on the right you will be asked questions about your palm relevant to the particular markings presently being displayed.
When (after many screens of questions) you have finished, Palmistry For All will generate an in depth report on the subject.
A good little program, even if you only want it for its entertainment value.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
POOLS
Order Code: 4340 Total Disks: 1
Another pools prediction program for people wishing to make some real money.
POOLS includes all the English and Scottish football leagues, is easy to use and not only does it predict draws but gives you odds on each potential draw to make your selection easier.
It does not stop there however, there is also a permutation checking chart for those who like do the newspaper plans etc.
Requires CGA.
RECIPE MASTER
Order Code: 5720 Total Disks: 1
You can now store all your favourite recipes on this excellent database program which allows you to retrieve them quickly.
You can add categories and recipes at the touch of a button.
The program comes with a number of recipes already loaded with sections for Fish, Sweets, Starters, Vegetarian etc. but you could add other non-standard ones such as Kids Meals, Microwave Meals, Quick meals and Slimmer's meals.
It is very quick and easy to recall a menu and once recalled it can be printed.
This program is a must for anyone using a PC at home and will impress dinner guests who always say ‘You simply must let me have a copy of the recipe, the meal was delicious’, you can now print it out in seconds and sell them a copy.
REELS
Order Code: 7350 Total Disks: 1
For all tape collectors everywhere, Reels offers a complete tape collection management and analysis system.
Once you have input your collection data, Reels allows searching by date, source, quality, song, city etc. or any combination.
The program can provide statistics for any year or range of years, it can also generate a text file of your list (in two formats) that can be viewed with any text editor.
ROOT DIRECTORY
Order Code: 4360 Total Disks: 3
After my first look at root directory I almost ran to the garden shed for my gardening tools.
The program is so well designed even a child could look up all the information needed, not only on how to plant a tree in the garden, but on which type, shape, name etc.
I was so impressed with this program, I only wish I were a gardening enthusiast, so I could put root directory through it paces.
The descriptions and explanations leave no questions unanswered, the graphics are extremely well drawn so you can see clearly what the author means when he is talking about planting etc.
A hard disk is required with about two Mb free space, if you have that and an EGA monitor together with a love of gardening, then you should have this program also.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
CYBER WARS
Order Code: 7100 Total Disks: 1
Cyber Wars is a simple but enjoyable game of robot bashing.
Your heroic blue robot must defend itself by obliterating the approaching red robots.
Weapons such as missiles and lasers are at your disposal and a limited number of mines may be laid.
The VGA graphics are colourful and flicker free and the game itself is quite addictive.
Requires VGA.
DUKE MAP
Order Code: 7180 Total Disks: 1
Duke Map is the latest addition to our range of Apogee game add-ons.
Like the Wolfenstein Extras (Disk Code 5150) Duke Map shows the layout of all levels in Duke Nukem.
The program works with all three episodes of Duke Nukem so there are no problems in that department.
You must be careful to use programs such as this only when you are desperately stuck so they do not spoil the fun of adventuring around each level.
On the plus side however, if you are really stuck, you can take a glimpse at the map and your under way once more.
A superb companion disk to Duke Nukem (Disk Code 1700).
Requires EGA.
ESCAPADE
Order Code: 7190 Total Disks: 1
Escapade is another offering from the Moraff programming team, fast challenging Apogee for the number one team spot.
In Escapade the objective is to construct traps and lure the pursuing monsters into them.
This clever ladders and platforms game is highly addictive, yet simple to get the hang of.
You will be entertained for hours wether using the highly colourful VGA version or the MONO version which is also included on this disk.
Requires VGA.
GALACTIX
Order Code: 7310 Total Disks: 2
Galactix is the latest 256 colour, soundblaster/Adlib compatible shareware game.
The graphics are stunning and rival the best that shareware games have to offer.
The Adlib/Soundblaster music is excellent and features digitised sound for Soundblaster users.
The game is extremely friendly, from a new user point of view.
For example, the ship has a power meter which drops as you get hit, but builds back up over a period of time, you don't just simply die when hit.
Similarly when you do eventually die, and you will, you can restart at the current level.
Ideas have been borrowed from Wing Commander 2 (Origin) and Xenon (Bit Map Bros) in terms of graphical presentation and animation.
The execution of these ideas with regard to graphical presentation and production of an addictive shoot-em-up arcade game have been carried out to the highest professional standard.
Galactix scores 100% in all departments, now I'm off for another game!
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
KEEN TIPS
Order Code: 7240 Total Disks: 1
All you need to know to be a whizz at Commander Keen.
The disk contains a text file containing hints and tips on how to best use the things you find as you travel the worlds of Command Keen.
The disk also contains secret cheat codes to provide additional ammunition and level skip features.
If you're stuck on what is currently shareware's most popular game get this disk and you will soon be on your way.
NEW WOLFENSTEIN MAPS
Order Code: 7280 Total Disks: 1
Our Wolfenstein extras disk contains a map editor for designing your own Wolfenstein Castle.
The author of this disk has put the editor to good use designing a challenging collection of maze like levels.
Get to level eight and nine and you go into pure shoot-em-up mode.
Level 10 has the awesome super guard, kill him and your home and dry, if only you could kill him!
Level 10 is a challenging game in itself.
Wolfenstein is so addictive you will probably attempt to play it to a conclusion by staying up all night.
If you do manage it then this brilliant collection of new maps will give you something to do tonight, at least for a few hours!
Get this disk today along with the Wolfenstein extras disk (Code 5150) they really do make Apogee's latest game unbeatable either in the shareware or commercial markets.
Requires EGA.
PRISONER
Order Code: 7420 Total Disks: 1
Prisoner is a puzzle game and computerisation of a little plastic puzzle the author bought in an airport lounge.
The rules are simple in that all you have to do is to move the blocks around to free the prisoner.
If you get stuck, pressing a combination of keys will show you one solution but, will not show you the graphics display that follows, to see that, you must solve the puzzle yourself, and judging by the opening graphics should be pretty good.
Requires EGA.
QUADRALIEN
Order Code: 7400 Total Disks: 1
Your mission is to prevent the breakdown of Astra, by pushing water barrels down chutes to reduce the core temperature and reducing the Entropy level.
You also have to find and destroy the quadralien mother, you do this by controlling two droids which you can pick from six available droids.
The graphics on this game are so good that I kept trying to push the buttons on the screen.
A very complex and enjoyable game that will provide hours of fun.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
QUATRIS PRO
Order Code: 5700 Total Disks: 1
The whole world is currently obsessed with spinning and falling odd shaped blocks.
The Tetris theme has been around for some years now but shareware authors have taken the original idea to new heights.
If you are in the grip of an addiction, suffering from a total block (PUN!) or have just mastered all other versions of the game then look no further.
We have 3D variants, Windows versions and now the most infuriating of them all…
Quatris Pro.
Not only do you have to complete lines of blocks, without leaving gaps but if you can make the numbers, which are displayed on each part of a block, add up to the target figure you get a bonus and a bomb.
Bombs can be used to blow-up awkward lines which you want to clear-out.
What will they think of next?
Virtual reality block-out!?
We will just have to wait and see.
Requires VGA.
QUESTMAKER
Order Code: 7010 Total Disks: 1
Questmaker is a program that allows you to create your own graphics adventure games using the questmaker editors in conjunction with a graphics editor like PC Paintbrush, for the creation of graphic screens with a PCX format.
I found the creation of various screens and game plans very easy to put together.
Although it will take a while to complete a fully working graphics adventure game, the creation is very enjoyable and, who knows, you may even end up with a game that can be sold through the shareware concept.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
STELLAR EXPLORER
Order Code: 7440 Total Disks: 1
Here's one for all you Star Trek fans, basically this is a windows version of the very popular EGA Startrek.
The game was designed with sound effects being a major enhancement, it uses both WAV sounds and MIDI sound output through the MIDI Mapper (if you have these facilities).
I found the game easier to play than the EGA version and the graphics are much better, which is hardly surprising as this game requires a VGA graphics card.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
THREADS
Order Code: 7460 Total Disks: 1
A version of the popular arcade game where you have to prevent the destruction of your isolated city from the alien threads that are falling to earth, you do this by blasting the threads with your ground based lasers.
A mouse is required to direct the shots from your laser cannons, the longer you last, the more threads that fall.
A very addictive game that can be run in CGA, EGA or VGA mode.
Requires CGA.
TIC-TAC-TOE/CONNECT 4
Order Code: 5900 Total Disks: 1
This disk represents great value giving you two all time favourite games, namely Tic-Tac-Toe and Connect 4.
The colour graphics are reasonable and quite large so you will have no problems with eye strain.
You play against the computer which operates at a chosen skill level so you could have a chance of winning.
If present a mouse will be used and that can speed up operation of the game.
A good version of two popular games.
VGA JIGSAW
Order Code: 4060 Total Disks: 1
VGA Jigsaw is, as the title suggests, a jigsaw puzzle for use with a VGA monitor supporting 256 colour mode.
It uses the popular PCX and GIF files, giving you the best graphics available for your chosen picture.
The program comes with three different pictures, birds, a clown and coloured balls.
Registered users can load in their own PCX or GIF files so you will never get bored with this program.
The puzzle supports mouse, joystick or keyboard and has four levels of difficulty, giving hours of fun for all ages.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
WOLFENSTEIN 3D
Order Code: 3080 Total Disks: 2
Due to the realistic graphics and sound Wolfenstein 3D is only available to those over 13 years old so no postal orders will be accepted.
As an escaped prisoner in a German war camp you will move smoothly through a world of amazing detail and animation.
Use your pistol to dispense with individual guards or your machine gun to mow down a line of enemies.
For a single guard it is often wiser to use your knife as any noise can alert many more enemies including guard dogs.
You collect treasures on the way and eat any food found to sustain your health after being wounded.
Find the many secret rooms for first aid kits and weapons.
Wolfenstein 3D has the best graphics I have seen on a P.C. and should you have a soundblaster the voices and sounds are amazing.
It also has many amusing aspects to the game and the levels include ‘Can I Play Daddy’, ‘Dont Hurt Me’, ‘Bring ‘Em On’ and ‘I am Death Incarnate’with suitable graphics.
This game is truly a technological breakthrough.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
ZZT
Order Code: 7410 Total Disks: 1
ZZT is a new object orientated action adventure that will work in any graphics mode, because of this the graphics are a little basic but that does not mean to say that this game is any less enjoyable.
It will test your problem solving abilities as well as your reflexes.
I thoroughly enjoyed playing this game and, I like the idea of making my own game worlds with the ZZT Editor and controlling the objects using the built in ZZT-OOP programming language.
ADLIB/SOUNDBLASTER PROGRAMMING
Order Code: 7210 Total Disks: 1
At Transend we support all types of shareware, including books-on-a-disk.
These invaluable references can save you pounds on technical reference guides and provide the same level of accurate information as a book, only the text is at your fingertips.
This detailed, well written, text explains the AdLib and SoundBlaster hardware ports and their uses.
Anybody considering developing a composer or sound effects module should certainly start here.
The sound programmers quick reference is an essential addition to your technical library.
FROMBAT
Order Code: 5940 Total Disks: 1
This program is one of the best batch compilers I have used, and the easiest to get started with.
It comes with a great number of examples for each command, so if you are unsure how to do something you can load the demo to see how the Author would have done it.
The disc comes with Frombats own editor, so you can type in your batch commands to create a menu, scroll screens, print large fonts etc. then while still in the editor you can run the program.
This means that you do not have to exit the editor, compile the program, run the program, then reload the editor to fix any bugs.
‘Fred’(the Frombat editor) will exit the program on an error and return you to the line that caused the error.
I personally registered my version of Frombat and used it to create the Transend Menu Program, issued with every Shareware disc, and the Transend Catalogue which only took 3 hours to write.
The Shareware version allows you to create programs and compile them, but the compiled version only runs for 24 hours.
This means that you can fully test your programs but you will need to register to compile your programs fully.
MIDI PROGRAMS AND INFORMATION
Order Code: 7270 Total Disks: 1
A collection of information for midi-users, programmers and those interested in computer music.
The disk contains assembly language and ‘C’ language files for developing MPU-401 programs such as composers or dump/load patch programs.
There is an extensive list of world-wide MIDI BBS telephone numbers.
Finally there is a program for capturing MIDI patches already for use.
To use this program you will need a MIDI card that is 100% MPU-401 compatible.
AS EASY AS
Order Code: 7080 Total Disks: 1
This is the latest version of the worlds best known shareware spreadsheet, namely version 5.01c.
With thirteen graph types, array manipulation facilities and full mouse interface As Easy As is going to take some beating.
These facilities are sure to impress expert spreadsheet users, especially those with experience of Lotus 123.
The comprehensive on-screen manual will teach novice users how to use the more commonly used features.
As Easy As can also simulate a 3D working spreadsheet by dividing its 2D sheet into ‘PANELS’.
Each panel then becomes a spreadsheet in its own right.
Pull down menus offer easy access to the multitude of facilities and options can be selected by mouse or keyboard.
BLAZE
Order Code: 5830 Total Disks: 1
Blaze is designed as a screen saver but best acts as a security key.
Whenever your computer is going to be left unattended for some time simply run Blaze.
The screen draws some impressive patterns until the password, which is selected by you when the program starts, is re-entered.
The program only runs on VGA screens but makes excellent use of VGA 256 colour mode.
Requires VGA.
COPY QM
Order Code: 7140 Total Disks: 1
Copy QM is a bulk disk formatter and copier with a multitude of intelligent options.
The menu driven screen allows you to setup a copy session in seconds.
Copy QM features Smart-Format which formats only the parts of a disk that are used, if there are large blank areas these will not be formatted.
This kind of intelligence produces high speed copy times of around 50 seconds for format, copy and verify on a 360k drive.
Copy QM is ideal for those distributing catalogues/price lists on floppy disk.
DELETE TREE (DLT)
Order Code: 5480 Total Disks: 1
Delete Tree is a very good program for those who have a hard disk needing a little house keeping.
DLT allows you to delete complete directories, if that sounds a bit drastic, don't worry, there are several safe guards with this program.
With DLT you can look at all files that will be deleted with your command before you execute it, so for those a little wary of deleting files, that feature alone makes this program a must.
Another feature of DLT is that it will ask for a yes or no answer before deleting each file, you can also delete only files with a specific extension in a specific directory e.g. DLT C: \*.;
BAK or delete only files that were updated after a certain date.
DLT is a safe and powerful tool that will save you hours searching through files and directories looking for those unwanted files to delete.
The program comes with many more features too numerous to mention.
DIRTOT
Order Code: 5750 Total Disks: 1
When your hard drive is nearing capacity and you need to delete a few directories to install your new 5meg program it is not that easy to decide which directories to archive and delete to achieve the required disk space.
This utility will total up the number of bytes each directory is using across a given path.
The reports given can be in a number of formats to help you decide which directory must go.
Of course it can also be used in a network environment to monitor disc usage of each user.
FLCOPY
Order Code: 5160 Total Disks: 1
Flcopy is a utility that allows you to copy a large file across a number of floppies.
So if you only have a 360k floppy drive and need to copy a file from a friends hard disk that is over 360k (even after compression) then this is the program for you.
The disc comes with a small document file explaining how to use the program.
We found that on two occasions it was unable to copy a large file across 5 floppy discs.
HARD DISK MIRROR
Order Code: 7230 Total Disks: 1
The program allows you to selectively copy directories and their contents from one disk to another.
The program title is misleading as the operations can also be carried out on floppy disks.
Disk Mirror is useful when copying large disks from one drive to another, especially over a network, as you can copy only the required directories.
The program uses pull down menus and is easy to follow.
The screens are colourful and a MONO version will be along shortly.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
TARGET15
Order Code: 7040 Total Disks: 1
McAfee Associates continue to lead the market in virus detection systems and the addition of this utility adds to the strength of their product range.
The program is primarily designed to list files matching a given search pattern and possess the extraordinary ability to search all popular archive files.
For example, one could search the hard drive for all programs ending in ‘.
EXE’.
Target would also find ‘.
EXE’ files in ARC, ARJ, ZIP, ZOO, LHA and PKA archives.
When a file is found matching your search pattern you can either execute a command, SCAN for example, or output the filenames into a text file ready to build a batch file.
TARGET has a ‘-scan’ option so can automatically scan all files and archives for viruses.
To ensure best use of this system make sure you get the latest version of SCAN and CLEAN and the virus detection and removal programs also developed by McAfee.
TURBOBAT
Order Code: 5580 Total Disks: 1
Turbobat is a very powerful multiple pass batch file compiler that takes DOS batch files and turns them into binary code that can execute up to four times faster than the original.
It also has many additional features that standard DOS batch file language lacks, such as the handling of Screen Colours, Drives, Directories, Input, Output, Text and many others.
If you are running under 4Dos any of the extra commands you are used to including in your batch files are also catered for.
You can enter a number of switches to the command line to change the way Turbobat handles the way it compiles and produces output etc.
PC-WRITE VERSION 4
Order Code: 7000 Total Disks: 4
The very latest version of the world-famous shareware word processor.
PC-Write version 4.00 features spell check (includes auto check as you type), preview mode, advanced and novice menu configurations, windowed operation for multiple document editing and full mouse operation.
These features now make PC-Write suitable for all levels of user from novice to expert.
If you find the full menus over powering switch to novice mode and you still have quick access to all key features.
Full short cut-keys are available to most menu options and a full configuration and system is included to help set colours, special display characters and all default formatting styles.
Finally PC-Write also offers indexing and body text style to aid rapid formatting and index production.
A brilliant word-processor proving shareware can push back the boundaries of software value for money.
Requires Hard Disc.
WINEDIT
Order Code: 5100 Total Disks: 1
WinEdit is essentially an ASCII text editor that takes full advantage of the Windows graphical environment.
You are able to load a file of up to 16MB in size and you can open an unlimited number of windows.
It is an excellent front end for desktop publishing and word processing packages such as Ventura Publishing, Word and Pagemaker.
Where WinEdit stands out from the rest is for programmers who use Microsoft C and SDK.
You are able to run your favourite compiler from within WinEdit and it will monitor the compilers output and allow you to view any warnings or error messages.
You will also be pleased to know that access to Windows SDK and ‘C’ language help is available just by clicking on a keyword.
The program comes with all the standard tools like Search and Replace, Cut and Paste etc.
WinEdit is one of the better text editors available for Windows 3. x.
Practical
Shareware is the leading full colour monthly guide to the latest low cost software.
If you have an IBM compatible PC then you can use our extensive range of software.
If you are not sure simply call our experienced support staff and tell them what kind of computer you have.
We are always happy to help.
Welcome to the first edition of Practical Shareware for 1993, produced in association with Transend Services.
Many companies distribute their disks through Transend for you to try out for up to 90 days.
If you like the disk and find it useful then you may register with the author or ourselves.
All shareware disks contain a manual that can be printed, which means you are using the program just as if it were the full priced product.
Shareware means buying computer software with the lowest possible risk.
If you bought software from a shop and didn't find it to be suitable you are unlikely to get a refund.
With shareware you have ample time to try before you buy, discovering all the programs abilities, and testing it on your own computer.
Remember, registering shareware means you often save up to 50% on the price of buying a similar package from a computer shop.
Every month we will look at software for Business, The Home, Games and Education for you and your children.
These are just a handful of the subjects we cover.
We also carry a range of programs that teach you how to use your computer and even how to type.
Your children can learn Maths, English and Sciences or one of many Foreign languages taught by shareware programs.
A priority order form has been placed at the end of this section.
Simply complete it and send it with your payment direct to Transend.
Your disks should be with you on the next working day after we receive your order.
You can telephone your order straight through to our credit card hot-line on (0274) 622228.
Now read on and discover the world of PC shareware and keep watching Practical PC next month for an entirely new selection.
Happy New Year and Happy Computing from all the staff at Transend.
Fate of Atlantis
FORMGEN
Order Code: 1390
Total Disks: 1
A very powerful form design package that will help computerise the collection of information.
The key to getting quality information from people, via forms, is a clear format.
With Formgen you will be able to design your form on screen, making changes as you go along to perfect it, and finally print out for copying.
The program allows you to draw lines and boxes as well as shaded areas.
Support is provided for many popular printers as well as some laser printers, so quality of output will not be a problem.
An excellent package which could be used by many companies and individuals involved in the collection of data.
Requires Hard Disc.
FORMGEN FILL
Order Code: 1350
Total Disks: 1
The shareware package Formgen has been around for some time now and is a proven system for designing forms.
However, it seemed a shame to be able to design the forms using the computer and not be able to complete them on the same machine at a later point.
For this reason the authors released Formgen Fill, a package which does allow you to enter details on a predefined form.
The whole thing works quite well, displaying the form on screen so that you can indicate the position of fields which are required to be filled.
Each field is given a use, i.e. is it for text or numbers, and a length.
After the form has been completed it can be printed out for filing.
An excellent addition to one of the shareware greats.
Requires Hard Disc.
MANAGEMENT TRAINING
Order Code: 8380
Total Disks: 1
This tutorial disk teaches Communication Skills, Interviewing Techniques, Decision Making, Time Management, Employee Evaluation and Motivation and other skills.
In fact it is everything a manager needs to know so if you are bucking for promotion you need this disk.
THE ULTIMATE SALES PROGRAM
Order Code: 3340
Total Disks: 2
As the title suggests, this is the ultimate in integrated sales invoicing and stock control for the small to medium sized businesses.
I have not used any other accounting type program that is as easy to install and use within minutes of opening the package.
It comes complete with pre-designed forms for printing Retail price lists, Invoices, Statements, Summaries and even customer and stock labels.
It is easy to see why the Author was the winner of an award for ‘U.K. Best Shareware Author’ with programs that are so easy to use with on-line help that a manual is not needed.
The current shareware program is version 4.0 and on registration you receive free updates for life.
The program is menu driven but one of the best features is the ability to input new data at practically any stage, i.e. if you are entering an invoice and the product does not exist you are able to create it there and then without exiting to the previous menus.
Version 4.0 also comes with the facility to print reports to screen.
We will now be using ‘The Ultimate Sales Program’ as, I believe, do Thames Water, Kodak and H.M.F.
Requires Hard Disc.
BACK SOON
Order Code: 9010
Total Disks: 1
This handy message utility has tremendous potential in the busy office.
Before you leave your desk for any length of time you load Back Soon which gives you a choice of messages to display.
This message is displayed on the screen telling any passers by where you are.
If anybody wishes to leave you a message they simply press a key and enter the message using a very simple and friendly editor.
Get rid of all those untidy stick on notes and post messages the electronic way!
LABELS PLUS
Order Code: 8120
Total Disks: 1
An easy to use address label program that prints an address and return address label.
Label has the unique feature of adding advertising lines to the envelope.
The program uses five files each which can store one thousand records.
You could easily categorise your addresses into five sections.
The manual can be read on screen so getting help is a key press away!
Requires Hard Disc.
TIME LORD
Order Code: 3010
Total Disks: 2
A complete suite of accessories, Timelord is a very user friendly personal organiser, best described as a computerised File-o-Fax.
It has the ability to dial phone numbers and print labels.
Accessories include a diary, an appointments schedule, calculator, calendar, to do list and a reminder facility.
Any tasks not completed by the due date on the ‘to do list’ can be automatically carried over to the reminders list, a facility I found to be very useful.
You may input an unlimited number of addresses which may be called up by name, town, any of two user-defined fields or simply scroll through the list in ‘Rolodex’ fashion.
Timelord also has a document database where you can index all your text files wherever they are on your hard disk giving you the ability to search and browse with the built in report viewer.
I found Timelord to be extremely useful in controlling my time and I am now awaiting my registered version.
Registered users will receive an update to the latest version and a utilities pack which includes data import/export, file rebuilding and reports generator.
Requires Hard Disc.
ADVANCED MS-DOS TUTOR
Order Code: 10040
Total Disks: 1
The second of this months MS-DOS tutors, only this one is for advanced users and covers the organisation of data on disks, etc.
Again this is the first lesson and more are available in the registered version.
The tutor examines the make of disks, explaining the meaning of sectors, clusters and tracks, etc.
Very graphical, easy to use and all jargon is explained in detail.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
ADVENTURE MATH
Order Code: 9930
Total Disks: 1
From an educational point of view Adventure Math is well suited to teaching basic maths for 4–9 year olds.
The stunning VGA graphics and optional Sound Blaster support will hold the young user's attention.
The digitised speech is crystal clear and the FM music would justify spending that little extra on a Sound Blaster to get the full benefit of this excellent package.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
ECOMASTER
Order Code: 9180
Total Disks: 1
Aimed at children of 10 years and over Ecomaster aims to teach a little about which environments best suit a kind of animal.
An educational game in which up to four players compete with animals for a set amount of food.
The environments change and this makes the game more interesting.
At the start of each environment players bid for animals, the highest bidder wins.
You must then see how your animal competes to survive.
An excellent game for younger users.
GUITAR TEACHER
Order Code: 9900
Total Disks: 1
The guitar teacher is a program containing hundreds of chord charts showing the finger positions required to form chords.
The program can be configured for left or right handed players at the press of key and also provides a tuning facility via the PC speaker.
A very professional tuition tool that will help any music student with their studies.
HENRIETTA'S BOOK OF SPELLS (VGA)
Order Code: 9350 Total Disks: 1 This program is ideal for introducing children to computers and helping them with their spelling.
The excellent graphics and animation sequences keep them interested to the end, especially if you have a soundblaster card as well as it is now supported with this program.
The authors have obviously taken note of the thousands of users of the first release to bring you this wonderful educational program.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
INTRODUCTION TO MSDOS/HARDWARE
Order Code: 10080 Total Disks: 1
This is a very modern and comprehensive tutor package covering the MS-DOS operating system used by most PC's in the world today.
It doesn't stop there though, it advances into the basic components of a computer.
The functions of memory, floppy drive and the hard disk are all explained.
The is the first lesson of the series.
An advanced MS-DOS tutor is also available.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
KIDDIES PUZZLES
Order Code: 9260
Total Disks: 1
This game is similar to games you would buy for 2–6 year olds that had Zoo animals cut out of the board with little pins on them, The child would try to fit the animal back into the right shape.
This one is mouse controlled and is ideal for encouraging children to use the PC and mouse.
Each time the game is played the animals are in a different position on the screen.
Requires EGA.
MATH COUNTS
Order Code: 9970
Total Disks: 1
Aimed at children from toddlers to early teens, this package provides many tutorials on basic maths, shapes, fractions and graphs.
The large text is easy to read, so your child needn't sit too close to the screen, and the language used is simple so younger users should be able to learn with a little encouragement from an adult.
Well put together with good appeal.
MATHS RESCUE
Order Code: 9860
Total Disks: 1
Aimed at 4 to 10 year olds this educational game is fun and sure to keep the attention of any young student.
Guide your young friend around the various worlds and rescue numbers in the correct order, solve more difficult calculations and get bonus points.
From the famous Apogee team in the USA, the quality of graphics, sound and subject matter is second to none.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
MICROPROCESSOR TUTOR
Order Code: 10100
Total Disks: 1
The first lesson in microprocessor technology is available on shareware, another 17 appear in the registered version.
This lesson covers computer arithmetic, specifically signed-binary numbers.
The tutor is comprehensive in this subject and is well suited for use by students or lecturers as course material.
Requires Hard Disc.
SIMSTAT
Order Code: 9750
Total Disks: 1
Not for the faint hearted, this statistics program is the most comprehensive of its kind that we have seen.
The menu driven interface provides access to the following statistical modelling techniques: Cross-tabulation, nominal & ordinal statistics, inter-raters and host of breakdown analysis techniques.
This is a very serious package proving the academic strength of our authors.
GFA REMBRANDT
Order Code: 9420
Total Disks: 2
GFA Rembrandt is the best paint and graphics package I have seen on the Shareware market, it will work with any PC and really is a paint program anybody can use.
Not only do you have all the facilities of other commercial packages but with Rembrandt you can draw in stereo 3D, of course you will need a pair of glasses with the two colour lenses to see you drawings disappearing into the back of your monitor.
It has a slide show facility to quickly flick through all your pictures plus many other drawing tools.
The astonishing image manipulation routines will have you drawing until the early hours, we have already used it to manipulate some of the pictures shown in this section.
This program is one that you must see, and once seen I know you will want to register it.
Requires CGA.
IKONIZE
Order Code: 9770
Total Disks: 1
Ikonize is a screen capture utility specifically designed to allow you to cut up pieces of displayed graphics and use them for Windows icons.
The program runs under DOS and writes its files out in bitmap (BMP) format ready for use by windows.
If you lack the flare for graphics and are fed-up of the same old icons get Ikonize and brighten up your Windows desktop today.
Requires Hard Disc.
PROTOCAD
Order Code: 10010
Total Disks: 1
This 3D design package is ideal for any novice to intermediate designer, people involved in teaching design should also look closely at protocad.
Full 3D wire frame views and rendered images can be selected.
Perspective is there along with all the other obvious CAD requirements.
The program was developed by Trius, one of shareware's most professional teams, and authors of AsEasyAs.
Requires Hard Disc.
FORTUNE
Order Code: 9870
Total Disks: 1
A program encompassing many diverse fortune telling areas such as Numerology, Runes, Cards and Dice.
The program also provides a simple E.S.P test.
Computers are becoming more and more involved in the areas of strange phenomenon.
Maybe this program will guide you to the best shareware company of all (or perhaps you already know!).
A very detailed program, easy to use.
HOME FINANCE COMPANION
Order Code: 5000
Total Disks: 1
NOW AVAILABLE FOR ALL SCREEN TYPES.
— This best selling program lacks nothing, it is obvious within the first five minutes of using the program that the author has listened to end users and their requirements.
As well as all the things you would expect from a home finance package, such as automatic standing orders debits and bank reconciliation, this package has all the extras that, once used, you will wonder how you managed without them.
You can access a pop-up calculator, a notepad facility that can be called up each time you execute the program and, from a reviewers point of view the most appealing, you can access the manual at any time during the running of the program.
It will produce graphs (if you have EGA minimum) and ASCII reports to be loaded into your word processor.
Even if you are running an existing home accounts package it is worth having a look at this one, I feel confident that you will want to change.
I for one will certainly be registering a copy for my personal use at home.
POISON FOR THE HEART
Order Code: 9840
Total Disks: 1
Poison For the Heart is one of a collection of computer ‘books’ for thinkers.
The book is read by choosing keywords from a screen rather like an index.
The computer then displays question and answer like text on many philosophical topics.
Transend are continually looking for shareware that spans a wide spectrum.
This title achieves this goal and will appeal to students.
ADVENTURE COLLECTION
Order Code: 10030
Total Disks: 1
An excellent collection of three text based adventures involving various challenges.
Many puzzles must be solved and treasures found to complete your adventures.
You are sure to get lost if you don't map out these detailed games so keep a pad and pencil to hand.
While away those dark winter evenings and exercise the grey matter at the same time!
BANDOR
Order Code: 9850
Total Disks: 4
A very graphical and highly playable Dungeons and Dragons game featuring 256 colour screens and excellent Sound Blaster support.
The East side of the city is flanked by the slums of the underworld.
Your task is to clean the underworld of foul beasts and make it inhabitable so the city can be expanded.
This game will certainly stretch the imagination of D & D gamers.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
BEYOND
Order Code: 9920
Total Disks: 1
A game of blocks to challenge the most hardened Tetris expert.
The shapes are comprised of 3 blocks, each with a symbol of varying colour.
As the blocks fall you must guide them to align similar objects.
Matching symbols are cleared from the screen making additional space for more blocks.
A very addictive game, which will appeal to players of the block genre.
Requires EGA.
COMMANDER KEEN 4 (CGA)
Order Code: 9960
Total Disks: 1
At last ID software recognise the existence of CGA computer users who will no doubt make a mad dash for the phone, to order this disk.
Thousands of Keen disks were ordered last month by EGA/VGA users proving the undying popularity of this loveable, young, hero.
Guide the Commander around many levels in the hunt for his disassembled space ship.
Great fun for the kids.
Requires CGA.
COMMANDER KEEN IN KEEN DREAMS
Order Code: 10000
Total Disks: 1
Commander Keen has the largest fan club of any other shareware game available.
Transend has scoured the world from Norway to the U.S.A. in the search for more Keen Games.
We found this latest version from Gamers Edge in America, along with many other titles form ID Software, now known as the lost collection of ID Software.
Your Hero is Back and needs help to rescue the captured children being held by the Vicious Vegetables.
We fell about laughing at the jogging carrots, head butting parsnips and other wacky characters as we jumped, climbed and ran about the many levels.
A well aimed flower bomb soon put paid to the battling vegies, but only for a few seconds to give you time to pass, save the children and leave quickly.
Shin up the fireman's poles to heights never reached before but before careful the potato doesn't bash your head in at the top.
Game players every where are now queuing up for a copy of this excellent graphical game with breathtaking colours.
Requires EGA.
CORNCOB 3D
Order Code: 8160
Total Disks: 1
Good Shareware flight simulators are a little thin on the ground (or in the air) so, we were delighted to find this one.
A hard disk is preferable although you can run Corncob from a high density floppy.
It is 1949 and you are in control of a standard front-line ground attack plane, you have a choice of missions on which to embark.
Your objective is to complete your mission and return to base in one piece.
The Author has paid a lot of attention to detail in the use of controls and instruments.
It has excellent graphics and flight simulation, you can even leave the plane and walk around it if you wish.
Corncob is one of the best Shareware flight simulators I used and will provide hours of entertainment for any would be Hero.
Requires VGA.
DRUM BLASTER
Order Code: 9730
Total Disks: 1
This is a brilliant piece of software enhanced greatly for those with a soundcard.
You can create and play music using various instruments and sound effects while the animated keyboard and drum player act out the song.
This is a professional program that will keep you at your PC for hours.
It is another offering from Epic Megagames whose name now guarantees hours of fun.
Requires EGA.
EGA STARTREK
Order Code: 1800
Total Disks: 1
I almost had a Vulcan mind melt when I saw the colour graphics on this version of Star Trek.
The screen is extremely well laid out and help is always at hand as there are many commands for the game.
Your mission is to boldly go about the galaxy destroying the Klingon forces which possess many new tactical weapons and abilities.
As you complete more games and improve your skills the game gets more difficult, the Klingons get more intelligent.
One of the best versions of Trek available on shareware.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
ELECTRO BODY
Order Code: 8130
Total Disks: 1
Whenever you want top quality arcade graphics and dazzling sound you need look no further than the shareware leisure section.
Electro body is without doubt one of the most stunning arcade action games.
Search the maze dodging the robots and auto-firing laser guns.
Brilliant digitised speech for Soundblaster users and a first class music track.
Arcade addicts get this!
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
GALAXY CONQUEST
Order Code: 9890
Total Disks: 1
A refreshing new board game, designed for two players, where the aim of the game is to destroy your enemy's ships.
Various pieces decorate the board and can be helpful in your quest for survival.
These pieces can recharge your ship or warp you out of difficulty.
A game which is easy to learn, having simple rules, yet requires the development of a good strategy.
Requires CGA.
HUGO'S HOUSE OF HORRORS III
Order Code: 9390
Total Disks: 1
Game lovers who have played the Larry series of graphical adventures will enjoy the excellent graphics of this third game in the Hugo series.
Guide Hugo around the various locations talking to other characters and using various objects on your way through the game.
Worth adding to your collection of graphical adventures and other Hugo Games.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
INDIANA JONES DEMO
Order Code: 9950
Total Disks: 1
A truly awesome demonstration version of Lucas' Films leading commercial game.
Very rarely do we distribute demo's of commercial games, but as a service to our readers we do make one or two exceptions.
The animation, Sound Blaster support and VGA graphics are brilliant.
The demo can be played for some time and allows for detailed assessment before opting to buy.
LLAMATRON
Order Code: 10070
Total Disks: 1
Based on a highly addictive arcade game llamatron is a high-pressure, adrenaline pumping shoot-em up.
There are masses of aliens surrounding you on all sides.
Innocent llamas and other wild beast roam the screen, helpless, bleating and afraid.
You must save them from the pursuing aliens, brains and (what's that, are you sure? surely not) YES! the HUGE Lavatory!
Get this now!
Requires VGA.
MARIO VGA
Order Code: 5250
Total Disks: 1
This is an excellent adaptation of the Mario Brothers game.
The game play is smooth and the graphics are as good as any other platforms type game.
The task is to collect coins and to tip up the tortoises and spiders that crawl out of the pipes along the platforms.
By jumping and bumping your head under the platform the tortoises are walking, on you can tip them onto their backs, they are then helpless to move.
All you have to do then is get up there to knock them off.
Beware! if you take too long they remove their shell, change colour and are even harder to keep up with.
This game is well worth adding to your leisure library.
Requires VGA.
MIN-HA-TO
Order Code: 9980
Total Disks: 1
An oriental Korean card game, played for points with the computer facing you as the opponent.
Cards are played by each player in turn onto a playing area made of eight cards.
Points are gained for matches though you can also score when the cards don't match.
The deck is beautifully drawn and is a tribute to the author's programming ability.
Well worth adding to your card games disks.
Requires VGA.
MORKIN2
Order Code: 10020
Total Disks: 1
An electronic board game with excellent graphics and Sound Blaster support.
A Dungeons and Dragons theme where you guard your wizard from attack whilst attempting to destroy other wizards on the board.
Many spells may be cast to create creatures which attack the enemy.
Spells may be cast at your own character to increase ability.
Good graphics and playability.
Requires VGA.
NEW WOLFENSTEIN MAPS 1.0
Order Code: 7280
Total Disks: 1
Our Wolfenstein extras disk contains a map editor for designing your own Wolfenstein Castle.
The author of this disk has put the editor to good use designing a challenging collection of maze like levels.
Get to level eight and nine and you go into pure shoot-em-up mode.
Level 10 has the awesome super guard, kill him and your home and dry, if only you could kill him!
Level 10 is a challenging game in itself.
Wolfenstein is so addictive you will probably attempt to play it to a conclusion by staying up all night.
If you do manage it then this brilliant collection of new maps will give you something to do tonight, at least for a few hours!
Get this disk today along with the Wolfenstein extras disk (Code 5150) they really do make Apogee's latest game unbeatable either in the shareware or commercial markets.
Requires VGA.
OVERKILL
Order Code: 9940
Total Disks: 1
Without doubt this is the best shoot-em-up arcade action release of 1992.
Those familiar with the quality of XENON from the Bitmap Brothers will see a likeness in professional graphics and sound.
The shareware version provides two levels of stunning creatures, space ships and scrolling terrain.
Guide the ship to the end of this boggling game then register for more action!
Requires EGA.
PHYLOX
Order Code: 10390
Total Disks: 1
A fast moving, rapid action arcade adventure with you as the jet-pack propelled hero on your way to meet one of the most fiendish Insects known to man.
Hidden deep beneath the ground is the breeder, your task is to blast your way passed the smaller attacking insects and laser beam enhanced security cameras and confront the beast in it's nest.
Brilliant graphics
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
SAND STORM
Order Code: 9330
Total Disks: 1 Fire up your mouse for non-stop action in this high-octane graphics arcade game.
Intercept scud missiles and jet attacks with your patriots; then guide your Tomahawk missile through enemy Ack Ack fire on a search and destroy mission.
This is a shareware version of a popular commercial game sold through high street stores and includes 20 missions.
You do need a mouse and minimum 286 machine to run it.
Requires VGA.
SCRAMBLE
Order Code: 2000
Total Disks: 1
An excellent computer version of the popular board game Scrabble.
You have the option of 1–4 players, or if you prefer the computer can play with you.
The documentation on disk with this program comes with full instructions and details of installing and loading.
It even deals with possible technical problems.
The EGA graphics are very well done and make the game every bit as enjoyable as the board game.
The disk comes with the necessary programs to decode the 33,000 word dictionary, to allow you to edit, and to re-encode it for use with Scramble.
This enabled me to put in all the words I consider legal and thus go on to win the game.
Using a mouse is optional but it does make the game more playable.
Requires EGA.
TEGL MONOPOLY
Order Code: 1780
Total Disks: 1
This TEGL product does great justice to the game of Monopoly.
Good use of animated VGA graphics and pop-up windows with property information make this a must for fans of the board game.
The American property titles do not detract from the game which can be played by up to fifteen players at the same time.
A game that can be played by all the family is quite rare so this is sure to be popular among readers.
The pull down menus make the game easy to play and the smooth animation help keep the interest of younger players.
Requires VGA.
THE CATACOMB ABYSS
Order Code: 20000
Total Disks: 2
EGA Graphics owners cursed when they saw that Wolfenstein 3D required a minimum of VGA to display its 256 colours.
Wolfenstein was nearly Transend's best selling game of ‘92…
Nearly!
All must now step aside and make way for The Catacomb Abyss from U.S.A's Gamers Edge team.
Our librarian passed me the disk ready for review, I ran it and nervously waited for the title page.
Impatient as ever I skipped the help and went straight for the action!
Caught unawares I was dragged helplessly into the nightmare world of The Catacombs.
My soundblaster convinced me that there were footsteps coming from behind me.
I wheeled around to see a 3D abhorrent Zombie attempting to maul me.
Quickly I hurled two magical fireballs, both hit the creature of the night square in the chest reducing him to a pile of smouldering bones.
I darted for cover, blasting a hole in a wall with another fireball.
Beyond the rubble stood a chest of treasure with more healing potions and firepower beneath its lid.
A Screech, and in the distance appeared a bat, another fireball took care of it…
The Catacomb Abyss More than a game…
IT'S REAL!
Requires EGA.
THE QUIZ
Order Code: 9760
Total Disks: 1
A quiz game for windows.
Many questions on popular movies and the stars are included.
Developed in Visual Basic, the quiz is a multi-choice format game where you choose an answer from a list of several possibilities.
Get the family around the keyboard one evening and test your knowledge.
You will be surprised how popular quiz games are with families as all can play.
VGA-JONGG
Order Code: 10040
Total Disks: 1
The ancient game Mah-Jongg is very popular amongst PC games players, particularly those who are keen on logic, card and board games.
This beautifully drawn game of matching tiles is very challenging, yet the rules are extremely simple and can be mastered in under two minutes.
As with all similar games it is the strategy you develop that makes the difference.
Requires VGA.
WHOOP IT UP!
Order Code: 5310
Total Disks: 1
Windows 3.1 now allows you to add sound events to certain system procedures This means that from your PC speaker, using the speaker driver program, or your Soundblaster card you can play certain sounds (stored in.
WAV files) during system events such as start-up, shutdown and on encountering an error.
With WHOOP IT UP! you can now add sounds to System, Generic and Application events.
A number of files are included so you can hear Captain Kirk whenever you UnZoom, the Knights who say Ni! when you start an application and Arnold Schwarzenegger saying ‘I'll be back’ when you close an application.
This program is excellent! and we have also included on the disk a WAV file called Getout! which you can use every time you exit windows.
It is taken from Wing Commander II and it says ‘Now get out of here and I hope we never meet again!’, brilliant.
WOLFENSTEIN-2 (SPEAR OF DESTINY)
Order Code: 9800
Total Disks: 2
All you Wolfenstein 3D fans will find the two level demo of this program just as playable.
It has the same excellent graphics and takes place in the Castle Wolfenstein where you must find the spear of destiny, killing the guards along the way.
If you have already seen the first Wolfenstein get a copy of this today, if not, order Wolfenstein-3D on order code 3080 (2 Disks).
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
ZENTRIS
Order Code: 10380 Total Disks: 1 A highly colourful VGA version of the popular Tetris game that provides mouse support if a suitable mouse is attached.
The game is very playable and the graphics are flicker free as we have come to expect from the top shareware authors.
The mouse support is very intelligent, allowing you to rotate, position and drop the blocks almost without thinking.
Very addictive.
Requires VGA.
MATHS WORKSHOP
Order Code: 10110
Total Disks: 1
An ideal self-teach tool that would also appeal to those tutoring in the field of advanced mathematics.
Students may enter complex calculations from sources such as passed examination papers and the computer will take them through a solution step by step.
The package is designed to solve, through symbolic manipulation, problems in differential calculus.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
PSPICE
Order Code: 1150
Total Disks: 1
A circuit analysis program that reads a circuit description from a text file and performs various ‘bench’ tests and writes results to an output file for later viewing.
The program itself is very simple, thus easy to run.
However, the text file describing the circuit requires some long hours studying the manual.
The program is very popular among those teaching electronics and well worth assessing.
The documentation is comprehensive and should help you master the more technical aspects of the program.
Features of the circuit that are analysed are bias, performance of the circuit when used with DC and AC and finally noise.
Requires Hard Disc.
AS EASY AS
Order Code: 7080
Total Disks: 1
This is the latest version of the worlds best known shareware spreadsheet, namely version 5.01c.
With thirteen graph types, array manipulation facilities and full mouse interface As Easy As is going to take some beating.
These facilities are sure to impress expert spreadsheet users, especially those with experience of Lotus 123.
The comprehensive on-screen manual will teach novice users how to use the more commonly used features.
As Easy As can also simulate a 3D working spreadsheet by dividing its 2D sheet into ‘PANELS’.
Each panel then becomes a spreadsheet in its own right.
Pull down menus offer easy access to the multitude of facilities and options can be selected by mouse or keyboard.
AT-SLOW
Order Code: 10130
Total Disks: 1
One of a new generation of slow down utilities which caters for high speed 80386 and 80486 computers.
If a game or other program runs too fast using a utility such AT-SLOW will reduce the performance of your computer to a level similar to a XT or 80286 machine.
If you have any older games that are infuriatingly fast then load up this excellent compact utility.
SUPER DISK COPY
Order Code: 1180
Total Disks: 2
Super disk copier speeds up the operation of duplicating a master disk many times.
It is particularly useful for central offices distributing disk based information to regional branches.
The program is fast and simple to use being menu driven and has excellent printed and on-line documentation.
A master disk can be read into memory and once there can be written out to blank disks many times.
The master disk can be read from a floppy or from an image file held on hard disk.
There are options to format a floppy in any drive to any suitable capacity and support is provided for 1.2 and 1.44 megabyte floppy drives.
The same disk also comes with COPYMASTER which claims to duplicate copy protected disks.
The version provided says that it will duplicate software that early versions of CopyIIPC will not.
Such utilities may only be used to make backups of precious disks which you have purchased and respect for the rights of software manufacturers must be upheld.
Misuse of any duplication program could result in proceedings against you by a software vendor.
Requires Hard Disc.
TCD
Order Code: 9810
Total Disks: 1
A fantastic, easy to use, file and directory manager.
This graphical system runs on all PC's regardless of monitor type and aids disk management.
It is important to keep your disks in order, especially hard drives which hold lots of information.
TCD makes the task of tidying and organising much simpler and even enjoyable.
Also has an easy to use editor.
A must for new users.
TEXT TO EXE
Order Code: 9830
Total Disks: 1
This disk contains a number of utilities for turning text into self displaying text files.
If you have a file called MANUAL.DOC you can turn it into MANUAL.EXE.
Whenever you run ‘MANUAL.EXE’ the original file is displayed on the screen so you can browse through it.
This way you don't need an editor to view a text file.
Great for Shareware or for distribution of text disks.
VIRUS TERMINUS
Order Code: 9300
Total Disks: 1
For those of you with the McAfee virus utilities Scan & Clean, this is an excellent choice of front end menu.
It takes all the work out of scanning and cleaning virus on hard disks or floppy, there are many options to choose from and it allows you to scan just certain files or directories and makes use of all the Scan options.
VIRUSCAN-97 & CLEAN97
Order Code: 1290
Total Disks: 1
The McAffee virus tools are now famous across the world being used by thousands of companies and individuals alike.
It is difficult to pick up a magazine these days and not see an article or item of news about the latest attack on some computer or other.
With strict procedures and a great deal of co-operation it is likely that you will not receive a virus.
However, as it is difficult to know the history of every disk you are presented with then it is better to be safe than sorry.
The VIRUSCAN utility hunts for viruses which are described in a disk based document called VIRLIST.TXT which comes with the package.
Briefly, the program searches memory, then the boot sector of your disk then every single file for an infection of any kind.
A report is then provided on screen to tell you if a virus was found.
A corresponding cleanup program is supplied which scans for viruses and removes them, often by having to delete the infected program.
The virus utilities are a must for every computer user concerned with computer security.
BREEZE
Order Code: 9820
Total Disks: 1
An excellent, friendly, menu driven text editor with colourful, well laid out screens and all the facilities required by novice to intermediate users.
We found the program packed with features such as spell checking, a handy pop-up calculator and good Word-Star compatibility.
More advanced features include multi-document editing and macros.
Best editor seen for a long time.
FORMAT AND PRINT
Order Code: 9290
Total Disks: 1
Format and print is an excellent utility for adding margins, headers and page numbers to a standard text file before sending it to the printer.
It is ideal for printing the on-disk manuals supplied with shareware, you can even invoke your favourite file viewer to check the format before printing.
A good program to add to everybody's library.
PC-PROOF
Order Code: 10120
Total Disks: 1
The problem with writing large amounts of text is the time it takes to proof read the final document.
PC-Proof is an automatic grammar checker and searches for changes in tense, missing words, bad punctuation and a whole host of ‘technical’ errors.
The level of checking can be tuned to reduce the number of errors detected.
A Must for authors, reviewers and editors.
PC-WRITE VERSION 4
Order Code: 7000
Total Disks: 4
The very latest version of the world-famous shareware word processor.
PC-Write version 4.00 features spell check (includes auto check as you type), preview mode, advanced and novice menu configurations, windowed operation for multiple document editing and full mouse operation.
These features now make PC-Write suitable for all levels of user from novice to expert.
If you find the full menus over powering switch to novice mode and you still have quick access to all key features.
Full short cut-keys are available to most menu options and a full configuration and system is included to help set colours, special display characters and all default formatting styles.
Finally PC-Write also offers indexing and body text style to aid rapid formatting and index production.
A brilliant wordprocessor proving shareware can push back the boundaries of software value for money.
Requires Hard Disc.
Ami Pro 3.0
by Janet Swift
What do you expect your word processor to do for you?
If your answer is just print out nicely justified text with the spelling checked then you may be in for a surprise.
Ami Pro 3.0 not only gives you a full range of text and text styles it also gives you a drawing package, a charting package, an equation editor and a grammar checker.
It also makes all its facilities easy to use and comes with an attractive range of templates suitable for documents of many types.
So what's the catch?
Well it is a big package.
It runs under Windows 3.0 or 3.1 and so needs a 386 machine and 2 Mbytes or more of RAM and a full installation requires 15Mbytes of space on your hard disk.
If this sounds rather a lot it is worth noting that other word processors that offer similar facilities make similar demands of your hardware.
Having used both Ami Pro 3.0 and Word 2 for Windows (which has to be seen as the main competition as it is the number one heavyweight word processor) I find that I do prefer Ami Pro for one simple reason — its use of colour.
(Please note I have a colour VGA monitor which definitely colours my opinion here!)
Both programs use icons for frequently used operations but because Ami Pro's are coloured it makes them easier remember and easier to use.
It is worth pointing out that Ami Pro uses the same SmartIcons as Lotus's other Windows products — in particular 1-2-3 for Windows and Freelance for Windows and so learning their use in one package gives you an advantage in the others.
One of the improvements in this version is that you can get an instant description of an icon just by clicking the right mouse button.
So if you cannot decide what the icon that looks like a milk churn with an overgrown mushroom beside it means you can select it and discover that it means Paste Clipboard contents — oh perhaps it is supposed to be a drawing pin besides a board but you could have fooled me!
Another way in which the icons are now easier to understand is because you can now include separators in the SmartIcon palette in order to group icons together.
So the fact that Paste is grouped together with Cut and Copy means that you probably recognise it by association rather than by the picture on the icon!
Better ways with SmartIcons
The problem with SmartIcons up until now had been that while you could customise the current palette you could not name and save different versions of the palette.
You can now do this and in fact its very easy.
If you look at the screen shown here you will see that I have added the Customise SmartIcons icon to my palette.
Clicking on this reveals the SmartIcons dialog box and it's pretty obvious how this works — you simply drag icons on or off the list on the left of the screen.
If you are an old Ami Pro hand you will be pleased to see the new design of this dialog box which gives you a description of each icon.
Equally important is the new button marked Save Set which lets you give a name to a selection.
You can quickly load any named set by clicking on the button marked with three icons at the bottom right of the screen — a pop-up list of all the possibilities appears — including Hide SmartIcons for times when you prefer to do without any!
Another small point to note is the question mark in the upper right hand corner of the dialog box shown.
Clicking on this gives direct access to context sensitive help — which supplements the usual routes to online help including a Search command.
Use your mouse
Ami Pro 3.0 uses the mouse much more than the previous version.
There is now a FastFormat icon which works like a ‘paintbrush for text’ and gives a quick way of applying a text attributes from selected text already in your document to any other area you then select.
This facility is made even more useful because it can remain available while the user continues to type at the cursor.
You know that FastFormat is ‘on’ since the cursor changes to have a paintbrush beside it.
Drag and Drop, a facility to move and copy text by selecting it and then holding down the mouse button, is now included.
When you move text in this way the cursor changes to show scissors like those in the Cut icon and when you copy (the same operation with the Ctrl key held down) the cursor resembles the Copy icon.
While Word for Windows 2 already included Drag and Drop, a more novel use of the mouse is SmartClick which uses the right button.
This gives instant access to settings dialog boxes.
For example, if you have inserted a frame into your document when you select it and right click on the mouse you access the Modify Frame Layout dialog box.
Perhaps more generally useful is right clicking on the normal text entry area — this brings up the Modify Style dialog box — or in the border around the page when you are in the default Layout Mode — which brings up the Modify Page Layout dialog box.
Plenty of extras
In common with all the top-of-the range word processors, Ami Pro now has a grammar checker.
I have to admit that this is a feature I can live without most of the time but I like to have access to one for important documents where a silly slip would be embarrassing.
The good thing about this one (which is based on the Houghton Mifflin standard) is that it has a pretty comprehensive range of supplied sets of rules and you can easily modify one of these to your own requirements.
You are likely to need to modify it at least a little as it is American in origin.
Other new features in this version are automatic envelope printing, and an easier route to mail merge, called Smart Merge.
If you decide to keep your name and address records in Ami Pro (an attractive option if you do not already have them in a database such as dBase or a spreadsheet such as 1-2-3) then it provides an easy to use record keeping system.
There is an improvement to Ami Pro's style sheets in that there is now a Viewer so that you can see what they look like before selecting one.
Some of them are automated and ask questions — such as name and address of person a letter is going to — and fill in the relevant sections — see
There is a list of new ‘legal-specific’ features to make Ami Pro more suitable as a word processor for those working on contracts, case law and other specialised applications but it would be misleading to dwell on those aspects and not mention facilities that are not new but are still exciting extras.
For example, Ami Pro has a charting module that makes it very easy to include graphs in your documents.
Its chart gallery offers a good range of options and you can easily customise your chart in other ways- such as by adding a legend or by select an alternative colour palette.
Equation editor — diagram to illustrate this EQUATION.PCX
Drawing module — diagram to illustrate this DRAWING.PCX
Ami Pro supports OLE and DDE but what you see in the illustrations of the Drawing module and the Equation Editor is TOOLS p Technology for Object Oriented Linking.
This is a technique developed by Lotus for making these modular features available while at the same time allowing you to see the document page — so you can edit a drawing while viewing it in context.
So at the end of my review can I recommend Ami Pro 3.0?
If you need a full featured word processor — and while you might like the idea of drawing and charting do you really need them within your word processor — and have the hardware to support it, I think it is a strong competitor to Word for Windows 2 and currently in advance of any others.
It is also worth noting that while its recommended price is £395 there is an upgrade offer to users of all competing word processor or any Lotus word processor for just £99 which means you might get a bargain.
Step by Step to Customising Ami Pro
by Janet Swift
However full of features your software is — and Ami Pro 3.0 is a front runner in this respect — you are always likely to find something different or extra that you want.
Luckily using macros and the customisable icon palette you can tailor Ami Pro 3.0 to your way of working.
Steps 1 — 3 Using one palette as the basis of another
Once you have worked with Ami Pro on a given type of document for a reasonable period it is time to define your own palette for that type of document.
From experience you will know which of the icons you rarely use and which tools you frequently access via the menu.
For example, when writing letters I do not use Add a frame, the Thesaurus, Create drawing, Charting and I can quite well do without the final two icons on the default palette that concern icons themselves.
On the other hand I could do with icons to Exit Ami Pro, Find and Replace, Full justification, Right justify text, Insert the current date and so on.
So using the default palette as the basis it is time for change.
Unless the Customise SmartIcons icon is itself showing select the SmartIcons option from the Tools menu to access the SmartIcons dialog box.
Step 1 CAPTION — To delete an icon just drag it off the right-hand set of icons.
Step 2 CAPTION — To add an icon just drag it onto the right-hand set of icons.
In order to group icons into logical groups you can use the Spacer as often as you like — it is to be found at the top of the list of Available Icons.
You can move icons just by dragging them to new positions.
Step 3 CAPTION — When you have finished making changes name the new palette giving it a suitable name and file name.
Make the name as descriptive as possible as it is added to the pop-up menu that is accessed when you click the button bar icon at the bottom right of the screen.
Steps 4 to 7 — Using an existing macro
As well as just using existing icons you can create ones of your own for facilities that would otherwise require a number of separate operations.
For example, as a magazine journalist one feature of a word processor that is an absolute necessity is the ability to do a quick word count.
When reviewers criticise software for not including such a facility the manufacturers often reply that it's only journalists who are interested in this feature and that ‘ordinary users’ find a word count irrelevant.
Well having discussed this matter with many typical users of word processors, I beg to differ.
As anybody responsible for running a small business will confirm, numerous forms require you to complete them ‘in no more than 300 words’ and students everywhere are asked for quantities of words as their regular assignments.
Ami Pro 3.0 does have a word count facility — it is in the Doc Info box accessed via the file menu and so my only complaint is that it entails a four stage process — select File, Select Doc Info, select Update and select OK or cancel to return to your document.
Instead I would just like to be able to click a single button which means assigning a macro to an appropriate icon.
Before you embark on writing a macro always check to so if there is one already.
In this case there is one called WORDCNT and it is much more sophisticated than the one I would have written.
If you want to inspect the macro open WORDCNT.SSM.
I discovered the existence of this macro by reading the file GOODIES.SAM which gives a list of macros supplied with Ami Pro 3.0.
(By running a macro called SPECIALF.SSM you can add an item Special Features to the Tools menu that displays this file without you needing to locate and open it).
Having found this macro we want to assign it to an icon but this entails designing an appropriate one.
Again the method is to choose an existing icon to base it on.
I decided to use the icon for launching 1-2-3 for Windows since 123 suggests counting.
This icon in fact appears by default when you select Edit Icon from the SmartIcons dialog box simply because of the way the list of custom icons is ordered.
All I considered necessary was to simplify the design of the icon and give it a different colour scheme.
Having created a distinct icon I could then associate the icon with the word counting macro.
Finally I added this custom icon to an Articles palette containing others useful for such documents.
Step 4 CAPTION- GOODIES.SAM is a mine of useful macros.
It also provides instructions to enable you to have quick access to the information it contains via the Tools menu.
Step 5 CAPTION- Change the icon pixel by pixel by choosing colours from the Editor's palette and using the mouse to apply them.
Notice that the preview shows you what the icon will look like at its normal size.
Step 6 CAPTION- Having completed the edit use the Save As option to name the file (which automatically has a.
BMP extension) and by selecting WORDCNT.SSM from the list of macros so that it appears in the Run Macro box and the summary of what it does appears in the Description box.
Step 7 (NOTE-THIS CAPTION IS ALSO WITHIN THE PIC ITSELF)-The result of clicking on the new word count icon — you will notice that it shows a very polished and informative dialog box.
Steps 8 — 11
If you look at the Articles palette shown in Step 7 you will see I have added a second, very similar icon with the letters Bk on it.
This icon is going to be used for a macro to count the number of words in a highlighted block — a very useful facility for making sure that any document you write is properly balanced.
The method to be used is to copy the highlighted block to another file specially reserved for the purpose, then count the words and display the result in a simple message box.
This is to be a ‘home made’ macro and therefore the results will be not nearly as sophisticated as the dialog box produced by WORDCNT.
The macro depends on there being an empty file called COUNT.DOC so that preliminary step was to use File New and save it while still completely blank as COUNT.
I then proceeded by recording a keystroke macro — that is I used the Record option on the Macros section of the Tools menu, typed in the filename BLOCKCNT into the dialog box that appeared and ran through steps needed to perform the task while the macro recorder was on.
The operations were to copy an already highlighted block to the clipboard; open the file COUNT; paste the block into it and then close COUNT without saving any changes.
Recording was then terminated by using Tools, Macros, End Record.
At this stage you will notice that no attempt has been made to count the words as it was not possible to use the macro record facility for this operation.
Instead counting required extra statements (those indicated in Step 9 by the black background) to be inserted into the macro.
The file BLOCKCNT.SMM (stored automatically into the AMIPRO\MACROS directory was opened and the additional instructions were typed into it.
The file was then saved and its purpose was typed into the Description box.
The final stage was to return to the icon Editor and, with the count a block icon selected, repeat Step 6 to associate it with the macro BLOCKCNT.SMM.
After this you can highlight any passage in the currently active document and click on the new icon to see a result like the one in Step 11.
Clicking on OK takes you back to the current document, leaving COUNT in its original empty state.
STEP 8 CAPTION — Using the command Tools, Macros, Record takes you to the Record Macro dialog box.
Enter the name of the macro file you want create — in this case BLOCKCNT.
STEP 9 CAPTION — The entire BLOCKCNT macro.
You can either create it the way I did or just copy everything you see here into a new file.
NOTE TO EDITOR: IT IS VITAL THAT READERS CAN READ THE MACRO IN STEP 9.
If it does not show up well enough as the screen dump replace with the following text:
FUNCTION BLOCKCNT1() Copy () FileOpen (’ C: \AMIPRO\DOCS\COUNT.SAM’1 ‘’) Paste () FieldUpdateAll() words=EvalField (’NumWords’) message (’There are words words in this block’) AnswerMsgBox(No)'Answer the next message box ‘NO’FileClose () END FUNCTION
STEP 10 CAPTION — Having entered the macro save it as BLOCKCNT.SMM, filling in the description box so that you can understand what it does.
STEP 11 CAPTION — Having linked the new macro to its icon (see Step 6) make sure that it is included in the palette you are using.
When you use the Block Count icon to count an already highlighted passage you will see the text with the message box giving you the information you require.
Anatomy of a PC
New to PCs?
Or just need a refresher course on what goes into one?
David Dorn guides you round the body of your workhorse
A PC is a PC is a PC — isn't it?
Well, no, it isn't, not really.
This series will, hopefully, tell you all you need to know about what makes a PC tick, what the various bits of one are, and how the various types of PC differ for one another.
So, stick with it for four months, and you'll have all the information you need to look like an expert down at the pub!
How can it be that the chap next door has a PC, yet his has a different processor from yours, has a different monitor, and probably has a different keyboard?
Doesn't that make it a different computer?
In a way, yes it does, but because of the common denominator — DOS — it can function in exactly the same way.
So, what we're going to do for the next four months is look at the anatomy of a PC.
You may already know exactly what's inside your box, but be unsure how others function.
You may not know anything about what's inside your machine at all, but just about everybody will have three separate bits to their machine, so that's where we'll start.
Boxes
Just about every PC (which means Personal Computer, but, for this article at least, implies an IBM PC compatible personal computer) comes in three distinct parts — the CPU (also called the system box, main box, processor unit and others), the Monitor (also called the VDU, Display, Screen) and the Keyboard.
In this article we'll consider the CPU — the monitor will have a separate article of its own.
Every IBM PC compatible computer is built around a Processing Chip (processor), and this chip is nominally a member of the Intel x86 family.
Time for some history.
The first of the IBM PCs was designed around the Intel 8088 processor, an eight bit device which ran at a clock speed of 4.77MHz (we'll cover clock speeds a little later).
It was, for its time, quite a capable machine, being blessed with 64k of Random Access Memory (RAM) and was initially aimed at the home user.
The date?
August 1981
The machine was developed as an alternative to the many CP/M based machines that dominated the computer industry at the time, and was, unusually for IBM, designed around ‘off the shelf’ building blocks.
Almost anyone could have done the work.
It needed an operating system, which, as no doubt everyone knows by now, was supplied by an enterprising small firm called Microsoft, and became known as MSDOS (MicroSoft Disk Operating System).
IBM had made a few changes (very small) and entitled it PCDOS (because it ran their PCs, strangely enough!)
David Dorn guides you round the body
Within 18 months, the IBM PC was established as the de facto standard and CP/M machines began the inexorable slide into oblivion.
Thus it was that in March 1983, IBM launched the IBM XT, a denomination that still stands today.
The XT came from the middle of the word ‘extra’, which was meant to imply that this new model had better expansion capabilities than the PC.
It also had an upgraded processor, Intel 8086, which was a more capable version of the 8088, and, incidentally, was capable of being run at a faster speed — although it wasn't.
These, then are the building blocks — where the whole thing started.
Further developments came when Intel introduced the 80286 processor,(the 286) a 16 bit implementation of the 8086 that had some clever bits tagged on, particularly in memory handling — another point we'll cover in depth a little later in the series.
After the 286, as you may have gathered, came the 386, a 32 bit processor, which was followed by the 386SX, which was a 386 with a 16 bit address bus — see the BUS BITS box.
In parallel with all of this, Intel developed Maths Co-Processors (x87 chips) which took on the task of computing floating point mathematics, and took away some of the load from the main x86 processor.
This only occurs when programs are written to take advantage of the co-processor.
Thus, when Intel designed the 80486 processor, it was really an amalgam of the 386 processor and 387 maths co-processor into one package, together with some go-faster bits and bobs.
The next stage is the 586, which is widely believed to be the P5 processor which Intel has pre-announced.
BUS BITS
What does all this 8 bit, 16 bit and so forth really mean?
It refers to the address bus of a chip — how it receives and sends data.
The BUS is just a set of parallel electrical conductors, and its width depends on how many conductors there are.
An 8 bit bus can move one whole byte at a time (a byte is made up of eight bits, and a bit can have one of two values — off or on (often annotated as 1 or 0)) down the parallel lines, whereas a 16 bit bus can shift two whole bytes.
It follows that a 32 bit bus can move four bytes at a time.
The only difference, therefore, between a full 386 and a 386SX is that the SX chip communicates with the rest of the computer via a 16 bit bus, where the full 386 (the 386DX) uses a 32 bit bus.
The SX therefore has to shift four bytes as two blocks of two bytes (16 bits at a time) while the DX can move the four in one lump.
This obviously causes a minor slow down in perceived performance as far as the SX chip is concerned, but the percentage difference is small enough to be negligible in real world applications.
The same applies to 486DX chips and 486SX chips.million cycles per second) clock speed, which means that the crystal oscillator that controlled how the system timed its various functions fed 4,770,000 ticks per second into the works.
In 1985, when the first XT compatible machines made by other manufacturers appeared on the market, some had the bright idea of speeding up the clock to make the machine faster.
A common speed for XTs was 6MHz, and many Amstrad 1640/1512 users will be aware that a 10MHz clock speed was used in their machines.
When IBM's AT (the 286 based computer) was launched in late 1984, it ran at 8MHz, but it wasn't long before faster and faster oscillator speeds were used — a 25MHz 286 based machine was quite common only a couple of years ago.
It's appropriate to bring in the alternative processor manufacturers at this point.
Intel produced x86 chips to run at ‘traditional’ speeds — 8 and 16MHz for 286 chips, initially, and 16/20MHz for 386 chips.
However, other chip makers, in producing work-alike processors, decided that more speed gave them a selling point over Intels, and thus 20 and 25MHz 286 chips became common, as did 25, 33, and 40MHz 386 units.
Now, of course, Intel has fought back with 50MHz DX, 33MHz DX and 50/66MHz DX2 processors.
Speeds are becoming ever faster.
increasing the complexity of the tasks that our PCs are capable of performing in a reasonable time-span.
The Glue
What brings all of the x86 family together, primarily because of MSDOS, is that they can all pretend they are the original 8086, if a bit faster.
This is the glue that makes a PC a PC, no matter what processor chip is inside it.
Whether it be a Intel 33MHz 486DX processor or an AMD 40MHz 386 or a lowly 8086 at 4.77 MHz that forms the brains of the machine, it will run DOS, and, subject to having enough memory, lots of programs that run on all IBM PC compatible machines.
The differences come in what else it will do besides run DOS.
The 286 family can access more memory, and the 386/486 family can act as though it was a number of 8086 based computers all at once— but there you see the glue coming back — the magic 8086 crops up yet again.
Hot PCs
Practical PC is ever mindful of its readers' wishes.
With this in mind, we've got a new rating system for PCs on review — Jo Lawton checks out Watford Electronics' Aries Mini-Tower to show you how the new system works.
Benchmark tests are commonly used to give the reader some idea of how well a PC performs — is it fast, slow, or average, is its video performance up to scratch, what sort of speed does the hard disk go at, and that kind of thing.
The big problem with Benchmarks, though, is that they only tell you how well a given machine runs that particular benchmark.
What they tend not to tell you is how well a given PC stacks up against others…
You'll see a lot of guff written about PC performance, almost everywhere you look.
The plain fact is, if a PC does what you want it to do at a speed you're happy with, then its performance is perfectly acceptable.
That's fine from the user's side of the fence.
We at Practical PC, however, have a slightly more complex problem on our hands.
It's our job to bring you comprehensive performance results on PCs that are up for review, and we have to be even handed while we do it.
Since issue number one we've quoted the raw results of the benchmark tests we use (and we've chosen them pretty carefully, I might add, and applied them to every machine submitted to us for review), but we've discovered that the raw figures don't mean a lot to a great many of you.
It seems that it makes more sense to the majority of people if we tell you how much faster (or slower) than a common reference machine the test machine is.
So, we've come up with the Practical PC-ometer.
Relatively Hot.
Just as a thermometer measures the level of heat relative to freezing point and boiling point, so the Practical PC-ometer shows you graphically where the various components of a PC fall on the performance scales relative to a slow and fast machine — and other machines we've tested.
As our ‘freezing point’, we've used a base level IBM AT compatible with a clock speed of 8MHz, a 20MB MFM hard drive and a basic VGA graphics card.
That's likely to be a very common specification for machines you will have come across, and makes a good low-end reference point We haven't set a ‘boiling point’ machine, but we have set another reference point at the 25MHz 386 level — we've used the Ambra Sprinta as the reference machine here.
As time goes by, and more machines are added to the scale, you'll have a month by month reference for PC performance — and as performance levels creep ever higher (as they are doing at the moment) we'll extend the scale, and pick up new reference points.
The next one will be a 486 clocked at 33MHz — in fact the machine on test in this article!
And so to the Watford 486. 486 Desk Tower Watford Electronics' 33 MHz 486 offering is clad in a handsome desktop tower case.
The quality of the build shows that some care has been taken in its assembly — for instance, where at all possible, input and output ports have been mounted on the case rather than taking up usable expansion slot space.
Everything falls neatly to hand, and all switches and indicators are clearly marked.
The reset switch is a little large for my money, but, being well labelled, it is unlikely that accidental resets would dog its user.
Performance You can see the PC-ometer ratings here, so let's interpret them, shall we?
CPU: with a CPU performance rating of 111.45, this machine is at the top end of the performance scales.
It will be useful for processor hungry applications — spreadsheets, graphics applications, and multitasking spring readily to mind.
DISK: a data transfer rate of 995KB per second means that it's fast, beaten only by caching IDE controllers and the Elonex machines on our meters.
The performance is easily good enough for heavy-duty disk intensive applications such as databases and large graphics applications, as well as Windows 3.1 work.
VIDEO: a rather disappointing video rating of 1580 characters per second in DOS mode means that there is a potential bottleneck for graphics intensive work.
This doesn't show through in practice, though, since under Windows, probably one of the most graphically intensive environments you can have, screen updates are acceptably quick, although not as fast as with Windows-optimized accelerated cards.
Overall: the overall performance rating of 225.28 is not at all bad, putting the Aries machine up there amongst the rest of the 33MHz 486 machines.
The let down has to be the video speed, but otherwise, we're looking at a solidly built machine that should provide good service for years.
Easier We hope you find the PC-ometer a useful guide to how a PC works, but if you don't, why not tell us?
(You can tell us if you do, as well, of course ).
Legends for thermometers: CPU Speed A measure of how fast the central Processor actually works — it takes into account all manner of computations.
DISK Speed The data transfer rate is what is measured here.
In other words, how many bytes of data per second are moved from disk to memory.
The higher the better.
Video Speed It takes time to create the picture you see on screen.
This PC-ometer shows you how fast the video circuitry in the machine works.
PC-ometer We take the three ratings — CPU, DISK and VIDEO and combine them to get an overall performance mark.
The higher on this scale, the better the machine performs all round.
The mighty Atom But no Roy!
Jo Lawton reviews a 50MHz desktop 486 from Leeds firm Atomstyle.
There are now two flavours of 50MHz 486 machines — the plain vanilla 50MHz DX chip based machines and those built around the speed-doubling 50MHz DX2 chip.
The Atomstyle machine uses the DX chip, which means that its motherboard runs at the full 50MHz.
Is it fast?
Read on and find out!
In a market where speed is everything, as seems to be increasingly the case these days, ultimate speed brings mucho kudos.
The fastest machines need the fastest motherboards, unless, of course, they're built with Intel's new speed doubling DX2 chips.
Even those must suffer a slight speed penalty, although the DX2 66, a 66 MHz chip, is destined to be the fastest of the lot (until the 100MHz DX2 makes its appearance, not forgetting the P5, or 586, of course).
The 100MHz DX2 will need a 50MHz motherboard, so Atomstyle's 50MHz unit might be just the thing to upgrade a little further down the road if you're a real speed freak, but I have the sneaking suspicion that you won't either want or need to.
But back to the plot.
Build Quality.
Atomstyle has been supplying the various bits for building PCs to dealers for quite some time by now, and so the cases and motherboards it supplies fit together really well.
This machine is no exception, and the quality of the build is better than you might expect for a bog-standard clone.
The only exception to this is that the test machine arrived without one of its little rubber feet, something that I feel might happen quite regularly, given that they just screw in with a small self-tapping screw, and have no supporting adhesive to really make things permanent.
That aside, I can complain about nothing.
My pet bugbears and gripes are all neatly circumvented by Atomstyle using the facilities that the casing offers, and mounting ports direct onto the case wherever possible.
Some of the nicer touches are lent to the machine by the inclusion of a pretty hairy caching IDE hard disk controller, which, in the review machine, is complete with 4MB of RAM to cache the IDE hard drive.
That accounts for the particularly speedy data transfer and seek times you can see in the benchmarks box.
Similarly, the graphics sub-system turns in some respectable benchmark timings, allied to a neat 14″ SVGA monitor of indeterminate parentage which gives a very steady, if over-bright display.
The monitor looks like a AUVA unit but is branded APC, Atomstyle's own brand.
Either way, it's a perfectly acceptable display.
The keyboard is my favourite.
I have to own up and confess to buying only this one.
Its feel is absolutely perfect for my typing style, being positive and clicky, with plenty of travel.
It is not an expensive piece of kit by anyone's standards, but mine has given sterling service for quite some time, and there's another one in the cupboard waiting its turn to get plugged in when I've killed the one on my machine.
I reckon the average user will keep it in working order for ages — I kill them at roughly yearly intervals.
In use Let's get the speed thing out of the way first, shall we?
It's Fast with a capital ‘F’.
I am a Windows fan, and can tell you that it runs applications at a rate of knots most folks just aren't accustomed to.
I normally work on a 33MHz 486, and don't ever have to wait much for anything to happen.
On this machine, I just don't have to wait.
The combination of 8MB of RAM and that massive disk cache makes for exceedingly quick operation.
The only tweak I would recommend to the putative purchaser would be to reduce the Smartdrive cache to one megabyte and institute a 2MB RAMdrive with a TEMP directory on it.
Set the TEMP and TMP variables in AUTOEXEC.BAT to D: \TEMP and everything will fly, I promise.
Using the machine is, as you might have guessed, a pleasure, and not only because of its speed.
That's the thing about having a keyboard that suits you, and it's something I can't overstress.
If the keyboard is right, and the monitor is right, then the two items that you need the most suit the way you work, which makes for a lot less hassle in the long run.
I can't tell you that this keyboard is the best you'll ever buy, because its feel may not suit you at all, but if you take that and the monitor aside, and specify totally different units that do suit you, then the system box won't let you down.
Summary
The only thing I haven't really mentioned about this machine, and which you'll see in the FAX box is its price.
Hang on to your hats.
A year ago, I could not have contemplated saying that a machine of these specifications was within the grasp of the individual.
Specs like these were destined for file servers in large companies, or to grace the MD's desk and be used rarely if at all.
Not now.
The price for all this speed and power is £1395 plus the inevitable Vatman's cut.
That, I would say, is not a bad price to pay for a machine that is probably as fast as any I have played with.
Recommended?
Certainly!
Interactive Animation
Sound, movement and graphics all in one package could make for an interesting new hobby or extremely effective presentations.
David Dorn gets animated about Animation Works Interactive.
Multimedia is the present buzz-word — it's what all the mags think will be the ‘big thing’ this year, and they're probably right.
The trouble is, to have a full multimedia system, you need to have all the media — sound, graphics, motion video, animation, and probably more besides.
Animation Works Interaction combines sound (if your PC is MPC compatible), graphics, and animation to come somewhere close to the ultimate Multimedia package.
Everybody has seen Fantasia or Snow White, or one of the many Tom and Jerry cartoons, and the majority of those old enough to understand will realise that they're made up of literally thousands of drawings.
Each of those drawings is placed on a background, photographed, and another, similar, but slightly different one photographed next to give the impression of movement.
It's a long and drawn out affair — one minute of cartoon can take weeks to build.
Modern PCs, though, have the power to reduce the time needed to construct quite sophisticated animations — lots of the time-consuming steps can be automated using the computational power built into our machines.
Animation Works Interactive (AWI) uses the number crunching and logic abilities of PCs to make animation an art that is within the reach of even the least artistic amongst us, almost a science, in fact.
Many parts.
Broadly speaking, constructing an animated movie, such as Tom and Jerry, can be broken into three main procedures.
First is the background.
The action must take place against a backdrop of some description, even if it it is a blank black curtain.
Secondly, you have the characters.
These must be drawn and then animated, by having stages in movement drawn.
Finally, the backgrounds and characters must be brought together to build the final product.
AWI uses this algorithm by presenting three separate utilities — a Cel Editor, a Background Editor, and a Movie Editor.
Cels
A Cel is, in cartoon parlance, a sheet of transparent acetate (originally celluloid, which is where the name comes from) upon which a character is drawn.
It has to be transparent in order that the background, or other characters which pass behind, can be seen through it.
When a cartoon is made using traditional animation techniques, each cel is drawn with the preceding cel in the sequence below it — a process known as onion skinning — so that registration and the level of movement suggested can be seen.
AWI's Cel Editor maintains that method of working, and, in fact becomes very much a graphics package which has a number of screens to work on.
At any time, you can only see the cel directly preceding the one you're working on.
Now, the cheats amongst us (like me) will discover that you can import graphics into the Cel editor, and will quickly come to the conclusion that very lifelike images can be formed by using a scanner to scan individual frames from a film, and then pick out the bits they want and place them on cels to form a small animated sequence.
The process is made all the easier by the Cel Editor allowing you to animate the cels you have produced, within the editor itself, so you can see how it looks, and make any alterations you think necessary.
It's much like the ‘proper’ animators flicking the acetates like one of those flick books that were all the rage a few years ago (or the ‘What the Butler Saw’machines at the end of the pier) to see how the work has progressed.
Backgrounds
Similarly with backgrounds, the Background Editor is very much a draw type package, with all of the usual facilities you would expect of one.
As with the Cel Editor, you may import a number of different image file types to form your background, and may, indeed, find that you prefer to work on backgrounds in another package altogether, and bring them into the Background Editor only to convert them to the Device Independent Bitmap (DIB) format that is native to the package.
The exciting part of a movie construction, though, takes place in the Movie Editor.
Making Movies
As I said at the top of the article, making movies — in AWI's parlance — is so similar to making a cartoon using traditional methods that it could well be used as a training ground for animators in the traditional industry, but with a much shorter wait before the results can be seen.
I've done a step-by-step guide to a very short movie, so you can see the basic principles, but a tour through some of the facilities won't go amiss.
One area of normal animation that can cause some heartaches is backgrounding and the scrolling of scenery as action moves from one place to another.
In the traditional industry, this calls for long landscape backgrounds that the cameraman scrolls with the action — another task in an already exhaustive list.
AWI's Movie Editor allows for a background to be scrolled automatically, at the rate you specify (assuming you have the processor power to cope with the speed you have set).
Failing that — and it is not an easy task to time a background scroll to coincide with foreground action — you can wipe backgrounds in a plethora of ways.
The names of these are, to say the least, a little esoteric, but, thankfully, as in almost every area of this program, and animated preview is available to let you see what the final effect is like.
A wipe, by the way, is like on of those weird effects the directors of such programs as Top of the Pops are so keen on — where the picture changes via a tumbling square or comes in from one side to replace the picture you have onscreen already.
There are plenty to choose from, some of which are very clever, and would be exceedingly difficult to reproduce using traditional techniques.
Also, you may choose merely to fill the background with a solid colour (up to 256 — 16 and 24 bit colour are not supported) or use a graduated fill.
The graduated fill allows you to choose a number of colours in the fill, not just two, which means it is a great facility for the poor of taste to prove their shortcomings.
Once you've sorted the background out for a sequence (a scene, in other words) you need your actors or characters.
AWI treats both text and cartoon characters as actors, and has some very powerful tools for making them move.
All movement is taken care of by what is called a path.
That is to say that in a real life movie, the director would say to Kevin Costner ‘Start walking here, Kev, darling, and walk over to the chair.
Pause for a second or two, then creep towards the door.
Then run through it.’
A path is simply a set of instructions like that, but you don't have to type a long string of commands to do the job.
Paths
AWI provides a set of path tools to let you define the pattern of movement.
They include a straight line path, a registered motion path (more on this anon), text transition paths, gravity affected paths, freehand paths, and so forth.
You select the one you want, point to the start and draw to the finish.
If you want an actor to stay still for a while, you can elect to freeze the path (Kev's pause), or, alternatively, you can accelerate and decelerate.
Along the path, which you see onscreen, are nodes.
These correspond to frames in the movie, and the closer together they are, the slower the actor moves.
The farther apart they are, the faster it moves, and you can alter the position node by node if you like.
The only problem you're likely to encounter is jerkiness of movement as the nodes grow too far apart.
The registered motion path type is potentially one of the most interesting, and also the one that will cause the most problems.
Its use is intended to be for characters that walk, where you don't want to have a Michael Jackson Moonwalk effect (although that's a doddle to do — you just move an actor backwards while it's animated to walk forwards).
Each frame has a registration mark that you can define, and the node on the path is where it sits.
In registered motion paths, you click for each node, and so can accurately define where the actor will be in each frame relative to where it was in the last frame.
It's very powerful, and is the closest to traditional animation.
To be honest, I've found the other paths to be much quicker to use, but it is very nice to have a fine tuning tool like this included in the package.
Text transition paths are also very powerful.
With these, you define a chunk of text as an actor — you can do this either in the movie editor or in the Cel editor — and can then define, via dialogue boxes, how it appears onscreen, any movement you want it to have and how it departs the screen.
Great for livening up otherwise boring presentations.
Sounds and events.
The MPC equipped user has all the advantage of sound in his movies.
Sounds are treated as events, and can be either MIDI files, WAVE files or CD tracks.
Let me clarify events.
Each frame has all kinds of details associated with it, and the ones you can control explicitly are to do with backgrounds, wipes, sound and a few other bits and bobs like frame display timing.
So, you can choose to play a sound — perhaps the sound of a bomb exploding — as an actor collides with another, or a background feature or whatever.
Since the event is attached to frame, it always occurs at exactly the same point in the movie, so sound effects are very accurately synchronised to the pictures they should accompany.
Actually it's all very much easier to explain in pictures than to tell you how it works, so let's go step by step, shall we?
Summary.
I've had a great deal of fun reviewing Animation Works Interactive, so much so that I've been staying in the office well past my normal time just to play with it.
The ease with which it's possible to construct very professional looking presentations has to be experienced to be believed, and some of the tools it provides would make professional traditional animators green with envy.
This is version one of what promises to be one of the leading packages in this field, and, given that that is the case, I expect future versions to add greatly to its functionality.
Even so, as it stands, I feel that whether it be for business presentations, hobby or educational purposes, AWI has much to recommend it.
There's much more to it than can possibly be covered in an article of this size, but keep an eye out for some animations complete with a run-time player (that is included and can be freely distributed) on BBS systems.
Highly recommended, nay Practical PC Recommended.
A worthy shield winner!
FAX BOX
Step by step for Animation Works Interactive Article
Captions.
AWI1.tif.
In the Background Editor, I've created the background I want to use — at least I've loaded a.
BMP file that I want to alter.
There are elements that need to be duplicated.
The Background Editor is easy to use — just like a normal Bitmap Graphics Editor.
AWI2.tif
I've copied the small group of palm trees, and pasted the image in further along the beach.
Now I want to copy the large group of trees — they will become an actor later in the process.
AWI3.tif
The clipboard copy of the trees has been pasted into a Cel in the Cel Editor.
Everywhere that is coloured white will be transparent in the movie itself, so I have had to use the drawing tools to get rid of the coloured bits of the background.
It would probably have been easier to create the actor first and then paste its image onto the background, but the way I've done it here isn't difficult to do.
AWI4.tif
While I'm in the Cel editor, I can create a multi-cel animation, one cel at a time.
This animation of a plane has six cels in it, and the only things that move on it are the propeller and the pilot's scarf.
Note the video type controls that allow you to view the animation as you're working on it.
These are repeated in the movie editor.
AWI5.tif
Into the Movie Editor, and the first thing I want to do is get that background onto the screen.
It's an event, so from the Event menu, I choose Background and then Bitmap, because I've already saved the beach scene as a file.
I could have left the background editor open and used embedding to place the background, but it's better to keep it as a file.
AWI6.tif
I've called the background NUBEACH.DIB (a device independent bitmap) and here's where you choose it.
Note the preview, and the choice of placement radio buttons.
A smaller bitmap can be tiled, as this is, or you could have a small object placed in the corner or centred.
AWI7.tif
I've placed the background as an event, and have also loaded up the big trees as an actor.
Note the small icons in the actor window to the right of the main edit window.
The disk icon allows you to load actors, the dustbin trashes them from memory, and the third icon allows you to have the actor animated, in case you have similar actors doing different things.
The trees are going to be placed directly on top of the large trees on the background, since I want one of the actors to move behind them, as you will see later.
AWI8.tif
The first actor is some text.
I want to use Arial as a font and have the text red.
No problem.
All the dialogue boxes are familiar from other Windows applications.
Now I have to sort out how it's going to work.
AWI9.tif
This is the Text Path Transition dialogue box.
The text will appear and disappear in 200 frames of the movie.
It will slide on as a whole line, from the bottom right hand corner (which will take 50 frames to complete) stay still for 120 frames, and then scatter off randomly over a period of 30 frames.
I can alter this at any time, of course.
AWI10.tif
Now I want to include some background music.
I need to use a MIDI file to do this, which will play over the SoundBlaster Pro card in my PC (and anybody else's).
If I distribute the movie and the recipient has no Multimedia PC facilities, they won't hear the tune.
Perhaps it's a good reason to buy a SoundBlaster???
AWI11.tif
I've sorted out the background music, and have moved to frame 61 to put another actor into the movie.
This time it's the plane we edited earlier in the Cel editor.
The path which you can see being drawn will eventually go behind the big trees, using the bottom button of the path selection bar.
I've selected a straight line path for the plane.
Note that the actor window tells you how many cels the current actor is animated over.
AWI12.tif
This time I want to put a sound effect in — a WAV file, which is a sampled sound.
The screech of a jet will do nicely.
It will start as soon as the plane enters the screen.
AWI13.tif
The plane's path goes behind the big trees — now you can see why I needed the white areas of the trees actor to be transparent, so you can see through them.
This is a very powerful feature — you can designate any colour to be transparent.
If you look back to the cel with the plane on it, you can see its background is cyan, which has also been designated transparent, but only for that actor.
AWI14.tif
The final event.
I've already done a background event to change the background to black, using the colour fill option.
I want it to wipe in, though, and not just appear, so I've chosen a growing rectangle to do the job.
That's it, my short movie is complete, and, once the actors and backgrounds have been sorted out in their respective editors, it only takes a matter of ten minutes to assemble the final movie.
It's a pity we can't animate the final movie for you to see, but take my word for it — and the editor's — the results are certainly superb.
Animation Works Interactive is the kind of program that will make you want to go out and buy a Multimedia PC upgrade kit!.
THE SOFTWARE MAGAZINE: REVIEW £1 ISSUE £1
PRODUCT: BIRDS OF PREY by Electronic Arts.
bird of prey — member of orders Raptores & Accipitres, as hawk, eagle, owl — as defined by the Oxford Concise Dictionary.
As defined by Jez San and Argonaut software an opportunity to fly Hawks, Falcons and Strike Eagles plus Harriers, B-52 Stratofortress, Jumbo jets, Hercules, the Lockheed Blackbird, and the Soviet MiG 21, 23, 25, 27, 29 Fulcrum and many others — 40 aircraft in total.
This makes Birds of Prey the most comprehensive ‘plane-wise’ flight simulator on the market.
Birds of Prey has been awaited on the PC for some time now, and is the result of over 12 man years' development — the basic scenario is simple — Side A against Side B in all out aerial warfare, with its elements of air superiority, ground attack, strategic and stealth bombing, general recce and patrol.
The end of the Cold War is neatly dealt with as instead of East vs West, it is Side A ‘supplied’ with NATO armaments, and Side B equipped with SOVIET hardware.
The design of BOP allows you to fly all of the main airplane types, through each of the varying types of mission common in modern aerial warfare.
The aim of BOP is to destroy your opponents air power and achieve total superiority.
This is achieved within a complete ‘campaign’ and you select the mission type you wish to fly — choose ground support and you then select the plane you wish to fly and once armed and fuelled you will be given your mission.
Birds of Prey does allow you to limit the choice of airplanes to make them more appropriate to the mission type, but it is only too easy to select totally the wrong plane and/or payload for the task in hand.
The enclosed manual is chock-a-block with plane and armaments information, but is poorly written from a users point of view, and appeared to be the same manual as for the Amiga product (a command summary card for the PC is enclosed, but the documentation remains poorly written and even confusing).
The missions are well varied, but the planes themselves have a feeling of ‘sameness’ about them that just suspends belief.
One package simulating 40 very different aircraft is perhaps over ambitious, but the flight models are just too similar — sometimes the only way to remember whether you are flying a 747 Boeing or a Harrier jump jet is to use the external view!
Also there was a genuine feeling of anticipation when selecting the Soviet YAK 38 Forger (the Russian answer to the Harrier jump jet) but its cockpit, controls, Head Up Display and its general ‘feel’ were just like most of the other fighters.
The flexibility of views is another plus point for BOP, with the ability to look at the aircraft from almost any internal or external position and angle.
The graphics in 256 colour mode are pretty good, and the ground detail is also up to a high standard.
The flight controls and other options are laid out in an unusual way, not following the normal conventions and taking some time to learn.
Keyboard, mouse and joystick are supported, but every now and then the planes seem to do their own thing!
Combat is competitive, with the opposing planes appearing to have more ‘Artificial Intelligence’ than normal — eg using counter measures against your missiles etc, but again these aircraft do not seem to have their own ‘character’.
The missions are fine in themselves, but are manufactured to order, rather than in a true campaign fashion forcing you to undertake certain tasks.
In this way the attempt to give depth to BOP and create a strategic aspect totally fails.
So what makes a good flight sim?
Well, a wide choice of airplanes and missions — a responsive flight model and control system — graphics and to a lesser degree sound of a high standard — a campaign option for more depth of play — and that elusive quality which is really a combination of all of these — PLAYABILITY.
Birds of Prey does satisfy some of these criteria and has several novel features, but it is flying in a very competitive and ‘target rich’ environment.
Falcon 3 from Spectrum Holobyte is still the best around for serious sim pilots, Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe from Lucasfilms, and Aces of the Pacific from Dynamix show how good ‘historic’ flight sims can be — against this formidable opposition Birds of Prey does not come up to scratch and in open combat would soon become the hunted, rather than the hunter…
HARDWARE Will run on most PC's but a 16Mhz machine is recommended, supports CGA, EGA and VGA graphics, and requires a hard disk.
Memory depends on graphic mode — 567k for 256 colour VGA, 498k for 16 colour VGA and EGA, 512k for CGA.
Additional memory for Sound Board support as follows — Sound Blaster 20k, Roland 9k, Ad Lib 5k, PC Speaker 3k.
THE SOFTWARE MAGAZINE VERDICT: FOR: 40 different aircraft, many not available in other flight sims Good variety of missions CGA, EGA and VGA graphics supported Small program — comes on 1 disk!
AGAINST Poor Interface, with some odd key combinations Most of the planes ‘feel’ the same Lack of sense of a campaign Flight models are not very good BIRDS OF PREY is available from Electronic Arts (0753-549442) priced at £39-99.
Building your own computer can, and should, save you money — but just how easy is it?
Chris Hankins assembles a 386-40 Computakit from NCM.
Searching endless suppliers for individual components is time consuming and expensive.
You must also take full responsibility for your choice of components and their suitability for the job.
The safest route is to approach a company that specialises in DIY computers, use their support services and product guarantees.
Nationwide Computer Maintenance (NCM) are one such company — so we set about assembling one of their Computakits.
The company provide a glossy instruction manual and a telephone support service to make sure your project is a success.
If all else fails the company also operate a bale out scheme where, for a price, they will get your machine up and running.
The best laid plans don't always run as smoothly as they should, so we have tried to identify areas where you might encounter problems.
We wanted to build a machine to run a single Desk-Top Publishing package such as Aldus Pagemaker, Windows and a graphics program such as Aldus freehand or CorelDraw.
This should produce a comprehensive DTP system capable of producing professional leaflets, flyers or an in-house newsletter or magazine.
Working on a tight budget, we opted for more on-board memory at the expense of a large capacity harddisk.
The Windows Smartdrive memory management and caching system, it was decided, would make good use of the extra RAM and make the system more efficient.
A large harddisk, on the other hand, would be used to store files which could just as easily, and more safely, be stored on floppy disks.
The programs required would fit comfortably on 20 megabytes of the harddisk, so a 40Mb drive would be adequate for the task and leave plenty of storage space for current files.
The parts, as supplied in kit form from NCM, cost around £900 including VAT and a sizable 8Mb of RAM.
MCM provide quite a good assembly instruction leaflet with photographs depicting the 48 stages of the assembly procedure.
The case is supplied with the power supply already in place and the motherboard with its memory modules fitted.
You must, however, observe the rules regarding static electricity which can damage sensitive components.
To completely eliminate any risk of static work on an earthed metal surface (the kitchen drainer will do) or wear a metal bracelet connected by a flexible wire to any bare earthed metal such as a central heating pipe.
You should allow anything up to four hours for the assembly, which gives you plenty of time to make sure that you understand each step fully.
Our project took around two and a half hours to complete, stopping from time to time to take photographs and make tea!
There is little point in reproducing the instruction manual here.
The manual is well laid out and easy to follow.
Problems only arise when non-standard parts are supplied which differ from those detailed in the manual's photographs.
There follows a step-by-step account of our own build-it experiences.
Points made are not meant as criticism of the Computakit, but show areas where problems may arise and the possible solutions.
Photo 1
The motherboard is mounted on small plastic spacers which locate in slots in the casing.
It is quite difficult to align all the spacers at the same time and several attempts may be needed.
The manual shows a motherboard with the SIMM (Single-In-Line Memory Module) chips to the right of the expansion slots.
Our motherboard was designed with the SIMMs diagonally opposite and tucked underneath the power supply unit.
This may cause some confusion as to which way round the board should fit.
Although it is annoying to have SIMMs in this position (you would have to remove the motherboard to add extra modules), it is only important to ensure that the expansion slots line up with the slots in the rear of the case.
The expansion slots house the input/output controller, the video controller card and any additional cards you may wish to add in the future.
Access to these cards must be available to allow external connections to be made.
The front panel LED connections are made to the motherboard at this stage.
Wires are colour coded and have labelled fitted plugs which slide over libelled pins on the motherboard.
This sounds relatively straightforward but is confused when you find a two-pin plug and a five-pin socket!
This is the time to test out the telephone support system (or read our Fax Box).
The only other problem was found with the speaker support bracket which had no screw hole or a corresponding hole in the case to fix it to.
We drilled a small hole in the bracket and secured it with a nut and bolt to the front panel.
FAX BOX
Connect the green wire of the power LED to pin 1 and the white wire to pin 3 of the keylock connector J7.
The two keylock cables can go either way round on pins 4 and 5.
Speaker cables are connected either way round to pins 1 and 4 of the speaker connection.
The harddisk activity LED cables connect to pins 1 and 2 on the input/output card.
NOTE
The polarity of LED connections is important, if one does not light reverse the two connecting wires.
Photo 2
Fitting the harddisk was almost trouble free.
We encountered some problem lining up screw holes in the harddisk with holes in the mounting frame and settled for two fixings instead of the recommended three.
The mounting bracket is lipped to locate flush with the front of the case.
We wanted to set the harddisk back inside the casing to allow for a cover plate, so the assembly had to be inserted from the inside.
Photo 3
The 3.5″ floppy drive assembly slid effortlessly into its housing.
Be careful not to push the unit in too far or it will crash down onto the floor of the casing.
The drive must be held in position until a screw fixing can be made.
You may need a third hand for this.
When you connect the ribbon data cable make sure that the drive you wish to be the A: drive (or the only drive if you have a single drive configuration) is connected after the twist in the cable.
Two sockets are provided after the twist, one fits 3.5″ drives, the other 5.25″ drives.
This allows you to have two drives (A + B) of the same size.
Photo 4
It is easier to fit the connections to the input/output card before fitting it into its slot.
The harddisk and floppy disk data cables will fit on the card the wrong way round, so make sure the red edge of the cable goes to Pin 1 (which is marked) of the connector.
This rule applies to all data cable connections.
Photo 5
The input/output card and the video card are inserted into their sockets.
A second serial port and a games port socket is supplied on a separate bracket.
Fit this closest to the power supply unit and fit the input/output card in the adjacent socket.
Fit the video card in the fourth slot form the power supply unit leaving one free slot between the cards to aid air circulation.
Often the cards are quite difficult to fit, and a slight rocking motion might be necessary to ensure the card is pushed fully home.
The cable connecting the harddisk activity LED to the input/output card can now be attached.
The cable is fitted with a two-pin plug, the card has four connector pins — make your second call to the technical support service (or read our Fax Box).
Photo 6
At last the machine is built.
Plug in the monitor, keyboard and mains power cables and switch on.
Your new computer, however, is not yet ready for use — you have to run a setup program to tell the machine which components are installed.
When you enter the setup routine you are faced with a warning that ‘improper use may cause problems’— and it will — but mistakes can be rectified later.
You use this procedure to set the time, date, size of floppy drives A and B (if fitted) and the type of monitor or ‘primary display’.
The setting most likely to cause problems, and most worry if you do it wrong, is the harddisk setting.
You have to type in the number of cylinders, the number of heads, the number of sectors and the landing zone to suit your particular model and size of harddisk.
We mistakenly followed the instructions in the NCM manual which gives two ‘correct’ settings — one in the text and one detailed in a photograph.
Both, as it turns out, were wrong and gave ‘invalid drive specification’ messages when trying to change to drive C after booting from the A drive.
Worse still, on attempting to boot from the C drive, we were faced with a ‘Harddisk Drive Controller Failure’ message.
This message sounds disastrous, but is only due to incorrect harddisk settings.
The important parameters were eventually located in the installation guide which came with the harddisk — a little logic mixed with an educated guess or two provided the other figures and the project was complete.
We would not be so brave as to suggest that ‘anyone’ can build their own computer.
One or two of the instructions are ambiguous, some of the parts do not fit together as they are supposed to and more than a little initiative is required to complete the project.
In fairness to NCM, we have passed our observations on to their technical department and there will be one or two changes to the next reprint of the instruction manual.
They say that they make every effort to supply components exactly as detailed in the manual so that you can follow the photographic sequences.
In rare cases where components differ in some way they will be pleased to give additional support.
All in all, building your own machine can be a worthwhile exercise — not only for the savings in cost, but also for the experience and knowledge you will gain to give you a greater understanding of your Personal Computer.
FAX BOX
Supplier: Nationwide Computer Maintenance (NCM)
Sample Product Specifications: 386DX-40MHz based IBM compatible computer.
128K cache, 4Mb RAM, 1.44Mb floppy disk drive, 40Mb harddisk drive, desktop case, 102 key keyboard, IDE controller card, 14″ Super VGA colour monitor, 1Mb video graphics card, MS DOS 5, toolkit, instruction book and 12 months warranty on parts and labour.
Price £699.00 + VAT
Bale Out Scheme £65 +VAT
For: Very good value and a helpful telephone support service.
Against: NCM must standardise the components supplied or improve on the instruction manual.
THE SOFTWARE MAGAZINE: REVIEW £4 ISSUE £1
HOT ON THE ‘CAMPAIGN’ TRAIL WITH EMPIRE AND THEIR NEW STRATEGY GAME…
Historically ‘Wargames’ have been either of ‘macro’variety — the strategic/tactical type such as SSI's Second Front or Broderbund's Patton Strikes Back, or the ‘micro’type such as Microprose's M Tank Platoon or Lucasfilms Secret Weapons of the Luftwaffe.
Each genre established you as ‘commander’ at a particular level — for example as total military supremo controlling grand strategy, or at regimental level in charge of smaller units such as squads or platoons, or at the lowest level actually controlling individual tanks or airplanes.
This level of command was fixed ie as General Dwight Eisenhower you would not be expected to fly planes into combat, nor as the jockey of a M1 Abrams tank could you try and effect changes in grand strategy.
CAMPAIGN from Empire attempts to defeat this division, by allowing you on the one hand to be in control of complete military formations and make strategic decisions, and then as your valiant troops come into contact with the enemy allow you to drop down into each tank and fight for glory.
This ‘multi- level’ wargame is a unique approach, and works reasonably well.
The game is divided into three main sections — Campaign Level, Battle Level and Map Edit.
Campaign Level lies at the core of the product, and is where the major decisions and tactics are decided — this map has a zoom feature, which means the scale can be varied from a 25Km square, to an enormous 3200Km area!
CAMPAIGN comes with a series of ready made scenarios, made up of 16 Simple Campaigns with about 30 vehicles involved, plus 4 Average Campaigns (including a Battle of the Bulge ‘extract’), to the main event — 5 Complex Campaigns, which include two day scenarios, and a Kursk battle featuring over 3000 tanks and other armoured vehicles!!!
The Simple scenarios will take minutes once mastered, the Average Campaigns will require some hours, the Complex Campaigns may take literally days, so stock up on the ‘ole K rations!
From the Campaign Map you issue general orders to your formations, normally ‘GO TO’, ‘STOP’ or ‘DIG IN’.
The interface is smooth and once you get used to the system you'll be throwing out orders and manipulating huge military formations at will.
Once you come into contact with the other side you can drop down into command the individual tanks and engage in fast armoured conflict — the controls here do take some getting used to, although you can opt to assign either the driving or firing to the computer.
Driving is not just an ‘up arrow’ to go forward etc — the tracks are controlled separately by four keys ie right and left, and backwards/forwards.
The turret is also separately controlled, as is gun elevation so the whole thing is quite testing.
The graphics are well drawn, and all the major pieces of Allied and German hardware are represented, with many of the pieces not normally seen in computer wargames like the British Sexton Self propelled gun, and the massive JagdTiger Tank destroyer.
Each vehicle is defined with its own graphics and statistics detailing armour class, gun penetration road and cross country performance etc.
At ‘battle level’ the action is fast and furious, and this part of Campaign could almost be removed and developed as a stand alone game.
As it stands it has neither enough action or ‘feel’ for an arcade game, nor enough depth or tactics for a true simulation…however it does give CAMPAIGN a unique flavour and will be welcomed by many, in several ways it is like the well received Team Yankee and Pacific Islands with a much stronger strategic element.
The gaming system itself contains many many features and subtleties, such as indirect fire, line of sight, hidden movement, minefields, air support, towed guns and coastal invasions.
Logistics also play a crucial part, with the critical need to protect and control your manufacturing plants, and to destroy your enemies!
CAMPAIGN is completed by a full terrain and unit editor, allowing you to build your own scenarios, and to re-create any conflict from this period, and to try lots of ‘what-ifs’ by tweaking and altering the balance of power.
So CAMPAIGN is a very original product that takes on a huge task and just about succeeds…it can be criticised in certain areas, but on the whole is a very designed game that ‘boldly goes where no game has been before…‘
On the techie side CAMPAIGN requires an 80286 as minimum, but a 80386 16Mhz is recommended, graphics are EGA and VGA/MCGA, hard disk (4Mb) and a mouse are necessary and the usual SoundBoards are supported.
CAMPAIGN is available from Empire on 0268-541126, priced at £39-99 for PC.
The Amiga version is also now available at £34-99, and an ST version is also planned.
How not to buy a computer — a cautionary tale
Andy Watts
Practical PC recently received a heart-rending letter from a reader and while it was already too late to help in her particular case it is worth going over her story to prevent others from falling into the same trap.
A few extracts from Val's letter will quickly indicate the problem:
I bought an Amstrad 5086 just 2 months ago as a total novice, not even familiar with a keyboard on the advice of the staff of my local Dixon's store.
I now find that this computer is clearly inadequate for my needs and that despite the fact that Dixon's staff assured me that it would support desktop publishing and graphics, I now discover that it is never going to produce the results I need.
I have also learnt that there are other makes of computer — even among those supplied by Dixons — that would have been more suitable at little or no extra cost.
You may tell me that I went to the wrong place to begin with — and I can now agree.
However, at the time the security of a large firm and a well known brand appeared to be the most sensible decision I could make.
I know few people in my situation will admit they have made a mistake for rear of looking silly.
Perhaps if more of us did protest other novice purchasers would not face the same problem.
I have bought Practical PC since it first came out in an attempt to help with the strange world of computers and from reading it I think I might need a 286 or 386 PC — but how can I be sure and I still haven't the foggiest idea what most of the terminology means.
Could you help me:
Find out what machine would best meet my needs
Come to terms with the strange terminology
Find an appropriate means of learning about my PC — I have thought about evening classes — is this a good idea?
Finally will you challenge large firms like Dixons and Comet to train their staff or at least encourage their staff to suggest customers seek skilled advice for specific requirements?
Well, Val I think you are quite right in thinking that you are not alone in feeling let down after purchasing the ‘wrong’ computer for your needs and I do agree that you were given poor advice by the store you purchased from.
But perhaps your first mistake was to think that a shop could give you totally impartial advice — their prime concern was probably to make sure you actually made a purchase and from them rather than elsewhere.
I'm sure that there are hundreds of dealers getting ready to write me letters at this point to tell me that a satisfied customer is more important than a sale.
The hard fact is however that such altruistic dealers are still the rarity and more often than not the innocent computer customer will come face to face with an almost equally innocent computer sales person!
And this is unlikely to change — after all if the sales person knew enough to do a good job of giving advice they could easily start a new career as a consultant!
In defence of Dixon's there are DTP packages that will run on an Amstrad 5086 — Timeworks 3 for GEM for example so they were not in fact wrong.
Where they were wrong was in leading you to believe that the package they were selling you represented good value for money.
In practice most informed advisors would say that the 5086 is very under powered for the DTP job that you have in mind.
While it might run Timeworks 3 it doesn't do so fast enough to make using it easy.
You suspect it might have been better to spend just a little more in return for lots more computing potential and you have every justification in feeling misled.
Their advice should probably have been to go down the High Street to a large newsagents and buy one or more magazines devoted to the PC and read up on the subject.
The trouble is that people only start to read these magazines after they think of themselves as computer users — and the point they most need help is when they are deciding what to buy.
You can hardly blame Dixons for not making this suggestion.
Such magazines are full of adverts for products similar, and even identical, to those stocked in Dixons often at much lower prices.
So what about books — which normally do not carry adverts and so would be less threatening.
The problem with books are that they date very quickly and so it is difficult to get up to the minute advice.
You could easily have borrowed a book from your local library and come to the conclusion that the specification of the 5086 was perfectly state-of-the art — whereas in fact it is now looking really rather old fashioned.
To a certain extent you are not in a good position to know what you want until you have some experience.
It is easy enough now for me to convince you that what you need is a PC running Windows and capable of running up-to-date software such as Timeworks 3 and Works for Windows (which basically means a 386, although an SX model will do).
But if I had said this to you three months ago would you have thought it worth the extra outlay?
So how do you go about learning about your PC.
Ideally you need just a little one-to-one tuition, preferably after you have struggled on your own for a bit to discover which bits are clear as daylight and which are clear as mud.
But it's worth looking for books and magazine articles that are on relevant topics — and these will certainly help in getting to understand the terminology.
And evening classes are a good idea but more for a general grounding in computing in general as there are not likely to be directly relevant to your hardware and software.
And do not expect them to be up to date— if you carry on reading Practical PC you might soon know more about state of the art computing than the tutor.
One of the problems is that educational establishments can't renew their equipment as often as desirable.
The moral of the whole story is that you really do have to take the responsibility for making the choice of PC yourself.
Don't expect a sales person to do the job of analysing your requirements because in general it is just too difficult a task.
Find out about computers before you buy one by reading everything up-to-date that you can get your hands on.
Following this strategy you stand a good chance of getting what you need.
PS A happy ending.
Since Val wrote to us her local branch of Dixons have exchanged the Amstrad 5086 towards a 386SX machine.
Which shows that it is worth complaining instead of just accepting a raw deal.
But Val's message to the High Street stores that sell computers is still important — you have a duty to your customers to provide some guidance even if this means pointing out that some of the computers you sell are very limited!
Title: The 1991 Time Magazine Compact Almanac
Format: PC and MPC
Publisher: Compact Publishing Inc.
UK Distributor: Optech Limited
Contact: 0252 711121
Price: £99.00 + VAT
Good Points: Easy to install and use.
Excellent source of reference material on a large range of topics, with good quality graphics and sound.
Without a sound card however, the package is still enjoyable to use.
Bad Points: Although the software can be used with a keyboard only, this is very slow and laborious, so if you don't have a mouse it's worthwhile investing in one.
Memory requirement: 640K
Graphics: 60%
Sound: 90%
Features: 80%
Overall Score: 75%
If you've never seen Time Magazine before, the 1991 edition of the Time Almanac will delight and intrigue you.
Although devoted mainly to world current affairs in 1991, the Almanac also contains some very interesting articles on topics such as history, geography, economics and agriculture.
To run the program on your PC you will need a minimum of 640K RAM and a VGA colour monitor and adapter.
It is also advantageous, although not absolutely necessary, to use a mouse.
If you do have one though moving around the screens is much quicker and easier than using the keyboard.
Installation is fairly straightforward, the software being installed directly from the CD onto your hard disk.
As this application has video with narration, however, you do need to specify the sound card you will be using.
Sound Blaster and compatible cards, IBM M-Audio Capture and Playback, PS/1 Audio/Joystick Adapters, and Digispeech DS 201 Adapters are all fully supported.
If you don't have any of these though, you can still enjoy watching the videos, but they won't have the sound to go with them.
The opening screen presents the user with the menu bar and main menu.
On the menu bar are Search for finding articles quickly rather than scrolling manually through the word list, View to find photographs, videos, maps and magazine covers and Mark for marking a place in an article and making notes.
There are also the more usual options of Output for saving and printing, Help and Quit.
These pull-down menus can all be accessed either by pressing ALT and the appropriate letter, or by clicking on them with the mouse.
The main menu is divided into six categories for easy reference: Time Portrait, Time, NewsQuest, 1991 Almanac, World and United States.
Time Portrait encompasses a series of essays and articles, on prominent public figures of the 20th Century such as Albert Einstein, Martin Luther King, and Henry Ford.
Also featured here are motion and sound videos of each of these prominent people, the most memorable one being a very angry speech from Adolf Hitler.
The Time section gives straightforward coverage of all the weekly issues and highlights reported by the magazine in 1989, 1990 and 1991.
Going back further than this are yearly highlights from the years 1980 to 1988, and major issues of the decade from the ‘20's right through to the ‘70's.
On the right hand of the screen within the Time section are icons for Article, Charts, Photo, Video, Cover and Map.
These are automatically highlighted when there are ‘links’ to other material relevant to the current article.
If you click on Article for example, a pop-up box will appear with a list of related articles, or clicking on Photo will bring up a picture.
When you have taken all this in NewsQuest will test your knowledge.
The idea of this quiz is to earn letters that make up a quote by answering the questions correctly.
You have won the game when you guess who the quote was from.
This adds a bit of fun to the proceedings, but the same questions crop up repetitively, so its quite easy to cheat by remembering the answers after playing for only a short time.
World and United States cover a wide range of topics including history, geography, people, government, agriculture, health, housing and business.
Again these are fully supplemented by maps, photographs and charts and make an interesting source of reference over a large variety of subject matter.
More reference material is to be found in the 1991 Almanac which gives useful charts and lists of celestial events, units of weights, holidays, world time zones and so on.
The 1991 Time Magazine Compact Almanac contains some excellent articles and photographs, but the videos are to be honest, a bit fuzzy.
You do have to bear in mind though that some of these films are very old, and this is the best picture quality you could expect from a standard VGA monitor and adapter.
The quality of the sound however more than makes up for this.
On the whole this is an excellent package whether it be for research, leisure use or plain old-fashioned nostalgia.
Once you've dipped in you'll be hooked.
Title: The Hutchinson Multimedia Encyclopedia 1992 Edition
Format: PC and MPC
Publisher: Attica Cybernetics
UK Distributor: Optech Limited
Contact: 0252 714340
Price: £149.00 + VAT
Good Points: Up to date Encyclopedia with an attractive user interface and high quality sound output.
Bad Points: Many of the images are partially obscured by captions.
The hardware requirements list on the box doesn't specify that a mouse is needed.
Memory Requirements: 2MB
Graphics: 50%
Sound: 100%
Features: 70%
Score: 70%
The Hutchinson Multimedia Encyclopedia contains over 25, 000 entries and is well supplemented with hundreds of maps, illustrations and sound clips.
It comes with both 3.5″ and 5.25″ floppy disks containing the installation and retrieval software, a clear and easy to understand user's guide and of course a compact disk.
The package runs in the Windows environment so you will need a PC with Windows 3.1 installed, and for the graphics an SVGA monitor and adapter to give the best possible output on screen, anything less than SVGA doesn't do the pictures full justice.
As this software incorporates sound you will also require a MediaVision, Sound Blaster or Ad Lib Sound card with the appropriate drivers installed in Windows.
You can use the Encyclopedia without a sound card, but the audio output is of such outstanding quality that you really would be missing out on the best feature if you don't use one.
A mouse is also a necessity, although the list of hardware requirements on the back of the box doesn't mention this.
Information is divided into six main groups: Aspects of Society, Science and Technology, History, Places, Life Sciences and The Arts.
To find a given subject you can just double click on the appropriate word in the word list, or type a word into a search box to bring up a number of related articles.
The articles themselves have buttons with arrows on to indicate words that have a separate entry in the Encyclopedia, these are accessed by clicking on the button.
Other symbols within the articles are pictures that will enlarge to half screen size when clicked on and audio icons with play and stop buttons indicate when there is a sound attached to an entry.
Illustrations and photographs can be maximised to full screen size if required, or set up to load as a full screen image every time instead of just half screen.
The only slightly annoying thing about these images however, is the fact that many of them have captions running across them, rather than along the top or bottom, spoiling the overall view.
Sound quality though cannot be faulted, and you can choose from 250 pieces of music, animal sounds, bird song and speeches.
This encyclopedia is fun to use and would be especially useful for use in schools and colleges, as well as for pleasure.
A great diversion for curious kids of all ages.
Title: People
Format: PC
Publisher: Hulton Deutsch Collection Limited
Contact: 071 266 2660
Price: £350.00 + VAT
Good Points: A valuable source of reference material for professionals that is very easy to use.
Bad Points: Rather expensive unless you are going to use it on a regular basis.
Graphics: 50%
Features: 60%
Score: 55%
The Hulton Deutsch People disk is a intended for use commercially as a point of reference for professionals.
This CD features 10,000 colour and black and white pictures of people from the world of sport, theatre, politics, art, religion and music and is designed to make picture research less demanding on both time and resources.
To use the software you will need a 386 based PC, a VGA monitor and adapter, and a mouse, as well as your CD-ROM player, and as the program runs under Windows, you should have Windows 3.1 installed on your system.
Future versions are planned for the MAC user.
The opening screen presents you with search, print, help and exit buttons.
Clicking on the large search button in the top left hand corner of the screen brings up a search dialogue box into which a word can be entered.
Below this is a keyword list box, and clicking on the down arrow brings up a list of words that the program will recognise.
If you know more details about the person you are searching for, Date and Archive contains a list of Hulton Deutsch Collections and Photographers.
Here you will also find a date input box, together with Date Type which has options for exact year, circa year, and within two dates, plus Date Sort with a choice of subject date, photo date or lifetime.
So for example, if you typed actor in the search field, chose award from the keyword list and put the date 1971 in the Date and Archive box the program would come up with Woody Allen.
When a search is completed up to twelve small images will be displayed on the lower area of the screen, you can then choose the one you want and enlarge it so that it appears on the screen together with any relevant background information.
These photographs which are in DIB (Device Independent Bitmap) format can also be exported to other Windows applications, such as CorelDraw and Aldus PageMaker.
Should you require a print or transparency of the results of your search it can be ordered from Hulton Deutsch for a small fee.
Although this disk is primarily aimed at the professional market like advertising agencies, broadcasters and newspapers it could also prove invaluable research material for schools, colleges, and local theatre groups.
If you don't fall into the professional category however, you will need to be very sure that you are going to get a lot of use out of the People disk to justify the cost.
Chris Hankins explains some basic steps you can take to keep your PC in a healthy condition.
Like us, your PC will last longer if kept in a healthy environment.
A healthy environment for the PC is one free from smoke, dust, knocks and spills.
The easiest way to ensure this is to leave your computer in the box!
For those of us who prefer to make good use of our machines and subject them to the rigours of the office environment, a regular pattern of preventative maintenance is necessary.
This will not only ensure continued trouble-free life, but will add substantially to its resale value when the time comes to upgrade.
It is all too easy to ignore PC maintenance until something goes wrong.
This attitude is fine if you can afford to have your machine out of action until it is repaired and replace components which have failed through neglect.
If you rely on your computer and value the investment you have made, then it is well worth the few minutes spent on preventative maintenance.
A successful maintenance routine should be regular but not too often.
Most of the components that make up your computer are delicate and don't take too kindly to being taken apart.
The frequency of maintenance will depend on the harshness of the environment, and in normal circumstances should be once or twice a year.
Many problems are caused by dirt, dust and smoke particles that collect on the read/write heads of disk drives and form a film on electrical contacts increasing resistance and reducing conductivity.
Weekly Maintenance
A weekly maintenance routine simply involves a visual check of external cables for wear or mechanical damage which can occur if they are stretched or frequently move across a hard surface.
Check that all cables are firmly in their sockets and have not worked loose.
Finish off by cleaning the monitor, keyboard, system unit case and any peripherals such as printers.
PC consumables suppliers will be able to provide suitable cleaning materials.
Do not use abrasive kitchen cleaners or fluids and never apply the cleaner directly to the surface.
Always put the cleaner first onto a clean, lint-free cloth to stop fluids getting into ventilation slots or between the keys of the keyboard.
A clean machine is more of a pleasure to work with and tends to command more respect form others.
The amount of dirt removed during the weekly clean is an indication of the harshness of the environment and the amount of dirt which will find its way into the inner workings of your machine.
Bearing in mind that the gap between the read/write heads and the hard disk platter is less than the size of a single smoke particle, it is sensible to declare the computer work area a no-smoking zone.
This will also prevent your equipment from becoming tarnished with nicotine stains.
Coffee drinkers too should adopt clean habits and keep drinks away from computer equipment.
Annual maintenance
At least once a year it is worthwhile taking a look inside your machine.
Before starting make a backup of any important files — just to be on the safe side.
Remove all power leads and the case and make a visual check of the inside.
Look for accumulations of dust and cables which are not pushed fully home.
Dusts acts as a thermal insulator which prevents efficient cooling of the components and results ultimately in failure due to overheating.
The warming and cooling that takes place when the computer is turned on and off expands and contracts circuit boards and socketed integrated circuit chips.
Over a period of time circuit boards and chips creep out of their sockets as different components cool and heat up at different rates.
This in turn creates a minute gap between the board and the socket into which dust particles can gather.
Accumulations of dust can be removed with a small vacuum cleaner after loosening with a dry, soft bristle brush.
This process is made easier if all the expansion cards are first removed.
This also gives you the opportunity to clean the gold edge connector contacts of the boards with an alcohol based cleaning solution.
Socketed chips which may have eased out of their sockets can be pushed back in with firm pressure applied squarely with the thumb.
Loose chips will snap into place and you will hear a cracking sound as the pins are pushed deeper into the socket.
Drive cable connectors can be cleaned by easing the connector off about halfway and then pushing it back on.
This is sufficient to dislodge any particles.
The cooling fan blows air out of the system unit thus lowering the pressure inside.
Air is drawn in to this low pressure area primarily through the ventilation slots and also through the floppy disk drive apertures.
The dust build up on the fan housing is dust which has already passed through the unit — and the disk drives!
You can only clean the read/write heads of the floppy disk drives with a special cleaning kit which fits into the drive in the same way as a normal floppy disk.
Save this task until the system unit is re-assembled and powered up.
The cleaning kit will also remove the build up of magnetic oxide which collects on the head.
The harddisk does not suffer from the same problems as it is in a sealed unit which should not be tampered with in any circumstances.
Cleaning the Keyboard
The keyboard is often the part which is first to show signs of abuse.
It is subject to grease and grime from the hands, occasional coffee spills, cigarette ash, dead flies and sandwich crumbs.
If you don't believe it, turn the keyboard upside down and shake it gently.
Use a vacuum cleaner to remove debris from between the key caps and clean them with a suitable solution.
Some key caps have the letters printed on rather than moulded into the plastic.
The letters will fade with excessive cleaning.
This can be prevented by painting the surface of the clean key cap with clear nail varnish.
Regular cleaning of the keyboard should prevent dirt build up which can lead to sticking or non-operative keys.
If you have let your keyboard get into this state it may require complete dismantling.
Avoiding Problems
You can reduce the risk of damage to your computer simply by treating it with care and respect.
Keep the computer in a clean, vibration-free place away from smokers and coffee drinkers.
Do not place the computer where it will be subject to large variations in temperature or near a radiator.
Make sure there is sufficient room around the machine for adequate air circulation.
Avoid switching the machine on and off many times during the day.
Physical stresses caused by expansion and contraction can damage components.
Loosen dust and debris from the motherboard and expansion cards with a soft bristle brush.
This is a genuine photograph showing how much dirt can accumulate after about three years.
Using the end of your thumb firmly and squarely push socketed integrated circuits (chips) back into their sockets.
Make sure you do not flex the motherboard by applying too much pressure.
Hold on to the case chassis with your other hand to eliminate the possibility of static discharge between your thumb and the integrated circuit.
Before replacing expansion cards clean the gold edge connectors with a little cleaning solution applied to a lint-free swab or cloth.
The annual COMDEX/Fall is the largest computer show in the world.
Chris Hankins, reporting from Las Vegas, catches a glimpse of the future and the myriad of products on show.
The greatest computer show on earth, COMDEX/Fall ‘92, is set against the glittering background of Las Vegas, Nevada USA.
Las Vegas, famed for its gambling, outlandish hotels and casinos, is dominated by this annual event, with exhibitions, conferences, seminars and product launches taking place in most of the major hotels.
Although the COMDEX (COMputer Distribution EXposition) show is multi-platform covering all popular types of computer, the PC is dominant with major companies such as Microsoft, Intel and IBM at the fore.
The idea for the COMDEX exhibition was born some sixteen years ago, featured 157 American companies and attracted less than 4,000 visitors.
This, the fourteenth COMDEX, is the biggest yet — attended by over 135,000 people from over 100 countries.
To a great extent, COMDEX is a show-case for new technology giving a glimpse of the future, and yet, multinational companies with large research and development budgets mingle shoulder to shoulder with over 2,000 smaller manufacturers, suppliers and resellers from 22 countries around the world.
The exhibition is organised by the Interface Group, a multi-hundred-million-dollar organisation, which leases and manages the Sands Expo and Convention centre in Las Vegas.
Its Chief Executive Officer, Sheldon G. Adelson, describes COMDEX as the one computer event the whole world turns to.
It is the premier international marketplace for new product introductions, support programs and high-performance technologies.
COMDEX/Fall is part of the United States Department of Commerce Foreign Buyer Program and is promoted in embassies throughout the world.
As you might well expect, Microsoft Windows played a key role at the COMDEX exhibition, a single section of which was dedicated to the largest ever demonstration of third-party Windows applications.
More than 260 Windows applications were on show, covering dedicated 32-bit applications for the 386 and 486 range of PCs, multimedia solutions for home and business based on the recently released Microsoft Video for Windows technology and applications using the new Microsoft Windows for Pens operating system.
Pen Computing will soon be a familiar term in the PC market place allowing PC users to use ‘natural’ and intuitive pen movements for PC input using a graphics tablet or, in some cases, directly on the screen.
The pen, which is cordless and has no batteries, looks and feels like an ordinary pen.
It works by using an in-built coil and capacitor to return a radio wave emitted by the screen to a grid of wires below the screen.
This grid enables the software to determine the position of the pen.
In applications such as drawing packages where the pressure applied to the pen determines line thickness or style, the frequency of the returned signal is changed by the pen nib compressing the integral coil as pressure is increased.
The change in signal frequency is identified by the software and appropriate action taken.
Windows for Pens is a special set of extensions for Windows 3.1 that supports pen innovations such as ink and gestures, as well as handwriting recognition and recognition of shapes and special symbols.
More than 70 pen functions are supported allowing application developers to create exciting new pen applications.
You will not be able to buy Windows for Pens off the shelf as it is only available to original equipment manufacturers and licensed vendors for distribution as part of specific pen-based hardware products.
Grid Computers are the first company to produce a specially designed pen notebook portable computer.
This new notebook, the Grid Convertible, was launched at COMDEX and uses a unique hinged LCD screen which turns and locks over the keyboard to convert the notebook into a hand-held notepad.
The Grid Convertible, when set-up as a notepad, makes for easier and more natural input for note taking at meetings or when standing.
Many of the Windows applications on display were running under Windows NT — the new Windows operating system.
Although the launch date for Windows NT is yet to be released, the system is in its final stages of development and was certainly put through its paces at the exhibition.
Of the larger software companies, the WordPerfect Corporation was most prominent.
New for 1993 is a suite of WordPerfect applications for the IBM OS/2 operating system.
WordPerfect have found the multi-tasking capabilities of OS/2 valuable and see it as an important platform for future development.
WordPerfect's DOS based DrawPerfect presentation and graphics program has been redesigned and renamed as WordPerfect Presentations 2.0 for DOS and will be available soon.
To win over users of other presentation packages such as Harvard Graphics, Freelance Graphics and Microsoft PowerPoint, WordPerfect are offering competitive trade-up discounts.
The electronic mail, scheduling and calendaring application, WordPerfect Office 4.0, has also been released, initially in DOS, Windows and Macintosh formats with OS/2 and UNIX versions to follow.
Finally, WordPerfect have announced WordPerfect 5.2 for Windows which includes an integrated module to take advantage of the Digital Equipment Corporation's TeamLinks for Windows — a network, electronic mail and file sharing utility.
John Wiley and Sons, prolific publishers of computer books, have announced a new series of books that will, they claim, change the face of computer book publishing.
In an attack on all computer book publishers (including themselves), they see the scramble to publish books on every piece of newly released software as resulting in shelves full of regurgitated documentation — modified either for the novice or the power user and thus leaving the average user with intermediate skills out in the cold.
Wiley's new series of books, the Insider series, are written by experienced users or gurus (rather than experienced writers) in a question and answer format with real-life scenarios and practical demonstrations.
Each book in the series will include ‘hot tips’ and shortcuts, and explain hard to find and undocumented features of each subject.
It will be interesting to see whether the Insider philosophy slows the publication of books on future software releases.
There are many Eastern, American (and even some European) countries who are not yet making their products available in the UK.
They see the UK as a market growing in size and importance, but their reluctance and over-cautiousness result in UK computer users lagging behind their American counterparts.
A small number of European and UK distributors and Value Added Resellers (who offer product support and technical back-up) are seeking to help the smaller American companies break into the UK market.
If they are successful, we should soon see an influx of new products and more choice.
Look out for products such as Visio, a drop and drag drawing package which utilises job-specific stencils; WinDesk, a customisable desktop for Windows; ProtoView, a screen management facility for Windows; Star Trek the Screensaver, a screensaver program for Star Trek fanatics; Office Accelerator, a program to run your office from within your favourite word-processor; Color Tools, a multimedia graphics solution; Labtech Vision, a program that produces dynamic graphics that automatically update in real time, and CameraMan, which records and plays back Windows routines.
If you need even more software choice, why not run Apple Macintosh software on your PC?
This is now possible with an add-on card from Hydra Systems Inc. who produce the ANDOR EX — a 33MHz Mackintosh compatible upgrade board which allows you to run any Macintosh software and any PC software on the same machine.
A single keystroke changes between the Mac and PC environments which can run simultaneously.
The card also has Macintosh connection sockets to give complete connectivity compatibility with external Macintosh peripherals.
The personal desktop computer is growing too powerful for stand-alone desktop use.
World-wide and local networking, and modem communications are increasing the scope and usefulness of the PC.
COMDEX/Fall dedicated a complete section of the exhibition to computer connectivity.
The growth of wide area networking and the recent introduction of wireless networks will mean more mobility, easier access to information, electronic mail and video conferencing — anywhere in the world.
The future.
COMDEX/Fall, if nothing else, gives some indication of the way in which future developments are moving.
Intel, developers of the processor at the heart of every PC, announced a new generation of processors.
Not, as expected, a 586 processor, but the Pentium which, although still in its final development stage, was demonstrated working in several major manufacturer's prototype machines including IBM.
Little is known about this new processor's specifications, but the drive for its development was led by the increased performance demands of real-time full-screen motion video and virtual reality graphics.
Intel are developing more than processors, they are working towards the diskless computer and demonstrated a prototype that included a small capacity solid-state C: drive containing boot information and operating system in Read Only Memory chips and new high capacity (40Mb) removable flash ROM cards for storage of applications and data.
Solid-state technology reduces ‘disk’ access time to nanoseconds and is more reliable than the conventional hard disk drive.
The Intel prototype diskless computer was based on a modified 486 motherboard.
In the future we can expect to see this technology integrated into the motherboard circuitry — initially for use in portable computers to reduce the unit weight and power requirements.
The NeXT Computer company, headed by Steve Jobs (co-designer of the Apple Macintosh), are releasing NeXTSTEP 486, an object-oriented system that gives complete software data compatibility, unlimited multitasking both locally and across a network, and allows you to create custom applications on your desktop.
In the not too distant future we should see a diskless, Pentium, networked, pen based computer running NeXTSTEP or Windows NT.
Watch this space.
January Competition
Super charge your computer
Practical PC brings you three state of the art computer cards that will get you well on the way to building a multi media computer.
Prizes:
First Prize
The Renoir NT Windows Accelerator card
The Renoir NT is up to 12 times faster than the fastest VGA with resolutions of 1280x1024 in 16 colour mode and 1024X 768 in 256 colour mode…
It also includes a graphics coprocessor running at 80 Mz and 1Mb of on board memory.
The high screen refresh rate means no perceived picture flicker making it easy to look at…
The card also supports XGA 16bit colour which allows display of a maximum of 65,577 colours.
Second Prize
The Renoir Sierra Hicolour 1Mb Ultra-SVGA Hires
This graphics card can display 32,000 colours on screen at a maximum resolution of 800x600.
It also has a maximum resolution of 1280x1024 in 16 colour mode.
This is claimed to be the fastest VGA card in the world.
Third Prize
The Media Vision Thunder Board sound card brings high quality sound to your computer.
The Thunder Board has a 11 voice FM music synthesiser that is fully AdLib compatible a very large library of games support this standard.
It also has Digitised audio record/playback capability with a sampling rate of up to 22KHz
All prizes Supplied by Program Solutions (UK) Ltd call 091 384 5401 for more information and last but not least a built-in joystick port.
The thunder board will give you everything you need to get the most out of your games.
All you have to do to win one of these fantastic prizes is answer the simple questions
1.
Who was Renoir
2.
How many FM voices has the Thunder Board
3.
what is the maximum amount of colours the Renoir NT card can display
RULES:
Winners will be printed in the February issue of Practical PC.
DARKLANDS
Microprose are better known for their comprehensive Simulations such as F-15 II Strike Eagle, and Gunship 2000, their latest release is a strategy type Role Playing Game called Darklands.
This is a massive departure for the Kings Of Simulation, and has many original features.
It is set in Germany during the middle ages, and although not abandoning a ‘fantasy’ setting, its stance is rather more along the ‘if what they believed about magic and legends were actually true’.
A massive product, occupying some 18Mb plus of hard disk space, with the whole of 15th Century Germany as the playing area.
You control the usual party, exploring and developing your characters.
There are no ‘quests’ in the normal way, but a series of encounters and campaigns that will achieve fame and fortune.
The character stats are amongst the most comprehensive in any RPG, but are rather poorly presented.
The gaming world is randomly created, with the intention of making the game replayable, but the quests seemed limited and repetitive.
The combat sequences and ‘party’ views are well presented, but the town and other locations are disappointingly represented by static graphics and a series of deep menus.
Darklands is a valiant attempt to create something new, but will only really appeal to a very limited (and dedicated audience).
MICROPROSE
FAX BOX:
Graphics: 3
Sound: 3
Gameplay: 2
Verdict: 3
PRICE: £49-99
DataEase 4.5
John Brown and Geoff Cox
Geoff Cox and professional Accountant, avid Practical PC reader and long time Dataease user John Brown team up for a look at Dataease 4.5 the latest version of the popular Dataease Database.
Dataease is the market leader in relational databases, although not as well known as Dbase or FoxPro it is an extremely popular product with both corporate and hobbyist user.
Many large and medium size companies, government departments and Local authorities are putting Dataease to use somewhere within their organisations.
One reason for the ubiquity of Dataease may be the ease with which well presented and reliable Databases can be set up.
The marketing department of Dataease stresses how easy it is to get going with the product, most other databases have to be programmed.
In the case of Dataease setting up the initial forms is easy, even quite complex forms with many relationships can be set up very quickly.
All you need is a little understanding of what the end result should look like and a to spend a few minutes reading the manuals.
A basic address book can be up and working in under half an hour.
The manuals, they are generally quite helpful, although they are definitely reference manuals rather than text books.
The tutorial supplied is excellent and more than makes up for the formal style of the manuals.
One small gripe is that the manuals have not been rewritten since the advent of version 4.
Extra manuals have simply been added to give details of the new features.
This is extremely confusing if you upgrade from version 4.2 to version 4.5 and have to refer to two manuals with identical titles containing different information.
The upgrade instructions are a little confusing, the instructions in the manuals did not agree with the upgrade product I was sent!
The technical support line was very helpful, though.
I did not have to wait long.
I received good knowledgeable advice, that worked.
and most importantly, I was treated like a human being.
I only wish I could say the same of some other companies!
Once installed transfer of my existing databases was fairly painless.
The only surprise was that the manual said that conversion of my 4.2 databases would not be necessary unless I wanted the benefits of the new release.
In fact it was necessary to convert all of my databases.
An easy and quick process even with the large amount of data I already had stored.
Over 70,000 large records.
Each form that you set up within Dataease is a database file.
All of the forms within one database can be related to each other.
When you set up the form, you have immediately created your database.
The data is entered in to that form.
You can at any time, if you have the security level, add a field to a form or delete fields from a form.
Help fields can be added to the database if required.
The programme is very hot on security.
Each Database can be set up with a range of users and passwords.
Each user can have one of seven security levels, only a high security level can set up forms and DL procedures.
Medium security levels can enter and delete data and low security levels can only view data.
In addition each form and each field of each form can be assigned a view and a write security level.
What is much better than just the security levels is the User Definable menus.
You can set up menus which are assigned to specific users and passwords.
Those users can only access the functions, procedures or other menus you have allowed them to.
This means that you can exclude the options required to set up or delete forms.
Dataease can have 2000 files per database and 255 fields per file.
Each file can have millions of records., more than adequate for most users.
It is possible to have up to 32 sub-forms within any other form.
I (John) find the reporting procedures awkward to use.
The language is reasonably powerful, if you have the time to work out how to best perform specific tasks.
Having two types of procedure, command and processing, that only have a few functions in common, is annoying.
I often want to lookup a value in a form and then on the result run one of a selection of procedures.
The lookup functions (any, or all) can only be performed in a processing procedure and the run procedure can only be done in a command procedure.
The other down point is the speed of reporting.
If you have a very complex sort or lots of calculation that add up values from lots of records, expect to wait and wait for your report.
One of the best reasons for upgrading to version 4.5 is its dramatic increase in speed over previous versions.
If you only have simple lists of results you will not notice the improvement.
However, one report that took nearly two hours using version 4.2 was reduced to a mere 20 minutes using version 4.5.
Do not expect such a dramatic improvement on all of your reports but they will all benefit from a modest improvement.
Dataease 4.5 comes with a PIF and icon for use with Windows.
It still has to be used full screen, or at least with a fixed window size.
If you are a serious Windows user, you may prefer to wait and see how the Windows version of Dataease performs when it is released shortly.
Dataease 4.5 has more good points than it has problems.
At the end of the day it is how you feel when using it.
It is a powerful text based database, primarily set up by typing in field names and parameters.
I think it's biggest advantage is the speed in which even a novice can set up a new database and get data on to it.
+ Easy to use and to set up
+ Good security features
+ No programming ability required
+ Excellent Technical support
+ Improved speed
-Disorganised and Formal Manuals
Facts Box (Dataease)
Overall a recommended buy if you are looking for a simple but powerful professional database.
£400 from Watford Electronics Dataease UK Ltd, 1 Coventry Road Ilford Essex IG1 4QR 081 518 4150
Dataease 4.5
Windows tiles
Being able to tile or overlap windows within applications is a nice convenience but have you ever wished that you could do the same thing with separate applications on the desktop?
Well you can because it is an option within the Task Manager.
To call up the Task Manager all you have to do is double click on the desktop or press Ctrl-Esc.
Once the task manager is visible all you can select Tile or Cascade to instantly tidy up the all of the application windows currently open.
My only complaint is that there seems to be no way of selecting a between a horizontal or vertical tiling split.
A free diagnostic
If you have upgraded to Windows 3.1 then you might not know it but Microsoft were kind enough to supply you with a free diagnostic utility — MSD (Microsoft System Diagnostic).
This is stored in the directory \Windows and all you have to do to run it is to change to this directory and type MSD.
In a few moments you should see a summary screen showing details of your machine.
To see more just press the key corresponding to the highlighted letter.
You might even like to print out the summaries so that you can see if anything has changed.
MSD is especially helpful in solving memory allocation clashes.
Spreadsheet convert to values
One useful trick that often comes in handy is to convert an entire spreadsheet to values.
This effectively freezes the results of all calculations and enables you to save a ‘snapshot’ copy of the data.
In the case of SuperCalc this is very easy via the command: /Copy, All, All, Values
In the case of 1-2-3 it is a tiny bit more difficult but only because there is no 1-2-3 equivalent of All.
The command is: /Range, Values, A1…x where x is the bottom right hand corner of the area of the worksheet that you want to convert to values.
Today's the day
The simplest but most useful WordStar tip that I know is to press ESC @ to insert todays date into a document.
By the way if your system date and time is wrong you can correct them using the MS-DOS commands DATE, and TIME.
After you have typed the command MS-DOS will tell you what it thinks the date or time is and then you have to correct it if it is wrong.
Using Date or Time unfortunately doesn't alter the system clock for good.
The next time you start your machine it will still show the lag or lead that it did before you tried to correct it.
The real solution to the problem is usually to be found in the system BIOS.
Now while this sounds complicated it isn't — as long as you can find a way into your systems BIOS SETUP.
Most modern systems usually put a message on the screen when they are first switched on that tell you to press ESC, DEL or some other key combination to enter the BIOS setup.
Older systems may require you to hunt around for a disk that contains a BIOS setup program.
Once in to the BIOS setup you will find it very easy to follow the instructions to change the system clock and so put the time right once and for all— but be careful not to change anything else!
Patience is a virtue
Does your Windows 3.1 sometimes freeze on you without an error message of any kind?
Does the mouse pointer still work even if the keyboard doesn't?
If this is the case don't immediately reach for the reset or on/off button because there might be nothing at all wrong.
If you wait for a few minutes, and it really can be that long, you might be surprised to discover that Windows un-freezes of its own accord.
It seems that every now and again the memory gets so disorganised that Windows goes off to do something about it and hence the frightening silence.
If you wait long enough then when it finishes this large task everything will work as normal.
One final word of advice.
Try not to click with mouse and type on the keyboard while Windows is frozen because when it comes back it acts on all of the commands that you have given it — so apparently switching from a state of deep sleep to rapid activity that can look like another stage in a serious crash!
Quick disk drive check
If you want to make sure that all of the files in a directory can be read use the command: COPY directory \*.; * NUL
The NUL device is a do nothing device that can be used to send any amount of data into the empty void.
In this case it still forces the COPY device to read each file in turn.
If you want to check the data on and entire disk complete with sub-directories then try XCOPY \*.; * NUL /S
The /S at the end of the command tells XCOPY to copy all of the sub-directories and the files and sub-directories that they contain.
In other words this copies and so reads the entire disk.
It may not be PC Tools but it's cheap!
Two ways to swap drives
Have you ever tried to install software that refuses to use anything but the A: drive even though you are forced to use it in the B: drive because of the size of the diskettes?
Don't give up and you don't have to open the case.
There are two way to swap the identity of the disk drives.
The older way is to use the command ASSIGN A: =B: B: =A: but in todays modern MS-DOS this is discouraged for reasons that are to do with networking and device drivers.
Instead you should use the command SUBST A: B: /B: A: /which does more or less the same job.
It also helps to known two different ways of swapping drives because not all installation software will work with both — so be prepared to try each one.
To undo the drive swap you have to use ASSIGN or SUBST A: /D and SUBST B: /D.
Working with Design
DesignWorks suffered a little in its initial release by having Typographica fonts bundled with it.
Version 1.2 changes that an other things.
Is it worth the upgrade?
Gil Benson draws on his experience.
The advent of Windows 3.1 has caused a minor shake-up in many applications — OLE and TrueType are just two of the features of the environment that software houses have been keen to take advantage of.
The fear must be that if your application doesn't use the advanced features of Windows, programs that do will be the better sellers.
All this, of course, means that the end user gets better and more functional applications, as exemplified by DesignWorks 1.2, the most recent upgrade to GST's vector graphics application.
DesignWorks is/was the first tentative step into the Windows environment for Cambridgeshire firm GST and was reasonably well received by reviewers, but with one or two caveats.
The most obvious of these was that if fonts were to be provided with any application, it was better if they could be shared by others, and the Typographics fonts supplied with early versions were, if not exactly grotty, not up to the standard users would expect of, say, TrueType or ATM fonts.
In this upgraded version — 1.2 — not only are Typographica fonts not supplied, but they have been replaced by Adobe Type Manager 2. x and ATM fonts of the same style of the originals.
Added to that is full support for TrueType fonts, which gives the intending user the best of both possible words.
To make things even easier, if you have a preference for one font system over the other, in any font dialogue box within DW1.2, ATM fonts are noted as such, with the ATM symbol, and TrueType fonts are annotated with the ‘TT’ symbol.
Other new features in this version include line styles that have arrowheads to them — not a great thing, but nonetheless useful, and a fully resizable floating toolbox.
In the screenshots you'll see that the review program's toolbox is sited at the left of the screen as a ‘drainpipe’, but can be positioned anywhere in the DW1.2 window and with whatever dimensions the user chooses.
Very useful.
Other enhancements such as the mouse pointer changing shape according to the function currently selected and changing curve points to corner points may be of less use but at the very least point to a great amount of thought being paid to the design of the program.
In use This reviewer makes no great claims to artistic merit, but is perfectly capable of following a tutorial and picking up skills.
It has to be said that the user interface to DW1.2 is of the first order.
Within a few minutes of installing the application (which, incidentally, takes rather less than fifteen minutes, even on a reasonably slow machine) quit sophisticated logos and graphics of that ilk were appearing onscreen courtesy of some simply presented but powerful facilities.
The ability to define some text and have it converted to curves, which can then be edited to distort the shapes of letters, for instance, gives even the novice user the chance to adopt a style similar to that used by Ferrari, where the initial ‘F’ is elongated.
Similarly, importing a bitmapped graphic in any of the variety of formats DW1.2 supports gives the opportunity to use the very simple tracing tool to trace only selected shapes and pick them out of the bitmap — the second screenshot shows the Windows 3.1 window being picked out of the 3.1 opening logo screen.
That tool, particularly is a far cry from the auto-trace feature in many other vector drawing packages, and will probably be one of the most useful for many users.
The same sort of simplicity applies to almost every aspect of DW1.2 — editing fills and colours could not be easier, given that, if you really don't want to specify the ‘mix’ for your own colours, a large subset of the Pantone chart is available for use instantly.
Fills are easily set up, and once defined demand a name.
Thus you can define fill as ‘chainmail’ for instance, and know exactly where on your drawing of medieval knights to apply the fill (it isn't going to go on a flag, is it??)
Best of all for banana fingered reviewers, the DW1.2's undo seems to go back forever, nd is not limited to just one step as is the case with so many other programs.
In short, DesignWorks 1.2 is a program that takes a function many other applications have sophisticated, and ‘simplicated’ it.
The same level of sophistication in the end product is available, but with much less complexity and a very shallow learning curve.
For all of this, you might well expect to pay a premium price, but with a recommended price of £149, which is very likely to be discounted to under the £100 mark, DesignWorks lies in the ‘affordable’ bracket.
One has to be impressed.
Info Box Product: DesignWorks 1.20 From: GST Software Products Ltd.
Double Glazing — February 1993 Edition
Two pages on the Microsoft Windows environment — what else but double glazing!
This column is dedicated to Windows users everywhere.
We'll show you all the latest applications that run in Microsoft's fastest selling Graphical User Interface (GUI) environment.
In addition we'll have hints and tips on how to get the best out of your very own GUI (Graphical User Interface).
Double Glazing is where we welcome your questions, comments, and experience with Windows.
Contact us on CompuServe ID 70007,5557 as well as via the usual pigeon post.
Is this Utopia or the ultimate HelpDesk?
In any organisation the most active and critical area is the computer support help desk.
End-user requests for support and problem resolution can easily bog-down even the most efficient of departments.
Fortunately one company, Hammersly Technology Partners Inc, has the answer, it's called Utopia, it runs under Windows, and it covers the vital tasks of HelpDesk, Inventory, Training Administration, and System Administration.
Utopia is currently used by such household names as AT&T, Johnson & Johnson along with 20 US corporations.
Now the product has been launched in Europe, and The Software Magazine is the first UK publication to evaluate the product.
Our initial impressions of Utopia are very positive, so much so that we're going to install the application to log all the Windows related problems, hints, tips and fixes encountered via this column.
Utopia significantly improves the management of vital technical information, track end-user requests, log all action taken on those requests, and also automatically escalate the routing of information to solve day-to-day problems.
HelpDesk requests are stored in an historical database, which can be searched for effective answers to future reader queries.
The HelpDesk Request screen provides Client History and Inventory buttons which will allow us to view past specific requests for support as well as the configuration of the machine on which the problem was experienced.
Such state-of-the-art software will enable Double Glazing to cross-reference problems that we all experience in the Windows environment, and provide timely and accurate fixes and work-arounds.
Watch out for a regular HelpDesk feature in Double Glazing — starting next month!
Making Windows work for you.
Much of the performance of Windows on any PC is down to the compatibility of the hardware with the operating system, and Windows itself.
This three-layer cake of Hardware/DOS/Windows is a complicated mix of compromises, which is fine when they all pay-off, but less impressive if they don't!
Unfortunately there seems to be no substitute for actually installing Windows on a hardware and operating system platform to find out how it's really going to behave!
The boffins behind Double Glazing are devising some simple to execute routines that will test the compatibility of your mix of hardware and software.
While we're devising some interesting experimental parameters here's a relatively basic test for hardware and software compatibility.
Quite simply the test is to run a rival GUI (Graphical User Interface), Digital Research's GEM, from a DOS window in Microsoft's Windows 3.1.
The Graphical Environment Manager or GEM pre-dates Windows by many years.
DR's GEM was happily running on Intel 8088-powered XT machines whilst Bill Gates had to wait for Tandy's Intel 80186 processor powered PC, just to make version 1.0 of Windows run efficiently.
Besides Windows you will need to install GEM and a GEM application on your PC's hard disk.
To run a DOS window just double-click on the MS-DOS icon.
Your PC then will switch to a full-screen DOS mode.
Simultaneously press the Alt and Return keys, this will ‘pop’ the full DOS screen back into a DOS window overlaying your Windows desktop.
If the BAT file that runs GEM or its main application is correctly PATHed then just typing GEM or the application PUBLISH for GST's Timeworks Publisher should be an interesting experience!
The speed of the GEM application running under Windows 3.1 will not impress you, even on a 33-MHz 80486 PC!
Nevertheless the fact such a unusual combination actually works proves that your Windows platform is very compatible indeed!
Virus Watch
Computer Viruses are almost entirely contained in Software.
There is one shady exception, when prior to the Gulf War, it was rumoured, the US managed to infect part of an Iraqi air-defence system with a Virus.
The Virus code was hidden in the ROM chip firmware of some networked printers supplied to the Iraqis just before the outbreak of the Air Campaign.
As you know ROMs or Read Only Memory chips are effectively loaded with software, so this example is casts a fine line between Hardware and Software.
Most Windows applications are very easy to use, in comparison to their text-based cousins.
That's why the vast majority of users are attracted to Microsoft Windows by its very simplicity.
The ability to control a computer via a Graphical User Interface or GUI is much like a car driver who doesn't need to understand the internal combustion engine to be able to manoeuvre the car with considerable skill.
However every car needs a regular service by trained personnel who do understand its mechanical workings.
It is obvious that you don't need to change the oil, or check the brake pads on a PC, but there are many just as vital checks to carry out if you want your data survive every eventuality.
Whether its diagnostics or anti-virus checks there are some very capable products that run under Windows.
However as either of these applications have to rely on Windows to report on the health of the underlying DOS, users don't always get the correct information they require.
Even Microsoft's MSD (Microsoft Diagnostics) throws up a warning screen when run from the Windows DeskTop, saying ‘information presented may be less accurate or complete than if MSD is run outside of Windows.’
It is with that general proviso that we review anti-virus or diagnostics applications running under Microsoft Windows.
Britain's best known anti-virus software comes from S&S International in the shape of Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit, which has now been launched in a new Windows version.
What is undoubtedly very powerful anti-virus software is controlled via only six on-screen ‘push-buttons’.
As one of these ‘buttons’ is the exit button, you can't really improve on the application's simplicity!
Like all good anti-virus products Dr Solomon's Windows offering diligently checks the RAM for lurking nasties before tackling the job of examining any hard or floppy disk for viruses.
Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows (what a mouthful!) is a very quick performer, it zoomed through 157 Megabytes of files on our Victor V486M's 200 Mb hard disk in just 47 seconds!
The best part of Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows (what another mouthful!) is the Encyclopaedia, which via an easy-to-use browse bar can pick any of the thousand plus entries.
Each Virus listing gives essential information, such as is virus widespread, damage done, increase in infected file size, infections system and its on-screen symptoms.
This is probably the first Windows Application that we've reviewed where you could lock away the manual, a great on-screen help system helps both the novice or experienced user.
Any product which is so easy to use, will get run more often, and therefore meet its true purpose, detecting and zapping viruses!
DOS 5 An Overview for Beginners
by Chris Baylis & Darren White
Over the months, The Software Magazine will guide you through basic concepts of popular software.
This jargon-free tutorial approach will ease the novice gently into the fascinating world of computing.
This month everybody's favourite operating system — DOS 5
If you have recently changed from a 16-bit computer (something like an Atari ST or an Amiga) to a PC, you will have suddenly found yourself face to face with DOS (Disk Operating System), and this will most probably be Microsoft's DOS 5 (MS-DOS 5).
Although this looks at first to be quite incomprehensible, it is actually quite a friendly little creature and most willing to assist you with either your work or play, as long as you take a short amount of time to learn a few basic commands.
To begin with there is the DOS SHELL,(also known as the FRONT END) which is a graphical user interface,(or GUI) and this is most likely to be the screen you first encounter when you switch on your computer.
(see fig 1.)
From this screen you can enter a number of commands, such as copying files, loading programs from the directory tree, formatting disks, or (most important) backing up your system,(saving all the information on your HDD in case of accidental damage or loss) just by highlighting the necessary on-screen text information with either the keyboard or mouse cursor, and pressing return/double clicking the mouse button.
AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS (see fig 2.)
In DOS there are two files that are automatically set up and loaded when it is first installed; these are the AUTOEXEC.BAT and the CONFIG.SYS files.
Each time you turn your computer on these files will activate certain programs and routines that configure your system to your pre-set specifications.
Two of the main instructions found in the autoexec.bat are PROMPT, and PATH, in which the DOS directory should be included to enable DOS commands to be called up from any location.
eg: PATH=C: \DOS
In the config.sys file you will find many of the commands that need to be individually altered depending on the programs you are running.
For example, some programs will express that the Files and Buffers have to be set to a certain number for that particular program to operate correctly.
In many cases the program will automatically update the config.sys, generally after asking if this is okay.
Adding a mouse to the system will almost certainly mean an addition to one of these files, but most mouse software will automatically introduce the necessary line(s) to the config.sys file.
If you have to set the commands manually in either the config.sys or the autoexec.bat files, you will have to use either the Edlin, or Edit commands.
(see fig 3.)
If you use the TYPE command (ie: TYPE autoexec.bat) you will be able to view the file without fear of altering it accidentally.
If you look in your autoexec.bat or config.sys files you may see REM in front of a sentence or command line.
This is showing you that the sentence or command line is a comment or reminder, and is not being implicated at the moment.
MEM & CHKDSK
When loading a new program you may see from the instructions that a certain amount of base (or conventional), high, expanded, or extended memory is required.
To check whether you have enough RAM (Random Access Memory) available configured as the required type, use the MEM command (see fig 4).
If you only need to check the base memory and also wish to know how much space remains on your HDD (hard disk drive) then the CHKDSK command will convey this information, as well as informing you of any HDD errors such as lost files and bad sectors.
Knowing which type of memory you require is a matter of experience, but a good thing to remember is that most computers have 640K of base memory — even though they state 1 meg — and that most programs now require at least 530K of this to operate properly.
If you are looking to buy a new computer in the near future it would be wise not to obtain one with less than 4 meg of RAM on board.
Certain specifications allow the use of High, Expanded, or Extended memory, but MS-DOS 5 leaves you with up to 621K of the original 640K to use and programs that require more than this are more complex than a new PC owner should initially be concerned with.
FORMATTING and COPYING FILES
MS DOS 5 has three copying programs that you can use to transfer files, but before you can copy any file onto a floppy disk you will have to FORMAT the disk first.
To format, place a disk in the floppy drive (either Drive A: or B:) and type the command FORMAT: DOS will then attempt to format the disk to the specifications of that drive.
For example, if you are using a high density 3.5″ drive A: the disk will be formatted to give 1.44Mb of usable clean space; and if you have a 5.25″ high density drive B: the space available will be 1.2Mb.
If you are using low density disks in high density drives you will have to give the computer extra information on the format line.
Type HELP FORMAT for a listing of relevant switches and advice on when and how to use them.
At this present time there is no need to worry about the UNFORMAT information DOS will place on your disk as it formats, or giving the disk a LABEL — this latter being a personal title you may wish to code each disk with.
(This is simply an identity code, not a security code — don't be confused) Format (fig 6)
Having formatted your disk(s) you are now ready to copy files over.
The first program you can use is the COPY command, and this will basically copy a file from one disk to another by typing a straightforward command such as: COPY (Drive letter:)(filename including extensions)(drive to be copied to.
Don't forget the:) for example COPY A:Chris.TXT B: This will copy a file from Drive A: named CHRIS.TXT to the disk in Drive B:
You can COPY direct to a disk, as shown above, or you may wish to COPY the file into a DIRECTORY on another disk.
If this is the case, then the command would be: COPY (Drive Letter:)(Filename)(Receiving Drive Letter:) Directory Name)
Example: If I wanted to copy Chris.Txt from Drive A: to a Directory called Darren on Drive B: I would type: COPY a:Chris.txt b: \Darren
Talking of directories, if you want to know what files are already on a disk, Type DIR (Drive letter:).
If there is more than a page full of directories on the disk, type DIR/P and the screen will pause at the end of each page.
(Press return to continue after each pause).
DIR/W will spread the files out across the screen in a number of columns, whereas the regular DIR will list them vertically in one column.
The second copy command is the XCOPY and this will copy only selected files from one disk to another, along with all files in their sub directories. (a sub-directory is a directory that is placed inside another directory) To begin with this is the least used of the copy programs and should be studied further before use is attempted.
(XCOPY fig 7)
The third, and easiest copy program, is DISKCOPY.
This can only be used with one or more floppy drives, and copies all the information from one disk to another.
(ALL includes hidden files, damaged files, in fact it will make a clone copy of the disk) To use DISKCOPY simply place the Source disk in (for example) drive A: and the Destination disk in drive B: and type DISKCOPY A: B: If you only have one drive (drive A:) then type DISKCOPY A: A: and watch the screen for directions, as it will tell you when to swap the Source disk over for the Destination and vice versa .
(Note: Do ensure that you have carefully marked the Source disk or at least that it is ‘write’ protected.
If you leave it unmarked and unprotected it is easy to mix the Source and Destination disks up and you could overwrite and lose your valuable information)
Figure 8 shows the Utilities Screen and from here you can choose and run a variety of the helpful programs available in DOS5.
Point the mouse cursor (seen here as an arrow) onto the required program and double-click on the left mouse button to highlight and operate the program.
The BACKUP and RESTORE programs are opposite to each other, one will backup your programs to floppy disks and the other allows you to restore them to your hard drive.
Also here is the UNDELETE command which will sometimes (don't rely on this as a guaranteed safety catch) save your bacon if you have accidentally wiped (deleted) a file from a disk.
There are many other DOS commands that you may eventually use (some are shown listed below), but most of these should really not concern you until you have become more familiar with your new machine and it's basic abilities.
It is a good idea to make a BOOT disk in case you ever have problems when you first turn the machine on and it has difficulty reading the hard drive.
This may occur if you have been playing a game or using a program that has somehow corrupted your system files.
This should never happen, but it has been known to, and being safe rather than sorry is always best.
However, if you are unsure of what to do, don't mess around for what could be a simple job for a trained engineer can turn into a nightmare if an inexperienced user starts to experiment.
Call an engineer, he will be pleased if you have a BOOT disk, and ecstatic if you have prudently backed-up your files on a regular basis.
To create a BOOT disk place a disk in your floppy drive a: and type FORMAT /s this will format the disk and place the system files on it.
You can also put a few other useful files onto the disk, such as the autoexec.bat and config.sys.
DOS HELP and Exclusive DOS5 Commands
You can type HELP followed by the command name (as in HELP FORMAT mentioned earlier) or type the command name followed by /? as in FORMAT /?
The following commands are new to DOS 5.
DOSKEY:-Edit command lines, recalls previous commands.
EDIT:-Starts editor program to create or change ASCII files.
EMM386:-Toggle on/off EMM386 expanded memory manager.
EXIT:-Quits the Command.Com program.
EXPAND:-Expands one or more compressed files.
FC:-Compares two files or sets of files and displays their differences.
LH:-Loadhigh.
Loads program into upper memory area.
LOADFIX:-Loads a program above the first 64K of memory.
MIRROR:-Records information about disks.
QBASIC:-Starts QBasic.
SETVER:-Sets the version number reported to a program by DOS.
UNDELETE:-Recovers deleted files.
UNFORMAT:-Recovers data ‘erased’ by formatting a disk.
Finally, just a couple of interesting tips you should remember.
a).
At the DOS prompt (>) pressing F3 will automatically bring up the last line you typed.
b).
If you have to change your autoexec.bat or config.sys files, you must then REBOOT (restart by either turning it off then on or by using the reset button) your computer for the changes to take effect.
Smoothing the Jags
Epson's low-cost, second level laser printer sports lots of emulations and enhanced imaging technology.
Jo Lawton checks out the EPL 4300 and smooths out the bumps
The majority of laser printers use a resolution on the page of 300 dots per inch.
That means that, in a totally black patch of ink, there will be 300x300 (90000) individual dots.
Even at that resolution and that many dots, curved lines can appear jagged, albeit under a magnifying glass.
Epson's RITech technology seeks to smooth out the jaggies, which ought to give a much higher quality print.
When I got my first laser printer many moons ago, my bank manager almost had a heart attack.
The cost was over three thousand pounds, which is a considerable sum today, but was then worth about four and a half thousand in today's terms.
If I'd been buying my fist laser today, the poor benighted soul would be less likely to endure a coronary, since, for less than one thousand pounds I could nip out and buy a very nicely specified machine.
On my shortlist would be this latest printer from the Epson stable, the EPL 4300.
Lust at first sight
The EPL 4300 looks the business, of that there can be no doubt— at least in my mind.
To me, aesthetics are important, and the 4300 is chock full of pleasing design qualities.
To begin with, after it has turned the head with its slightly bulky but macho presence, the ergonomics of the thing strike you.
The paper tray is front mounted, slips easily into place, and can handle up to 100 sheets of A4 — a respectable if not outstanding load.
This requires that the machine be placed on a surface such that the tray is not constantly collided with by passers by.
In truth, you need around two and a half to three feet (that's up to a metre in Blue Peter-speak) of front-to-back space to site the beast, which may seem a little profligate for a printer's footprint, but is worth it, believe me.
All of the rest of the day to day gubbins is front mounted — the control panel and a large font cartridge slot complete the picture here, while the power on/off switch is neatly recessed towards the rear on the left hand side.
There's also a side mounted font card slot at the rear of the right hand side, which, if not the most handy place to have one, at least echoes some of the printer's antecedents, in that that's where the first Epson laser printer, the GQ3500 had its slots.
Ah, the memories!
The rest of the specifications are in the specifications box — extract from them what is of interest to you, but take it from me that the machine is as well specified as any at this price.
From the ergonomic and looks point of view, at any rate, the EPL 4300 is, to me, a good looking and easily manageable piece of equipment.
Skin Deep
Beauty is, however, only skin deep, or so they tell us.
One part of the duties of owning a laser printer is the task of replacing consumables — the toner cartridge and photoconductor unit spring readily to mind at this point.
In some printers the two are one, and you replace the photoconductor with the toner every time, albeit less frequently than you might change toner cartridges in those printers which maintain the two separately.
The 4300 features separate units, which makes toner cartridge replacement cheaper when it happens.
Unusually in my experience, there are two doors for entry into the works of the machine.
The top swivels open to reveal the photoconductor cartridge for insertion and replacement, while the toner cartridge slides in and out through a flap on the front of the machine below the paper tray.
Given that the cartridge may need to be removed for the purpose of transporting the printer, it means that, should any toner be spilled from the cartridge, it is likely to fall below the paper path, and so not contaminate the rest of the machine and subsequent print-outs.
I've got first hand experience of this, since the unit Epson provided for review had obviously been in use elsewhere before it got to me, and there was toner flying free from the part-used cartridge.
Thankfully, because of the placement of the cartridge in the machine, I have not been troubled by contamination.
Output.
All of this, of course, is very well, but what of the output from the machine, and what is it like in use?
Firstly output.
It's extremely good.
The RITech imaging enhancement firmware certainly does its job well, smoothing out tiny jaggies to give the impression that the print is at a higher resolution than it actually is.
Quite how it does it is beyond the scope of this review, but the results are certainly impressive.
What is also impressive is the rest of the intelligence built into the machine.
For instance, it is perfectly possible to have more than one (up to three, in fact) PC connected to the 4300 at any one time, and the printer will accept data from any one at a time, or concurrently, in effect queueing the jobs itself.
As it is shipped, two ports are available, one serial and one parallel, but a third port is available as an option.
A memory upgrade from the 1MB supplied is likely to be advisable should you need to use this feature — the printer will accept up to 6MB onboard.
Print times are also quite speedy.
Time to first print is roughly 45 seconds and multi-copy printing pulls that up to the rated 6 pages per minute claimed for the unit.
That's not at all bad, but expect time to first print to be longer for highly graphical subjects.
Inevitably, the PC manages to slow things down a little.
Fonts.
The main emulation that the EPL 4300 sports is HP Laserjet IIIP, complete with PCL5, the latest of the Hewlett Packard page description languages.
As part of this, there are 14 bitmapped fonts and 13 scalable fonts built into the machine — probably more than enough for most people.
That said, I have printed TrueType and Adobe Type Manager fonts with excellent results as well, and seemingly quicker than to my aging PostScript printer.
See sample printouts to judge quality for yourself.
Summary
I'm impressed.
For £999 the EPL 4300 provides a functionality that normally costs two or three hundred pounds more, and adds some particularly nice features, such as the multi-PC sharing capability and automatic emulation sensing.
This latter feature is very useful, given that in a sharing environment, it is by no means certain that each PC will be capable of using the PCL5 page description language backward compatibility with previous Epson printers is also very handy.
Output is very good, and as speedy as you will get from a 6ppm laser printer.
Graphics handling is also quite impressive, on a par with much more expensive laser printers.
In short, the EPL 4300 represents an excellent printer at a very competitive price.
One for your shortlist.
THE SOFTWARE MAGAZINE: REVIEW £5 — EDUCATION FEATURE NO 1 ISSUE £1
Europress Software have been producing educational software for many years with their best selling ‘Fun School’ series.
This has recently reached Volume 4 and now really looks the part.
From the same stable, come two rather different products, both of which conform to the National Curriculum and are well presented additions to the fast improving library of educational software available for the PC:—
PAINT AND CREATE
This is a suite of six programs, all with an artistic bent and designed for ages 5+.
The main activity menu has a series of characters or objects that become animated if selected, and also gives access to the other five options.
These are Art Alive, Music Maestro, Card Creator, Make a Monster and Jigsaw.
Make a Monster is good fun, letting the younger user design their own creations using a mix-and-match technique of arms, heads, legs, eyes etc.
Some really weird creations are possible, and although their are thousands of possibilities, this probably has the least long-term ‘playability’— you know once you've seen one thirty eyed, nine legged, four mouthed Zug monster from Venus you've seen 'em all…
Jigsaw Creator is excellent, in particular in its ability to allow jigsaws to be made from either the ready made pictures, or from your own creations in the Art Alive module, or from the Make a Monster game.
The number of pieces can be set between 12 and 120, and an added complication can be added by rotating the pieces.
Art Alive is a well functioned drawing package, allowing either freehand creations or import/editing of existing pictures.
It comes with the standard features found in more sophisticated packages, but is far easier to use.
Music Maestro is the real Jewel in the Crown, in which the user can select their own band, pick the musicians and instruments, and then compose their own songs!
Card Creator is a run of the mill greeting card maker, but other than the normal borders, clip art and messages it allows use of freehand drawing and writing to personalise the cards.
In summary, Paint and Create does very little that has not been done elsewhere — but what it does achieve is to bring together in one coherent and consistent product a series of easy to use enjoyable programs that will delight the younger user, and more importantly provoke use of imagination and of creative thought.
Europress Software claim that Paint and Create meets virtually all of the requirements of the National Curriculum, key stage One Technology Attainment Target Five (translated modestly by them as nearly all infant and lower junior computer technology requirements — presumably learning hexadecimal is in the next year!!!)
SPELLING FAIR
This is the other recent Europress Software release and is designed to help the younger user master basic techniques of spelling and grammar (OK big yawns etc — but wait a second, because this is one of the best of its type!).
SPELLING FAIR is divided into a series of games which almost transparently teach plurals, similes suffixes, prefixes and homophones (buy the product to find out what that means!).
The games include Coconut Shy (hidden words), Test your Strength (plurals), Haunted House (homophones), Mechanical Grabber and Word Juggle.
The graphics are well presented and are of the good quality EGA type, the AD Lib sound board is supported, albeit sparingly, and the basic interface is easy to use.
The games have various levels of difficulty, and there is a reporting system to measure progress.
Good additional features include the ability to add your own words, and a Special Word Set containing selected words which frequently cause children difficulty plus some specifically chosen to help dyslexic children.
The software is complemented by a helpful 30 page manual with some ‘Spelling Rules and Lists’.
SPELLING FAIR deals with a fairly dry and stodgy topic in an entertaining an educational way, and is well recommended.
Aimed at the 7 to 13 year old age group, SPELLING FAIR is designed to ‘help equip children to achieve a high standard within…attainment target 4 in the National Curriculum in English at Key Stages 2 (ages 7–11) and 3 (ages 11–14).
In a spreadsheeting world where once Lotus 123 was king, users are increasingly switching to Windows based applications, and Excel is the pretender to the throne.
Gil Benson examines the latest release of Excel — version 4 — to see what all the fuss is about.
Spreadsheets used to provide the vital function of allowing people who had to juggle with figures to do so, achieve their answers, and print out seemingly interminable reams of numbers in columns and rows.
To read a complex spreadsheet was something that required not a little experience, but these days, it's the presentation and ease of use of the spreadsheet that is being sold.
The functionality is taken for granted.
In this review, I've started from the premise that Excel is capable of doing all the spreadsheety things — like adding columns of figures, applying formulae, and allowing complex calculations based upon built-in functions.
What I think you'll be more interested in is its time-saving and intuitive approach to what will in the future be referred to as presentation spreadsheeting.
No matter what spreadsheet you currently use, if, in fact you use one at all, it will be capable of adding figures (via a sum function) multiplying, dividing, converting and so forth .
There are many functions that are common to 99% of all spreadsheet applications, in much the same sort of way that a word processor has to have certain abilities.
Like word processors, however, it's not so much what a spreadsheet can do in common with others, but what it does that others can't, and how it does things that make one stand out from another.
In this respect Excel has always been the first of the Windows spreadsheet, and incorporated much of the ease of use that Windows offered.
With Excel 4, Microsoft has taken things a stage further, and used the philosophy of document processing, I feel, in the way the application is structured.
I do not intend to list all the normal things Excel can do — just take it for granted that you will be able to set up a spreadsheet to calculate whatever you want to — but I want to concentrate on some of the features that will certainly save time, effort, and head scratching.
Intelligent fills
Imagine the scenario — you are creating a set of figures ordered by month.
You highlight cell A1 and type in Jan, then highlight cell B1 and type in Feb, then highlight cell C1 and type in Mar and so forth.
Twelve such operations later, you have your year's month headings entered, and only then realise that you should have started not at cell A1 (the top left hand corner of any spreadsheet), but in a bit and down a bit— you have to put row headings in as well .
So, you either decide to start again, or you cut and paste, often laboriously, to move the range to where you think it ought to be in the first place.
Now open up Excel 4, highlight cell A1, and type in Jan.
A small cross appears at the bottom right hand corner of the cell border, to tell you it's the current cell.
Place your pointer over the cross, and drag the border along the row to cell L1, and release the mouse button.
Lo and behold, you have the full twelve month series from Jan to Dec done and dusted, in the format you typed the first one.
Had you entered January instead of Jan, the each month would have been entered for you in full.
But it still isn't in the right place.
No problem.
Put your pointer over one of the sides of the border that now stretches for twelve cells, click, and drag the range to where you want it.
If it isn't right later, you can highlight the range again and move it again.
Now, that, to me, is the sensible way to do it.
I can see the range, where it is, and where I want it to be.
Using traditional methods (ie. pencil and paper), I suppose I could easily have got the scissors out and done the same job.
But I'm using a computer, and there's no need to adhere slavishly to the old methodologies.
This is called drag and drop, and it's a pleasant way to shuffle your spreadsheet about.
Intelligent moves
Drag and drop movement doesn't just stop there, though.
The  instance where you have constructed your spreadsheet, and to all intents and purposes, it's complete.
You check it through, like all good workmen do, and come to the conclusion that a range of totals is in the wrong place.
You want them up at the top of the sheet, where they're going to be seen first (they look that good).
Just drag them and drop them — the formulae will still refer to the cells they referred to previously.
But what about any formulae that referred to the cells you have just moved?
That's ok — they get changed too, automatically.
You can see all of this in the screen shots.
Intelligent copies
The same intelligence applies to copying formulae.
Instead of highlighting the first cell with the formula in it, and the rest of the row or column, then accessing the edit menu and copying right or down, all you do is use that little cross in the bottom right hand corner of the cell border, and drag it across the range you want the formula copied to — Excel is clever enough to decide whether you want to copy or fill, and copies the formula through the range of cells — making the necessary alterations to cell references as it goes.
The whole thing is remarkably quick and easy.
In fact, the intelligence built into Excel 4 is remarkable all the way through.
I used to have odd problems creating graphs — I never could remember the optimum order to do them in.
Excel boasts a graph creating wizard, which guides you through graph creation, and turns out the kind of thing you see in the screenshots.
It's all very easy — it even sorts out the labels for the axes for you.
Add to that all manner of other goodies — like fitting your spreadsheet to the printed page, automatic formatting (in other words choosing colour schemes and text styles in order to make the sheet look better) and so on, and you have an application that sets the standard for others to follow.
Summary
I'm sure that a picture is worth a thousand words, and so the screenshots can probably tell you much more than I have space for.
Suffice it to say that Microsoft has excelled itself (pun totally intentional) with Excel 4.
I can find no significant problems with it, and have to say that, after you've looked at Excel 4, other spreadsheets begin to look quite primitive.
What Microsoft has done is throw away the traditional basis of a spreadsheet and brought the concept into the computer age.
Why think if the computer can do the thinking for you?
Why go the long way round if the computer has the shortcuts?
The plain fact is, constructing a spreadsheet can be a time consuming business, and editing one can be a morass of potential errors.
Excel 4.0 makes both tasks quick and less prone to embarrassing errors, and has to be the best on the market today.
From that point of view, it has to be awarded a Practical PC recommendation, and mine as well.
FAX BOX
Product: Excel 4.0
From: Microsoft UK Ltd.
Verdicts
Performance *****
Ease of use *****
Innovation *****
Value for money *****
For: There is no better spreadsheet on the market today.
Against: It's so good, somebody is sure to write a better one very soon now!
Analysis
Spreadsheets are primarily for analysis — or so I am constantly being told — but I have always had a problem reconciling that with what-if constructions.
Inevitably I end up with three different files, one showing the worst case scenario, one showing what I really expect to happen, and one showing the absolute best I could ever hope for.
With the best will in the world, this kind of multiple file (or great tracts of copying on one spreadsheet) can at bet lead to confusion, and at worst be totally inaccurate and misleading.
Excel 4 has the answer to my prayers in the Scenario Manager.
Its use is very simple — you tell the manager which cells hold the values you want to change, and they're added to the scenario, which you name (I tend to go for Disaster, Real and Brill — all self explanatory).
You then put new values in — they may be sales targets, interest rates, whatever — and the sheet changes onscreen to show you the way the picture stands with them in but the main sheet remains as it was.
As you build up a number of scenarios, you can identify the cells that best show the results of your what-if constructions, and have the results of the various scenarios displayed side by side onscreen or printed.
This is a very powerful tool, and one that can cut out many hours of frustration as you alter cells by hand, save files and print results.
If the MD asks you What if interest rates drop to 6%, you can use the scenario manager to show how the end result would differ from the figures you have calculated — and throw in a few other interest rates as well, just to impress him/her and make that rise you were after a touch more attainable.
Outline
Also, you may want someone to be able to see base figures and a final result, but not the devious manipulations you have performed on the route twixt the two.
Excel now provides you with a set of outlining tools, complete with onscreen buttons, so menu navigation to hide and unhide ranges of cells is unnecessary.
Outlining goes much deeper than that, and can become quite complex, dealing with the way you can handle 3d spreadsheets (not, I hasten to add, Excel's, but those from another, competing manufacturer, whose 3d spreadsheets can be imported directly).
Booting from the other foot
Many people spend an awful lot of time editing AUTOEXEC.BAT and CONFIG.SYS to re-configure memory managers and so forth when they switch between applications.
The plain fact is, there is an optimum configuration for any given application, and it may be completely different from the optimum for any other.
So what do you do?
The alternatives, without some kind of program to help matters, are limited.
Here at Practical PC, we've had AUTOEXEC.BATs full of REMmed lines — alternative command lines that needed editing to make changes in the various programs and drivers we used from time to time.
We also had REMmed out CONFIG.SYS lines, and had to suffer screens full of ‘Invalid Command in CONFIG.SYS’ messages in versions of DOS before 5.0.
The reason?
Drivers, mostly.
After you've loaded your network drivers (which are memory hungry), ANSI.SYS, SMARTDRV.SYS, RAMDRV.SYS, MOUSE.COM, EGA.SYS, EMM386.EXE, CD ROM drivers, Sound card drivers and a few other bits and bobs, not to mention your memory resident anti-virus software, you can find yourself getting the ‘not enough memory to run xxxxxx.exe’ rather more often than you'd like.
And that leaves out Path statements that read like a road map of your hard disk.
Which is why people delve into the two system start-up files and edit commands out.
Memory managers help, of course— the ability to load drivers up into Upper Memory Blocks is very helpful — but you've often got drivers you're rarely going to need taking up memory.
Easy Boot
Wouldn't it be lovely, then, to be able to tell your PC that you want to run a CD ROM based game, and would it please re-configure itself to do the best job, preferably without making you wait five minutes while it re-boots?
Well, you can.
Easy Boot allows you to have fifteen separate configurations available at the touch of a mouse button, or the press of a key.
So, you can set up a CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT that not only starts Windows but also gets rid of any drivers that you don't need to have loaded.
When you've finished with that, you can load up another configuration to run, say, Supercalc, that likes lots of expanded memory.
The way it all works is very simple.
The Easy Boot main screen consists of fifteen buttons, each one corresponding to a boot-up configuration.
As you install the software, it picks up the AUTOEXEC and CONFIG files and copies them into each configuration slot.
All you then have to do is edit them to reflect the configurations you want to use.
If you have been fiddling with the boot files a lot anyway, you should have no bother with this, and will be able to use the in-built editor to make any changes you want.
And the editor is the only area to niggle with, really.
You can use the whole thing with a mouse (is there anything you can't use a mouse with these days?), but we found that the I-beam cursor was anything but stable with a mouse.
That said, editing in the old-fashioned way — with cursor keys — is probably quicker anyway, and works just as well.
Boot-time choice
Once you've got the editing out of the way, you have some choices to make.
Do you want to have Easy Boot pop up when you switch the machine on and ask you which configuration you want to use?
You might as well say yes to this, if you're always going to be around when the machine reboots.
It gives you a level of control over the configuration that is cleaner and quicker than anything DR-DOS offers in its question and answer CONFIG.SYS functionality.
You will also want to decide what kind of re-boot Easy Boot will perform.
There are two types of warm boot (the same as pressing CONTROL, ALT and DEL), a cold boot (like switching off and on again, or pressing the RESET button) and a reload, which is the quickest of the lot.
This last option just clears out the PC and re-loads CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT.
The downside is that some memory managers might not take kindly to the reload option, but if you try it and can get away with it, it's the one to opt for.
As an example, one of our machines with a SCSI hard drive takes about three minutes to boot from cold, as the SCSI card gets its affairs in order.
Even with an ‘all options included’ configuration we've got in Easy Boot, that time is reduced to less than fifteen seconds, and that includes loading a complex network setup.
Summary
If you have a variety of programs with varying demands on your system, the most difficult task facing you, under normal circumstances, is to get the configuration details sorted out so that everything runs, but maybe not at its best.
With Easy Boot, you can have up to fifteen highly optimised configurations that ensure your PC is working at its best in any given situation, and a lot less hassle.
We are impressed, especially since Easy Boot is not expensive.
Info Box
Product Easy Boot
From Clear Software
Tel: 0752 606200
Price £49.95
Verdicts
Ease of Use ****
Range of Features ***
Speed *****
Value for Money ****
Overall ****
Pros Simplifies the tiresome task of changing configurations
Cons A slight bug in the mouse cursor routines 
Linking at Speed
Tired of copying files to floppy so you can move them from machine to machine?
David Dorn has found the answer — FastLynx!
The current rage for portable computing has prompted a greater need for packages to help tired executives move their files from notebook to desktop.
Some adopt the server/client approach — where one or other of the machines acts as a sort of networked machine, and can be used only as a file and print server.
Others go for the split screen, interactive, file transfer only approach, where you can copy files to and from either machine, but little else.
Fastlynx, from Rupp Technology Corporation, falls into neither and both of those camps…
The age of the floppy-based network is over.
Now that Windows has proved to the world that massive files are OK (yah!) you've as much chance of being able to save a decent sized word-processed document onto a 1.44MB floppy as Madonna has of becoming a nun.
So by the time you've finished that mega-report for the MD on the 6:30 from Newark, you need some way of shifting the hulking brute from laptop to desktop that doesn't involve circular bits of plastic.
You could, of course, get out your trusty copy of PKZIP and shrink it a bit , then flip it onto a disk, then copy it onto your desktop, then unzip it, then delete the ZIP file.
You could.
But a lot of people can't — or won't.
And, of course, the job will get worse the longer you've been away from the office.
The alternative, then, is a utility to do the job for you in as painless a way as possible.
FastLynx takes the bind out of file transfer.
It's so simple, at its most basic, that Rupp Technology doesn't even provide an installation routine.
If you want it on your hard disk, you've got to get your hands dirty in DOS to create a directory and copy the files from the floppy disk into it.
If you're at all unsure how to do such things, the slim manual covers the process in minute detail — almost too much detail for the more experienced user.
It's not that it's patronising in any way — it isn't — it's just that there are lots of words describing a simple process.
Still, too much detail is better than not enough, and the experienced user probably won't read a fat lot of the manual anyway.
File Transfer There are two distinct aspects to FastLynx.
The first is pure and simple file transfer.
Accessing this part of the package requires no fiddling with anything in DOS, but needs you to connect the two computers between which files are to be passed via either a parallel or serial lead.
Both leads are provided, and they're both of more than adequate length for connecting a portable PC to a desktop machine.
Once the connection is made (and it must be said at this point that the parallel connection is far and away the faster of the two possibles) a program rejoicing in the highly descriptive name of ‘FX’ must be run at either end of the link.
FX is the transfer program, and has three modes of use.
Split Screen This is, for my money, the most intuitive of the three modes.
On one side of the screen is the local machine's drives, and on the other is the remote machine, as you can see by the screenshot.
To copy a file from one side to the other, you highlight it, and press F3.
A few seconds later, all is done — the screen changes to show you the status of the transfer, and drops back into split screen mode as soon as it is finished.
In this mode of operation, one machine becomes the ‘master’— the machine you drive the process from — and the other becomes the ‘slave’.
Just to avoid confusion, the slave machine pops up a small banner at the top of the screen to let you know that it is being controlled from the other machine.
One of the clever and pleasing touches about this process is that you don't have to tell the program which lead you're using.
Even if you have both the parallel and serial leads connected between the two computers, Fastlynx is intelligent enough to test both and choose the faster and more reliable of the two.
A comprehensive complement of file management operations is also provided, each mapped to a function key — you may make directories, rename file, delete files and directories and view files, both on the master and slave machines.
Forms To cater for the user who copies the same files to and from his laptop on a daily basis — and there must be quite a few who do — the second mode of operation is Forms mode.
This is analogous to a script language or batch file, in that you set up a file transfer transaction which can be repeated every day, short-cutting the need to highlight and copy individual files.
It is relatively straightforward in operation, and once set can be forgotten — a valuable addition to the program.
The final mode is described as Command mode, and, essentially, gives command line access to the FastLynx program.
It's ideal for die-hard command line aficionados, and brings with it lots of switches and specifiers.
Perhaps not everyone's cup of tea, but no less welcome for that.
Overall, the FastLynx program offers everything you would need for simple file transfer, and is probably unique in offering three entirely different interfaces to it facilities.
It is also very fast, especially using the parallel cable option, and gave transfer rates in our test setup that averaged better than 4 megabytes per minute.
Service If it all stopped there you'd still be left with a very capable and complete utility, but the people at Rupp seem to have taken another class of user into consideration — the user who wants to ‘dock’ a portable into a desktop setup and use its drives and printers in a sort of client/server networking fashion.
This is a somewhat more complex task to achieve, since the machine that is docked (the client) needs to be fooled into thinking it has more disk drives than it really has, and the desktop machine (the server) has to be made to share its resources with the client.
Enter the device driver!
Device drivers are made to enable DOS to do things it would not normally be able to do — like treat another machines drives and printers as though they were its own.
The problem with device drivers is that they have to be installed in your CONFIG.SYS file, and it is usually helpful to have an install routine guide you through the process — lord knows, just about every other program you come across these days insists on writing to CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT.
Unfortunately for those of a nervous DOSposition (rotten pun, I know) the FastLynx package has no install utility, so setting up the device drivers to enable what amounts to a two machine network involves rolling up the sleeves and getting stuck into editing a file or two.
This is where the manual really scores with its comprehensive explicitness.
All the possible permutations and combinations of server and client are explored, examined, dissected and explained in minute detail, together with advice on the loading order of device drivers and so on.
Once you've read it a couple of times and confirmed in your own mind exactly how you want the system to operate, it's surprisingly easy to get it up and running, and once you have, you've got a quite capable mini-network to play with.
Because the device drivers operate at DOS level, the new drives appear as additional drives to the client machine — in both DOS and Windows — so much so that you could be forgiven for thinking that they were part of your machine.
The same applies to printers.
However, devices on the server that use redirection (networks, CD ROMS etc.) will not be re-directed to the client machine, which is a bit of a shame.
Intelligent Aside from that small niggle, which isn't that important, given that you can always use the file transfer utility to move any files you need from redirected devices to the client machine, the FastLynx device drivers are very intelligent — if you tell them to be.
For instance, if you add the switch ‘/auto’ to the device driver command line in CONFIG.SYS, it will not load if it can't find a server, which saves you some memory, and also means that you don't have to repeatedly edit the config file.
You can also specify which port you intend to use — either LPT or COM, and the device driver will not load the code necessary for the one you don't want to use.
The same applies to printers.
If you don't want to use the server's printers, then by telling it so, it leaves that code out of the load procedure as well— all very clever.
In terms of speed, we found, using the parallel cabling (and it's a special cable, so not just any old parallel cable will do) that response from server to client was as quick as using a native drive.
We also connected a portable with Stacker loaded (a device driven compressed drive) and the drive read perfectly normally over the link.
It's very impressive — you can even load the server software in a Desqview or Windows window and multi-task the whole thing, if you fancy trying to work with two machines at once.
Talking about Windows, the file transfer section of FastLynx comes with PIF and ICO files to let you use it as a DOS program under Windows.
Better yet, it also includes a VxD (virtual device driver) for use with Windows in Enhanced (386) mode, which actually speeds transfers up — which is not what you would expect, really.
Summary
All in all, FastLynx is an impressive package of well thought out programs that will give anyone with a need for its facilities a comprehensive resource for file transfer and pseudo-networking.
That it could conceivably be used as a low-cost simple two station network is a bonus.
If Rupp can get networked drives and CD ROMS to re-direct across it, it will be even better.
As it is, there's little to fault about FastLynx — it offers in one package what you might otherwise have to buy two packages to get, and is easy to use.
Info Box
Product: FastLynx From: Rupp Technology Corporation
Price: £99.95
Verdicts Ease of Use: **** Versatility: ***** Intuitivity *** Speed: ***** Accuracy ***** VFM **** Overall ****
Pros Fast and intuitive file transfer in as many modes as you have moods
Cons We'd like to see it handle CD ROMS and Networks
This month's reading matter includes Excel for Dummies which explains the Microsoft Excel program in humorous detail.
Paul Bocij shows you how to get software for free and author, Jack Dunning, shows you how to make money with computers
Excel for Dummies
Author: Greg Harvey
Price: £15.45
Publisher: IDG Books Worldwide
ISBN: 1-878058-63-0
Distributor: Computer Manuals
Tel: 021 706 6000
Shortly after the release of DOS for Dummies IDG Books have added to the series with Excel for Dummies.
The book, which is written in a humorous and easy to understand style, is aimed at the beginner, and covers all you need to know to use Excel 4 for Windows.
After a comprehensive introduction to the basics of Excel such as how to start the program, move around the worksheet and use the pull down menus the reader is gently introduced to more advanced functions.
Topics covered include creating custom formats, creating charts with Excel's ChartWizard, generating reports and editing the worksheet.
For the more adventurous Chapter 13 explains how to use functions such as PV (Present Value) and PROPER (for text).
Throughout the book are literally hundreds of highlighted boxes containing technical information, tips for short-cuts, and warnings, plus plenty of illustrations to supplement the text.
The light hearted and straightforward way in which the author has approached this book should take most of the hard work out of learning Excel, even for the most apprehensive beginner.
Greg Harvey is not only the author of over 30 computer books, but has also been training people in the use of business software since 1983.
He is currently teaching Lotus 1-2-3 and dBase courses at Golden Gate University in San Francisco.
How to Make Money With Computers
Author: Jack Dunning
Price: £9.95
Publisher: Computer Publishing Enterprises
ISBN: 0-945776-18-7
Distributor: Charles Letts & Co.
Ltd.
Tel: 071 407 8891
If you have a computer at home, or are thinking of buying one, and have often dreamed of starting your own business How to Make Money with Computers will provide you with some valuable pointers.
The book begins with some sound advice on factors to consider when deciding what sort of business to run, plus information on how to market your product successfully, and where to look for possible sources of finance.
Suggestions for computer related businesses are covered in detail in further chapters, these include Computer Consulting, Software Publishing, Freelance Writing, and Building Computer Hardware.
The rest of the book is devoted to matters such as creating a business plan, sales and public relations, accounting, manufacturing and distribution, and business administration.
Useful appendices provide information on the various software packages and how to use them, and some helpful troubleshooting guides.
Apart from being well written and a pleasure to read the overall feeling of this book is that the Author has a great deal of enthusiasm and knowledge about his subject, and it is based on personal experience.
This is not surprising when you learn that he is a successful businessman, and in fact the founder of San Diego's ComputerEdge Magazine and the founder of the company that published this book.
How to Make Money With Computers contains a wealth of essential business advice, which even makes it suitable for the budding entrepreneur who doesn't intend to start a computer related business.
Software for Free
Author: Paul Bocij
Price: £9.95
Publisher Kuma Computers Ltd.
ISBN: 0-7457-0234-1 
Tel: 0734 844335
Shareware and Public Domain programs are often as good as their commercial counterparts, and there is the added advantage of being able to try the software before you buy it on payment of a nominal fee.
It is difficult however, when browsing through advertisements to ascertain which is the best and most reliable program for your particular needs.
Software for Free has been written especially to help you make that decision without having to plough through mountains of Shareware and Public Domain Software first.
The opening chapter covers the history of Shareware, Freeware (Public Domain), and Licenceware, and explains the basic differences between each.
There are also tips on what to look for in terms of quality, and a number of sources through which low cost software is available.
The majority of this book however, is divided into sections containing detailed descriptions of the most popular and best available packages.
Categories include word processing, spreadsheets, accounts packages, databases, utilities, graphics and communications as well as educational software and games.
At the back is a list of useful addresses, numbers for bulletin boards from which software can be obtained, and lists of some further program names.
Software for Free evaluates the very best in low cost software making the task of choosing a lot less frustrating and time consuming, and by effectively cutting down the number of programs you need to look at it might even save you some money.
Word-processors become more complex (and expensive) and yet many of the basic techniques are rarely used.
Chris Hankins shows you how to use your word-processor efficiently.
Many people take to a word-processor like a typist takes to a typewriter.
This is wrong — or at least a great waste of technology and time.
Word-processors, because of their general similarity with the typewriter, are exceptionally easy to use — as a typewriter!
Ignore, for the moment, the fact that many modern word-processors can check your spelling, punctuation and grammar, and that some can suggest alternate words or phrases when your ideas dry up.
Some will allow you to add pictures and diagrams to the document, or lay out the page in columns like a newspaper.
With all this technology literally at our fingertips, many people insist on using the computer keyboard as if it were mechanically connected to the printer.
If you are the sort of person who starts each word-processing session with a blank sheet and relies heavily on the backspace key to erase mistakes as they occur — read on.
The Computer Keyboard
The computer keyboard differs from the typewriter keyboard in several important and fundamental ways.
Firstly, it has no mechanical connection with the monitor or your printer and thus the hard copy.
All the letters you type are stored in the computer's memory or on a disk if the available memory is not sufficient.
The monitor allows you to see the contents of the memory in a form that you can understand i.e. it is translated back into text as a screen image.
This, of course, happens so quickly that it appears that the letters are displayed as a direct mechanical response to the keypress.
Bear in mind that at this stage neither the letters displayed on the screen, nor the text stored in the computer's memory are permanent.
They exist only whilst the computer is turned on and the word-processing program is active.
You must save the file and give it a recognised DOS filename for a permanent record of your work.
Secondly, the computer keyboard has many additional keys which are used to alter the function of the alpha-numeric keys.
These are the keys labelled Alt and Ctrl which, like the shift key on a typewriter, bring a new set of values in to play.
The actual function of the QWERTY keys when used with the Alt and Ctrl keys depends on the software being used.
The Alt and Ctrl keys together with the shift key provide a possible seven different definitions of the keyboard — SHIFT, ALT, CTRL, SHIFT+ALT, SHIFT+CTRL, ALT+CTRL and SHIFT+ALT+CTRL.
WordPerfect is a good example of a word-processor that makes heavy use of these key combinations.
It has been criticised for being difficult to learn and praised for being efficient once proficient.
The computer keyboard also has a Delete key to delete letters in front of the cursor, a Backspace key to delete letters behind the cursor, a set of Cursor Movement keys that move the cursor up or down one line or side to side one space, a set of Function keys that perform preset functions with a single keypress and an Escape key that is normally used to reverse or undo the last action.
Movement around a page of text is made easier still by the use of the Page Up, Page Down, Home and End keys.
Before you pack your computer back in its box and reinstate your typewriter, remember that the additional keys on the computer keyboard are there to make life easier — and they do.
Keyboard Techniques
A common mistake made by first-time word-processor users is in using the Return or Enter key at the end of each line.
(The key is referred to as the Enter key as it is used to enter a command, and sometimes as the Return key in word-processing because of its similarity with the typewriter carriage return lever.)
Although in word-processing this key acts in the same way as the typewriter lever that moves the paper up one line, on a computer it is only used to force the word-processor to move one line — usually at the end of a paragraph.
A feature known as Wordwrap takes care of normal line changing as each line is filled with text.
The program is aware of the width of the page and can calculate the number of words that will fit in the space available.
The Wordwrap feature can, on some programs, be disabled to let the text overrun the right hand margin.
Editing a document on the computer screen is simply a matter of placing the cursor at the spot you want the alteration and type in the changes.
The way the document reacts to these changes depends on two self-explanatory word-processor modes — Insert and Overwrite.
The Insert mode, the normal mode for most programs, inserts new text at the point of the cursor, shifting the text to the right and below to make room.
Wordwrapping is normally automatic, but with some programs you may need to give an additional Format command to tidy the edited text.
Overwrite mode, as its name suggests, erases existing text to the right of the cursor replacing it automatically with your alteration.
Many word-processor programs support the use of a mouse.
The mouse pointer can be used to place the text cursor anywhere on the document and also to activate menus and commands.
Generally speaking, it is easier to learn and use the keyboard equivalents of the mouse movements to activate menus as it saves having to remove your hands from the keyboard.
The mouse does, however, come into its own when editing, highlighting and moving blocks of text.
Hidden Instructions
When a word-processor records your keyboard actions in memory it also stores additional information about the layout, spacing and style of the document.
If, for example, you changed a word to italic, the word-processor would record a mark before the italicised word indicating ‘italic from now on ’ and a second mark after the italicised word so it knows to return the rest of the text to normal style.
Although you cannot see these marks on screen (some word-processors do, however, give you the option), you must be aware of their existence when editing a document.
Alterations made by placing the cursor between two such embedded marks will conform with those instructions.
Thus, if you add or change a letter in an italicised word the alteration will also be italicised.
Remember, however, when deleting sections of text, that the instruction marks added by the word-processor must also be deleted even though you cannot see them.
Say, for example, the text as recorded in the computer's memory showed WORD WORD WORD i WORD n WORD WORD.
The word between the i and the n would be recorded as being in italics (i — change to italics, n — change back to normal).
To remove the italicised word completely the i must also be removed.
The text attributes embedded in the stored document also apply to spaces.
When editing you must be aware that the space between two italicised words is also italicised and that if you place the cursor on this space (even if the space is a carriage return or tab) any additions will also be italic.
To illustrate the way word-processors use embedded symbols, type a paragraph of text and indent the first line with a single tab.
Place the cursor at the start of the paragraph immediately to the left of the first letter.
Press return to move the paragraph down one line.
You will notice that the first line of the paragraph is no longer indented.
The tab, however, although not displayed is still in its original position on the line above the paragraph.
These invisible tabs, if not removed, are responsible for text mysteriously jumping to an unexpected position.
To prove that the tab mark is still there place the cursor to the left of the first word of the paragraph and press the Backspace key — the paragraph will jump to its original position with the indent in the expected place.
Repeat the above exercise by pressing Return to move the paragraph down one line and leave the invisible tab mark behind.
If you then take the cursor up one line and press the delete key you will have deleted the tab.
You can prove this by going back to the start of the paragraph and pressing the Backspace key.
This time the paragraph will jump up one line, but there will be no indent.
The lazy man's guide to word-processing
You can, and should, use your word-processor to improve your efficiency and reduce the number of key presses needed to produce your document.
The first thing to get used to is the use of templates.
Design a template for each type of document that you produce and save it as a separate file — even if it is only your name and address and other information about the page layout and design.
A template is simply a part-finished document file, a copy of which is opened automatically leaving the original unchanged.
If your word-processor does not support template documents, you can still create a template file but you must remember to change the file name before saving to disk.
The more information a template file contains the more useful it becomes.
It is surprising how often the same words or sentences are used in similar types of document.
A business letter, for example, will usually contain your address, the recipients address, the date, dear sir, yours faithfully and possible the words ‘with reference to …
‘. It is easier and quicker to edit words in an existing layout than type in afresh.
A template file will also contain a lot of information about the layout and style of the document.
Spacing, tabs, margins, typefaces, type sizes and print options need only be set once if a template file is used, saving valuable time and ensuring conformity.
You can, with many word-processors, set a standard design for the layout of each paragraph.
The Return key which denotes the start of the new paragraph can also trigger off other paragraph attributes.
The first line can be automatically indented and line spacing, justification and space above and below the paragraph may also be preset.
Even when you are forced to physically type in words, there are many short-cuts.
Search and replace are two very useful facilities found on the majority of word-processors.
To save time typing in frequently used long words simply type in an abbreviation.
In this article the word ‘word-processor’ has been used many times.
If the letters ‘wp’ were typed instead, you could ask the software to search for every instance of the letters ‘wp’and replace them with the word ‘word-processor’.
(Wish I'd thought of that earlier!).
You could also use the abbreviation ‘wpg’ for the instances when the word ‘word-processing’is required.
Make sure the abbreviation used is not a proper word which you might use elsewhere in the document.
If you are using a lot of abbreviations in a document keep a note of them beside the keyboard as you can easily produce a lot of nonsense if you accidentally use the wrong abbreviation.
Search can also be used to search for a single word or a string of words and letters.
Try typing a two letter abbreviation in place of the word antidisestablishmentarianism and you can see the potential time saving.
A good spell-checker program can be used not only to rectify accidental spelling mistakes and typing errors, but also to speed typing input.
You only need to type in a close approximation of the word and leave it to the spell-checker to sort out.
Don't forget to add technical words and proper nouns that you use frequently to the spell-checker dictionary as this saves ‘word not found’ messages slowing the spell-check process.
Most word-processors support the use of Macros.
A macro is a string of instructions executed with a single key stroke.
They can be used as short-cuts for all sorts of complex operations and deserve an article of their own.
As far as word-processing is concerned macros can be used to automatically sent a string of letters to your document.
This could, for example, be your address complete with tab and carriage return settings, or a frequently used sentence.
You will need to refer to your word-processor documentation to find out how to set up a macro.
The cut and paste or copy and paste features can also save time.
A section of text which is either cut or copied is moved to a different section of the computer's memory.
Cut and paste is used to move the selected text to a new position in the document, copy and paste is used to duplicate a section of text and place the duplicate in a new position.
The computer keyboard also has its own memory and if the computer is busy doing something else or you type too fast, the last sequence of keystrokes (usually 16) is remembered so that nothing is lost.
Windows and DOS based word-processors.
There are a multitude of word-processor programs available for the PC, but they can be divided into two broad groups — DOS based and Windows based.
DOS based word-processors are free of the sometimes cumbersome Windows desktop allowing efficient programs to be produced which operate on low memory, low specification (and cheaper) PCs.
The disadvantage of DOS based programs is that each has its unique way of dealing with the word-processing process and, therefore, different commands for each must be learnt.
This will not be a problem if you only ever use one program, but if you are ever tempted to upgrade to a more powerful word-processor, changing the ‘brand’ could mean starting from scratch.
Windows based word-processors share many of the techniques common to the Windows interface.
This makes any Windows word-processor quick to learn for those familiar with Windows.
The disadvantage of Windows word-processors is that they, together with Windows programs in general, are very demanding of the hardware.
A typical Windows based word-processor.
Passages of text or individual letters or words are highlighted by ‘dragging’ the mouse cursor over the area.
One action prepares the section of text for editing.
The highlighted section is ready to be cut, copied or given special text attributes and styles.
Search and replace features can be used to personalise correspondence by adding the recipient's name to the document or, as in this example, to make it easier to input frequently used long words.
guide5.tif
Macros
Macros can save time by including frequently used strings of letters.
Set the macro option to record and all the keypresses made until recording is stopped become part of the macro.
The macro can then be replayed by pressing the assigned key combination.
Macros can also be used to carry out any set of commands used by the word-processing program.
guide8.tif
Text justification
Printed text is normally set level to the left-hand margin leaving a ragged edge to the right in the same way as a typewritten document.
Word-processors, because the text is not printed one line at a time but as a complete document, allow you to break from convention and set the text level to the right-hand margin or even level with both the left-hand and right-hand margins.
In word-processing these options are referred to as left justification, right justification and full justification.
Text may also be set centred to the page leaving a ragged edge on both the left and the right.
This feature is often used for headings or for the production of notices, posters and flyers.
Spelling checkers can be used to correct miss-spelt words and typing mistakes.
You can also use the spelling checker to identify and correct deliberate spelling mistakes made to speed text entry.
Each word in the document is compared with words contained in the word-processor dictionary, if no match is found the program suggests probable corrections based on similar letter patterns and also phonetic similarities.
Words which are correctly spelt but not identified as such by the program may be added to a user dictionary.
Document layout is made easier if you predefine the characteristics of paragraphs.
An indent for the first line of the paragraph, the position of the paragraph in relation to the page and the space above and below can be set.
These setting can be used as the default setting for all the paragraphs of the document or to alter the characteristics of an individual paragraph.
A typical DOS based word-processor.
Some word-processing programs use block markers to identify the position of a selected portion of the document.
The identified block is ready for the usual editing options — cutting, copying, moving and pasting.
This screen is set to display embedded markers which mark the position of tabs, carriage returns and text attributes.
The word ‘typewriter’ in this example is set to be in italics.
The spelling checker highlights words which are not found in the dictionary.
You can manually rectify mistakes or ask the program to search the dictionary and list the probable corrections.
Search and replace options are activated from the command prompt.
There are a number of additional options with which you can limit the extent of the search or increase it by ignoring spaces and making the search non case-sensitive.
You must be careful not to make the search too general or, as in this example, the ‘wp’ letter combination in a word such as Pawpaw would be changed to ‘Paword-processoraw’!
The Software Magazine News February 1993
Microsoft launches Windows for Workgroups 3.1
Specialised versions of Microsoft Windows are currently very trendy.
An advanced version of Windows, called NT (New Technology) is due out next year for high powered workstations and an adapted version of Windows 3.1 for PCs is now available for pen-centric portable PCs.
Now Microsoft has produced a version of Windows 3.1 for small PC networks, often referred to as workgroups — hence the name Windows for Workgroups.
What you get is basically an up to date release of PC Windows 3.1 with added functionality to exploit networked PC connectivity.
For example Windows for Workgroups supports electronic mail, group scheduling, plus file and printer sharing.
The new system is designed to hook into most of the popular network operating systems used in small to medium size PC networks.Microsoft is not just targeting existing PC network users but also customers seriously thinking about installing a network.
If the recent huge success of Windows is anything to go by, Windows for Workgroups could prove to be a catalyst pushing many more PC users into the world of networking.Windows for Workgroups has several obvious new features.
Microsoft Mail allows users to read, compose, forward or reply to electronic mail messages.
Entire word processor documents can be sent as mail items to other users on the network.
Microsoft has also demonstrated voice mail working on the system — if you can't be bothered to type a message in, just record it instead!
Schedule+ is a graphical scheduling application designed to coordinate a working timetable for any or all the users on the system.
For example.
If you try and arrange a meeting with a colleague or even a group of colleagues and he or they have already booked the time slot you want, you get to know about it before it's too late.
Basically the system provides shared access to a common multi-user timetable/calendar.
Thirdly, there is DDE (Direct Data Exchange) communication across the network.
Windows DDE was designed to enable separate applications to send each other data instantly.
You might have a spreadsheet application running which was DDE linked to a word processor containing a chart.
DDE would enable the chart in the word processor to be updated if the spreadsheet values changed.
Network DDE is much the same except the connected applications can be on physically different computers on the network.
Security always becomes an issue when resources are shared and measures to enable users to limit access to their filers or applications, say by password, are implemented in Workgroups for Windows.Networking is one of the fastest growing sectors of the PC market.
Windows for Workgroups should make that growth even faster — and it's not expensive either.
The suggested retail price (software only) per workstation is £149+VAT until March 31st.
Windows 3.0 and 3.1 users can upgrade for £94 or £49 respectively.
A starter kit complete with software, interface cards and cabling for two workstations is priced £569.
FoxPro 2.5 arrives for Windows and DOS
One of the first new products to emerge from the Microsoft take over of database specialists Fox Software has been revealed.
FoxPro 2.5 for Windows is a PC database management system (DBMS), based on the popular Xbase programming language, which boasts extremely high data access performance.
This new product fills effectively closes a major gap in Microsoft's Windows product line up, which until now hasn't featured a top-end DBMS.
Previous versions of FoxPro were notable for their performance and version 2.5 is faster still.
The key to FoxPro's performance is something called Rushmore Technology.
This accelerates database searches by cleverly optimising the query operation.
Microsoft claims FoxPro 2.5 performed at least four times better than its closest rival, Borland's Paradox 4.0, in tests carried out by a third party consultant.FoxPro 2.5 will eventually be released for non-Windows DOS, Apple Mac and Unix platforms.
All versions will, where possible, feature an identical user-interface for cross-platform compatibility.
As part of a new pricing strategy, Microsoft has lowered prices and combined FoxPro 2.5 with its other new database product, Access, for a total price of £395+VAT.
Microsoft Access
Microsoft's second database to be released recently is called Access.
Microsoft has worked tirelessly to implement user-friendly Windows applications which you could come under the banner of ‘enabling technology’.
Visual Basic, for example lets a user construct home-made Windows applications by using graphical tools and the minimum of programming.
Access is a database management system aimed at non-programmers which also uses graphical tools.
Microsoft is confident that users can build forms, reports and graphics in minutes using Access tools.
The mouse can be used to drag and drop tables, join fields, etc. to construct quite complex queries without having to enter any complex program codes.
When programming can't be avoided, a friendly Access Basic language is provided.
Microsoft Access will initially be introduced for the special price of £99+VAT.
The more comprehensive Access developers kit is priced £395+VAT.
Guildsoft gets busy
Plymouth-based Guildsoft has been hard at work readying several new products recently.
MasterClips Clipart is a new library of full colour vector clip art drawn by professional artists.
CGM and Harvard file formats are supported.
Picture subjects range from Technology to Seasons and Holidays.
MasterClips Series Collections, priced £34.95+VAT, contain on average 60 images while MasterClips Volume Collections, at £99.95+VAT, contain around 300 images each.
New selections and volumes are being compiled all the time.
If you enviously yearn for a PC sound card but can't afford one, Guildsoft's Icon Hear-It for Windows might be the answer.
Developed by Moon Valley Software in the States, Icon Hear-It adds sound effects to the Windows desktop even if you don't have a sound card.
Sound effects can be added windows selections, icons, messages, cursors and other programs.
Not only that the software also doubles as Windows look-and-feel customiser.
Among the hundreds of pre-programmed sound effects, custom cursors, custom icons and animated wallpapers are a talking clock, sound effect explosions for the Windows mine sweeper game and an add-in clock for the Solitaire game.
Icon Hear-It is priced £39.95+VAT.
Finally this month from Guildsoft is the plainly titled ‘Adventure Series,’ a range of multimedia adventure games developed by Knowledge Adventure Inc.
John Cave, Guildsoft's managing director, is particularly enthusiastic about the Adventure Series.
‘Of all the products we have evaluated during the last year, Knowledge Adventure's range of products are the most innovative, enjoyable and most interesting educational/home learning titles yet.’
This didn't sound like marketing hype; there was genuine excitement in his voice.
A great deal is stuffed into Knowledge Adventure disks through the use of high efficiency compression algorithms and John Cave says that many of the benefits of CD ROM are featured like full motion video, sound, music and speech — without the need for any additional hardware like a CD ROM drive.
Different titles in the series look at general knowledge, science, space adventure and dinosaurs.
All titles are priced £59.95+VAT except for Dinosaurs which is cheaper at £39.95+VAT.
Guildsoft is on Tel. 0752 606 200
WordPerfect acquires Mac Beagleworks
WordPerfect Corp. in the US has announced it has agreed terms to acquire BeagleWorks, the six-module integrated business package for the Apple Macintosh from Beagle Bros Inc.
The package includes a word processor, database, drawing and paint applications plus a spreadsheet with graphs and charts and finally a communications program.
An updated version of BeagleWorks for the Mac will be released later in the year under the WordPerfect title.
Microsoft claim their Word is gospel
WordPerfect has responded angrily to Microsoft claims that a clear majority of users prefer Word for Windows over WordPerfect.
A six-point retort to Microsoft's claims was posted to computer journals in the UK by WordPerfect's Windows product manager, Daniel Sumner.
He points out that though the implication was that the customer research forming the basis for Microsoft's claims was impartial, Microsoft actually commissioned the report.
Sumner was unhappy that WordPerfect wasn't invited to take part in the exercise and was critical of the relatively small sample of 51 people who evaluated the products.
On top of that Sumner practically accused Microsoft of biasing the test parameters in favour of Word and not allowing enough time for the testers to fully explore the respective packages.
The final punch line from WordPerfect was that enhancements in the new release 5.2 of WordPerfect for Windows invalidated most of Microsoft's arguments anyway.
Until we sift the evidence ourselves, we can't comment objectively except to say that as far as the publicity campaign is concerned, Microsoft had better think again.
Lotus Ami Pro — the king waiting to be crowned?
While Microsoft and WordPerfect bicker over whose Windows word processor is best, Lotus Development's Ami Pro 3.0 continues to win new friends on merit alone.
Lotus highlights figures from independent market researchers Romtec which indicate that Ami Pro has displaced WordPerfect into third place in the Windows word processor league.
Lotus reports a 50% increase in sales and a total market share of 27%, second only to Microsoft Word for Windows.
Many reviewers have concluded that Ami Pro 3.0 is a serious match for Word, something WordPerfect 5.1 at least never was.
Lotus Development was criticised for being slow to recognise the importance of Windows applications two years ago when Windows 3.0 took off.
The story today is rather less critical as Lotus reports significant gains across the Windows software scene, with, for example, Freelance Graphics increasing its market share from 35% to 59% in just one month.
Corel continues its sharp growth
Canadian firm Corel Corporation, best known for its Corel Draw package, has reported a 145% increase in turnover to C$29M for its latest quarterly results to the end of August 1992.
Gross profit doubled to C$19.6M. 91% of the company's turnover is attributed to Corel Draw with the remainder coming from SCSI (small computer system interface) software-related business.
350,000 copies of Corel Draw for the PC have been sold worldwide to date and an Apple Mac version is scheduled for release later this year.
Kuma book releases
Four new software guide books have been published by Kuma Computers.
‘Break Into Windows’ by Bill Stott and Mark Brearley is the latest in a long line of different guides to using Windows 3.1.
Priced £18.95, the book is aimed to be as useful to a PC novice as it would be to a seasoned user.
Included are tips on recovering from system errors and there is a section on using Windows on networks.
Over a hundred diagrams, tables and pictures illustrate the book.
‘Databases using Clipper 5.0’ by Will Chapman illustrates how to build business databases by taking the reader on a guided tour of the code which makes up a generic multi-purpose database using the popular Clipper DBMS language.
Included is the actual program code for a finished application called Databox.
The book is priced £16.95.
Another database book from Kuma, this time looking at the Windows database system from Harley Systems, is ‘Skylight Illustrated’ by Richard Hunt.
This book is a detailed guide to the Skylight database package with step by step tutorials and strategic summaries.
Skylight Illustrated is priced £16.95.
Finally on a lighter note, ‘Amiga Five-O’ by computer games reviewer Ashley Cotter Cairns is a personal look at the top-50 Amiga games of all time.
Also covered by the book are game cheats and advice on hardware configurations to get the best out of your Amiga for game playing.
Amiga Five-O is priced £9.95.
Lots from Mindscape
DataEase Express for Windows
For so long dedicated Microsoft Windows users had very few decent database packages to choose from.
Recently this problem has been attacked by several companies including DataEase International with its DataEase Express for Windows package.
DataEase Express provides an intuitive Windows user-interface to a full relational database system.
Graphical tools encourage users to quickly and easily to store, retrieve and analyse information on screen.
The package is compatible with a wide variety of database formats.
DataEase Express is priced £385+VAT.
For more information phone 081 554 0582.
Quattro Pro tops usability study
Microsoft recently got a dose of its own medicine when Borland published the results if a comparative survey of PC Windows spreadsheets — with Microsoft Excel on the losing side this time.
The tests were carried out by Coopers and Lybrand who apparently found that Borland Quattro Pro for Windows outscored both Excel and Lotus 1-2-3 in 6 out of 10 categories.
Timeworks Publisher 3.1 for Windows
A faster and easier to use version of Timeworks Publisher for Windows has been unveiled by Huntingdon-based GST Software.
Improvements include a template manager, TrueType support for the Powerfont embellishment function and faster file saving and loading.
EPS (Encapsulated PostScript) files containing TIFF bit-images can now be displayed on-screen and printed on non-PostScript printers.
Timeworks for Windows 3.1 is priced £149+VAT and existing users qualify for a discounted price of £42, which is also applicable to users of other DTP packages wishing to trade up.
GST Software: 0480 496 789.
Passing the self-mutating test
Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit 6.01 recently did rather well in an exhaustive test at the Virus test Centre at the University of Hamburg.
Toolkit 6.01 and IBM Virscan 2.2.3A were the only two anti-virus packages to score a 100% reliability rate in the face of self-mutating viruses.
These ‘polymorphic’ software viruses actually re-encrypt themselves every time they execute in an attempt to avoid recognition.
S&S International: Tel.0442 877 877.
Wordbase gets personal
Kew-based Microft Technology Ltd has released a low cost version of its fast text retrieval system, Wordbase.
The program indexes specified files on your PC hard disc to enable almost instantaneous key word searches.
Target words can be matched exactly as spelt or phonetically.
Multi-keyword searches can be used as can logical operators NOT, AND and OR.
There is also a WITHIN command for limiting the search area to within a specified number of words of another specified keyword.
Wordbase Professional features missed out include field searching with conditional operators, searches using defined sections of documents and subdocument (chapter) searches.
That may not sound a lot but Wordbase Personal is just £84+VAT while Professional is £380+VAT.
Microft Technology: Tel.081 948 8255. *
And so does Compsoft Delta
Compsoft has produced a low-cost personal version of its relational database package, Delta Five.
£99 nets you a copy of Delta Personal, a menu-driven database system which has a transactional file system structure.
Compsoft's Clifford Wetherall commented: ‘(Delta Personal) is the first product of its kind to bring the unique performance and power of a full fledged relational database within the reach of the low-end PC user without sacrificing functionality.’
Compsoft plc: Tel.0420 29 545.
WordPerfect 5.2 for Windows
After enduring a year of indifferent reviews, WordPerfect UK has released a much-needed revised version of WordPerfect for Windows.
Version 5.2 includes a variety of new tools including QuickFinder, an indexing and fast text-retrieval system, plus a new selection of button bars and a related QuickMenu feature.
Adobe Type Manager plus several fonts is also included as is the popular grammar checker, Grammatik 5 from Reference Software.
There's also a list of new custom macros designed in response to user-requests.
Another new attraction is that version 5.2 can now be an Object Linking and Embedding (OLE) client, enabling objects like graphs, for example, from other OLE-compliant applications to be embedded in WordPerfect 5.2 documents.
Improved Windows printer driver support is highlighted as well and overall WordPerfect says the package is now easier to install than before.
Hooks are provided to integrate both Apple's QuickTime for Windows and Microsoft Video for Windows digital full motion video playback system which will be introduced later this year.
Existing users can upgrade to 5.2 for £35 without documentation, or £75 with the books.
The latter doesn't seem such a great deal as anybody with one of a selection of rival Windows or DOS word processor can trade it in for WordPerfect 5.2 for only £99+VAT.
WordPerfect UK is on Tel.0932 850 500.
* WordPerfect has provided an important boost to IBM's alternative to Windows and DOS.
All major WordPerfect products will be developed for IBM OS/2 2.0 Although technically superior to Microsoft Windows and even offering Windows 3.0 software compatibility, OS/2 suffers from not having a large enough software base and not yet having reached a critical mass of users.
IBM will no doubt eagerly want to see if any other big names follow WordPerfect's example.
Easier to use Lotus Freelance
Version 2.0 of Lotus Freelance Graphics for Windows presentation software has been released.
New features include an updated Quickstart tutorial, an animated product introduction, 12 new Smart Master presentation styles plus tighter integration into the Lotus applications family.
Freelance 2.0 now embraces some multimedia functionality with an enhanced screen show routine.
Priced £445+VAT, existing users can upgrade for £99+VAT Lotus: Tel.0784 455 445.
FAST targets car-boot piracy
The Federation Against Software Theft (FAST) has issued a warning to deter would-be software pirates hoping to ply their wares at ever-popular car-boot sales.
FAST is to coordinate an operation in conjunction with the UK's 1600 Trading Standards officers to establish a nationwide database and programme of investigations centred around car boot sales.
FAST's senior investigator, John Loader commented: ‘As the recession deepens, many hundreds of car boot sales are now taking place every weekend.
As these sales have evolved from the original trading of bric-a-brac and home produce to an open market for all goods, this has proved a lucrative market place for groups trading in illegal software.
As well as computer games, a large quantity of business software is available — often on open sale.’
Blackspots have been identified in areas like Glasgow and West Yorkshire.
Overall complaints about car boot sales have risen from virtually nil to around ten a week in just two years.
Croydon Trading Standards recently seized over 6,000 illegal programs.
Microsoft Mac Office offer
Microsoft's latest scheme to increase its market share in the Macintosh software arena is a trade-in deal which nets a customer the four Microsoft applications which make up the integrated Microsoft Office pack for less than the price of just one of those applications.
The idea is that you bring along a fully licensed copy of a rival business application, buy a Microsoft Office Trade-In pack, which includes a mouse mat, voucher and pre-paid envelope, post the voucher with proof of ownership and Microsoft sends you Office 3.0, which has a recommended price of £575.
All four applications contained, Word 5.1, Excel 4.0 spreadsheet, PowerPoint 3.0 presentation graphics and Mail 3.1 would cost over £1,000 if purchased separately at their recommended prices.
For more information contact Microsoft's customer response line on 0734 270 000.
Word for Windows update
Microsoft Word for Windows has reached version 2.0c.
This latest maintenance release fixes some minor bugs and will be of special interest mainly to users network users.
There is improved compatibility with Windows for Workgroups and Microsoft's new FoxPro 2.5 database.
Those registered users of Word for Windows requiring the upgrade can obtain it from Microsoft for a nominal fee of £7.75inc.VAT.
The Microsoft Upgrade Centre is on Tel.081 893 8000.
Beam me up Berkeley
At the recent Comdex mega computer show in Las Vegas, a PC screen saver to beat all screen savers was launched by Berkeley Systems.
Well, it's the best thing since Romulan brandy — if you're a Trekky that is!
It has to be none other than Star Trek: The Screen Saver, which Berkeley is marketing under the slogan of ‘Beam Up or Burn Or Burn Out.’
This totally over the top utility which is ostensibly designed to prevent phosphor burns on your monitor stars digitised pics of all your favourite Star Trek crew members, animations and classic digitised quotes like Bones McCoy's ‘He's dead, Jim’ or Spock's totally logical ‘Fascinating!’
There's also the TV series theme music and a guest appearance by the Tribbles…
We haven't yet found a UK outlet for Star Trek: The Screen Saver, but no doubt it won't be long before it's beamed over.
In the US its suggested price is $60 or about £40.
Berkeley Systems, not to be confused with Berkeley Software of Geos GUI fame, can be contacted in the US on (0101) 510 540 5535.3400 words approx.
The Base Data
Don Bradbury reviews two speciality databases from shareware.
Overview
One software category that gets good attention from shareware authors is speciality databases.
These can be in the form of a database waiting for the user to enter his own data, or a complete database ready for interrogation.
I have one in each category to offer; the first on fishing and the second on food additives.
If they do not match your specific interests, take a look at a good shareware catalogue to see if it can offer something closer to your heart.
The advantages of speciality databases include customised data entry and searching, but they can also save an enormous amount of your time setting up an industry standard database.
A Fisherman's Tale
If you're keen on fishing, take a look at Fishbase, a program to database every facet of the sport to maximize performance.
At first glance the association between fishing and computing may be hard to see, but the sport is as much a science as an art, even if the number of factors involved in the success rate is close to infinite.
Beside the skill of the angler, I think most would seriously consider only a few of these factors; perhaps the location, weather, bait, and a maybe one or two others.
Fishbase lets you record factors such as the water temperature and its pH, the air temperature and humidity, the barometric pressure, water clarity, as well as the location, bait/lure type and size, and also the general prevailing conditions.
All of this data can then be correlated in the database with the catch, showing the species, weight, length and the number caught.
Powerful search routines may then be summoned for use with your database, and statistical analyses can be carried out to compare catches by angler's names.
In this way the program caters for clubs and competitions, though it is aimed primarily at databasing in-depth historical data.
Fishbase is so simple to operate that no documentation file has been considered necessary.
Nicely menued in full colour, and with up to five  overlaid windows of help screens, operations are quite straightforward.
The boot screen presents six options as well as a DOS gateway.
You use the first option to input data into a named database file, but an example file is given to practise with.
Your file accepts a date (YY/MM/DD format), the angler's name, the species caught and its length and weight, and also the lure type, size and colour.
Also requested is the number of fish caught this trip, the location, and the general conditions mentioned above, though any of these may be excluded as required.
Entries are freeform in that the cursor may be placed on any field in order to bypass unrequired fields.
When every catch has been entered, editing or searching may be carried out.
At any time you may summon extensive and well laid out help screens.
The first of these screens is a conversion chart showing catch length and weight, although this is only an approximation.
The second help screen partly overlays the first and shows a proposed convention for colour abbreviations which can be used for describing the lure type.
The third screen gives some useful hints and tips for searching the database.
It reminds you that part strings are acceptable but, as is usual, the more complete the entry the less ambiguous the search.
You can use the ‘<’ or ‘>’signs in searches, either alone or in combination with the ‘=’sign, in fields such as length or weight.
As many fields as you like may be included in searches, and these searches are completed reasonably quickly.
Not so rapid are the statistical analyses.
These may be run from option three of the main menu.
A large database of the type given in the example file takes quite some time to analyse completely, but the output is truly comprehensive.
The author of Fishbase obviously takes his fishing very seriously indeed.
Help screen number four offers assistance with editing.
Here it is pointed out that the edit form involves two parts.
The first indicates the range of entries you want to change by filling in only some of the fields.
You may then enter the type of change you require and then carry this out on only the current record or elect to make the change globally, that is on every record with similar field entries.
Searching and editing can include wild card specifications using the ‘*’ character, but due care is needed if you do.
The last help screen might be considered superfluous in that it is simply a reminder that all entries have to be made in an appropriate manner.
Angler's names, for instance, must always be in the same format if they are to be considered unique.
Data entry has not been error-trapped and every field will accept any type of entry, even the date field, so it's up to the user to ensure the integrity of the data he enters.
The statistical searches constitute possibly the most important incentive for using Fishbase rather than an industry standard database — presuming you have access to one of these — for the output is very extensive, as I said.
It reports the average size of all fish, the average size for each year, the size of fish caught by the name of the angler, the twenty largest fish caught, the most productive baits, the catch related to water temperature, and even the number of fish caught during each major phase of the moon.
Under option six, called ‘other goodies’, you can analyse the data to report on the success rate at a particular fishing spot, or investigate any one angler's record, plot water temperature versus the date, or find the full and new moon dates for a given year and month.
Fishbase is a very practical application of the personal computer.
It is generally well programmed and has some nice touches by way of opening graphics.
It provides comprehensive coverage of practically every variable involved in the sport, and it makes the extraction of extensive statistics a simple matter.
Those who have to organise fishing events, and any club or individual who wants to maintain records with any degree of detail, will appreciate this program.
I would have like to see some attempt to error-trap the data input routine, but help with record location is good and editing is easy, so reliance on the good sense of the computer operator should be a feasible proposition.
Doctor Data — A Food Additive Guide.
This is a Public Domain computer database of permitted food additives which references, among others, the E number chemicals and their effects on man.
Few things spark the wrath of the British like food additives.
Controversy rages over their safety, and value-added components of any variety in our diet are mistrusted and often suspected of being there largely for the benefit of the manufacturer, not the consumer.
While most would agree that the protection of food against microbial activity and so on is essential, keeping a check on possible human reactions is what this database is mainly about.
The scene is complicated by being beset by the E number categorisation, and references on packaging are often entirely in the form of these assigned values.
The problem for the layman consumer is how to interpret the label when this is all the information he is given.
In particular, can the additive be regarded as totally safe?
Are there conditions when such additives should be avoided?
The Doctor Data database is aimed at defining the entire compass of E-type additives, allowing the whole range to be investigated, at least up to the date of author Peter J Menter's documentation, although the main menu of the program includes an option to update the database in various ways.
New E number substances may be added as they come along, the records themselves may be edited, and a personal history of the observed response of various people, perhaps members of your family, may be added.
The main menu provides eight options altogether, each selectable by number.
The first is used to ‘search and view’ the database records.
Any valid E number may be entered, or the material's chemical name.
Alternatively, a search may be conducted by the usage of any group of additives.
The sub-menu also allows you to call up a ‘display usage terms’ option, and finally, there is a ‘search personal history’category.
The E numbers search reveals the chemical name and applications of the additive.
If you enter a part-specification in the E number definition, all those matching the entry will be shown.
Any one of these may be highlighted and then located in the database to display a full summary of its present rating with regard to the nature of the substance, its source and effect on man, and notes may be added to expand on this.
A typical entry would be for, say, E233, a preservative, chemical name thiabendazole, a man-made material, with a note of caution attached warning that it should be avoided during pregnancy because it can damage the unborn child.
A third search criterion is by the use of a group of additives.
Selection of the group is from a pop-up menu and this produces a list of substances in the category, again requiring a selection to be made of an individual chemical.
You can use the program to create a personal history of problems that are felt to be related to certain substances.
These histories can be held in separate, personal files.
Though the menus make provision for it, I could not get the printout options to work on my particular hardware.
However, since the database files were in dBASE format, it is possible to interrogated them using this software rather than Doctor Data if you choose.
There is a menu provision for re-indexing the database if corruption occurs.
Not all of these additives are known by an E number categorisation.
Some simply have a number allocated without the E prefix, so take care to include all materials within a required category when abstracting the databases.
Several of these additives contain dire warnings of quite nasty effects, particularly upon certain groups of susceptible persons.
E122, for example, carries the comment ‘Carmoisine, colouring matter, man-made, do not eat this!
Red colour, do not give to babies/ young children and asthmatics.
May cause hyperactivity, causes skin rash.
Also called Azorubine.’
Sounds nasty!
Any deficiencies in this software may be forgiven in so far as it is distributed entirely free of charge; no registration fee is requested by the author.
There is minimal documentation on the disk, but, since the program is menu-driven, little explanation is required.
I think that many with an interest in the field will value this database as a source of reference material.
The pH value is the chemists way of rating the water's acidity or alkalinity.
It can be affected by pollution as well as natural variation.
A DOS gateway provides a way of temporarily exiting a program while you carry out some activity at DOS level, that is, when the DOS prompt is showing.
Your program is saved in memory, and the usual way of returning to the application by entering EXIT.
A ‘string’ is any set of alphanumeric characters.
Such strings can easily be found by search programming, and the rapidity of such searching is one of the major justifications for using a computer for storing data.
FAX Box
Description: Fishbase and Doctor Data's Health Software
Product: Volumes 1732 and 1804 respectively
UK Supplier: The Public Domain Software Library, Winscombe House, Beacon Road,
Crowborough, Sussex TN6 1UL Tele: 08926 63298
Price: £4.65 (or £5.15 on 3.5 inch media).
Fishbase Doctor Data
Range of features: 5 4
Overall speed: 3 3
Ease of use: 4 3
Verdict: 4 3
+ Comprehensive and robust
+ Good data assembly
-Slow statistical analysis
-Not outstandingly robust
The Base Data Don Bradbury 2000 words — July 1992
Moving the Furniture
How many times have hard-working men arrived home from work only to find that the house is upside down, furniture completely re-arranged and their favourite chair completely out of kilter with the best view of the TV?
David Dorn checks out a package that might prevent that from ever happening again!
Apart from re-arranging the furniture — which can be a bad enough job in itself — visualising an extension or addition to any building can be very difficult.
The PC-based answer is a CAD package, but how many of us have the time to get to grips with a full blown application like that?
Something simpler is obviously called for, and Floorplan Plus is an attempt to provide the layman with the tools he needs to make a convincing stab at planning out a house, extension or furniture arrangement.
If you're anything like me (and with due apologies to the ladies) you will have arrived home and found either your wife or husband desperately trying to shove a six foot sofa into a five foot ten inch space between a door and a wall.
Either that or you will have decided to build that extension you've both wanted for so long to put that rattan furniture in, and when it's finished discover that the blessed stuff doesn't fit at all.
Many are the times me wife and I have sat at the table with a large sheet of graph paper and worked it all out, only to find that either my ruler's idea of an inch doesn't tally with the real thing, or the width of a pencil line on the plan actually equates to a foot in real life.
Thus it was with a certain amount of relief that I acceded to our editor's request to look at FloorPlan Plus,(FP from hereon) which promises to make this kind of thing much easier to sort out.
Drawing on experience
FP is a greatly simplified CAD package that comes complete with libraries of symbols to make the drawing of rooms and their associated bits and bobs that much easier.
It provides lots of building materials-type stuff of American origin that are of only limited use over here, but since it is meant only to be a very basic application, better suited to a visualisation rather than a concrete architectural drawing (forgive the pun, by the way), this hardly matters.
The user interface is very Windows like, but the whole thing runs under DOS.
Although a mouse is not vital, I'd suggest that it makes using FP a whole lot easier.
Similarly, although the bog standard graphics cards from Hercules to VGA are supported, VGA makes more sense than CGA.
Otherwise, a bog standard XT will do nicely.
The main idea is to draw the house from the outside in, a task that at first appears quite daunting, but, once you've worked through the tutorial files (which I heartily recommend that you do) it's actually relatively straightforward.
You'll find yourself taking a few measurements, unless you have the architect's drawing of your abode, in which case the walls and doors and windows are child's play to put onto your plan.
After that comes the fun part — designing your extension or moving the furniture.
Certain items of furniture have standard measurements — King size beds, Queen size, Double and so forth, as well as kitchen fitments that fit under or in standard sized units.
Thankfully, US standards seem to be much the same as ours, so there's no problem there.
You will, however, probably need to draw your own soft furnishings, since our colonial cousins seem to favour settees the size of a stuntman's soft landing pad.
Great Fun
Once you have sorted out the distractions like that, you can have some amazing fun re-planning your house.
But before you do, take a look at the sample file — there's a screenshot on this page — and see how the other half lives.
Frankly, Floorplan Plus is not the kind of program you're going to use every day — unless you get addicted to moving the furniture, that is, but it does have its uses.
At £49.95, it's affordable for the one-off job (it could easily save you that in architect's fees alone if you're looking at an extension), and it doesn't require a mega-PC to run it.
Info Box
Product Floorplan Plus
From Guildsoft
Tel: 0752 606200
FAX 0752 606174
Price £49.95
Verdict
Ease of use ***
Facilities ****
Value for Money ****
Pros Price, doesn't need a mega PC, fun to use
Cons Takes a while to get into it.
File fragmentation can be slight — two parts — or severe.
Files will occasionally spread themselves over as many as fifteen non-contiguous clusters, which increases loading time substantially.
Norton's Speed Disk is just one of the utilities you can use to discover the amount of fragmentation on your drive and fix it.
Rex Nebular And The Cosmic Gender Bender
As the packaging suggests, Rex does indeed have a problem.
He must find a priceless vase but more importantly he must escape from a planet of bizarre alien women with earthly desires!
My word, Rex does have a problem!
To give you a small clue of what type of game this is, the installation set-up has a section that asks you how naughty you want the game to be!
Not one for being bashful, I selected the naughtiest setting — wouldn't you?
The game appears to have a similar smut to the Leisure Suit Larry series but goes further in different ways!
Putting any sexist remarks about the game away, Rex Nebular is an interactive graphic adventure.
Just like many of the best adventures, it uses a point and click interface that is extremely easy to use, i.e. no typing required.
I must draw you attention to the game's graphics.
Not content with producing the most human-like walking movements on any adventure, MicroProse have given the game perspective, so the further you move your character from the camera, the smaller he gets.
Background graphics are highly polished and the sound compliments it well.
The music changes depending on your location.
The first village you reach will echo of bongo drums and will change when you exit that location and enter another.
The intro at the beginning of the game is most excellent!
Crystal clear speech accompanies the swish graphics and 3D spacecraft in one of the best intros I've seen to date.
Back to the game now.
Interaction on a planet full of women is totally important, wouldn't you agree?
Apart from the lack of the most wishful of commands, most of your work will involve talking to the women.
It's tempting to be manly and brutal at times but it often pays to be more cautions with your responses that are selected using a multiple choice system.
Unlike many other adventures, Rex gives you three levels of difficulty to suit both amateurs and hardened adventures.
Generally, all the clues for problem solving are there, if a little disguised at times, but it's unlikely you will get too stuck on the easy setting.
Rex may be the ideal idol to many men but you will have to settle with playing his character in the game.
Let's not upset any ladies, please!
Overall, Rex will be a big winner for Christmas adventurers! £44.95 MicroProse 
Graphics 9 Sound 9 Gameplay 9 Verdict 8
Risky Woods
At last!
An arcade platform game on the PC!
Collect your weapons and defeat the evil legions and set your home land free.
Journey on…
Okay, the plot of defeat the evil baddies' may not be new but the release of a high quality platform game on the PC is.
I guess this shows the Segas and Nintendos that they aren't alone when it comes to producing fast arcade platform games.
Obviously the idea of killing everything in sight is a little primitive and shows the storyline up to be a little on the shallow side, but hey, it's light relief from the hectic world outside.
You play a character called Rohan who must set free the monks he finds on his journey.
Getting in his way are various nasties (okay, they're tying to viciously kill him!) such as skeletons, flying mutated anteaters and demons.
As you kill the monsters they leave behind coins which you can collect.
At the end of each level you'll find a shop where coins can be exchanged for extra weapons and life.
As well as finding coins you'll come across poison apples, extra weapons and even a thing that turns the screen upside down!
Gameplay is naturally limited because of the very nature of the type of game.
However, your character responds well and moves quite fluidly.
The graphics are very slick for an arcade game that measure up very well compared to the latest Sega offerings.
Musically — forget it, but the spot effects are great and make up for the poor acoustic tones.
Risky Woods is the type of game which will keep kids quiet for hours, so perhaps it's ideal for Christmas.
However, the price is a little too expensive compared to the best similar games on the Amiga and there's not enough in it to compete with the likes of Sega games.
Electronic Arts £29.99
Graphics 9 Sound 7 Gameplay 6 Verdict 6
The Lost Files of Sherlock Holmes
Come now, Watson.
Can't you see there's a murder to be solved?
We cant sit around all day playing on this fangled computer thing.
No, Mr Holmes, we use the computer to solve the murder.
We don't need to leave our armchairs!
Most incredible, my dear Watson!
If you haven't guessed, you play the part of the world's best known detective, Sherlock Holmes.
Your day starts with the news of a murder which you should attend.
There you find clues pointing to the identity of the murderer — Jack the Ripper!
Contrary to the obvious evidence you find, there is also enough clues to suggest that it wasn't Jack the Ripper at all.
As the game continues you'll uncover a whole story which you, and your chum Dr Watson, will have to piece together.
The best way to recreate the atmosphere of 1888 is to generate some stunning graphics.
It appears evident that Electronic Arts have achieved this to a good effect, hence EA richly deserve full marks for graphics.
Using 256 colours on a VGA display, the graphics show warmth around lamps and fireplaces and muggy dampness out on the smog filled London streets.
(Well, you get the drift!)
Animation is, again, excellent with animation of all characters occurring all the time (it puts Eldorado to shame!).
As for control, interaction couldn't be easier.
Moving your mouse pointer over the scene will tell you what the object is beneath the pointer.
To pick up an object you would click on the pick up box on the control panel and then click once on the object you wish to pick up.
To move Holmes, just click on the place where you want him to go.
To travel through London, clicking off the edge of most outdoor scenes will bring up a large map of London.
You can select Holmes destination by clicking on the target and Holmes will hastily travel there by cab (the horse drawn type, of course!)
The clues come together nicely, or should I say eventually, but just require you to persevere with the game and take notes when you find new clues.
It's not just you who finds the clues though.
Watson and other policeman help to identify major and sometimes misleading clues.
Nonetheless, every detail you can obtain from a crime, or witness's statement, the better you chances of finding out what's happening around here!
The Lost Files of Sherlock Homes is just like the classic books and brings the old London atmosphere into your own home.
It's definitely one for your Christmas list and will take your mind off any festive overeating! £39.99 
Graphics 10 Sound 8 Gameplay 9 Verdict 9
Games News
The Carl Lewis Challenge
There haven't been a lot of track and field games around like this one for years, ever since the barrage of Daley Thompson finger aching games.
Challenge puts you in charge of your own sports team which you must train to compete with other teams.
(Up to four human players, each with their own team.)
The simulation side of the game deals with training and management while an arcade option allows you to interact vigorously in all 5 events.
The graphics are smooth, well defined, and the spot effects are adequate with some good sports music.
It's nice to see a keyboard bashing and mouse jerking game once in a while but this game lacks events and the numerous score board screens really frustrate me.
Perhaps children will enjoy this but it's not too appealing for the slightly mature PC audience.
Psygnosis
Graphics 8
Sound 8
Gameplay 4
Verdict 5
Disney Animation Studio
Disney, the king of cartoon animation, have released their own animation studio package for the PC so you too can create magical animated sequences.
The Disney Animation Studio (DAS) is split into three main sections.
There's the pencil test, ink and paint, and the exposure sheet.
The best place to start is in the pencil test.
Just as real animators do, we start drawing sketches of the characters with a simple pencil tool.
Each frame of the animation can be advanced or rewound using keyboard shortcuts.
To aid you with your work DAS features onion skin pages which show the previous frame in a different shade.
It's just like a light table which is an invaluable tool for animators.
DAS has most tools found in regular paint packages such as the different shape tools and freehand, fills and brushes.
Brushes can be resized, flipped and pasted.
Pencil animations can be moved into the ink and paint department to be coloured in.
This is a simple job for the fill tool or a more complicated one if you decide to shade your creations.
You don't need to worry about backgrounds because they can be loaded in if you have drawn one earlier.
The exposure sheet is where you can bring together your animation and add sound effects.
Timings can be quite accurate so you could have a ‘splodge’ sound as a character gets hit by a custard pie.
DAS comes complete with a library of sampled sounds so you don't have to scrape around for your own.
The example animations in the DAS package are brilliant because they were drawn by Disney artists.
There's also a few backgrounds thrown in too and some rather nice fonts.
DAS supports its own file format called Cfast but also supports more common ANIM and IFF formats.
An included file conversion program will convert these IFF files to GIF, TIF, or PCX.
DAS really gives the creative artist a simple way to create fast moving, effective animations which could easily be mistaken for a real cartoon.
DAS appears to be a clone of the Amiga version right down to the screen font, menus and file requester.
Now that the PC has an affordable animation package there's no reason why you couldn't be the next Walt Disney.
Recommended for the artist inside you! £99.99 
Infograms
Features 7
Ease of Use 8
Documentation 9
Verdict 8
Epic
A demo of Epic was released two years ago which was extremely impressive.
It's now been released and the same question once again arises: Can you save the human race?
Cutting through pages of storyline and technical specifications, you eventually find out what you have to do in the game.
The Rexxon Empire is standing between your convoy (fleeing from Earth) and your destination solar system.
The Federation have developed an advanced fighter craft called the Epical.
Due to lack of resources there are only three such craft in existence.
(This is another way of saying you have three lives.)
The Rexxon Empire needs to be penetrated and outposts destroyed for the human convoy to pass safely.
There are seven missions in total and the first is in two parts.
Your ship has many different weapons varying in power.
There are several types of laser guns, an epical blaster, a few types of homing photon torpedoes and your shields for defence.
The on-board computer gives you a cross hair sight which automatically tracks the target when in range.
When you get a lock-on, just fire the weapon and watch the scanning monitor broadcast a picture from the camera in the nose of the torpedo.
On the first mission, tracking stations have to be knocked out so the human convoy can pass undetected.
This takes place on a planet's surface using solid 3D graphics.
Fuel is needed if you want to stay in the air because the Epical engines consume fuel at an alarming rate.
The computer will point you in the right direction of a fuel pod which can be scooped up at close range.
Don't expect it to be easy because there's usually a patrol of Rexxon fighters in the area.
Eight views can be selected with the function keys.
External views are very impressive such as the remote target view.
Graphics are extremely fast (you need a 386 or a 486 for Epic) with solid 3D fighter ships and buildings which flash past you.
The best camera view is an external shot looking at the Epical craft from outside.
This sort of angle gives an arcade machine a good run for its money!
Sound is a little disappointing however.
Soundblaster effects such as laser fire and explosions are terrific but that's about it.
Music is of the military kind and hardly imaginative.
Control of the ship can be handled by mouse, joystick or keyboard.
I found keyboard control to be better because other keys such as‘weapon select’ and ‘shields’are only a finger stretch away if you are on the keyboard.
Epic's plot is very thin but it packs a lot in for what is essentially an arcade game.
The more you play Epic the more you want to complete it.
I can't see action fans turning away from Ocean's ‘big’ game which is both highly playable and addictive. £34.99 
Ocean
Graphics 9
Sound 6
Gameplay 8
Verdict 8
PGA Tour Golf For Windows
PGA has finally made it on to Windows.
Now you can play golf without having to leave the comfort of your Windows environment.
It's debatable whether PGA is the best golf game, but it's certainly the easiest to get into without the fuss of reading pages of instructions and swatting up on the physics of the humble golf ball.
PGA sports up to four players each with a large selection of clubs.
The leaderboard keeps track of the games played and scores which can be saved to disk at the end of each game.
The game starts off with a view looking through a camera which can be moved around the course using arrow icons.
The bottom of the screen houses the club selection, wind gauge, power indicator and shoot button.
All you have to do is move the cross hair in the direction in which you want to shoot, hold down the shoot button to select the power of the stroke and then you tee off.
It doesn't have to be as simple as that because PGA offers other options too.
There's a fair amount of skill involved and it can be very competitive when playing with friends.
The graphics are highly polished and several screens throughout PGA feature very smooth shading.
The sound effects fit the game nicely with solid ball striking and ‘plopping’ sounds and the odd cheer or sneer from the crowd.
PGA is a big lunchtime hit around the Practical PC office and the Ed can regularly be seen tucked away in his office playing a round of golf.
Good game, good game.
Next hole, caddy! £39.99 
Electronic Arts
Graphics 9
Sound 7
Gameplay 8
Verdict 9
World Tennis Championships
The programming team behind this are well know for their 3D vector graphics.
Indeed, Tennis features some excellent 3D figures overlaid onto a bitmap tennis court.
Essentially the best tennis game I have played on any computer, the graphics and characterisation are in a class of their own.
There are two perspectives available: First person and TV camera.
The first person angle puts you in the shoes of your character on the court.
You're free to run anywhere, even behind your opponent!
Missing a shot or falling into the net will result in a laugh from your opponent as he puts his hand on his stomach and leans forward.
Other nice expressions include an evil stare, ‘schwing!’(if you have seen Wayne's World!) and he's always mopping his forehead.
Tennis is incredibly entertaining and will emulate most tennis championships from around the world.
(Pity about the annoying password protection.)
Definitely THE tennis game to put on your shopping list.
Mindscape
Graphics 10
Sound 7
Gameplay 8
Verdict 9
C
A powerful programming language, which will enable the writing of concise programs.
Currently the preferred language of the majority of programmers.
compiler
Translates programs written in a language such as C or Pascal into machine code which is the language a computer can understand.
Once translated the program can be run at any time without the use of the original program or compiler.
computer
A machine that is customarily made up of a CPU, disk drive, input devices, output devices and memory.
A computer will process instructions given via a program in order to produce output.
CPU
Central Processing Unit.
The part of the computer that translates instructions and makes calculations before giving commands to the rest of the system to make sure that these instructions are carried out correctly.
data
Computer jargon that really means information or facts.
database
A system of information storage and retrieval, making it easier to the user to maintain records.
disk
a) floppy disk which is a circle of plastic coated with metal oxides that can be magnetised to store data.
b) An aluminium disk also coated with metal oxides that forms part of a hard disk drive.
In both cases the disks have a series of tracks onto which data is recorded by a read/write head.
high-level language
A programming language that was developed to be as close as possible to our own, in order to make the programmers' work easier.
Programs written using high-level languages, such as C, must be translated using a compiler into machine code so that the computer can understand them.
I/C Integrated Circuit
An electronic circuit on a single chip.
An integrated circuit can be made up of a few capacitors, diodes, resistors and transistors or even thousands of them.
Each integrated circuit has a special function, such as memory for example.
input
Input is any data given to a program for the computer to act on.
Whether is it typed in via the keyboard, generated via mouse movements or information received from any other external source.
Input determines what the program will do.
memory
Memory is the part of the computer that stores information.
Information is held temporarily in electronic circuits and is lost whenever the computer is turned off.
MHz
Megahertz.
This is used to indicate the clock speed of computers.
One megahertz equals one million clock cycles per second, so a machine running at 25MHz for example will yield 25 million clock cycles per second.
output
The result of input to a program, such as sound, graphics, a file or printed matter produced after typing a document using a word processor for example.
PC
Abbreviation for personal computer.
Was most often used to describe the original IBM PC, but is now more widely used to describe any computer.
PCB
Printed Circuit Board.
A PCB is covered in thin copper strips onto which I/Cs and other components are soldered.
Processor unit
The part of the computer that stores and processes information.
A processor unit can contain RAM, the CPU and one or more disk drives.
program
A set of instructions written in a programming language, that will tell the computer system how to carry out a specific task.
RAM
Random Access Memory.
This is the memory that the computer uses to store instructions and information while a program is being run.program is being run (carried out).
RAM loses its contents when the computer is switched off
VGA
Video Graphics Array.
A PC video display circuit and adaptor that was first introduced by IBM in 1987.
A VGA display has the ability to support both text and graphics.
word-processor
A software application that allows typing and manipulation of text, making the creation of documents faster and easier.
FAXgrabber — converting fax messages to text
Do you ever have to copy type into the computer text and other data that has arrived in a fax?
If so there's a new program which will, at a stroke, cut out this tedious chore.
It's called FAXgrabber and it takes the fax and converts it into text which can be edited by any word-processor without the need for re-typing.
The problem is that it only works if your PC has a fax card and is set up as a fax machine.
Mike Smithson investigates.
With some industry experts predicting that within five years more people will be sending and receiving faxes through their PC than with stand-alone fax machines it is no wonder that software developers are examining ways of cashing in on this increasing market.
The latest product is called FAXgrabber — which operates only in Windows — and offers the ability to take any incoming fax and convert it into text which can then be edited and inserted in other applications.
The theory is that data from the vast bulk of incoming faxes is later inputted in some form back into the computer.
FAXgrabber cuts out all the hard work and will encourage more people to switch to computer-fax systems.
FAXgrabber itself has been developed by Calera Recognition Systems which has become a leader in optical character recognition (OCR) technology which allows computers to ‘read’.
Usually such technology does not come cheap yet FAXgrabber is being sold in the UK at under £100.
Calera are obviously aiming for the mass market.
For many people that sort of price for a piece of software which will cut out a lot of laborious typing will appear to be a snip.
Thus a hard-worked journalist could receive a press release by fax, use FAXgrabber to convert the faxed release to text, and then place it into his story without having to go through the process of re-typing much of the information.
Lawyers who spend their days faxing revisions of contracts to one another could avoid the need to type in the changes every time they receive something new.
Even the classified advertisement department of a local paper could convert faxed ads directly to text without the need for the operator to read it and then re-type it.
In offices with E-mail systems a fax can be copied to hundreds of different destinations without having to do more than make a few entries on the key-board.
FAXgrabber has another use which will be welcomed by all who use their PCs as fax machines — it should save an enormous amount of hard disk space.
One of the few draw-backs of computer faxes is that they treat all faxes as bitmap files and gobble up memory at an alarming rate.
A normal two page A4 fax can demand up to 200k and it only requires a moderate amount of activity before faxes are stretching the memory requirements of any system to the limits.
Fortunately FAXgrabber allows received faxes to be stored as text files.
The program is designed exclusively for Windows and runs happily in conjunction with Delrina's Winfax Pro and the other leading Windows-based fax programs.
Once installed FAXgrabber can be configured to monitor fax activity automatically and to convert everything to text as soon as it arrives.
The other option is to have it resident at all times but is activated only when you want a fax converting.
In theory FAXgrabber then operates in the background and you carry on with what you are doing.
In practice, unless you have a 486DX — it does not work quite like that because whenever the program is converting it makes such demands on the whole system that everything else is slowed up.
While working the FAXgrabber icon appears at the bottom of the screen and little bracket symbols move from side to side underneath it to tell you that it is operating.
Given the enormous time, more than five minutes, it takes for each page this is very useful otherwise you might conclude that the whole machine has hung.
Once converted FAXgrabber automatically places the text onto the Windows clipboard for insertion into whatever Windows application you are using.
All the popular Windows WP packages including WordPerfect and Word for Windows are catered for and the process of placing the converted text into a document is as simple as with any other document.
Provided the quality of the incoming fax is good then FAXgrabber copes remarkably well making very few mistakes.
In fact it works so well that within a few days of installing it friends were asking if they could fax me printed documents that they had always wanted to store on disk.
One had tried using a hand-held scanner for the job but had given up because it made too many mistakes.
FAXgrabber made about a tenth of the errors.
The big drawback of FAXgrabber is that the quality of the text conversion is totally dependant on the quality of the original material — the received fax.
The helpful handbook puts it succinctly —‘Faxes that are hard for humans to read are hard for FAXgrabber to read’.
The problem is that the vast majority of stand alone fax machines are set up to send faxes in low resolution.
This means that the number of dots per square inch are much smaller and the amount of processing required by the sending fax machine is much less.
The fax is transmitted at a much faster rate thus saving on telephone bills.
FAXgrabber finds it difficult to ‘read’ material unless it is in high or fine resolution.
The handbook, recognising the problem, states that ‘you should encourage associates to send clean, clear faxes and to send them in ‘Fine Mode’ wherever possible’.
That is all very well in theory but almost impossible to achieve in practice.
For many fax machine users can barely figure out where to put the paper in let alone change the default settings of the device.
For this review I asked the PR firm promoting FAXgrabber to send me a fax so I could demonstrate the program in operation.
Unfortunately they could not work out how to change the setting from low resolution and FAXgrabber found it really hard to make a good job converting a fax of a press realise announcing its launch.
The developers, Calera, have priced FAXgrabber at £99 with the aim of making it a mass market product.
It deserves to succeed — whether or not it will depends on fax senders being persuaded to produce better quality faxes.
After conversion by FAXgrabber this is the text that was produced for editing in a word-processor.
There are a large number of mistakes because the original quality was not good enough for FAXgrabber to cope with.
The only way round this problem is to persuade people who send you faxes to set their machines to ‘fine’ resolution.
The new DOS 5 Shell gives PC users a new way of interacting with their machine.
Chris Hankins shows you how to set it to best advantage.
If you still find DOS commands confusing, or you simply prefer working in a graphical environment, then DOSShell is for you.
DOSShell is a feature of the latest DOS version — DOS 5.
Those who never want to see the DOS prompt again can opt to have the Shell loaded each time the computer is turned on.
From then on, programs can be started and all filing, editing and disk management tasks can be performed from within the Shell.
A shell is a generic term for a software interface which encompasses and controls activities which take place within it.
You interact with the shell and the shell interacts with the computer.
Whether you use a shell to hide from the C: > prompt or as a useful tool, you will probably want to customise it to suit your system and personal preferences.
If your computer supports graphics, and most do, the first thing to do is to change from text mode (the mode that DOS sets up for you) into graphics mode.
Open the ‘Options’ menu either by clicking on the menu bar with the mouse or typing the ALT and O keys together.
Select ‘Display’ and a dialogue box will appear with a choice of screen display options.
This is a common type of dialogue box containing more information than the box can display at any one time.
A scroll bar with up and down arrows above and below lets you move through the contents.
Choose one of the graphics options and use the ‘Preview’ to see how it will appear on screen.
The number of lines refers to the lines of text which fill the screen.
Low resolution displays of 25–30 lines are easier to read than high resolution displays of 60 lines.
You can also use this opportunity to change the screen colours, choosing between the eight colour scheme options available.
To make the most of DOSShell, you need to create program groups and add your DOS applications to those groups.
Make a list of your installed DOS applications and see if they fall into natural categories — word-processing, accounting, drawing etc.
It is not absolutely necessary to group your programs but, in the interests of good organisation, programs are easier to locate when placed in logical groups.
Avoid large numbers of programs in any one group as you will have to scroll the Program List to locate programs which do not appear on screen.
To create a new program group, select ‘new’ from the file menu.
A dialogue box will appear asking you whether you want a new Program Group or a new Program Item.
Choose new Program Group and give the group a name.
Click on OK or press Return, and the name you typed in will appear in the Main Menu list.
Double click on your new program list and then select ‘new’ again from the file menu and this time choose new Program Item to add a program to your new Program group.
Another dialogue box appears into which you type the program name, the DOS command which starts the program and the Startup Directory (optional) which DOS will change to before starting the program.
You can also choose a Shortcut or ‘Hot Key’ combination so that you can switch from one program to another.
The Shortcut keys must include one or more of the SHIFT, CTRL and ALT keys plus one other.
Repeat the above steps for each Program Group and each Program Item that you will want to use through the DOS shell.
The same Program Item can be included in several program groups by selecting it and using the copy command.
You can also create Program Groups within Program Groups.
You may have noticed that the dialogue boxes used to set up the Program Groups and Program Item both have a Password option.
This gives two levels of password protection against unauthorised use of files.
Entry to any group can be restricted and/or entry to any programs within that group.
Unfortunately, the password only gives protection from within the DOSShell, files and programs can still be accessed from the DOS prompt.
Once you have set up your programs ready to run from within the DOS shell, you can take advantage of DOS 5's ability to run more than one program at the same time.
This saves you having to exit one program to start another, and you can move freely between open programs using either the Hot Keys or CTRL + ESC keys.
To open more than one application at the same time you must first enable the task swapper.
This is enabled by selecting ‘Enable Task Swapper’ form the Options menu.
The Program List area of your DOSShell screen will be divided in two with a new Active Task List heading displayed.
At the start of each session you can place all the programs you will be using in the Active Task List.
This is done either by opening each program in turn and returning to DOSShell without exiting the program, or by selecting the program whilst holding the SHIFT key.
It is always worth adding the Command Prompt to the active list so that you can access DOS directly from any program.
You can also add a Hot Key combination to the Command prompt by selecting ‘Properties’ from the file menu.
STEP BY STEP
SETTING SCREEN OPTIONS
You can change the screen display resolution and mode.
Graphics mode uses slightly more memory than text mode.
The resolution dictates the number of lines of text that are displayed on the screen at the same time.
In most circumstances you are better off using a lower resolution and clearer text.
Changing to one of the pre-designed colour schemes is simply a matter of selecting from a menu.
Use the preview option to see the results before making the change.
For more flexibility use the Editor to edit the DOSSHELL.INI file.
You can change any colours, but use colours names already in use — green, brightgreen etc.
Some colour combinations clash or make parts of the screen unreadable, so make notes of any changes you make.
STEP BY STEP
CREATING NEW PROGRAM GROUPS
Choosing ‘new’ from the file menu bring up the New Program Object dialogue box.
Select New Program Group and click on OK.
The next dialogue box let's you give the group a name.
This can be any name and need not refer to the programs contained within it.
Where several people use the same PC, each could have their own program group containing the programs they normally work with.
The same program can be placed in more than one Program Group.
When a group has been created, select FILE, NEW and PROGRAM ITEM to add a program to the group.
TIP BOX
TASK SWAPPING
Several programs from any group can be opened at the same time.
Once the Enable Task Swapper has been selected from the Options menu, a new box appears containing the names of all the programs which are opened.
The CTRL and ESC keys pressed together will take you from an open application to DOSShell.
To move from one open application to another you must designate a Shortcut key combination when adding the program to the group.
Placing programs in the active list.
When the Enable Task Swapper option is selected, an Active Task List window is displayed.
This lists all the DOS applications which have been opened and not closed during this session.
To move from an open application to DOSShell, press CTRL and ESC keys together.
To move from one open application to another open application use the Shortcut keys as defined in the program Properties box.
Programs can be placed in the Active Tasks list without opening them, by clicking on the program whilst holding the CTRL key.
FAX BOX
About DOS 5
The latest version of DOS, MS-DOS 5, can be purchased off-the-shelf as a full system or as an upgrade kit.
DOS 5 tends to be bundled with the majority of new computers and is likely to become the standard.
There are many improvements over earlier DOS versions.
DOS 5 is more efficient at managing memory and can install itself in a previously unused area of the computer's memory leaving more memory available for running programs.
The most immediate change you will notice with DOS 5 is the DOS shell interface which, if you choose, can be used in place of the C: > prompt to execute DOS commands and run programs.
DOS 4 users will be familiar with the idea of using a graphical interface, but the DOS 5 shell is far better and much more friendly.
FAX BOX
About DOS
DOS is the operating system commonly used on most PCs and a key factor in determining the overall efficiency of your computer.
At a basic level it communicates between you and your computer and between different parts of the hardware.
It also allows software producers to work within a common compatibility format.
If software applications were to include their own specific operating systems they might well be more efficient, but they would be unwieldy, expensive to develop and could not interact with other applications or with the variety of computer hardware designs.
Only ten years ago no-one foresaw the popularity and meteoric development advancements of the Personal Computer — not even Microsoft!
The earliest version of MS-DOS (MicroSoft — Disc Operating System) was designed to compete with the then standard home computer operating system — CP/M (Control Program/Microcomputer).
As hardware and software development progressed, MS-DOS was forced to evolve to meet previously unforeseen demands such as large harddisks, memory, networks and multi-users.
With today's fast and powerful machines there is a strong case for a complete re-write of DOS or for changing to an operating system specifically designed for power computing.
There is a great deal of reluctance in the Industry to produce a version of DOS which is not ‘backwards-compatible’ as this would make existing software obsolete at a stroke and users would be reluctant to make such a drastic (and expensive) move.
For better or for worse, DOS is the one thing which unites PCs and their users.
DOS is not the most efficient operating system for the modern PC due to its backward compatibility with older versions.
Its successor, OS/2, is better equipped and provides an ‘Apple Mac’ type graphical interface similar to Windows.
Although OS/2 can run DOS (and in turn DOS applications) it has not been as widely accepted in Europe as it has in America.
TIP BOX
It is often useful to have a Trashcan or Dustbin where you can dump unwanted files.
This routine lets you add a dustbin to DOSShell.
Make sure the C: \ (root) directory is highlighted and from the file menu select ‘Create Directory’.
Call the new directory DUSTBIN — you could use the name TRASH, but DUSTBIN will be nearer the top on an alphabetically sorted directory tree.
Click on Editor and enter the file name SHELL.BAT.
A blank editor screen will open into which you type the following lines:—
ECHO OFF DOSSHELL CD\ CD\DUSTBIN DIR/W/P DEL *.
*
Then choose SAVE from the editor's file menu and exit.
The SHELL.BAT file should now be in your root directory.
If it isn't, click on the C drive symbol at the top of the DOSShell screen.
Exit DOSShell.
Type SHELL at the DOS prompt to start DOSShell.
Unwanted files can be highlighted and, by holding the left-hand mouse button, dragged level with the DUSTBIN directory.
The message ‘Are you sure you want to move the selected files to C: \DUSTBIN? will be displayed — click on Yes.
When you have finished your DOSShell session the SHELL.BAT batch file will instruct DOS to list the files in the DUSTBIN directory and delete them.
You are given an ‘Are you Sure (Y/N)?’ option before the files are deleted, so check the list to make sure.
RECOMMENDED READING
DOS for Dummies by Dan Gookin
Published by IDG Books Tel. 021 706 6000 ISBN 1-878058-25-8 Price £15.45 and don't forget MS-DOS User's Guide & Reference Free with DOS 5
Harvard Graphics for Windows
Janet Swift
Harvard Graphics Windows is one of the latest generation of presentation packages that make it easy for anybody to produce a stylish and professional looking presentation suitable for any type of audience.
You do not need any artistic ability as the package itself can be trusted to take all the important design decisions.
On the other hand you can make sweeping changes or alter minute details and so can customise the program to cater for individual requirements.
This flexibility also means that if you have created a presentation for one output device and want to alter it to suit another you can do so without having to repeat your original efforts.
The best way to discover what HGW is like is to use it to create a presentation.
So here is a guided tour to its facilities and the types of results that you obtain.
The important point to note as you follow my progress is just how easy it is and how flexible.
Click on Create new presentation you see the New Presentation dialog box which lists the types of slides you can add to a presentation.
In order to start at the logical beginning I went with the default selection, Title.
The most important first step — although as we will see later it is by no means irrevocable — is to select a presentation style and in the latest version of the product — HGW Version 1.01 — you can do this from the New Presentation dialog box.
A Presentation Style is a combination of a background, a palette of colours and pre-selected layout and fonts.
The names of the 54 files only indicate which use Bitstream fonts (starting with a B) or Postscript fonts (starting with P).
There is a previewer provided so that you can see what each of the styles looks like in combination with any of the 12 slide templates.
Because of the timing and subject matter of my presentation — it's about an autumn sales campaign — I selected BLEAVES.STY with a motif of leaves in autumnal colours.
One of the most important aspects of a presentation style is that it is suited to your intended output — be it 35mm slide, overhead transparencies, screen show or printed output — in black and white or colour.
Although different presentation styles are appropriate to different media this is not indicated on the list and you will need to refer either to the Quick Reference Guide (a single folder card that you should try to keep handy) or to Chapter 20 of the User Guide — which frankly seems rather a long way in!
LEAVES is a 35mm style which is lucky as that happens to be what I wanted.
Once you have made your choice of slide type you are presented with an appropriate entry form in which to type in your data.
In the case of a Title slide this is a form with areas for entering text for the title, subtitle and footnote (if any).
Clicking on OK causes the slide itself to be shown — in other words the view automatically changes to the Slide Editor.
To create the next slide in the presentation click on the Add Slide button.
This takes you to a very similar dialog box to the one for a new presentation except that it lacks the button for selecting a presentation style.
This is because a presentation style applies to all the slides in a presentation.
For my second slide I chose a bullet chart and filled in the appropriate data form.
You can have up to eight levels of bullets.
Press Tab to move to the next level in and Shift-Tab to move back out again (or you can drag using the mouse).
Pressing on OK shows the resulting bullet chart in the Slide Editor and it is here where you can change the bullet attributes if required
Creating a graph is just as easy.
When you select one of the graphics chart templates, the data form that appears resembles a spreadsheet.
Do not be misled, however, into thinking that it works like a spreadsheet because it is only a grid for entering figures and cannot perform any calculations for you.
You can either type your data into this form — which is what I did in this instance — or you can import data from an Excel or Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheet or from a Delimited ASCII file.
The importing operation is very easy and you can specify just a range within a worksheet as well as an entire worksheet and can make the link to the source data active — so that when the data in your spreadsheet changes the chart in the slide is automatically updated.
Again, once you have entered your data, clicking on OK displays the chart in the slide editor
The range of templates provided in HGW is comprehensive.
It includes an option for a table in which case you fill in the same sort of data form as shown above but what is displayed on the slide is the completed grid.
The default table is for a design in which there is no border around the table and just a line beneath the column titles and between each column.
There are however other options which you can select in the Chart Gallery and it is, of course very each to make changes like adding a frame and additional lines in the Slide Editor.
There is also an organisation chart and you fill in the data form for this rather like a bullet chart in order to create a tree diagrams.
There are two basic styles to choose from but each is available in 2D and 3D relief.
It is also important to remember the Chart Gallery when creating a chart as it is sometimes the only way of achieving the effect you want.
For example, having gone straight ahead without referring to the chart gallery I created the default Pie Chart and was dissatisfied because I could find no way of exploding one of the slices.
However such a chart is one of the options provided in the chart gallery and you can apply a gallery style to a chart that has already been created.
This option allows you to make more sweeping changes — for example you can go from a bar chart to a line chart.
The final template worth mentioning is Drawing.
This just gives you a background.
Remember that as well as the drawing tools, HGW provides an extensive clip art library and you can use symbols from this (or any other graphics file you have available) on any slide.
Working on the whole presentation
There are two alternative views of the presentation.
The Outliner view shows you a text based summary.
You can collapse the outline so that it shows just the titles of each slide or expand it so that you see the text of bullet charts.
The icons to the left indicate that a slide is a chart or an organisation diagram.
You can enter text directly into the Outliner and it is therefore a quicker way of creating text slides.
The Slide Sorter view shows you thumbnails of all the slides in your presentation.
It has this name because it enables you to alter the order of slides — you just drag them to their required positions.
Slide Sorter view is also a good place in which to make global changes.
For example, if you realise that you want your presentation to be on a different medium then you can do so — and see at a glance the effect of changing the underlying presentation style.
It is the ability to make such a change that makes a presentation program like HGW such a useful tool.
If you decide to go for a ScreenShow then HGW offers a limited range of transition effects which you apply on a slide by slide basis.
Rather than an ordinary ScreenShow in which the order in which the slides are shown is determined in advance you can create an interactive HyperShow in which the viewer decides what to see next.
This is done by assigning keys or creating buttons.
You can also run other applications from a HyperShow.
The latest version of the product (that is 1.01) is supplied with HGW Play which can be used in combination with Windows 3.1 (or an earlier version Windows with one of the multimedia extensions) to add sound and animation effects to a ScreenShow — given all the other necessary extras such as a sound card or CD-ROM drive or a device driver for animation.
Version 1.01 also includes ScreenShow Projector which enables you to display your presentation on Windows PCs without the need for Harvard Graphics — this gives you grater freedom to take your show on the road.
You can also use HGW to prepare your handouts which give your audience a printed, condensed copy of your presentation with up to six slides per page and can add text, drawings or symbols to appear on each page.
The program also includes a spelling checker — that can be used to correct mistakes that would otherwise appear either on your slides or your associated handouts.
Harvard Graphics Windows is a pretty impressive presentation package but the competition is strong.
As yet HGW does not offer all the facilities of its DOS counterpart — for example you cannot include Speaker's Notes with each slide which is something you can do in Harvard Graphics 3.0 for DOS.
Another drawback is that while in most respects it is a well finished program it is not as eager to show off its own advantages as say Lotus Freelance for Windows which has a very slick presentation which serves as an introduction to the program.
This means you are not given the same level of initial impetus.
There is, however, plenty of help in the documentation and the QuickStart chapter guides you through creating your own first presentation and if you do not want to bother with typing in all the data for yourself the file for this presentation, QSTART, is available for inspection.
When you do delve further into its manual you will also find HGW very helpful on topics like choosing the right chart and making points clearly in bullet charts.
Introducing the tool box
You can edit your slide if required in Slide Editor view.
The toolbox at the left of the slide area.
The arrow icon is for the select tool for choosing the objects you want to work on and the other seven tools in this top group are drawing tools for adding text, polygons, rectangles, lines, ellipses and freehand drawings to a slide.
The next four tools are to change the positions of objects.
You can align and rotate objects, group or ungroup them or move them to the front or back.
Next come two zoom tools and below these an eye dropper icon — which copies attributes such as colour from one object to another — and a lorry icon — which gives access to the Symbol library.
The long button displays the underlying data form — in other words it lets you return to the form you initially filled in to create the slide.
Although you can do the same via the menus (the corresponding sequence being Chart, Edit Data) it is much more convenient to click on this icon.
Similarly, the three icons at the bottom of the toolbox can be accessed via the Text and Graphics pull-down menus.
They give access to dialog boxes that control the attributes of lines (thickness and colour); text (font, point size and colour) and the fills used for objects.
The middle icon is used not just for one option but four.
When you click on it you get a pop out menu of four icons and can choose between a solid colour, a hatched pattern, a gradient fill or a bitmap.
Each of these icons leads to an appropriate dialog box.
Step by Step to IntelliDraw
by Mike James
IntelliDraw is by far the most interesting drawing package to hit the market for a long time.
It needs a powerful machine to run it at a reasonable speed but even if you don't have such a machine you need to know about it as a sign of things to come.
The reason IntelliDraw is so novel is that it actually tries to help you draw.
Other drawing packages provide you with easy to use drawing tools but only IntelliDraw tries to understand the nature of what you might be drawing.
For example, in most cases when you draw something new on the screen its position will not be random with regard to the other objects already on the screen.
It is highly likely that one corner, edge or the centre of the object you have just drawn will need to be lined up with a corner, edge or centre of one or more of the objects already on the screen.
The most help in doing this that other packages give you are a set of guidelines that you have to position manually.
IntelliDraw, on the other hand, tries to detect near alignments between the object you are drawing and all the other objects on the screen and places a blue guideline automatically.
This makes it feel as if alignments between object correspond to ‘sticky’ patches on the screen.
It is difficult to describe exactly, but I assure you that it works wonderfully when you are drawing.
Automatic guidelines are just the start and to keep this description of reasonable length many important features have to be left out — there are just so many.
Objects can be ‘tied’ to each other in a number of different ways.
For example, if you draw two objects you can select Suggest Alignment and if any dimensions are similar making them identical will be suggested.
You can accept this suggestion and opt to make the two objects keep the alignment.
That is if you alter one of the object the other changes to keep the selected dimensions the same.
You can link object with drawn lines that are constrained in some way or other.
For example, if you constrain the lines to be only horizontal or vertical then the line joining the objects will be ‘steppy’
You can see how the connector lines stay attached as the box is moved and how automatic guidelines make alignment easy.
Such ‘elastic’ connection lines make drawing box charts such as flow diagrams, hierarchy charts, PERT diagrams etc. much easier than using a normal drawing package.
As well as connecting lines that stay attached as you move objects there is also a connecting polygon with the same ability.
This is the fancifully named Conectigon tool.
This can be used for filled areas that always adjust their shape to fill between other objects.
Most drawing packages offer you an alignment tool but it usually doesn't solve the problem of spacing a set of objects evenly.
IntelliDraw provides a range of distribute operations that will space objects evenly in an area either aligning them with the top, bottom or centre of each.
As well as aligning objects you can also distribute them!
What's more if you move one of the objects all of the other objects are repositioned to keep things correctly aligned or distributed!
The most wonderful and fascinating of all of the new drawing tools is the Symmetrigon.
This is a sort of real time kaleidoscope.
As you draw what you draw is reflected in as many mirrors as you specify.
For example, if you only specify a single mirror you can draw shapes that are symmetrical about a line — like a vase or light bulb etc.
It is surprising how many of the things that you want to draw are symmetrical in this way.
You can have more fun though if you set the level of symmetry higher than 1.
In this case it really is like drawing inside a kaleidoscope.
Controlling the number of degrees of symmetry of the symmetrigon.
Although this is fun it also makes drawing lots of shapes like gearwheels and stars easy.
A sample of symmetrigon objects.
Given that you can draw all sorts of amazing objects you might not think that you need to edit them much but IntelliDraw has some powerful editing tools.
It has all of the things that you find in other packages — reshaping tools, rotation, reflection, resizing etc. but it also has operations that will combine objects.
You can add objects together to make a complex outline or intersect the shapes to produce holes in one object with another.
This is a really excellent way to draw.
All you have to do is draw all the little bits of an object and push them all together to make a silhouette of the object and then performing one combine operation joins them all together to make an outline that would take you a lot longer to draw in one piece.
There are lots and lots of other features that are worth mentioning — a simple animation facility, linking objects to numbers, automatic dimensioning, a good range of gradient fills, linked text boxes for almost DTP quality text control, and so on and so on…
If you are interested in drawing packages then you need to try IntelliDraw.
I cannot simply advise you to go out and buy without trying for the simple reason that it can be very slow on anything less than a really fast machine.
It seems to be particularly sensitive to the type of graphics card in use and 256 colour mode often slows it down a lot.
If you can cope with the speed problem then I do recommend it.
I hope Aldus manage to find a way to speed up the next version so that we can all enjoy IntelliDraw, irrespective of class of machine.
Step-by-step to a pair of scissors
Step 1
Drawing the start of the handle is easy using the oval drawing tool.
At this stage the fill colour is yellow but it can easily be changed.
Notice that the lower oval is smaller than the top one because it is intended to fit inside.
Step 2
Moving the smaller oval into place is much easier than you might expect because of the way guidelines appear as the point that you have picked up come into alignment with important features on other object.
When the small oval is in the centre of the larger then two guidelines appear.
It is as if the smaller oval is attracted to the centre of the larger.
Step 3
To make the handle shape the object subtraction tool is used with both ovals selected.
This makes a composite object that results from subtracting the area that the two shapes overlap.
Step 4
The blade of the scissors is drawn using the round ended box drawing tool.
It is then rotated using the rotate tool.
Step 5
The blade can now be positioned, again with the help of the snap lines that automatically appear.
Step 6
The combine tool is used to join together the blade and the handle to make a single filled object.
Step 7
Although this picture looks complicated, all that has happened is that the handle plus blade have been duplicated to make the other half of the scissors.
Next the reflection tool has been used to turn the copy into a mirror image.
Step 8
Now we can customise each side of the scissors by editing the points that define the curve.
Step 9
The finished result with a gradient fill added and a small filled circle to mark the pivot.
Product details: IntelliDraw
Supplier: Aldus
Tel: 031 220 4747
Price £149
Practically Speaking Speak out!
Have your say in Practical PC's letters forum.
Anything goes, of course, so get pen to paper (or better still, fingers to keyboard) and write to: Practically Speaking, X or A?
Sir: Thanks for a great magazine, I am glad there is a magazine out now that caters for us home users as well, instead of just for the corporate buyers with deep pockets.
I found your motherboard upgrade article most interesting as I have been thinking of upgrading my XT, but I had not bargained for changing the keyboard as I have a 102 key board (no XT/AT switch).
I have used computer auctions in the past for some purchases and would like to know how to tell the difference between XT/AT keyboards.
Thanks again for a really useful publication, M.
A.
Budd Staines Middlesex PPC: Current models seem to be auto-sensing, so there shouldn't be much problem.
In general, a 102 key keyboard will work on an XT as an 84 key board.
Silicon Amnesia Sir: I bought your magazine for the first time this month and was very annoyed that I have been missing out on an excellent value piece of publishing catering to beginners (me) and experienced alike.
I have what to you may seem a small problem but one for which I can find no reason.
I am trying to free as much memory as possible by moving drivers etc into the UMB.
I seem to have taken it about as far as I can but can find no reason for the existence of the two command files in conventional memory as shown on the enclosed printout.
Also perhaps you could inform me if it is possible to run the 14k MSDOS in the upper memory, or does it have to remain where it is.
Thanks once again for producing what has to be one of the best mags around.
Keep up the good work.
I.
Mathie Fearn Ross-shire CONFIG.SYS DEVICEHIGH=C: \DOS\SETVER.EXE DEVICE=C: \DOS\HIMEM.SYS DOS=UMB DOS=HIGH COUNTRY=044,, C: \DOS\COUNTRY.SYS DEVICE=C: \DOS\EMM386.EXE 1024 RAM DEVICE=C: \DOS\DISPLAY.SYS CON= (EGA,, 1) FILES=30 From MEM.EXE Conventional Memory: Name Size in Decimal MSDOS 14288 14.
OK SETVER 400 0.4K HIMEM 1184 1.2K EMM386 8400 8.2K DISPLAY 8288 8.1K COMMAND 2688 2.6K COMMAND 2704 2.6K KEYB 6208 6.1K DOSSHELL 2144 2.1K PRINT 5776 5.6K FREE 80 0.1K FREE 602832 (588.7K) Total FREE 602912 (588.8K) Upper Memory Name Size in Decimal Size in Hex SYSTEM 163840 (160.
OK) MOUSE 14000 (13.7K) FREE 18704 (18.3K) Total FREE 18704 (18.3K) Total bytes available to programs (Conventional+Upper) 62161.6 (607.
OK) Largest executable program size: 602832 (588.7K) Largest available upper memory block 18704 (18.3K) 1441792 bytes total EMS memory 1018576 bytes free EMS memory 1441792 bytes total contiguous extended memory 0 bytes available contiguous extended memory 196608 bytes available XMS memory MS-DOS resident in High Memory Area PPC: We'll be running a series on tuning-up your PC, one part of which will deal specifically with optimising memory usage — the first part, covering hard drives, appears this month.
Until then, however, change your CONFIG.SYS to read as follows: DEVICE=C: \DOS\HIMEM.SYS DEVICE=C: \DOS\EMM386.EXE 1024 RAM DOS=HIGH, UMB COUNTRY=044,, C: \DOS\COUNTRY.SYS DEVICEHIGH=C: \DOS\SETVER.EXE FILES=30 and move KEYB up into UMBs from your autoexec.bat by prefacing the command line for it with LOADHIGH (or LH, which does the same job).
You'll notice I've knocked the DEVICE=DISPLAY.SYS line out of your config.sys, but if you're absolutely certain you want to keep it in, then use DEVICEHIGH to load it.
I have to assume you require EMS memory, which is why you have specified the 1024 and RAM options, otherwise if you use AUTO instead, you may get more UMBs to play with.
You can preface any command to load a program in your autoexec.bat by LH, and if there is no room, the program will load low — it's worth experimenting.
More in the PC Tune Up series!
Quad erratic demonstrandum Sir: Will someone tell all these wealthy Microsofts, Lotus's and Nortons, who seem to want to deluge Joe public with Rolling Wallpaper.
I refer to demos of their high end programs.
When we are told there is a shortage of floppy disks, what they ought to be doing is sending out working printing saving and using versions of their programs that we can load 10–20 times then said software will commit Hari Kari.
I am sure if shareware authors can do this these mighty fur lined Rolls Royce merchants can do like wise.
Joe public can then truly see if something is going to be worth buying.
Not, as I said, rolling Non Interactive wallpaper.
Think!
When you went to the Ideal Home Exhibition they gave you a hot sausage on a stick to eat — with pickle, not just a picture of one to look at.
The flush in the pocket types, then bought hot sausages on sticks.
Get my drift.
While we're on the subject of Shareware will someone please tell those loonies who insist on putting their 50 page manuals on disk in Write format with lots of pretty graphic diagrams which take forever to print and kill my ribbons, to desist pronto.
I pay for my own ribbons and object to this rape of my printer.
These WRI files are not printable everywhere, whereas ASCII text files are, a la notepad or any diddy wordprocessor, which makes them far more portable and thus usable on any old machine.
There are still a lot of old Dos boxes without Windows about you know.
Simple is efficient eh?
If I can think of one thing that makes modern software easy to use leading up to Windows it is the split screen.
The ability to see where something is coming from and where it's going to.
I am thinking of Xtreegold for file management, wordprocessors that can split screen and pull text from one piece of work to another and finally Windows, the ultimate hop to and go to and transfer stuff to the clipboard and elsewhere too.
Why isn't there a Shareware Windows Wordprocessor yet.
Where the Hell are you Galaxy for Windows.
Phil Morley.
Peterborough PPC: We can see where you're coming from, and indeed, some companies have already done what you suggest with regard to demonstration versions of their software.
However, they're almost never fully runnable all saving and printing versions.
Inevitably, the save and sometimes the print facility has been turned off, and it's not uncommon to find that a limit on file size (in memory) is also applied.
The major problem is likely to be that enterprising ‘try-outers’ will hack the code they've been given to play with and render the program fully usable if companies merely decrement a counter and destroy its function once it reaches zero as you suggest.
Another point to consider is that, these days, it's very unusual to find a commercial program, especially for Windows, that comes on one disk — some take up eleven or more!
As for the WRI files, I've yet to come across a shareware program that hasn't an ASCII file as well as a WRI file — and you don't HAVE to print it.
You can also delete the diagrams if you don't want to print them — that's why the files are editable, and not compiled to print without the use of a word processor.
You have to do some things for yourself in this world, you know!
Cluttered Holidays?
SIR: I bought a copy of the November issue of Practical PC and I have to wonder whether most of the editorial staff weren't on holiday in the Bahamas when it was put together.
1.
What happened to the article on Ti'ko?
Nowhere to be seen and one of the reasons I bought the magazine was to read the article as I have a Ti'ko machine (and incidentally have been very pleased with it).
2.
The Prodraw write up started neither on page 70, as heralded on the front cover, nor on page 79, as displayed within the menu but on page 78. 3.
The contents of the mag are far too BUSY.
Colours everywhere and not always having an apparent use.
For instance what do the colours at the very top of the page mean?
They differ throughout the mag and certainly don't tie in with the colours given in the boxes of different sections in the Menu section at the front.
Having said my piece it's not all bad!
I like the practical hardware articles and the use of photographs is helpful (although some annotation pointing to various items in the photo would improve things).
The use of the ‘Fax Box and Jargon Box’ is good and the general attempt to imitate the Windows desktop is a good idea but would work much better if less cluttered.
The PC magazine market needs a reasonably priced down to earth mag so I hope your circulation goes from strength to strength but on present showing there's a lot to do to get it right, Andrew H.
Broadbent Inverness PPC: On holiday in the Bahamas?
Certainly not — as a matter of fact, I holidayed not half an hour's drive from your house, at the bottom of Loch Ness, and it was nothing like the Bahamas — we journalists can't afford to go to such places.
The Ti'ko article, as you will have seen by now, appeared in the December issue — we ran out of space, as sometimes happens on a busy magazine.
Same thing affected the Prodraw review, and the contents page was printed by the time its new position had been determined.
We try to keep aberrations like that to an absolute minimum — we'd rather they didn't happen at all, obviously, but every so often the gremlins creep in.
Sorry!
Now as to matters of opinion.
Yes, Practical PC is busy — it's meant to be busy!
There's a lot going on out there, and we don't have anywhere near enough space to put everything in that we'd like, so busy is what it is.
That said, we do listen to constructive criticism (even if I do take the Michael in these letters every so often) and make changes where they seem needed — you'll see gradual change as time goes by, for the better, we hope!
In the meanwhile, do you think you could persuade a few more salmon to get into the rivers around your neck of the woods by the time next season opens?
I wouldn't mind the rivers up there being a little more cluttered with them when next I return!
PRACTICAL PC NEWS — JANUARY 1993 ISSUE
The collapse of the pound in the last month or two could mean that the party's over for PC buyers, with the downward spiral of prices finally bottoming out.
Those people who've been holding off buying anything just in case prices drop still further could now find they've missed the boat.
The cost of sourcing base components — usually paid for in US dollars — has risen dramatically thanks to the sterling crisis.
A number of smaller PC makers have been forced to pass on at least some of that increase to their customers.
Viglen, for example, is raising prices by as much as seven per cent on some models.
Dan Technology reckons it will be forced to put up to £120 extra on the price of a PC depending on the configuration.
Elonex too has raised the price on many of its machines, putting about £100 on popular desktop models and £200 on its modular notebooks featured by us a couple of issues ago.
‘Every player in the UK industry without exception has to source high value components on the international market,’ says Elonex m.d.
Israel Wetrin.
He reckons suppliers have a choice: stick with lower prices and compromise on quality or raise prices and maintain high standards.
So which type of supplier are you going to buy from?
More information from Viglen on 081 997 3000, Dan Technology on 081 961 6959, Elonex on 081 452 4444
If the idea of popping a PC or a printer into your shopping trolley alongside the jam, teabags and toilet paper appeals to you, why not try a day out to one of the PC World superstores that are cropping up on the outskirts of London?
A third store has recently opened in Brent, to add to the outlets Croydon and Thurrock.
At the time of going to press a fourth PC World was due to open at Staples Corner.
The new Brentford store covers over 40,000 square feet and holds over 4,000 computer related product lines from 486 tower systems to floppy disks and mouse-mats.
The company reckons that its superstore approach allows it to offer product at a much lower price than in a conventional computer dealership.
PC World chairman Jan Murray reckons it was only a matter of time before PCs lost their premium product status and started being treated like any other commodity item.
‘Most of our customers are second time buyers who know what they want and expect to be able to just walk in and take it off the shelf like a can of beans,’ he says.
More information from PC World on 081 649 9000
Intel has decided that the next generation of PC processors needs to have a better name than the 586.
Besides, it's actually impossible to copyright a number, as Intel has found to its cost in its failed attempts to sue rival ‘386’ chip manufacturers AMD and Chips & Technologies.
The new name for the 586 is Pentium.
Budding classicists amongst you will quickly realise that Intel has managed rather clumsily to match a Greek prefix to a Latin suffix.
For consistency's sake the processor should really be called the Quintium.
But then that would make the 686 — should it ever appear — the Sexium.
More information from Intel on (0793) 696000
The New Year marks the arrival of a whole new set of EC inspired health and safety laws that could effect the kind of computer you buy and exactly how you can use it at work.
The Management of Health and Safety at Work Regulations 1992 lays out in pretty tough terms exactly what has to be done in terms of assessing risks, appointing health & safety assistants, setting up emergency procedures, providing information and training to employees and so on.
But this is actually only one of six sets of regulations and guidance which are due to come into force.
The others will cover such things as workplace conditions and the use of work equipment, with computer screens getting special attention.
If you're buying a new computer screen it will now by law have to comply with European standards in terms of low radiation emissions and lack of screen flicker.
How can you tell if you've bought an EC monitor?
Well, you can't really unless there's a sticker on the box or something.
Just in case you're tempted by knockdown prices on old style monitors, by the way, you should bear in mind that in four years time it will actually become illegal to use them at all at work.
There are also new standards for office furniture and guidelines for prolonged screen working which the HSC hopes will cut down on incidents of repetitive strain injury and eyesight problems.
Meanwhile, the Swedes claim to have discovered a cure for the sore eyes caused by staring at a screen all day which doesn't involve putting any kind of filter or screen over the monitor.
Screensafe comes with two earth conductors one to be attached to the computer monitor, the other to the keyboard.
By wiping the screen with a special tissue every couple of months the electrostatic field that builds up on a monitor screen can be discharged.
At the same time the keyboard conductor makes sure that the electrostatic charge that builds up inside you also has somewhere else to go.
More information from HSC on 071 243 6000, ScanBrit Trade on (0628) 474491
As we predicted last month, the PC industry has fallen in behind Microsoft's big push to promote Windows for Workgroups.
More than 30 PC manufacturers have announced that they will be preinstalling the product on their systems.
Amongst those signed up are Apricot, Compaq, Elonex, HP, ICL, Packard Bell, Viglen and Zenith Data Systems.
More than 100 other companies have announced hardware and software products which support features within Windows for Workgroups.
‘This is another step towards encouraging users to share information in a networked PC environment,’ reckons Compaq marketing director David Clarke
You have been warned.
If you're not connected yet — you will be!
More information from Microsoft on (0734) 270 001
The Federation Against Software (FAST) is preparing to take action over the increasing amount of illegally copied software being sold at car boot sales.
‘As the recession deepens many hundred of car boot sales take place every weekend,’ says John Loader, senior investigator at Fast.
‘As these sales have evolved form the original trading of bric-a-brac and home produce to an open market for all goods, this has proved a lucrative marketplace for groups trading in illegal software.’
A couple of years ago FAST would get only a few complaints about car boot sales a year.
Now it claims to be receiving up to ten a week, with Glasgow and Yorkshire emerging as illegal software hot spots.
FAST is now planning to join forces with the UK's 1600 trading standards offices to clamp down on what it believes to be a serious number of professional software crime rings.
More information from FAST on (0628) 660377
Samsung has clearly decided it's make or break time for the company in the UK PC market, launching a completely new range of low cost machines and adding a couple of new laser printers to boot.
The new PCs include a 386SX/33, a 486SX/25 and a 486DX/33 plus a number of notebooks.
Samsung is clearly looking to shift the 486SX box in numbers, pricing it aggressively at £729.
For that you get 4MB RAM, 80MB hard disk and 8kb internal cache, plus all the usual trimmings.
The entry level 386SX with 2MB RAM comes in at a mere £499.
The two new laser printers are both eight page per minute machines and both come equipped with a clever automatic emulation switching device which can interpret incoming printer languages on the fly.
The SL-1082A comes with five resident emulations and costs £880.
The slightly higher specification SL-1082P (including PostScript compatibility) is priced at £1193.
More information from Samsung on 081 391 0168
If you're tired of typing all the time, you may be relieved to know that the keyboard could soon be a thing of the past, thanks to rapid developments in the world of pen based computing.
Writing on a touch sensitive computer screen with a ‘stylus’ just like using a pen and paper has been possible for quite some time now.
But the computer power required to turn all those dots and squiggles you call your handwriting into meaningful computer data has meant that most pen based computers have been incredibly expensive.
As with all computer technology the price of the necessary hardware and software has been falling dramatically and more and more manufacturers are starting to take seriously the idea of producing pen based computers for the mass market.
Small notebook systems have already been developed by the likes of Tandy Grid, NCR and Apple, and some of them are already use for simple form filling applications like supermarket stocktaking or car fleet management.
Acer is the latest PC company to jump on the bandwagon signing up handwriting recognition software expert CIC to develop pen based applications to be run on Acer hardware.
CIC is already one of the world leaders in pen operating systems, having produced PenDOS, an environment specifically designed for use not only in developing totally new pen based applications, but also for transforming existing mouse driven DOS and Windows applications so that they can become ‘pen aware’.
Expect 1993 to be the year of the pen.
More information from Acer Altos Europe on 010 33 1 4772 2662
The world's third largest PC maker, Packard Bell, has launched it's first fully configured Multimedia PC.
Designed to tempt Christmas shoppers, it should already be available in selected Dixons and Currys centres by the time you read this.
The Packard Bell MPC is a 486SX/25 PC with a 105MB hard drive, two floppy disk drives, a CDROM drive, 4MB RAM, a SoundBlaster Pro II card, Roland stereo speakers and a SuperVGA colour monitor.
Priced at £1799, the system comes with a whole range of preloaded software including DOS 5.0, Windows 3.1 Microsoft Works for Windows (multimedia edition) and Packard Bell's own on-line tutorial.
There's also a whole stack of CDROM titles including The Electronic Library of Art, Great Cities of the World, World Atlas, Chessmaster 3000 and a Sherlock Holmes interactive mystery game.
More information from Packard Bell on (0753) 831914
Northampton based Sight & Sound Technology has come up with a clever piece of software which allows blind people to use Windows.
The program, called Window Bridge, uses a system of synthesised speech and other sounds to guide the user around the Windows environment.
For all kinds of on screen information — including graphics — Window Bridge can produce a verbal description.
For example, as new windows are opened, all the icons, windows titles and available selections are announced.
All characters, fonts, point sizes, screen attributes and colours can also be described.
For those people who want to use a mouse, Windows Bridge also has a way of tracking the speed and direction of the screen cursor using a series of different sounds.
The whole package only takes a couple of days to master, claims the company, and it will set you back £449.
More information for Sight & Sound Technology on (0604) 790969
If you're running out of disk space, help is at hand.
A new version of the popular disk compression package Stacker has been launched, in both Windows and DOS versions, priced £99.
With Stacker 3.0 it's now possible to more than double your disk capacity using the package's customisable compression features.
In its Windows incarnation it's also possible to monitor exactly what's going on your hard disk using a utility called the Stackometer.
This is displayed as a set of real time gauges which show disk capacity, compression ration and fragmentation levels, so you can spot any problems with your disk early.
And for those people who aren't happy with what Stacker does anyway (like our esteemed editor, for example), the package now comes with a useful Unstack feature so you can automatically return your system to its original state as if nothing had ever happened.
More information from Stac UK on 90734) 776484
Locomotive Software has launched an entry level version of its popular LocoScript word processing package which is designed to get first time PC users up and running quickly and at minimum cost.
For people making the leap from an Amstrad word processor to a PC, it could be the perfect Christmas gift.
LocoScript PC Easy cuts out some of the more esoteric features that can usually be found in a word processor these days — advanced layout features such as newspaper style columns, the ability to add footnotes, access to an on-line thesaurus etc.
But does keep an electronic card index system for filing names and addresses, plus both mailmerge and labelling facilities.
The package costs just £49 and comes with 90 days of free hotline telephone support.
Special upgrade deals will also be available to customers who want to graduate to LocoScript Professional at a later date.
More information form Locomotive Software on (0306) 740606
For those parents who want to get their kids interested in computers from an early age, we've found the perfect creativity and entertainment package.
Noddy's Playtime is aimed at three to seven year olds, but it might well bring back memories for a few older people too.
The program takes you on a drive with Noddy in his little yellow car around ToyTown, visiting friends, interacting with them and occasionally tooting your horn.
There are eight places to visit and at each stop there's a game to play, a puzzle to solve or an exercise to carry out.
The £30 package also includes a picture colouring utility and freehand drawing tools.
More information from The Jumping Bean Company on (0602) 792838
The mother of all laser printers has arrived.
Hewlett Packard has launched the LaserJet 4, a 600 dots per inch network printer which sets new standards for print quality and ease of use, and yet costs no more than a current LaserJet 3.
The new machine will set you back a cool £1,700 which doesn't make it the cheapest machine in the world.
Nevertheless, it's worth knowing about because where HP goes with its Laserjet series today, every other printer company is bound to follow tomorrow.
The 600 dpi print resolution sets new standards for laser printing (although whether most people would be able to tell the difference between, say, 400 dpi and 600 dpi is another matter).
More impressive than the print quality, though, is the fact that it comes in a smaller, faster box at no extra cost.
HP has also tried to make network printing easier by building into the LaserJet 4 a bi-directional parallel port.
This means that as well as the PC sending messages to the printer, the printer can actually send messages back to the PC.
Using the Windows software supplied with the printer it is possible to setup, configure and maintain your printer from the comfort of your PC screen — no more fiddling about with mysteriously labelled buttons and switches, or peering hopelessly at a badly lit LCD panel.
Microsoft has hailed the LaserJet 4 as the ‘Windows printer of choice’ and for anyone dealing with a lot of graphics — in fact anyone looking to buy a trouble free, quality network printer — this is one machine that should be on your wishlist.
More information from Hewlett Packard on (0344) 369222
Seagate has ruled out a completely new range of hard disks for almost every conceivable type of computer from palmtop and penbased systems up to mainframe and supercomputers.
On some entry level products the company is also bundling in compression software from SuperStor free of charge to enhance the price per megabyte of storage space yet further.
Of interest to users who like to knock their PCs around a bit is the inclusion in the some of the new Seagate drives of new SafeRite shock sensing technology.
Designed to improve shock tolerance and data reliability, SafeRite is capable of increasing shock resistance in hard drives by as much as 100 per cent, claims the company.
The new drives were launched at the Comdex PC exhibition in Las Vegas, so our editor should be able to tell you all about them.
(Somehow, he's managed to wangle his way into a trip to the States while we're stuck here writing the news.
(Life's not fair…)
More information form Seagate on (0628) 890366
Seikosha has dropped the price of its SL-90 dot matrix printer by over 16 per cent.
This makes it the first manufacturer to produce a sub-£200 24-pin printer, the company claims.
The SL-90 offers 240 characters per second print speed, 360 dots per inch resolution, 20k buffer, plus two system fonts with another seven provided as an upgrade option.
Seikosha has also dropped the price of its automatic sheet feeder to £75.
More information form Seikosha on (0753) 685873
Jargon Box
Dumb Drive.
A drive that is ‘unaware’ of how it is set up and knows nothing of the way it's data is stored.
To retrieve data the controller has to tell the drive to move its heads, one track at a time, to the requisite track and where to start reading on that track.
Raw data is sent from the disk to the controller which then decodes it.
Smart or Intelligent Drive.
One that ‘knows’ how it is set up and how data storage is organised.
To retrieve data the logical track and sector is passed to the drive which translates the data automatically to physical tracks and sectors.
Data is sent from the drive is translated and ready to use.
Drive Types;
ST506 early dumb drive found in many pre 1991 machines.
EDSI Enhanced Small Device Interface.
Semi smart drives with data translation on the drive for higher throughput.
SCSI Small Computer System Interface.
Smart drives using a peer to peer 8 bit interface bus supporting up to 8 devices…
IDE Integrated Drive Electronics Very smart drives using a 16 bit data bus.
Drives can map a logical configuration onto a physical disk.
Thus a drive with 1660 tracks, 4 heads and 33 sectors per track can appear to the computer to have 8 heads and 830 tracks.
ATA AT Attachment, rare at present but an enhanced and standardised version of IDE.
Storage methods
MFM Modified frequency modulation a form of data storage giving approximately 8.5kB storage per track
RLL Run Length Limited an improved data storage system giving 13k per track on most dumb drives.
Improvements in mathematical storage theory has pushed this to 16.5k or more on smart drives.
Jobfile
Do you need information of a specific subject?
Then contact the PRACTICAL PC JOBFILE.
Build a 386 — the NCM Computakit
Build a 286 wordprocessor
Cleaning your PC
Multimedia workstation
Fitting a new motherboard
Installing a hard disk
Installing a second hard disk
Installing the Sound Blaster card
Installing a Super VGA card
Installing a co-processor
Installing a RapidCad co-processor
Adding a mouse to your system
Upgrading your Amstrad
Installing a hand scanner
Producing your own business stationery
Producing sticky labels
Design your own certificates
Producing the perfect newsletter
An introduction to your PC
Disks, bits and bytes
Introduction to batch files
Step by step spreadsheets
Anatomy of a PC
Windows basics
Auto DOS — get more from the Function keys.
Mastering spreadsheets
Wordstar 7
Fax grabber
Professional Draw
Conversion Artist
MegaCad
Chemistry Works database
Harvard Graphics
Excel 4
Lanstastic for Windows
Buying a printer
QuoteMaster
Lotus Symphony 3.0
Stacker
SuperCalc 5.5
Wordperfect Works for DOS
Quatro Pro 4
LotusWorks 3.0
Body Works
Windows Draw
Corel Draw 3.0
Lotus 1-2-3 Go
Ami Pro 3
Floorplan CAD
Wordstar for windows
Wordperfect for Windows
Hardware Reviews
Amstrad electronic notepad
Ambra Sprinta 386
Elonex 386SX
Scorpio 486
Diconix portable printer
Panasonic Quietprinter
Winfax Pro fax card
Cannon Bubblejet printer
Built-it Projects
Design Tips
Beginners Guides
Software Reviews
Do you need information of a specific subject?
Then contact the PRACTICAL PC JOBFILE.
For just £1.00 for each feature, you can receive any of those listed above.
Simply tick the subject areas you are interested in, and send this coupon together with a cheque or postal order and a stamped addressed envelope to Practical PC Jobfile, Symbiosis House, 204 Henwick Road, Worcester WR2 5PF.
Cheques must be made payable to HHL Publishing Ltd.
Cheques must be in pounds sterling only
This service is restricted to residents of the UK and Eire
Features will be photocopies which may affect the quality of photographs.
NAME
ADDRESS
I enclose cheque/PO for £ (payable to HHL Publishing Ltd)
If you need advice on a product before you buy or could use some helpful advice then contact the PRACTICAL PC JOBFILE — the easiest way to get the information you need.
Screen Antics Windows screen savers don't generally stop people from working, at least they didn't before Johnny Castaway came along!
David Dorn takes time off from watching the screen antics to bring you the details.
Let's face it — with current monitor technology, the chances of burning an image into the screen phosphors by leaving the same picture on display for a while are very remote.
They were never that high with colour monitors to start with, and with current VGA and better kit, burn-in is a thing of the past.
So screen savers are, as you might say, a bit of a luxury.
Well, this one certainly is, but it's great fun as well.
Sierra On-Line is a software house that is justly famous for its high-quality games.
The likes of the King's Quest and Police Quest series, with stunning graphics and fabulous sound (via MPC compatible sound cards, of course) show what the PC is capable of in terms of leisure.
If you've seen any of either of those series, you'll know exactly what I mean.
Johnny Castaway is from the same stable, and takes the production values of its forbears into a hitherto uncharted realm — the story-telling screen saver.
Forget myriads of stars whizzing towards you or bouncing triangles.
Even flying toasters get boring after a minute or two.
Johnny Castaway is something else.
It's a screen saver, yes, but that's only where it starts.
During its setup, it detects any sound drivers you have installed — you need Windows 3.1 or better to run it and 286 users will, I'm afraid, miss out on all of this, since you need a 386sx or better in order to run Windows 3.1 in enhanced mode — so that when Johnny goes about his business you hear his grunts and groans the screech of seagulls, the lapping of the waves and so on.
You can elect to have no backgrounds, if you've any doubt about screen burn-in, although the scenery changes enough to prevent any chance of that.
Last techy bit — Johnny is installed as a bona-fide screen saver under your Desktop icon in the Windows control panel, so it's fully compatible with everything else, and not running as an add-in TSR.
Time wasting.
The proof of the pudding, as they say, is in the eating, and never was a truer word spoken.
You can fritter away hours on end watching Johnny do what he does.
Day and night are compressed into an eight hour day, so you see everything our castaway hero can get up to.
After long and entertaining research (that's hours sitting watching the story unfold and telling everyone that this really was work) I can divulge that Johnny has a long-distance girlfriend, fishes an awful lot, is taken water-skiing by sharks, enjoys parties on passing cruisers, is invaded by ancient midget pirates, and is a very clean living, regular bathing type of guy.
I can also reveal that he is forever scratching his head and his backside (must be all that sand and dried salt), and builds some mean sand castles.
The plain fact is, you can get hooked on watching this ‘utility’ do its bit.
I have visions of bosses all over the land going hot under the collar as they see yet more of their staff enjoying the antics of this old salt — it could take over where Leisure Suit Larry left off.
In fact, there have been many discussions caused by Johnny — and his girlfriend who seems to do very little other than build up her tan on a beach and send him the odd letter in a bottle.
Various episodes in his life end in cliff-hangers, a la Neighbours and Dallas, and often I've been asked whether a certain story line has advanced any further.
Does he get the girl?
Well, that would be telling, as Barry Norman would say.
Should you buy it?
A resounding yes is the answer.
It does nothing useful, despite what you may think about screen saving, but it's given me more entertainment watching it than any amount of television soaps — Johnny even celebrates major holidays at the right time (assuming your PC's clock is set correctly, of course).
I'm keeping my fingers crossed that Sierra comes up with a few more of these!
Sierra release their latest and best episode in the longest running saga in computer gaming history…
HEIR TODAY, GONE TOMORROW — KINGS QUEST VI
The last two releases in the Kings Quest series received a fairly mixed reception, and since the heady days when Sierra WERE GRAPHIC ADVENTURES there have been some very strong releases from the likes of Lucasfilms (Loom, Secret of Monkey Island I and II, Indiana Jones), Westwood (Legend of Kyrandia), and even some of the Role Playing Games from Origin (Ultima VII and Ultima Underworlds) and Sir Tech (Crusaders of the Dark Savant).
Kings Quest VI has now been released without too much banging of the hype drums or rousing fanfares, and forms the main review of this the first Software magazine.
This is not out of nostalgia or for a longing of times gone by — it is because it is a real top notch release!
Firstly what is Kings Quest VI?
It is a graphic adventure, set in a far off mystical land, where you control the actions of a single adventurer and must explore, solve problems and achieve certain objectives.
The storyline is of you as a sort of medieval Indiana Jones in search of your missing sweetheart.
The action centres around the ‘Land of the Green Isles’ which consists of a series of small islands (sounds familiar, eh?).
You set off in a strong boat with keen crew, but your ship is dashed upon the rocks off The Isle of the Crown, and the adventure starts with your hero having been washed up on the beach of that isle and with a firm desire to seek out his long lost love…
The opening sequence (6Mb thereof!!!) is superb with a wonderful 3-D effect as the room rotates and moves around you — like one of those ‘panning’ shots in well produced films.
The sound support is excellent and a first in a Sierra adventure is the use of digitised speech in a two way conversation (for those with appropriate hardware).
Once into the game itself you control your character by way of a refined ‘point and click’ system.
The structure of this is interesting as over the last few years most software house have added default actions, verbs or options to their interface — Sierra have almost taken the opposite course by simplifying their system which now has a basic choice of some half a dozen actions.
These allow easy movement, actions and ‘speech’ within the gaming world — the core of any graphic adventure.
The system is very smooth, with actions selected either by moving the cursor to the top of the screen, or by clicking down the other mouse button which scrolls through the actions.
This works well once you get used to the mouse routine, and is considered so simple by Sierra that they no longer include any documentation in this respect!
The graphics are first rate in VGA, and have the now standard gentle and fuzzy ‘pastel’ feel.
The locations are beautifully drawn, and there are stacks of additional animations and detail.
Movement from scene to scene does not use scrolling as per Lucasfilms, but requires that you completely leave one location and then enter another — this is not as smooth as other game systems, but Sierra have refined it to a fine art.
The game also uses ‘and Meanwhile’ sequences showing events happening elsewhere, often with the use of graphics of digitised quality.
There is a high degree of interaction with other non-playing characters during the game, but all conversations are by way of‘forced’ options — being decided by what you have discovered or achieved during the game.
ie a ‘flag’ is set by the software, which means next time you speak or meet a character he will know that you have done something.
This approach is slightly linear, but the puzzles appear to be solvable in any order, and in a variety of ways.
Certain of the Kings Quest series have been criticised as being too ‘twee’ and sugary — KQ VI is basically a ‘fairy tale’but the storyline is much firmer than previous titles and avoids making the teeth grind and the stomach curdle!
The gaming world in part consists of four main islands (there are rumours of more!) and this nicely breaks up the game and avoids the feeling of a bland and repetitive world,(why does that Island concept ring a bell?) and you move from Island to Island by looking at a map and selecting your destination (sounds VERY familiar!).
The initial puzzles seem pretty straightforward, and would allow the game to be ‘adult supervised’ for the youngsters, although the computer hardened eleven/twelve year old would probably handle it — with the occasional flash of totally brilliant parental genius (in reality of course it is likely to be the other way round!).
Kings Quest VI is far and beyond the best of the series so far the first volumes were original and set the standards for all to follow.
Follow they did, and in many departments they matched and even surpassed the later Sierra releases.
The ‘second generation’ Sierra products have varied enormously and this classic series in particular, almost lost its way.
KQ VI may be criticised as being too easy and not achieving anything new — forget that, it is good old fashioned family entertainment, and with now Kings Quest VI and Quest for Glory III Sierra are back up at the top of the pile!
By the way any idea as to why there was this sense of Deja Vu when reviewing Kings Quest VI?
The name Threepwood seems to come to mind but can't quite place it…, anyway back to that puzzle with the rock…
TECHIE STUFF
Kings Quest VI requires a 80286 processor or better (a 16Mhz 386 is preferred), graphics supported are 256 colour VGA, 16 colour EGA and Tandy VGA (all with one set of disks).
A hard disk is required with almost 16Mb of hard disk available (some 6Mb is taken up by the opening sequence which can be removed), and it may be necessary to allow the program to make its own boot disk if you do not have enough available memory.
A mouse is also recommended, the normal soundboards are supported including an excellent SoundBlaster/Roland for sound effects/music combination.
Kings Quest VI is available from Sierra on 0734-303322, priced at £44-99.
ONCE UPON A TIME THERE WERE NO ADVENTURE GAMES…
THEN ONE DAY THERE MAGICALLY APPEARED…
THE KINGS QUEST SERIES — The Classic Computer Adventure saga.
Way back in the dark ages of computing ie 1980, two gifted software designers Roberta and Ken Williams wrote one of the very first graphic adventures — Mystery House.
Roberta produced the storyline, Ken took on the programming.
Mystery House was a combination of an Agatha Christie novel and the boardgame Cluedo — you and seven others are exploring a long abandoned Victorian house to find the hidden treasure.
As you progress various of your fellow adventurers are murdered — now you must discover the culprit as well!
The text was ‘illustrated’ with crude black and white pictures, the parser was very basic, and accepted only one or two word ‘phrases’, and the perspective was from the ‘first person’ie you didn't actually see the character you controlled.
This was before the advent of the IBM PC, so the hardware platforms were the Apple II and the TRS/80.
Mystery House sold 10,000 copies and Sierra was born!
Three further products followed — Asteroid, The Wizard and the Princess and Time Zone, with the same type of game system and absolutely NO animation.
Rumour has it that Sierra were then approached by IBM themselves, to produce a product that would take advantage of the colour graphic features of their forthcoming wonder machine the IBM PCjr.
Eighteen months later in 1984, the first three dimensional graphic adventure was launched — Kings Quest I: Quest for the Crown.
The Kings Quest series is basically set in the mythical kingdom of Daventry, and revolves around the adventures of King Graham, his family and subjects.
All the adventures have a strong ‘fairy story’ feel and have varied enormously in graphic standard and level of difficulty.
They do however share one thing in common, they are all quality products, and have always been high in the list of best selling computer games on all hardware formats.
The story so far…
1984 — Kings Quest I: Quest for the Crown
1985 — Kings Quest II: Romancing the Throne
1986 — Kings Quest III: To heir is human
1988 — Kings Quest IV: The Perils of Rosella
1991 — Kings Quest V: Absence makes the heart go yonder
Kings Quest I has now been re-released in high resolution EGA mode and with soundboard support.
Kings Quest II and III are available in CGA and ‘low resolution’ EGA mode, Kings Quest IV in CGA and high resolution, and Kings Quest V in separate hi res EGA and 256 colour VGA versions, plus a super-duper CD Rom version which is a full ‘multimedia’product.
All the Kings Quest series Volumes I to V have been released on Amiga, Volumes I to IV on Atari ST, and Volumes I, III, IV and V on Apple/Macintosh.
The Artisoft Ethernet network with Windows control and Novell compatibility Local Area Networking (LAN) allows computers on the same site to communicate with each other and share resources.
This can be an economical way of running a multi computer organisation, reducing the number of powerful machines required and making fuller use of peripherals such as printers.
LANtastic for Windows combines the flexibility of an expandable networking system with the friendliness of Microsoft Windows.
The starter kit contains two Ethernet network adaptors, 25 feet of cable with connectors, DOS and Windows software and set of instruction manuals — in fact all you need to network two PCs together.
Networked computers can act as one, sharing resources such as printers, disk drives and files.
They are also capable of sending and receiving electronic mail (e-mail) and linking up for ‘chat’ sessions.
Individual computers can be up to 500 metres apart and can be designated as servers, workstations or both.
A server shares its resources with the rest of the network, and workstations use these resources.
Traditionally, one powerful computer is used as a dedicated server using all its power and memory to run the network.
LANtastic is a peer-to-peer system and because the memory requirement of LANtastic is low, each computer on the network can be set up as a server and still function as a regular PC.
You should be aware that software licence agreements refer to installation and use on one computer only.
Each computer on the network should have its own registered copy of each piece of software unless either a site or networking licence is obtained.
The LANtastic network is DOS based with additional Windows support software and so the DOS side of things must be up and running first.
Installation of the card is relatively straightforward, the card can detect whether it is installed in an 8 or 16-bit slot and how much memory is present.
LANcheck, a program supplied with the software, will check the installation and report any conflicts with other cards which may be present.
During software installation you decide whether each machine is to be a server or a workstation and which drives and devices are to be made accessible to the network.
The LANtastic for Windows software can be installed from the DOS prompt or from the ‘run’ option in the Windows Program Manager.
LANtastic includes its own print manager which manages printing request across the whole network.
For this reason the Windows print manager should be disabled.
Security becomes important when files are accessible over a network.
LANtastic provides three security features.
Each user has a unique username and a password which must be used in order to log on to the network.
They are also assigned or denied privileges to limit the types of access open to them — this can restrict access to particular directories or prevent users deleting files.
Finally, an audit trail maintains a record of all the network activity, including unsuccessful illicit attempts to log on or access restricted files or devices.
Each user is given access rights to the server's files.
The ‘physical access’ option allows users to by-pass the server's print spooler and connect directly to the printer.
These access rights are set up from the server and cannot be changed remotely.
The LANtastic NET window is used by both workstations and servers to log in and out and use network resources.
The LANtastic Network Manager window is displayed only on servers, and is used to control network activities.
Drive resources available to the workstation are listed in this window.
Note that the server drives are accessed by the workstation as Drive F:.
This allows the physical drives of the workstation to be accessed in the normal way.
Drive F: has subdirectories A-Drive, B-Drive etc., representing the physical drives of the server.
As part of the LANtastic Network Manager window, network resources can be added or changed.
Sometimes it is useful to set up a single printer as several devices, each configured to a different printer mode.
This allows, for instance, both draft and letter quality printing to be carried out remotely without having to alter printer settings on the server.
LANtastic AE-2/Windows Starter Kit Artisoft Europe   
Range of Features ****
Overall Speed ****
Ease of Use ****
Verdict ****
For — Everything you need for two machine networking — in one package.
Pocket Money Programs
Way back, when I was just a lad, it seems, programs for the PC were, almost without exception, single use.
That is to say you bought a word processor, and all it did was allow you to type words onto the screen — that and some formatting.
If you wanted to spell check it, you had to buy a spelling checker.
If you wanted a thesaurus, you had to buy another program to give you that facility.
Spreadsheets allowed you only to play with figures — there were no built in graphing packages, they were something you bought separately.
The beauty about those days was that you built up suites of software to suit the way you worked.
These days, everything is built-in.
Word processors are more like DTP packages, and spreadsheets do just about everything bar make the money for you in the first place.
UK company Software Partners (part of GST, the people behind Timeworks) has stepped into this bells-and-whistles world with a new and quite large range of simple to use, very low cost programs that are single minded and, for the most part, single use.
Have they taken a step back in time, or are the programs they have available up-to-the-minute?
We've picked out a few packages from the Windows range, more or less at random, just to whet your appetite.
Words and Pictures
Firstly, one for the exhibitionists amongst you.
Since printers became affordable there has been a fascination amongst the computer-using community for producing banners.
Once folks had printed a few pages of closely spaced text, the next logical step was to print lots of pages of giant words announcing to the world that Fred and Wilma had just got married, or that winkles were on special offer at only ten bob a pound.
Banners on Parade (BoP) takes it a stage further and does it in Windows, adding graphics for visual effect.
Originated by New Horizon, a company totally new to me, BoP is very probably the Windows program that takes up the least space on a rapidly filling hard disk.
Its installation is simple and straightforward, like all good Windows installations ought to be, and its documentation is likewise.
The only giggle (not a niggle, this time) I've had is that, in common with most of the new GST range, the BoP box is filled mostly with a chunk of pink polystyrene — a case of more is less?
Back to the plot…
In Use It's a simple task to produce a banner — there's not a great deal you can alter in the way of system settings, but the bits you do get to play with are nicely implemented.
Because BoP is a Windows application, you have access to all the fonts you've got in your Windows system.
That could be five or fifty-five, and they could be nice or naff.
Given that you have only two lines of text to play with, and therefore a maximum of two fonts to use, gloriously grotty font clashes are unlikely.
You edit each line separately, once you've set up how high the banner will be, and have no control over how long the banner will stretch.
The only indication of how many sheets the thing will take is given by dotted lines on the screen showing page breaks.
It's best run full screen, as well, since running it in a window seems only to give you a partial view of the full-screen image, and no scroll bars appear to allow you to see what's happening in the bits that aren't shown.
It's a fairly minor point, though.
Otherwise, you have control over the relative sizes of the top vs. bottom line, and have a number of pre-set shapes that the text can take.
These vary from the normal flag and pennant styles (tapering to the left or right) arches, an eye shape and so on.
In some ways, these shapes serve to show how versatile the TrueType system in Windows 3.1 really is, since font rendering is perfect even when the text is bent out of all proportion — so if you're still running Windows 3.0, upgrade now!
You can also paste picture files onto your banner.
They're best placed on areas devoid of text, since they will overwrite a text area.
Three file types are supported — BMP, PCX and TIF (bog standard, uncompressed).
If you're lucky enough to have a colour printer, you can also fiddle with text and background colours.
These, again, are pre-set to a small selection, but, noticeably, they include only those colours that normally print well with a three colour ribbon, which, given the price and target audience of the program, is a sensible move.
Print time is very much printer and CPU dependent.
If you're running a slow dot matrix printer on a 10MHz 286, you can reasonably expect to have a cup of coffee and a sticky bun before your banner is printed.
A fast 486 and a laser printer will, obviously, be a lot faster.
Verdicts Ease of Use: ***** Versatility: *** Intuitivity **** Speed: *** VFM **** Overall ****
Summary
What we're talking about here is a £50 package which is worth its money.
What it lacks is sophistication and complexity, which is no bad thing, in my view.
It sets out to do one job, and, within the limitations it sets itself, it does it well.
There's not a lot more you can say, is there?
Wallpapering your PC Next in our flying tour of these low cost packages comes Wallpaper Art Gallery for Windows,(WAGWIN) a title which ostensibly is single use, but which lends itself to one or two other purposes as well.
It is a fact that Windows is catching on, probably because a graphical environment, although slower, at the moment, than a DOS character based environment, can be a very comfortable way to work, intuitive even.
There's also the point that customising the way your Windows display looks is easier than fiddling with ANSI screen commands, which is exactly where WAGWIN comes in.
What it provides is a fairly full selection of windows BMP files, all neatly packaged and ready to be loaded as wallpaper on your desktop.
There's a by-product, in that the images can also be incorporated into documents, including, strangely enough (he said tongue-in-cheek), BoP, not least because the two programs are from the same stable.
However, by-products are by-products, and we ought to concentrate on its intended use.
Installing A DOS install routine takes care of the process of copying the files and expanding them into your Windows directory.
I have to own up and say that I don't really like applications wanting to be installed into the Windows directory, but because of the way Windows handles wallpaper bitmaps, there's little option here — the lot has to go there.
And that, really, is that.
You can hunt through the various picture files and tiles that are supplied — there are 45 bitmaps and 15 tiles — or use the carousel utility as a startup item to change wallpapers every time you boot Windows.
A caveat here.
The bitmaps that come with WAGWIN are all for 640x480 displays, so if you're using 800x600 or whatever, you will need to make sure you've got the tile radio button clicked.
Either that, or convert all the bitmaps to the correct resolution.
Quality Of course, the conversion exercise would be worthless if the.
BMP files weren't of good quality, and, since beauty is in the eye of the beholder, I've pulled out some of the screens that I like.
Your tastes, I'd imagine, will be different, but, on the whole, I'd say the piccies are at worst OK, and at best very nice.
If you aren't keen on any of them, then they're easily enough deleted, of course, but WAGWIN also gives you a method of gaining more.
BMPs for your wallpaper.
There's a utility called convert that takes a GIF file and turns it into a BMP.
GIFs are fairly widely available, and can be generated by most types of computer, which is probably why there's a dummy Apple Mac screen in there.
You could be evil with that…
Summary.
At thirty quid, all but 5p, I originally thought the package was a wee bit overpriced — I'd have said £20 was a better price point for it, but then I expect that it will be discounted down to that level anyway.
If that's the case, WAGWIN would make a decent present for a Windows fanatic.
If you're into Windows Wallpaper, check out the samples, and decide for yourself.
Verdicts Ease of Use: ***** Versatility: ** VFM *** Overall ***
Sticky Backed Addresses
I have, on occasion, sat with a word processor and spent hours trying to get a set of labels printed.
I've written macros to let me print each label with a unique number, set page lengths to the size of the labels plus the gutter between them — in short, I spent too long sorting the problem out, certainly more time than it was worth.
Designer Labels is intended to short-cut the procedure, and allow you to do what you want with labels in a short time, and for the most part, it succeeds.
Like the previous two programs, this, too, runs in Windows, and like BoP, it has a very quick and simple installation routine.
In many ways it is a BoP lookalike — the technology must be very similar for the two programs — but it differs in many respects.
It's noticeable that BoP is in version 1.0, whilst Designer Labels is at version 1.2, and certainly, Designer Labels is the slicker of the two.
Mailing DLabel is primarily aimed at the user who wants to print out a run of mailing labels, or serialised labels for whatever purpose, and for those two tasks, it is admirable.
Laying out a label is very simple.
At its most basic, it's simply a matter of typing a bit of text here and there — each text string is treated as an object — and placing any graphics you might want to include.
Like BoP, BMP, PCX and TIF files are supported.
Text can be coloured — there are rather more colours available to the user in DLabel — for those with printers capable of handling it.
This is where my only major gripe comes in.
There is no way you can print text rotated.
For mailing labels, that's OK, but for disk labels, particularly 3.5″, there is a need for a 90 degree and 180 degree rotation — this applies to labels for any other use as well, as a quick glance round the kitchen cupboards will show.
Gripe over.
When it comes to a more sophisticated use, DLabel includes a database utility which allows you to specify fields from the a database to be printed at a given position.
You can also include a counter, which increments in whatever intervals you specify, to serial number your labels.
This is a very handy aspect of the program, since it brings in the prospect of it being used for other purposes.
You could, for instance, specify a label the size of a ticket, and print your own raffle tickets (you can print duplicate labels, you see), or serialise invitation cards etc.
DLabel has no idea what kind of paper or labels is in your printer, and takes your word for it that the size you specify is correct.
You can do whatever you want!
Coming back to labels, DLabel is pre-loaded with standard Avery label sizes and sheet formats, and can also handle customised sizes, multiple labels across a sheet and so forth.
The label print facility is very comprehensive, and as ever, print speed largely depends on the kit you're using.
A word of warning here.
If you're going to print labels on a laser printer, please make sure you buy proper Laser Printer Labels.
Ordinary ones have a heat sensitive stickum on the back, which is likely to run all over the insides of your printer, making for some heavy bills at the least, and, at the worst, ruining your printer.
Listen to the words of experience, folks!
Summary
Judging by how well labels sell in the shops — and they do — the world and his wife must be using sticky labels on everything, including the kids.
If that's the case, I wonder just how many people write labels that no-one else can read.
From the PC user's point of view, neatly labelled disks can be a godsend, and utilities for producing such things did well a few years back.
But if your need is for anything other than that, that is to say something a little more complex, then the functionality built into Designer Labels is probably powerful enough to do the trick for you.
I have the feeling that those of you who would want to use the mailing label feature more than any other might find the built-in database a little feeble, but then the chances are that your main database will provide all the information you require for that kind of thing.
And that's my only other niggle, really.
I'd have loved to have seen a database import facility in the software.
Perhaps in a later release.
Or perhaps the New Horizons people would prefer you to buy WinMail, which Software Partners also have on their lists at the same price — we'll perhaps look at that another time.
As it is, Designer Labels carries a price tag of £49.95, which is not too bad, and is likely to be discounted closer to the £40 mark, at which price, it's a fair buy.
Verdicts Ease of Use: **** Versatility: *** Intuitivity *** Speed: **** VFM **** Overall ***
Digital Daftness
I remember reading an article some time back that dealt with the phenomenon of down time — the non-productive time people spend at work.
It was published shortly after I'd taken part in a time and motion study during which I'd spoken to the man with the clip-board and asked a few pertinent questions.
It seems that all work and no play, even in the workplace, makes not only for a dull boy, but also one that is not as efficient.
That's more than likely why the likes of Solitaire and Minesweeper get booted as often in offices around the country, and why Leisure Suit Larry was so popular with the City types a while back.
So the next of the packages to wander through rejoices in the title Fun Pack — it's obviously not a word processor, but it may just interest you a little.
Within the box, apart from the seemingly obligatory chunk of pink polystyrene, lies a disk containing seven games' worth of code.
We'll skip the installation — its like the others — and get straight onto the games.
Warhead You've played it in the arcades, if you're over 25, that is, as Missile Command.
You have two missile launchers, one at either end of the screen, and a string of cities ‘twixt the two to defend.
From the skies above, incoming missiles blaze their trail to your cities, and you must defend them by hitting them before they hit you.
It's easy enough in the early stages, but gets devilishly hard as you get further on.
There are a few additions to the original game which add a little spice to the proceedings, and it's quite possible to waste an hour before you realise it.
Hyperoid It's Asteroids by another name, again with some additions (although I was never any good at this one, so maybe they've just chopped a few levels out).
Emlith Tetris, but with a kick.
At first, you're just playing a fast game of Tetris, and then you're suddenly confronted by a whole new set of liths (the proper name for the shapes).
Some have holes in them, some have five tiles in them, some have six or more (the normal ones have usually got four or less).
Another one that distracts you for ages.
Chomp An old favourite — who hasn't played Pacman?
This is as faithful a reproduction as I have seen, except that I remember the ghosts being eatable for a lot longer than they are here.
Jewel Thief A new one on me, this one.
You have to slide your cursor, which takes the form of a thief, over jewels randomly dotted on landscapes, while avoiding mobile meanies.
I can get to level five, and then I get bored.
This is the one for a five minute coffee break.
Block Breaker Breakout anyone?
I used to love breakout in the arcades, but this implementation is a little too slow for my tastes.
It speeds up, yes, but level by level, rather than row by row.
Still, it's one of the better breakout clones I've seen under Windows.
Blitzer Last and definitely least, this is a cross between Defender and Lunar Lander, and it just doesn't work for me at all.
The idea is to rescue six scientists imprisoned by aliens.
Only you can save the earth, it says here.
Fine, please do, cos I won't!
Summary
With the exception of Blitzer and Block Breaker, both of which I can do without, this is a decent little time wasting package.
OK, they're old fashioned games revamped, but I'm an old fashioned type of guy, and anyway, they're not so much old-fashioned as classics of their types.
At £24.95 for the lot, the price isn't bad.
There's even a boss key on one or two of the games — they minimise with a Program Manager description!
Verdicts Ease of Use: **** Versatility: ***** Speed: **** VFM ***** Overall ****
Conclusion
There's a fair selection in the Windows range, including some packages we just haven't had time to look at.
The prices, on the whole, are about right, and certainly will be by the time the discounts get their hands on them.
It will be interesting to see what else emanates from the Software Partners stable in the future.
Info Box Product: Banners on Parade Price: £49.95 Product: Wallpaper Art Gallery Price: £39.95 Product: Designer Labels Price: £49.95 Product: Fun Pack Price: £24.95 From:Software Partners 
Lyndhurst West — A PostScript postcard from the seaside, No Viruses for Windows, and Scotts Dots for Europe!
If you've got a HP LaserJet II printer and want more fonts, what do you do?
A PostScript postcard from the seaside explains.
When I'm cleaning Windows — Part VIII shows how to go virus hunting, and who's got the easiest anti-virus product under glass.
We catch up with the latest exploits on the portable front in Living with a Notebook.
Now we're in 1993 and the single European market — we visit a printer manufacturer that's Euro-ready in Scotts dots for Europe.
PostScript postcard from the seaside
Owners of HP (Hewlett-Packard) Laser II and compatible printers enjoy some excellent printed output, compared to the average dot-matrix printer.
But when you want to use more fonts, what do you do?
The answer is PostScript.
Many printer manufacturers produce a PostScript (or compatible) upgrade to add extra functionality, and about 35 scalable fonts to the HP LaserJet standard.
So we decided to carry out an Adobe PostScript upgrade to a standard HP LaserJet II compatible printer at our seaside site in Poole in Dorset.
Epson's 6 page per minute EPL-4000 laser printer is priced at a competitive £795, and in its basic configuration supports the HP PCL4 language, as well Epson FX, IBM ProPrinter and Diablo 630 emulations.
As the standard EPL-4000 comes with only 500Kb of memory it is necessary to upgrade the RAM to a more useful 4Mb before installing the PostScript card.
To upgrade the RAM you'll need a little manual dexterity (clever fingers!) to slot in the RAM chips, along with a screwdriver to open the side of the laser and install the plug-in RAM board.
A word of caution here the diagram for the DIP Switches screen-printed on the memory board is correct.
The manual is wrong.
Silly us, we believed the manual and turned the EPL-4000's new RAM Card into a high-tech toaster!
A second upgrade RAM Board from the very nice people at Epson and we were ready to try it again.
This time we set the switches as per the RAM Board diagram and all was well.
The next job was to plug in the PostScript card, which is no larger than the average credit card, and only three times as thick.
Making the PostScript Card ‘active’ is a just a menu selection from the EPL-4000's LCD screen, and hey presto instant 100% genuine PostScript.
To date we've printed several thousand pages of WP text, DTP and Graphics, all without a hitch, and with only a couple of paper mis-feeds.
Compared to other laser printers the mechanism of the EPL-4000 appears to be upside down.
The paper path is easily accessible, as it's just below the top lid of the printer, and not buried at the bottom of the machine.
This makes messy paper jams a thing of the past, and improves the reliability of the printer.
More about the EPL-4000 next month, when we'll try out it's other emulations.
When I'm cleaning Windows VIII — of viruses?
Windows hints and tips time again with a recommendation of the easiest to use anti-virus software to date.
Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit now comes in a new Windows flavour, and with only six on-screen buttons to push (one of them is the exit button), you can't really get any simpler selection of what is very powerful anti-virus software.
Like its DOS cousin Dr Solomon's Windows offering checks the RAM for lurking nasties before tackling any hard or floppy disk with considerable speed.
157 Megabytes of files on our Victor V486M's 200 Mb hard disk were checked in just 47 seconds — now that's moving!
The package occupies 1,579,671 bytes of space, which is not excessive considering its functionality.
The most impressive part of Dr Solomon's Anti-Virus Toolkit for Windows (what a mouthful!) is the Encyclopaedia, the browse bar was less than 50% down the list of virus information, and we'd already counted 500 separate items!
This is the first Windows Application we've come across where you could throw away the manual, the on-screen help is really that good!
Living with a Notebook
Just room for a quick update on the progress of the current Lyndhurst West Notebook, the Vortec 2040AX.
Every day for the last month we've been totting the Vortec back and forth to the local office, where it has been used to run an Alpha Four Database.
This continued use has proved that the Vortec is very reliable.
The only exception has been the rear access door that covers the Parallel and Serial Ports, which has too little clearance between it and any modern parallel printer plug.
Eventually both of the door's plastic hinge stubs broke, and it fell off!
The only other observation is that the screen brilliance isn't up to battling with a bright sunlit office, or overhead fluorescent lights, but that could apply to the majority of today's notebook computers.
The most impressive feat of the 2040AX is its battery life, which is nearly four hours in the ‘sleep’ mode.
Forgetting to switch it off after leaving the office, its muffled beeps from inside the zip-up travel case several hours later warned of its almost flat battery!
Scotts dots for Europe.
1993 is the year when we all embrace a single European Market, the lowering of Customs barriers will make it even easier to move equipment and staff right across the European continent.
In the field of computer printers companies are readying themselves for the challenge of Europe, Lyndhurst West previews the starting grid.
The European production centre for all OKI dot-matrix printers is at Cumbernauld, near Glasgow.
So it was off to a wet and windy Heathrow Airport, a BA Super Shuttle to Glasgow, and a twenty minute road journey to the factory.
OKI is a company with a real history in technology.
In 1881 Mr Kibataro Oki produced the first Japanese telephone and created a company that has grown dramatically over the last 110 years.
OKI milestones in technology include; 1915 — Radio Telegraph equipment; 1924 — Radio Broadcast receivers; 1953 — Mobile Radio for taxis; 1973 — Thermal Facsimile (FAX); 1975 — Cellular radio development with Bell Laboratories and the Laser Beam printer.
Today OKI employs 20,000 people in 25 countries worldwide, and has an annual turnover (in 1991) of £2.9 billion.
The OKI plant at Cumbernauld was opened in 1987, employs 100 people, and produces over 400,000 dot-matrix printers per year for Europe.
The factory has been awarded British Standards approval to BS5750/BS5850 and VDE 0860 for its quality system and product safety standards.
The local work force in Cumbernauld is very proud of the fact that it has exceeded the quality standards in OKI's Japanese plants.
Overall the factory tour was an impressive display of quality and pride in the job.
Surface Mount Technology (SMT) robots ‘glue’ electronic components onto printed circuit boards before they are passed through a ‘flow solder’bath.
Each printer is built as the completed boards then join other components via assembly stations on the ever moving conveyer belt.
Next call is the ‘Hot Box’ that simulates several months use.
Then there's the electrical insulation test where 1,500 volts is passed through the printer chassis,(Yes they still work afterwards!).
Lastly the printer serial number is attached to the chassis.
This number is scanned into the factory production computer.
OKI has production data for every printer they produce, including the eventual customer.
This enabled Police in Finland to reunite several stolen OKI printers with their rightful owners.
Finally a UK-designed packaging plant wraps up palette loads of printers as they come off the production line.
The result is a tried and tested printer in every box.
PostScript is a page description language.
Everything from a full-stop, question mark, box drawing characters, drop shadows, letter style, and even a tinted background design can be described or written in the PostScript language.
Here's a brief bit of PostScript code that describes the outer line of a twin-line box; the % characters allows non-printing comments to be added to the code.
As you can see the PostScript language is a little like BASIC in its construction.
When you install a PostScript driver into any software package the output is similar to the above.
In every PostScript printer there is an interpreter that coverts the raw PostScript code into 300 black or white pixels that are packed into every square inch of laser output.
The PostScript Language comes from Adobe, whose licensing fee ensures that any genuine PostScript laser printer is going to cost oodles more that its Adobe-less cousin.
This is a pity as PostScript is a much needed standard in a world of millions of PCs, all with different print output!
Now that Microsoft has launch it's rival TrueType font family, and embedded the same in Windows 3.10, Adobe's price for PostScript fonts has become far more reasonable — lets hope this co-incidence continues.
Items mentioned in this edition of Lyndhurst West
Lyndhurst West Column — February 1993 Edition
Lyndhurst West — PC products are US!— A Look at what's coming our way from the US of A.
There is no doubt that the US market-place drives the world of Personal Computers.
Every Autumn 2.2 million square feet of computer hardware and software attracts some 140,000 visitors to the world's largest computing event — COMDEX ‘Fall in Las Vegas.
Lyndhurst West looks back at COMDEX, and decides what's hot, and what's not in Coming our way.
Coming our way
Covering COMDEX ‘Fall, as the Interface Group calls the Western World's largest computing showcase, is a bit like being an electronic lemming.
2,000 exhibitors take up over 2.2 million square feet of space, in two gigantic exhibition halls and a further six Casino sites in Las Vegas, in the heart of the Nevada Desert.
This isn't such a monumental task but for the arrival of another 150,000 visitors who have exactly the same plans!
The US computing market-place does have some similarities, and some major differences with the UK and Europe.
Some hardware and software will transfer to Europe easily, whilst other products wouldn't a snowball's chance etc, etc.
The knack is actually predicting which products will make the Transatlantic transition.
Time is also a consideration.
Any product announced at COMDEX ‘Fall (in November) usually arrives in the UK the following March or April.
The extra three month interval often helps as the initial model or release is nearly always modified or upgraded by the following Spring.
In addition an agent or distributor has often been found for the new product, improving after sales support in the UK.
Here's the Lyndhurst West ‘Easy-8’, a short list of products that will easily make the transatlantic crossing to our market — look out for them this Spring.
D is also for DOC IT the desktop document processor from OKI Print, Fax, Scan and Photocopy from a single desktop peripheral?— Yes! with OKI's DOC IT an all-in-one hardware bundle of Laser Printer, Scanner, Photocopier and Fax.
DOC IT connects to a PC with its own interface card, and umbilical cord.
The software that drives DOC IT runs under Microsoft Windows, allowing users to transfer the document Copying/Imaging/Printing/Faxing format to existing Windows applications and the thousands of DOS software products.
The DOC IT is based on OKI's own LED (Light Emitting Diode) print engine for laser quality printing and on-demand copying, along with an image scanner for scanning, copying and faxing documents.
The scanner can also be removed from its internal cradle to facilitate coverage of large drawings or books that cannot be loaded via the 25-page feed hopper.
The DOC IT is controlled via a 16-bit plug in ISA (Industry Standard Architecture) AT-class board, powered by an Intel 32-bit i960 RISC (Reduced Instruction Set Computer) microprocessor.
OKI plan to launch the DOC IT in the UK next month with a competitive £3000 price tag.
D is for Dashboard for Windows from Hewlett-Packard
Tagged as ‘Convenient Push-Button control over everything you do in Windows’ Dashboard is an elegant solution to those cluttered screens after you've installed umpteen applications to your Windows environment.
In essence Dashboard is a utility panel that's neatly organised, much like the dashboard in your car, giving instant access to the features and applications you want — now!
The best feature of Dashboard is the Customisation, where every user can modify the ‘look and feel’ of their day-to-day Windows desktop exactly as they want it.
I is for ‘Icon Hear-It’ from Moon Valley Software
Moon Valley Software are already well-known for their Icon-Do-It application that lets Windows users select their own choice of Icon for any particular application.
COMDEX saw the launch of Icon Hear-It, which includes all the graphical abilities of Icon-Do-It, plus the added dimension of sound.
A wide range of sounds from  Bimboesq squeaks, sirens, creaking doors and famous one liners from the movies can all be associated with any particular Windows event.
Closing a file will sound off a threatening ‘I'll be back’ sound bite, whilst erasing a file will play the sound of a rubber rubbing against a sheet of paper.
Icon Hear-It is the perfect solution for PC users who want their business-like IBM compatible to be more like an Apple Macintosh.
M is for Messages from Software Grove Corporation
Its amazing the number of computer users that pick up a pen or pencil to take a telephone message when they're sitting in front of a working PC!
Messages from Software Grove solves the problem in both the DOS and Windows environments.
In the Windows version of Messages a totally realistic message form appears on-screen at the touch of a hot-key, or have it hovering in the wings by simply adding the Messages Icon to the Windows Start-Up Group.
The Date & Time fields are automatically filled from the PCs time and date.
Repetitive messages like ‘Isn't he in yet — OK I'll leave another message’ are catered for by a recall of names of previous callers, so Messages can automatically fill in the FROM, OF and PHONE fields.
Messages prints out to both dot matrix and laser, where its four-up format and the use of coloured paper stock can deliver the normal message slips, whilst the original data resides safely on the PC.
The Messages for DOS product can stay primed to ‘Pop-Up’ from its TSR status by using a mere 6K of RAM.
O is for OnTime the Calendar/Scheduler from Campbell Systems
As a regular user of OnTime for DOS I was pleased to see Campbell Systems release and update to both their Windows and DOS versions of this invaluable personal organiser/notepad/time manager.
New features include Work Groups — including the ability to schedule meetings across the Group.
RSVP — Automatically tract meeting attendees via an RSVP function, indicate who's coming and who's declined, as well as a list of who hasn't seen the notification yet.
Flexible Time Increments — Allows appointments to be added in any length, 1,2,3,4,5, etc minutes.
Group Memo — Originators of Group Meetings can now attach a group and personal memos to meeting notifications.
Reconciliation — Allows interfacing with laptops and other stand-alone PCs to transfer personal calendars and reconcile calendars with the master Network Calendar.
Perhaps the most useful feature is OnTime's ability to Import and Export data in ASCII format, now you can share your OnTime data with your favourite Database.
Q is for QBENCH — Disk Drive Benchmark software from Quantum
QBENCH from disk drive manufacturer Quantum gives a new perspective on disk drive performance.
The old chestnut of rating a disk drive by its Data Access Time, or Average Seek Time has long since been overtaken by modern drive technology.
Current test methods for accessing Average Seek Times are based on several myths; Myth-1: All disk drive requests are random access; Myth-2: Only the seek portion of a random access (the time taken to move the disk drive read/write head from one area of the disk to another)— is relevant; Myth-3: New disk drive technology that doesn't improve seek time can be dismissed as ineffective.
Quantum's QBENCH replicates the way that disk drives are used in the real world by combining the same portions of random and sequential read-and-write operations that are found in modern Operating System and Graphical User Interface (GUI) environments such as Windows.
T is for Trimm Industries who make a huge range of PC cases
Trimm's proud boast is that they make an enclosure for every purpose,’…from walk-in to carry out.’
Trimm's parent facility in California has been the home of engineering, design and manufacturing since 1928 — that's 65 years ago!
Today Trimm also has extensive facilities in England and Germany.
The quality is impressive, every enclosure carries an approval from the relevant agency, Underwriters Laboratories (UL), Canadian Standards Association (CSA), and TUV Bauart (European).
Such adherence to international standards makes it but a one-step process for the actual final assembler of the complete system to obtain either US FCC or European VDE electronic emission approvals.
W is for WinFax 3.0 from Delrina Technology Inc
As its name would suggest, WinFax is a Windows-based Fax application, which has been shipping for a year now in its Version 2.0 form.
The new WinFax PRO 3.0 adds significantly to the original product.
The extra features are OCR (Optical Character Recognition), Fax Document Management, Advanced Phonebook, FAX Cover Page Designer, Image Processing, and Scanner Support.
The OCR software, which automatically converts Faxes into an editable format for word processing or spreadsheet uses, was developed by Caere using their neural network recognition technology.
The stand-alone Caere OCR product costs nearly $600, with WinFax PRO 3.0 shipping at a US introductory price of $129 the product certainly exudes value!
Items mentioned in this edition of Lyndhurst West
A Machine for X
Each application places its own peculiar burden on the hardware that makes up a system.
To maximise performance at a given application it is necessary to choose components carefully — and if you are considering upgrades this again needs to be kept in mind.
Of course very few machines are used for a single application and in practice you need to balance the requirements of each application that you want to run.
Even so it helps to understand what each requires in an ideal situation.
In this series of articles we examine the performance profiles of a range of applications so that you may better define and refine your system.
The one complication is that all Windows applications place the same sort of minimum demands on a machine and so if you want to work in a Windows environment you will have to add the extra requirements to machine fit to run Windows.
This month a machine for spreadsheeting
The spreadsheet application is second only to word processing in terms of popularity.
There can be very few machines that do not have a spreadsheet program and if yours is one of them then you are probably missing out on one of the most valuable tools available.
But what sort of machine do you need to do justice to the application.
What sort of machine can run the largest and most demanding of spreadsheets without a hiccup and yet still be a reasonable price?
These days it has to be admitted that there are two sorts of spreadsheet.
The traditional MS-DOS based spreadsheet and the fancier Windows-based spreadsheet.
Windows spreadsheets look good but there are those who claim that they go so far beyond the basic requirements of a spreadsheet that they are a different kettle of fish.
To start with the basics:
A good spreadsheet needs two things — plenty of memory and the ability to calculate quickly.
The plenty of memory requirement sounds simple because today's machines have megabytes but spreadsheets can be very fussy about the type of memory that they can use.
Most spreadsheets were designed back in the days when 640KBytes was the maximum amount of memory that was available.
To get around this limitation Lotus Microsoft and Intel got together and invented a special type of memory — expanded memory or Lotus-Intel-Microsoft (LIM) memory.
LIM memory was more or less invented just for use with spreadsheets — the only memory hungry applications of the era.
And so it is today with most MS-DOS spreadsheets — expanded memory is the only type of memory that they can use above 640KBytes.
This would be fine but the natural type of memory for a modern machine, a 286 or 386, is extended memory and this means that often a machine will have 4 or 8 MBytes of memory that a simple spreadsheet just cannot make use of.
If you have an old fashioned XT then the only type of memory that you can fit to go beyond 604KBytes is expanded memory — so you it should work with almost any spreadsheet.
If you have a 286 or 386 then you have to find a way of converting the natural extended memory to expanded.
In the case of a 286 you usually need some special hardware — an expanded memory EMS or LIM board.
Some times a 286 based machine will have this hardware built into the mainboard.
The Amstrad 2286 is one such example, In the case of a 386 machine all you need is some software — EMM386.EXE that comes with MS-DOS 5, 386MAX or QEMM.
These are examples of 386 memory managers and they can perform the clever trick of converting ordinary extended memory into old fashioned expanded memory, using nothing but the memory juggling built into the 386 chip.
No matter how you achieve it you need expanded memory for a spreadsheet such as SuperCalc or a DOS version of Lotus.
How much?
This is a difficult question but in practice few spreadsheets need more than 1 or 2 MBytes of expanded memory.
The reason is that many MS-DOS spreadsheet programs are so large that they use most of the 640KBytes of conventional memory.
This means adding just a little expanded memory produces a large percentage increase in the amount of memory available for data storage.
After expanded memory the second requirement for spreadsheeting is fast calculations.
It is generally assumed that all spreadsheets will benefit from fast calculation but this isn't necessarily so.
Not all spreadsheets have a great deal of calculation built in to them.
Many only record data and perform simple calculations such as adding up columns or working out averages.
In this case speed of calculation will make little difference to the performance.
If a spreadsheet really is doing a lot of calculation then a machine using a 486DX or a processor with a x87 numeric coprocessor will help.
Every processor has its corresponding numeric coprocessor, a processor dedicated to the task of doing arithmetic and integrated with the main processor so that it can take over as required.
The 486DX is a different in that it has a numeric coprocessor built into it and so doesn't need one adding as a separate unit.
But if you have a machine based on an 8088/86 then you can fit an 8087, a 286 has the 287 and the 386 has the 387DX and 387SX.
Adding a coprocessor is relatively easy in that all you have to do is plug in a chip into an empty socket.
But it can be a nerve racking experience because the coprocessor chip costs a lot of money for such a small object.
As already mentioned, spreadsheets are often thought of as the key number crunching application and therefore benefit most from a numeric coprocessor.
Speed increases of double, treble and more are often claimed.
In practice fitting a coprocessor usually has a much smaller impact than advertised.
Even a spreadsheet that does a great deal of calculation will only speed up by around 25% or so.
The reason is that a spreadsheet program is generally inefficient at performing calculations and so much of the theoretical gain is lost.
The speed of the main processor still has more effect on spreadsheet applications than the coprocessor.
Still if you already have a spreadsheet machine adding a coprocessor is one of the few easy things that you can do to speed it up.
After discussing memory and numeric coprocessors the rest of the requirements for a good spreadsheet machine are more variable.
When it comes to video it all depends on what you want to look at.
Many spreadsheet users never use more than a mono text mode display!
If you want to look at graphs then VGA is usually quite sufficient.
Only if you want to go the whole way and produce typeset quality data will you ever need to consider anything better than VGA.
In this case though what you really need is a Windows machine.
When it comes to disk storage capacity spreadsheets don't normally take much space.
A 40MByte drive should be enough for nothing but spreadsheets and a little word processing.
It also doesn't have to be a particularly fast drive because spreadsheets read the data into memory once when you start using them and after that the speed of the disk has no effect.
As for printers the most common requirement is to print a table with a great many columns and this is easier using a wide carriage printer.
As an alternative you can make use of a standard width printer and a package such as Sideways or Allways to turn the text through 90 degrees and compress it.
Finally the latest generation of spreadsheets for DOS — SuperCalc 5.5, Lotus 1-2-3 and Quattro Pro — all include the facility to use a mouse.
Even if you are mouse phobe you should at least give it a try because you might be surprised at how easy it makes common operations.
Buying advice
Spreadsheeting is one of the few applications that you can do with an old, low cost XT machine.
Obviously the faster the machine the better and there is nothing wrong with using a super 486 for the job.
But — as long as you stick to the traditional DOS spreadsheet programs, such as SuperCalc 5 or 1-2-3 — you will manage very well with an XT.
If you have such a machine that isn't up to running the sort of thing that you are interested in then why not pension it off to another user who needs to work with spreadsheets.
You could even buy one of the sub-£200 XTs that are on the market at the moment — but don't make the mistake of thinking that they can be pushed into many other applications areas.
Magician Graphics Accelerator card.
Title: The Magician
Subtitle: If you want more colours from your monitor and faster screen redrawing then the answer is to get a Magician graphics accelerator card.
Introduction (Boxout?)
If the VGA or SuperVGA monitor of your PC can be thought of as a car, then the graphics card should be thought of as the engine.
Most off the shelf PCs these days come equipped with a graphics controller card which is either a card fitted into a vacant expansion slot or built in as part of the motherboard.
These cards come equipped with their own VideoRAM memory which determines the number of colour the monitor can display at certain resolutions.
Thus, a 512k card can display 256 colours at a resolution of 640 by 480 pixels or 16 colours at 1024 by 768 pixels.
A one megabyte card is an improvement and can display no less than 32,000 colours at 640 by 480 resolution.
Main review
If you spend any amount of time using photo-retouching programs like Aldus PhotoStyler or vector graphics programs like CorelDRAW then a graphics accelerator card is an absolute must for your shopping list.
The Magician from Datapath is just such a card and at £299 it is not frighteningly expensive.
The card itself fits into a vacant expansion slot in the PC and replaces the existing card.
If the graphics controller on your PC is part of the motherboard then you may need to disable it by removing a jumper switch, altering a DIP switch or running the BIOS setup program.
Check your manual for details.
The Magician is aimed firmly at those who are using Windows 3.0 or 3.1 and who need a faster screen redrawing speed combined with a better colour display.
The card is equipped with 1 megabyte of VideoRAM which allows up to 32,000 colours to be displayed.
Because the amount of VideoRAM can only be used to give a higher resolution OR more colours there is an inevitable trade-off.
If your monitor is capable of a 1024 by 768 pixel resolution then you will only get 256 colours.
However, at a 640 by 480 resolution the 32,000 colours offered by the card are simply stunning.
Sample files from PhotoStyler, Windows Draw and CorelDRAW looked superb with no dithering.
(SEE DITHERING BOXOUT).
Some PCs these days can already offer this type of performance or may offer a one megabyte graphics card as an optional extra for as little as £20 over the price of a 512K card.
The extra bonus with the Magician card is the S3 chip which is a dedicated graphics processor.
In graphical environments like Windows the whole screen is a colour bitmap image and any changes force the system to redraw either part or all of that image.
When you bear in mind that a 256 colour image at 1024 by 768 pixels is 768K in size then it is not surprising that ordinary monitor controller cards simply cannot redraw the screen image with any speed.
This is where the S3 chip comes in and Datapath claim that their card can improve common Windows functions by over 15 times.
Having spent some time loading and editing complicated vector graphics files in CorelDRAW I can vouch for the accuracy of this claim.
Conclusion
The Datapath Magician is a very impressive piece of equipment and must rate as an absolute must either for those users wanting more colours than their 512K card can manage or for those who find the screen redrawing speed of Windows too slow.
Of course there are cards on the market with more memory and processor power to drive expensive monitors at high resolutions (like 1280 by 1024) and 256 colours but they cost well over £1000.
At £299 the Magician compares well with other cards offering a similar performance and makes full colour programs like CorelDRAW come alive.
I know it's a bit early but I'm going to ask Father Christmas for one!
Dithering (Boxout)
If you are using a full 24 bit colour photo-retouching or vector graphics drawing program on a system which can only display 16 or 256 colours Windows will attempt to represent all the screen colours required.
It does this by a process called dithering which takes two or more colours from the 16 or 256 colour palette available and places them side by side to give the impression of another colour.
Whilst colour dithering enables the user to get a rough and ready idea of the true colours it is not really suitable for anyone involved in full colour work.
This is the reason why graphics cards like the Magician and others have been developed.
FAX BOX
Magician, £299
Datapath
Tel: 0332 294441
Specification:
The Magician card supports:
1280 by 960 (interlaced) 16 colours
1280 by 1024 (interlaced) by 16 colours
1024 by 768 (non-interlaced) by 256 colours
800 by 600 (non-interlaced) by 256 colours
640 by 480 (non-interlaced) by 32,000 colours.
The 16 bit card will support interlaced monitors up to 90Hz and non-interlaced monitors up to 72Hz.
Software drivers supplied for: Windows 3.0/3.1, Cadvance, MicroSoft Word 5.0, WordPerfect 5.1, Autodesk ADI 4.1, Generic CADD, MicroStation, CADkey/Datacad, Lotus 123, VersaCAD.
Two screendumps supplied — show the soft of colour quality possible using the Magician card.
Upgrade your machine
Motherboard upgrades by Harry Fairhead
The most popular question of the moment is how do I upgrade my machine.
The reason is simply that there are so many XT and 286 machines that are in perfectly good working order and only suffer from the fact that they are not 386s!
There two ways to upgrade to a 386 — by adding a coprocessor card and by replacing the motherboard.
Given that new 386SX motherboards can be found for less than £200 this is the more attractive way of doing the job.
Its only disadvantage is that it isn't as quite as easy as plugging in a coprocessor card.
If you want to find out how easy it is, read on…
Is it for me?
Before you start to get excited about the prospect of having a brand new machine I'd better say right now that not all machines are suitable.
The most important factor is whether or not it has a standard case and motherboard.
I'm afraid that this rules out most Amstrad machines as candidates for a motherboard upgrade.
The early machines, the 1512 and the 1640, used plastic cases and a non-standard size.
Even the later machines, the 3000 series and beyond, are not good candidates for upgrade because of the way they have VGA graphics, serial and parallel ports built in.
The point is to upgrade such a machine you would be throwing most of it away and having to buy replacements for nearly everything.
Assuming that your machine has a standard sized case and existing motherboard the important calculation to do is the value of what you would keep and what you would throw away.
For example, if you were thinking of upgrading a 286 with a 4MByte, VGA and a 40MByte drive the sums might be something like:
Total £700 £150 and from this you can see that motherboard upgrade is a reasonable proposition because you are keeping more value than you are replacing.
Notice that the prices quoted are the rough cost of buying a new item and £700 is what you would have to pay extra to create a whole new second machine.
Now compare this sum with the replacing the motherboard in an XT 8086 class machine that has the EGA video 
In this case the motherboard replacement isn't as clear cut a winner and it would only take a slight change, such as not being able to use the RAM, to make it look even worse.
This all implies that it is vital to work out what you can re-use from your existing machine.
The rules are:
1)
You can use all of the parts from a 286 AT machine when you upgrade to a 386.
The only possible (and likely) exception is the RAM.
Most modern motherboards use RAM in the form of SIMMs, older motherboards tended to use individual chips or SIPPs.
2)
If you are upgrading an XT class machine then you can re-use far less of the hardware.
The keyboard will have to be replaced unless it is XT/AT switchable.
The hard disk can be reused but it will need a new AT controller card.
Floppy drives and video are all OK but they might be in need of modernisation.
Also it is almost certain that the RAM cannot be re-used — see previous comment.
One surprising factor is that given a new case is only around £50 there is nothing stopping you from moving everything into a new box if the old one isn't big enough to take a standard size motherboard.
Don't make the mistake of thinking of your machine's case as the most important part of the machine just because it is the bit that you see most of!
Planning
After doing an audit to see which modules of your existing machine you can keep you will not only know if a motherboard upgrade is worthwhile, you will also know exactly what your shopping list is!
However you still have the choice of which type of motherboard to buy.
It seems obvious that you should buy the most powerful motherboard that you can afford but don't make the mistake of buying something out of keeping with the re-used components or you will be looking to replace those too in a few months!
Also find out what type of memory the new motherboard uses.
There is no point in planning to re-use the memory on your old board and then discovering that it doesn't fit the new one!
In most cases you will probably end up with a 386SX or 486SX and both are excellent choices.
Step 1
Removal
The first step is to open the case and remove all of the expansion cards.
Notice that if you are transferring a hard disk drive to a new motherboard then you should backup all of the data.
While there is a good chance that the disk drive will carry on working, there is also a good chance of it loosing the data.
There will be a number of wires going to the motherboard including the main power connector.
Disconnect each wire in turn and label it if you know its identity.
Next take a good long look at the existing motherboard.
It will most probably be fixed in place with two screws and a number of plastic clips.
You will need to re-use these screws and clips.
Undo the screws and slide the motherboard out.
The trick is generally to slide the board to one side and then lift.
Step 2
Preparation
The second step is to examine the empty case.
(Notice that the case in the picture has had its power supply and disk drives removed to allow you to see even more.)
The important things to discover are where the mounting slots and holes are.
These have to be matched up with the mounting holes in the new motherboard.
One way of doing this is to take a piece of paper and mark the position of the mounting holes and matching them against the motherboard.
Notice that you should treat the new motherboard with great care as it can easily be damaged.
Once you have decided where the mounting pillars are going to be inserted you are nearly done.
If the new motherboard is smaller then you will have some mounting pillars left over — keep them safe.
It is very important to have the greatest possible support around the expansion slot area.
Step 3
Inserting the board
Inserting the new motherboard is just the reverse of taking the old one out — however take your time because the case wasn't made for it.
Make sure that you place each of the mounting pillars into the slots and then slide the board over.
You may have had to move the mounting screw pillars to new locations and now is the time you discover if you are correct.
Whatever happens work slowly and if the board jams try to find out what is holding it or stopping it moving rather than just forcing it!
Once the board is in place you can insert the mounting screws.
Step 4
Wiring up
Now we get to the most problematic part of installing most motherboards — wiring it up.
The main power connector needs most care because this can cause damage if misconnected.
The rule is that the two plugs fit together so that black wires are in the middle — if you are in any doubt then seek assistance or use a voltmeter to check the power supply.
After the main power connector there are lots of little connectors that, in most cases, aren't essential.
You should be able to re-connect the speaker, keyboard lock, reset and power on LED but in many cases the Turbo LED and Turbo switch cables will have to be left unconnected.
In most cases this doesn't matter too much as the speed of the machine can be controlled by software instead.
As you can see from the photograph a common problem is that the wires are too short!
The only solution for this is to use a soldering iron to lengthen them!
Commissioning
Once you have the motherboard in place and wired it up then you have to commission the machine just as if it was new.
Connect the keyboard and the video card/monitor.
Install any RAM that needs to be added and get ready to test.
You may also need to set jumpers on the motherboard according to the type of RAM devices you are using and the video card.
Details will be in the manual that came with the motherboard.
When you switch on you should see the BIOS test the RAM.
Make sure that the amount reported equals the amount you think you have installed.
If you don't see a RAM test or the BIOS setup screen switch off and check the connections — especially the power connections.
The motherboard should get to a BIOS setup screen if nothing but the power supply and video card is connected.
Once you have access to the BIOS setup screen go through and enter all of the details of the floppy disks and hard disk you are using and of course the date.
Then switch off.
Install the disk controller and floppy disks.
Try booting the system from a floppy.
If this all works you can be very confident that the motherboard works and all that is left is to install the hard disk and any other adaptor cards you may have.
As this is just like performing a hard disk upgrade (See Issue 1) it should be easy.
You can spend quite a lot of time subsequently getting the machine configured just as you want it but at least you can relax in the knowledge that it all works and the difficult part of the upgrade is well and truly over.
Sporty Networking
Mainlan GTi could be the British answer to your Peer to Peer networking needs.
David Dorn drives it.
Peer to Peer networks (P2P) allow all the machines on them to share files printers and other bits and bobs with each other, rather than using dedicated machines to provide all of these facilities centrally.
For many small businesses and individuals, a Peer to Peer network may be the best answer, avoiding the need to dedicate a powerful machine to the role of a slave.
Sage, as a company, is probably best known for its accounting and financial software — there can't be many PC users in our readership that haven't heard of the Sterling and Sovereign range of programs — but still manages to produce a workmanlike networking product.
Mainlan GTI now comes in a Windows flavour as well as DOS, and it's the Windows side of things that we'll examine — the DOS software echoes it fairly closely.
Installation.
Based on 10 Megabit ethernet cards which support most kinds of ethernet backbones (the type of cabling system that is used to connect the network up) Mainlan is not too difficult to install, although you do really require a basic knowledge of memory configurations in PCs to get the best out of it.
The hardware requires very little in the way of dip-switch fiddling, and is accompanied by explicit manuals which explain what's going on reasonably well.
The software installation routine, though it installs a basic system very easily, could do with being beefed up a little in order to make configuring the network simpler for the first-timer.
That said, its manuals, if read thoroughly, give a complete guide, including troubleshooting.
In Use The main facilities Mainlan offers are File sharing and Printer Sharing together with an Electronic Mail system.
Via other programs, it is also possible to implement fax and modem sharing, a facility that Mainlan has in common with most other P2P network systems.
File Sharing is handled by the owner of a disk (i.e. the user of the PC in which a hard disk is mounted) making directories available for others to use, and remote users logging onto them.
Thus, to make the whole hard disk open for others to read, the owner would publish the root directory (C: \) and perhaps give it a name (eg.
Dave) This is handled very well in the intuitive Windows software, which occupies a position on the control panel.
Printer Sharing is handled in much the same way — the owner makes a printer available, and a remote user specifies it as a network printer in the Printers control panel, attaching it to, say, LPT3 on his own machine.
The software then diverts all output across the network to the printer on the other machine.
Electronic Mail (E-mail) is probably the least easy to configure under Mainlan, and indeed it took me a while to sort out exactly what was required to get a sensible system running.
It more or less forces you to define a central E-mail server machine, upon which all messages are stored — it can be quite profligate with directories, as can Mainlan itself.
However, once the E-mail system has been set up, it works very well, although it doesn't allow for real-time chatting facilities, and is quite basic in its facilities.
This is representative of the Mainlan GTI Windows software as a whole.
It can be a pig to set up in the most efficient way as regards memory, because it can use a tremendous amount of the base 640k of a PC.
That said, if it is configured to use Expanded memory and load into High Memory, it interferes with much less conventional memory.
Bottom Line The bottom line has to be how it operates once it is all up and running correctly, which assumes that, if you have minimal experience or confidence, you have had a dealer set it up.
The fact is that on the five station network in the office, file and printer sharing are transparent to the user.
Access to published areas is quick and easy via the standard Windows File Manager, and E-mail gets to its destination without too much fuss.
As in any software, there are bits here and there that could do with a polish, but, overall, Mainlan GTI for Windows does everything you're likely to want in a small network environment.
FAX BOX Product: Mainlan GTI From: The Sage Group plc Tel: 091 201 3000 Price: £399 — 2 station starter pack Additional nodes — £POA 
Verdicts Performance **** Ease of use ***** (configured) *** (installation) Value for money ****
For Easy to use once set up and running
Against Can be complicated to get up and running efficiently.
Can use horrendous amounts of RAM.
Professional CAD software is notoriously expensive and difficult to learn.
Does the German designed MagaCAD Break the mould?
Early versions of AutoCad, the market leader in Computer Aided Design (CAD), and many other comparable products, have been justifiably criticised for being difficult to learn.
CAD programs are complex, and not too long ago would only run on expensive mainframe computers.
As PCs become more powerful and CAD software cheaper, desk-top CAD for small companies and individuals is becoming more affordable.
It is not surprising that a PC which can help to design a ship, a skyscraper or an electronic circuit has to be one of the most powerful available.
A successful CAD program must have the power and flexibility demanded for modern professional draughting and be quick to master.
MegaCAD 3.3 claims to be just this — with ‘rapid learning whilst maintaining the highest efficiency being the uppermost principles’.
MegaCAD is DOS based and can operate within the 640k base memory of your computer.
Theoretically, it will run on a PC/XT 8088 based machine, although a 386 or 486 machine is recommended.
It will need a third-party memory manager to take advantage of expanded or extended memory.
Version 3.3 of MegaCAD has many improvements over earlier versions, in particular a new graphical user interface and a ‘user menu’ which can call up MagaCAD functions and third-party software.
External programs can be activated without terminating MegaCAD.
Before invoking the external program, MegaCAD frees almost all memory occupied by itself, occupying less than 15K.
There is also an enhanced UNDO function in which you can re-trace up to 63 steps.
MegaCAD is a 2-D draughting program capable of 3-D representations through isometric and dimetric projections.
Elements of each drawing can be assigned to one of 256 available levels, each of which can be displayed separately if required.
It can import and export AutoCad DXF file formats maintaining compatibility with other CAD software.
A range of specialist libraries is available with hundreds of ready drawn objects for engineering, architecture, electronics etc.
The program opens with a blank drawing screen and a single menu bar to the left-hand side.
When the mouse cursor enters this menu bar the main menu is displayed which controls the 19 primary functions of MegaCAD.
Each option reveals a secondary menu and some yet another.
You must learn to find your way through the menu maze before you can use the program efficiently.
A useful feature divides the working area into multiple screens, each of which can display a selected part of the main drawing at any level of magnification.
On complex drawings you can ‘switch off’ one or more of the levels to simplify the displayed image.
A full selection of dimensioning options is available.
Drawings, by necessity, are drawn to scale — so dimensions are automatically calculated.
You can, however, add text or tolerance specifications to any dimension.
FAX BOX
MegaCAD 3.3 COSCOM Systems Ltd Carrington Business Park Carrington Urmston Manchester M314DD Tel. 061 7764048 Price £850.21 + VAT Upgrade from 2.01 £680 +VAT Object Libraries from £94.47 +VAT 
Range of Features *****
Overall Speed ****
Ease of Use ***
Verdict ****
For: Comprehensive range of features designed for serious business use.
Against: Priced for serious business use.
Minimum System Requirements
PX/XT, AT or PS/2
Supported Graphics Card
Harddisk
DOS 2.0 (or later)
640K RAM
Mouse or Graphics Tablet
Hardware
Not too long ago I bought an Amstrad 2286DD for my son to use in connection with his school work.
He has a dyslexia type problem, which not only spoils the presentation and spelling of his work, but inhibits him from starting it.
Use of the computer has helped with both the problems.
Unfortunately I did not fully understand that the usefulness of the machine was limited by its memory capacity and the extent to which not having a hard disk would limit my son's use of the machine.
I would like your help upgrading the 2286DD to the equivalent of a 2286HD which I believe will be more than sufficient capacity for his school work.
I have read several magazines etc. with a view to doing it myself (because of limited finances) and also spoken to Amstrad and other advertisers but the result is confusion.
So far as I understand it my options are one of the following:
Plug in an external hard drive to a serial port — this has the advantage of being the easiest but it has the disadvantage of being the most expensive.
Install a hard disk card — the advantage of this is the apparent ease of installation, also it is completely additional and leaves the two existing floppy drives, again the disadvantages are cost and potential damage which I could cause installing it.
And how do I know which cards require a disk controller?
Install a hard drive instead of one of the floppies — the advantage of this is that it is the least expensive but the major disadvantage is my complete lack of technical knowledge and the need to purchase and install the controller which I understand my machine does not have.
Finally, after reading Practical PC I am attracted by the idea of building my own computer.
This strikes me as the best way of getting a real working knowledge of computers.
However I am afraid that the DIY machine might be flawed in some basic respect compared to a bought machine — e.g. the absence of a ‘help’ program.
Could you advise me and recommend any books that might help me.
A
Yes a hard disk does make a great deal of difference to how easy a machine is to use.
Personally I think that any manufacturer who sells a model without a hard disk is guilty of misleading the purchasing public.
Fitting a hard disk isn't difficult but I can understand you reservations.
A serial/parallel drive is easy to fit in the sense that you don't have to open the case but there is still the software side of the installation to consider.
The main problem with serial/parallel disk drives is that they are not only more expensive but slower.
Still if you shop around there are some good value units.
A hardcard isn't that much more difficult to install, its faster and it should be cheaper.
All hardcards come with a built in controller and software.
Fitting one to an Amstrad 2000 series is particularly easy because you can slide off the back panel and plug the hardcard in without having to open the case.
The only thing you have to be careful of is that the hardcard is thin enough not to obscure too many of the very few slots that the 2000 series has.
In most cases this isn't a problem.
The final option, fitting your own hard disk, is definitely the cheapest but it does need some skill with a screw driver.
Fitting a drive to the 2000 series can be tricky because of the way the case slots together and the need to use a 3.5″ drive and mount.
All things considered, in this particular case, I would opt for a hardcard for an easy life!
Again if you shop around you should find a bargain but you might think it worth spending a few pounds more to get extra help and advice.
To get more information I would recommend getting hold of issue one of Practical PC which has a step-by-step guide to fitting a hard disk.
For a wider account of building your own machine, including adding a hard disk try ‘Inside the grey box’ by P.D.
Coker, published by I/O Press (0969) 24402.
After building your own machine you certainly will not be worried about opening the box!
I can assure you that there is nothing sub-standard or left out of a home built machine.
Q
Mr Russell Hardingham Brighton East Sussex
Could you assist me in identifying the Video chip on my computer as I am a little confused.
All the documentation states that my Video chip is a standard VGA, built onto the motherboard.
However, when running diagnostic software I get a report that the chip is a Paradise SVGA chip.
This is reported by various software, including PCPROBE and LANDMARK.
My dealer lacks sufficient knowledge to be of any help.
I have tried contacting Olivetti by letter and telephone but they seem reluctant to deal with me direct, preferring to refer me to an ‘Authorised Dealer’.
Unfortunately many such dealers do not recognise previous customers and seem to have a ‘once we've sold it, we forget it’ attitude.
I'm sure such generalisations are unjust, but I can only speak as I find!
I decided to write to Practical PC in the hope that you might be able to solve this minor mystery.
I appreciate that the outcome will make no difference to my current computer display as I believe I only have a monitor capable of standard VGA display.
A
Many standard VGA implementations actually use SVGA capable chips.
In some cases you can upgrade the hardware by adding extra RAM etc. but in most cases where it is built into the motherboard is isn't.
This needn't worry you too much however as you can buy an SVGA monitor plus SVGA card as a bundle for nearly the same price as the monitor on its own.
Current street prices for an SVGA card is down at the £30 level.
All you have to discover how to disable the on-board VGA electronics — there is usually a way.
Discovering the way of course takes us back to your recalcitrant dealers.
I too agree that far too many dealers have the attitude that you describe but I can understand why.
From their point of view you are just a loss making nuisance and they have a living to make.
Personally I think that the answer is for manufacturers such as Olivetti to not pass the buck to the dealer using the excuse that it is the dealer who made the buck in the first place!
The manufacturer has a better chance of being able to deal with difficult technical questions like yours and they really should face up to this fact.
Of course I doubt that they will because they are too far removed from the commercial realities of life.
Perhaps if you write into PPC with your tales of which manufacturers do provide an adequate technical advice service and which simply expect you to look elsewhere we might all know who to avoid.
Clearly Olivetti don't care too much.
Software
Q
Mr A Haig Perth
When I attempt to run LOTUS 1-2-3 Release 3.0 from windows a message tells me that I have attempted to run a protected-mode application in 386 enhanced and to change to WIN /S or WIN /R.
Firstly is there any way that I can run Release 3.0 in enhanced mode?
Secondly having put up this message when I try to exit windows it tells me that 1-2-3 is still active but I cannot find a way to deactivate it.
The only way out is CTRL-ALT-DEL.
Can you help, please?
A
The problem is a real one and very complicated.
The trouble is caused by the way that Lotus 1-2-3 Release 3.0 implements an enhanced mode of its own and this clashes with Window's version of enhanced mode.
This problem has been cleared up by the setting of a new standard called DPMI which defines exactly how a pair of enhanced mode programs are to work together.
However you need Lotus 1-2-3 Release 3.1 before you find find a fully DPMI compatible version.
This means that the best solution is to upgrade to Release 3.1+.
However there is a solution to your question about how to deactivate the rogue 1-2-3.
If you click on the control button in the top left hand corner of the window the control menu will appear.
Select the Settings option and then Terminate in the dialog box that appears.
Alternatively double click anywhere on the desktop to evoke the TaskManager and select the 1-2-3 task and click on the terminate button.
You can use either method to kill rogue tasks but usually the system is left in an unstable state so save files and close all other applications before restarting.
Windows 3.1 is much better in this respect and claims that it is safe to carry on after killing an application but I personally would still prefer to re-start Windows.
Q
Martin Jelfs London
I have a Toshiba 1000XE portable (8086 processor) which I mainly use for wordprocessing and a small database.
I have two software/hardware queries.
I decided to upgrade from MS DOS 3.30 (in ROM as drive D:) to DR DOS 6.00.
This went smoothly and is a great improvement but in order to create the compressed drive and double the hard disk capacity the SuperStor program took my hard disk (drive C:) and seemed to create a compressed drive D: it then swaps drive D and drive C so that the compressed drive is now C: The result is that I seem to be locked out of my old drive D in Rom which has one or two useful bits on — like a hardware check program.
Is there anyway I can gain access to my old D short of removing DRDOS and starting again.
The second problem is rather more important.
I decided that things would work better if I upgraded by adding a 1 Meg expanded memory board to give 2 Meg of RAM.
DRDOS seems to have drivers only for 286 and upwards machines but I eventually got EMM.SYS which was also to be found locked away in my ROM and got the machine to recognise the expanded memory.
However, there seems to be very little I can do with it.
I actually get the ‘not enough memory’ line more than ever!
Most of DRDOS config.sys commands relate to high and upper memory which I still don't have.
Quite often, I can't even run the configuration programme for my Word Processor (Protext 5.08) even though the MEM command shows 1,024K of expanded memory available.
I hope you can help I have spent hours with Memax etc trying to understand this.
A
You are correct in your description of how SuperStor swaps drives.
To do so it loads a driver DEVSWAP.COM in the CONFIG.SYS file.
Because of the drive swapping the CONFIG.SYS file is stored in the uncompressed drive D. If you edit this file to REM out the DEVSWAP command you might be lucky enough to recover the ROM drive but I cannot guarantee it.
Make sure that you re-edit the file before you make use of the compressed drive.
When it comes to expanded memory on an 8086 you are correct in thinking that life is a bit more difficult.
You do need the expanded memory driver that comes with the machine rather than the one provided with DR-DOS.
You also don't have access to upper memory blocks or the high memory area.
All of the memory tricks that DR-DOS describes work on 386 systems and some 286 systems — none work on basic 8086 machines.
In short there is no real point in spending time with Memax — it isn't for your machine.
The only memory upgrade that you have performed is to add expanded memory and this has very little to do with the operating system you are using.
In short if an application does not know how to make use of expanded memory then the memory remains unused.
Fortunately most spreadsheets know how to make use of expanded memory and most other programs don't need to!
Your comment about having less memory available than before installing DR-DOS actually seems reasonable!
MS-DOS 3.3 and DR-DOS occupy roughly the same amount of conventional memory.
It is only when extended memory is available that DR-DOS can make use of it to reduce its demands on conventional memory and so improve on MS-DOS 3.3.
So why should you have less memory?
The answer is that the expanded memory driver that you have installed uses 12KBytes of conventional memory.
Even so I am surprised that you don't have enough memory left to run your wordprocessor's configuration program.
I would suggest that you run CHKDSK and note the amount of conventional memory.
You should have 582Kbytes without the expanded memory driver and about 12KBytes less with.
If the figures that you have are much smaller than this then you need to do something because that's what you can get under MS-DOS 3.3.
My personal opinion is that for the Tosh 1000XE the original MS-DOS 3.3 is the best operating system.
Hints and tips
Windows Archive
If you are working on a project with all of the relevant files stored in a single directory there is a fairly simple way of keeping a set of historical backups.
For example, if the directory is called WORK you can make a backup by copying the whole directory.
When you have altered the files in WORK enough to warrant another backup all you have to do is copy the whole directory into the first backup copy of the WORK directory.
That is the first backup is \WORK and the second is \WORK\WORK.
Get it?
If not the chances are that you need to find out about the way directories and path names work.
The next time you need to backup the directory you copy it into \WORK\WORK\WORK and so on until you feel that it is time to start the backup off from the start again.
If you need to restore a historical copy then \WORK is the oldest \WORK\WORK the next oldest, \WORK\WORK\WORK the next and so on.
The advantage of this scheme is that you don't have to think up a new name of each backup — the nesting of one directory within another takes care of that.
If you are using Windows then this scheme is particularly easy because all you have to do is click your way down through the duplicate directories in the File Manager until you can't find another copy of the directory and then drag the current version into the final old copy.
You can continue like this until you run out of disk space.
Sounds complicated but much more reliable than trying to keep to a regular naming scheme that lets you know which copy is the oldest.
Timing an interval
I often have to time how long a program takes to complete some task.
I used to use a stop watch and then I thought of a better way.
Every MS-DOS computer has a clock that can be used to do the same job as a stop watch.
The command TIME displays the current time on the screen and waits for you to enter the new time.
You can also make the command continue by pressing return without entering a new time.
You can automate the use of TIME to time an interval within a batch file.
All you have to do is create a batch file PERIOD.BAT containing the lines ECHO.
|TIME >RESULTS.TXT ECHO.
|TIME >>RESULTS.TXT
The command ECHO.
produces a blank line on the screen i.e. it is the batch file equivalent of pressing return.
Unfortunately this only works in MS-DOS 3.3 and later.
The vertical bar is a pipe command that passes the output of one command to another so the ECHO.
command essentially presses Return for the TIME command.
The > symbol is used to send the output of TIME into a file called RESULTS.TXT so recording the time that this line of the batch file is obeyed.
Next the program or event that you are trying to time occurs and then a very similar line records the time when it comes to and end.
The important difference is that >> is used to save the output in the file in place of >.
The difference is that > erases any existing file of the same name before sending output to it and >> adds the output to the end of any existing file.
The result is that the file RESULTS.TXT contains two lines showing the start and finish time.
Windows telltale
Even if you are running Windows there is nothing stopping you from using your machine as if it was working under MS-DOS.
All you have to do is run the MS-DOS executive and carry on as normal.
The only problem is that you might just carry on a little too normally.
If you are using MS-DOS full screen there is nothing to remind you that you really are using Windows.
The correct way to shut the machine down is to type EXIT to return to Windows, quit Windows and then switch off the machine.
Why?
Well if you have other applications running the reason is obvious — you are cutting them off in their prime without giving them a chance to save data or clean up any temporary files that they might be using.
The same is true of Windows itself.
If you just pull the plug it doesn't have time to erase the temporary files it used and if you are using the latest SmartDrv utility you might even lose data that you thought was safely written to disk.
In short it is important to close Windows down correctly.
One easy way of making sure is to simply type EXIT at any MS-DOS prompt before you switch off.
If you are in Windows you will be returned to the desktop and if you are not nothing will happen.
Even so it would be nice to have an indication on the screen that this command prompt came to you courtesy of Windows.
Fortunately the solution is easy.
If you add the line SET WINPMT= prompt to your Autoexec.bat file (or just type it in before you start Windows) any MS-DOS sessions that you start will have the command prompt as defined.
For example, SET WINPMT = THIS IS WINDOWS $p$g will make the command prompt in all DOS sessions
THIS IS WINDOWS path> where path is the path name of the current directory.
Of course in practice you may prefer a slightly more subtle prompt — maybe just a W to act as a flag for you to remember to type EXIT.
The WINPMT command will take all the same prompt characters as the full MS-DOS PROMPT command — so just look them up in the manual.
Microsoft's publicly announced commitment to multi media has spawned a host of products, but what is multi media and what can it do for you?
Alan Simpson investigates.
In recent years the popularity of the computer has soared, few people never come into close contact with computers, but a surprisingly small number use them to their full potential.
Ever since the personnel computer first thrust itself onto our desks it has been a largely text based machine.
In recent years the introduction of high power graphics cards and GUI's have meant that we are no longer faced with the plain vanilla text and a mouse isn't just a furry rodent, but still many applications are based around text, multi media will change all that, bringing 24-bit colour and digital quality sound to our PC's.
Information presented in a purely textual fashion is hard to grasp, after all we all think in pictures and often use them to portray our ideas to others.
Multi media gives us the ability to be able to embed pictures in text.
So what?
I hear you say, DTP has been doing that for years Yes — but moving ones?
Not to mention putting digitally recorded voice onto pictures.
Imagine using your mouse to press a button labelled Mozart and being treated to a near CD quality reproduction of ‘Eine kleine Nachtmusik’ whilst looking at, for example, the score or maybe watching a digital tour of Strasbourg.
If you can imagine the possibilities of that, well you've got it — multi media.
Before you start trying to watch home movies on your PC, remember that although Microsoft is kind enough to include a very basic multi media player and recorder (both illustrated) as part of the standard Windows desktop, in order to go some way towards true multi media you need a few more things: a windows multi media extension, a CD-ROM drive, a sound card and probably a new monitor, not to mention that faster machine you've been promising yourself.
Whilst this little lot may cost you a packet, your PC will become the all singing all dancing box the salesman claimed it would be.
Multi media first arrived with us (on the PC) when Microsoft released windows 3.0.
It was heralded by more than one hack as being just another gadget.
Whilst it is true to say that it might have started off that way (call me a sceptic if you will), it has now found itself a major market position.
Computer based training takes on a whole new lease of life when you throw in multi media.
Can this be the beginning of the end for vastly over priced computer training courses?
The United States department of defence is currently looking at using multi media to train reservists, and a few publishers are using it as an exciting new media for publishing encyclopaedias.
Multi media is still, never the less, a new technology, and as such there are no real standards.
Several different types of CD-ROM's, sound cards and displays are available, thankfully, because of the device independence of Windows, budding multi media authors need not worry about this too much, but customer beware!
Many sound cards are available (even Microsoft are making them!) and you can expect to pay upwards of £100 a good one.
CD-ROM'S are different, standards exist and you although one could cost up to £500 for one, remember that 680mb is an average capacity — so you can't grumble too much.
Full motion video is not quite within the reach of us mortals, despite the protestations of the add men.
Again, many different technologies exist mainly based around the Intel chip sets and the JPEG compression technique.
Before you start spending too much of that hard earned money, it may pay to check out some books, there are several to choose from and most will give you some examples of the products available.
Most of the so called Multi media packages available today are nothing more than the original versions supplied on CD-ROM.
This is by no means an entirely bad thing as the massive storage capacity of the ROM's often result in the software coming bundled with some associated product.
Media Word is one good example.
Microsoft's Media Word is a recently released multi media version of Word for Windows called Bookshelf, unfortunately they are having difficulty registering the name so it's not available in the UK yet.
Bookshelf is primarily Word 2.0a with a CD-ROM containing a collection of reference works comprising a dictionary of quotations, The World Almanac and Book of Facts 1992, an atlas, dictionary and a thesaurus.
The popular Corel Draw application is now available on a CD-ROM containing 250 fonts and 14,000 clip art images, but again it is essentially the basic product.
To date, encyclopedias, dictionaries and information bases are the largest single users of CD-ROM's.
Both Collins and the Oxford English Dictionary are available as well as countless numbers of Atlases.
Multi Media is a new and exciting technology, but we must all wait to see what it evolves into.
Products to look out for.
The Orchard Sound Producer provides and 11 voice FM music synthesiser and a 4 watt amplifier, comes complete with a pair of speakers it is compatible with SoundBlaster and AdLib files and costs £69.00
The Toshiba KT3301S retails at around £500.00
The Logitech ScanMan Colour gives 24bit colour at 400dpi, comes with FotoTouch software and costs around £450.00 great value for money.
Orchard Fahrenheit 1280o Will give you a stunning 16 million colours at 640 by 480 or 256 colours at 1,024 by 768, it is a little slower than some of its competitors but quite a bit cheaper at around £200
Logitech MouseMan Cordless Price (RRP) £89.95+VAT
UK radio emissions approval, error correction, battery life/cost, driver software, left handed version.
If there's one price technological progress has forced upon us, it must be that eternal struggle against an ever-growing tangle of cables and wires.
If somebody offers a way of eliminating at least some of the spaghetti which lurks around my PC, they have my undivided attention.
Logitech's latest in its prolific line of PC rodents is one such solution and a novel one at that.
A mouse without a tail, the PC variety I mean, is nothing new.
Until now, however, cordless mice have usually made do with an infra red link to feed mouse movements and button clicks to the PC.
The receiver unit needs to face the business end of mouse, but if your desk is as cluttered as mine you will quickly see how problematical this could end up being.
With its new MouseMan Cordless, Logitech has opted for the alternative cordless solution, radio.
As long as the mouse is within about five feet of the receiver unit, it will work no matter which way it is pointed, even with obstacles like cups and books in between.
The mouse itself is a no-compromise exercise in ergonomics.
Rest your hand on it and one's palm fits snugly over the comparatively wide and tall top surface.
The three buttons slope steeply but comfortably from right to left as viewed from the user.
There isn't a line of geometrical symmetry in sight — it rates as one of the most comfortable PC mice I've tried yet.
Unfortunately for those who are left-handed, a MouseMan Cordless for them is not available.By comparison the receiver unit is a modestly styled compact box with a conventional 9-pin D-type serial lead.
PS/2 style and 25-way D-type serial adapters are also supplied.
An unobtrusive LED on top indicates when the mouse is on the move.
It struck me this mouse would be very attractive to portable users, but the generous serial lead to the receiver unit is a bit inconvenient for this.One thing I noticed straight away compared with my A4 Tech Microsoft Mouse clone was that it was necessary to reduce the movement sensitivity of my Windows mouse driver.
This is because MouseMan Cordless has its roller ball sited further forward, virtually under one's forefinger and it took a bit of time getting used to, as did a small but perceptible response lag.
Version 6.20 of Logitech's versatile MouseMan driver software is supplied and this offers various utilities like programmable mouse buttons, Windows pointer customisation and even an option for the pointer to temporarily grow as it moves.
These latter features are joined by other neat utilities for LCD screen users to combat that frustrating mouse pointer invisibility syndrome.A choice of four switchable radio channels is provided just in case there is any external radio interference, for example, from other radio controlled devices.
The default channel four worked without problems for me in an office crammed with electronics easily blot out my portable FM radio.
A rotary knob on the receiver unit selects the desired channel.
A small button underneath the mouse can be pressed to reveal which channel it is set to by counting the number of times a neighbouring LED blinks.
To change channel, select the desired number on the receiver unit and keep the button pressed under the mouse until the receiver unit LED starts blinking.
MouseMan Cordless is exempt from UK radio licensing regulations.The Lithium DL123A 3V battery represents approaching a tenth of the cost of the package at £7 a go.
Logitech predicts a life span of between six months and a year.Overall, I liked the MouseMan Cordless very much.
It's beautifully designed and the freedom provided by banishing the conventional lead is very welcome indeed.
On the other hand, it's not cheap and the slight lag between mouse movements and the screen response I experienced needs sorting.
If you're set on getting a cordless mouse Logitech's contender must be seriously considered.
Build-it.
The second part of a series where we create a machine specially designed for making and printing music.
In this, part two of the series, we take a look at some of the music software which is available.
Starting at the software end of the project will help us to determine the hardware configuration best suited to the task.
Last month we identified three broad categories of musician; the programmer, who produces music within the computer without recourse to musical instruments; the performer, who uses computer technology to enhance their performance, and the composer/arranger who produces printed scores for use in live performances.
There will obviously be a considerable overlap of requirements for these categories of musician — real life is never so simple.
So, for the purpose of this exercise our musician is to be a composer/arranger requiring quality printed output and, to make the project more challenging, our musician will take advantage of the sound producing and manipulation capabilities of the PC and use the flexibility of MIDI input.
Never let it be said that Practical PC ignores the viewpoint of the end user!
We have enlisted the help of a musician to act as a guinea-pig and to test the available music software and hardware.
Our musician, Mr. Robert Turner, is currently the musical director of a successful Male Voice choir and has had countless years of experience in the world of music — but only hours of experience with computers.
This combination, we feel, will provide a real test of the products' value and ease of use — from the musicians' point of view.
‘As a composer and arranger (and erstwhile copyist) I am going to try to answer the questions posed by Chris Hankins in last month's issue.
What do I, as a musician, need from a computer music machine?
What do I demand from the software package?
My task, at the end of the day, is to put dots on paper (music to the uninitiated).
This could seen as a graphical art exercise achieved by astute utilisation of a drawing package.
I would, however, expect much more from the software.
I would expect it to ‘understand’ the laws governing traditional notation practices, be able to automatically count the beats in each measure and transpose the score into any key.
Most of all, as a musician and not a computer buff, the software must be intuitive, quick to learn and easy to operate.
The output must be suitable for reproduction and as near to typeset quality as possible.
Ideally, both the full score and individual parts should be able to be printed from the same file.
The hardware of this music machine should be capable of playing back the composition in the sounds of the instruments for which it was written.
To the musician, a MIDI keyboard attached to the computer would provide a more natural method of entering notes but, for those musicians who are not concert pianists, some allowance must be made for timing mistakes to reduce the amount of editing.
The person who is well versed in notating music will know that it is a time-consuming and laborious operation.
If they are going to make an sizeable investment to computerise the process, the machine must enable the musician to produce the finished product faster than by hand.
The time taken to become acquainted with the software will, of course, need to be taken into account so, to make the exercise worthwhile, the software operations should designed with the musician in mind.
Many composers and arrangers hand over their manuscripts to professional copyists for fine finishing.
Some published material is hand written and of such high quality that it is difficult to distinguish it from a typeset score.
The computer must, therefore, produce a final printout which is equally as good, if not better than the hand copied finished piece.
The latter criteria obviously has a lot to do with the type of printer that you choose, but several notation programs give a printout that leaves much to be desired — even when the printer is a top of the range laser.
The addition of a sound-card facility can add a completely new dimension for the arranger/composer.
It will give an audible confirmation of the accuracy of the composition or arrangement.
With individual voices chosen from the sound-card a reasonably close approximation to the a performance can be produced.
In the case of a commission, this could be sent to the client as a proof.
The possibilities are legion.’
SongWright. 5.1
SongWright 5.1 is the latest version of a package that has been on the market for several years.
It is capable of running entirely from floppy disks and so allows computer users without a hard drive to produce professional scores.
SongWright 5.1 benefits from laser output and mouse input.
The mouse allows you to click the notes into position on the stave and saves a lot of keying time.
SongWright, the smallest note SongWright 5.1 will accept is one thirty-second of a whole note.
A main menu gives a list of the main functions: compose, record, edit, perform and write.
These are activated by the function keys or by clicking with the mouse.
The first function, compose, enables the user to enter notes, symbols and text on, above or between five line staves.
This works reasonably well, but for speed, a mouse is essential.
Two independent voices can be placed on each stave.
The main drawback of the compose screen is that only two staves are displayed at any one time and it is not possible to smoothly scroll across the page which is divided into set sections.
This can make editing a time consuming and confusing exercise when working with a large piece of music.
Symbols can be created in SongWright with a limited drawing screen and are stored in a user symbols library.
For complex work it will be necessary to create some symbols as the range supplied with SongWright 5.1 is not comprehensive.
You are allowed up to four lines of text for lyrics.
The text is entered directly from the keyboard having first selected its position between the staves with the mouse pointer.
The edit function screen displays eight stave lines and is used mainly for cutting and pasting sections of music as the detail is not sufficient for more detailed editing.
From the edit screen you can play back your composition one voice at a time through the PC speaker.
If you have a sound card, better quality sound output is available by using the perform function which also acts as a mini-recording studio, allowing you to record direct from the computer keyboard.
The recorded music can then be notated and played back through the sound card.
A sing option within the perform function displays the song lyrics ‘Karaoke’ style as the music plays.
The write function controls the printout to dot-matrix or laser printer.
I encountered some problems with the SongWright 5.1 laser driver and two HP Laserjet clones.
The quality of output is, however, quite acceptable.
All in all, SongWright 5.1 is a useful program within certain limitations.
The author of the manual wins more points for entertainment than for clarity — the manual is extremely difficult to follow.
SongWright 5.1 has one or two points in its favour — low demands on hardware at a very competitive price.
It would be ideally suited to anyone who does not want full orchestral score facilities.
FAX BOX
SongWright 5.1 £105.00
Computer Music Systems Ltd
Minimum System Requirements — PC/XT with CGA, EGA or Hercules monitor.
No hard disk required
Compatible with Sound Blaster, Covox and Adlib cards.
For: Easy note entry by using a mouse.
Against: Difficult to edit individual notes and symbols.
Verdict ***
The SongWright music screen shows only two lines at a time.
It is possible to scroll right to give another screen.
The red flags indicate the start and finish position for beaming which when printed are converted to normal beaming and give an excellent result.
The dot indicators on each line of the staves give the position of each semi-quaver in a time signature of 4/4.
The smallest note value possible with this program is demi-semi-quaver.
The edit display screen can only be used, for all practical purposes, for cutting and pasting.
The alteration of text and individual notes and symbols has to be achieved on the music screen.
It is possible to play from this mode through the PC speaker — a useful facility.
The program can be used to record music input directly from the computer keyboard.
Clicking the mouse onto a screen key sounds the respective pitch.
Recording takes place on another screen which shows note duration with as a block-line which can then be turned automatically into standard notation.
The symbol editor allows you to edit existing symbols or draw your own.
Although the drawing tools are limited to freehand pixel editing, lines and fills, with patience you can produce any symbol that you require.
COMPOSERS PEN 1.3 — Composit Software, Lightmoor, Telford, Shropshire.
The original Composers Pen was written for the Amstrad PCW several years ago.
This is the updated version for the PC, although I understand the original is still available.
It is a notation program only, but you get the impression that the program was written by a musician.
For the composer, arranger or copyist it covers every imaginable aspect of notation.
I used the PCW version and found little at fault, except, that the limitations imposed upon it by the hardware made it slow to operate.
The PC version has none of those problems.
The program can be operated, in the main, with a mouse which speeds movement around the screen.
Unfortunately the mouse cannot be used to actually enter notes and symbols, but keying the notes in is straightforward so this is no great hardship.
The insertion of notes is controlled by two key clusters, on the right-hand side of the keyboard which governs octave, stem direction, note length and accidentals and on the left the actual notes.
Q, W, E, R become C, D, E, F and S, D, F become G, A and B. Slightly awkward to start with but within a very short space of time you perform these operation without looking.
The learning process for Composers Pen is quite a lengthy one, partly because of the complex ground that it covers, but do not be put off by this as the effort expended will be more than worth it in the end.
Text entry is not quite so simple and a little and time consuming, but it does allow for individual pieces of text to be attached to specific notes and symbols which stay attached to the correct notes even when you have edited a piece extensively.
The entering of symbols, with the help of a quick reference card, poses few problems.
So far I have not been able to come up with any musical symbol that has not been catered for, whether arranging for full orchestra, brass-band or choir — with the single exception of guitar chord symbols.
The editing capabilities of Composers Pen are an asset.
You can change notes, symbols and dynamics quickly without disrupting the rest of the piece.
It is useful to include a spare stave onto which you can copy sections of music for later pasting.
With narrow spacing, Composers Pen can clearly display up to twelve staves at a time, although the program can cope with up to 99 staves in any one composition.
The staves can contain up to 80 screens full of bars and smooth scrolling of the screen makes for easy movement around your work, either up and down or side to side.
The instruments screen lets you define the parameters of the composition including the note spacing, number of staves, stave spacing and linking and the naming of instruments
The finished product (or parts of it) can be printed out either dot matrix, inkjet or laser printer and it is the output which lets this program down.
Slurs, ties and beams show blocky and jagged, even when laser printed.
With its total control of spacing, its ability to print out separate instrument parts, the transposing facility and easy to understand manual, Composers Pen must be one of the best in its field — except for the final output.
Nevertheless at around £160 you are getting superb value for money.
Composers Pen is ideally suited to the serious musician who is arranging or composing for a choir, brass-band or orchestra but not for commercial publication.
FAX BOX
Composers Pen £146.88
Composit Software
Minimum system requirements PC/XT
Does not require a hard disk
For: Good manual, comprehensive range of symbols and satisfies the most demanding notational requirements.
Against: Poor printed output
No MIDI compatibility
The Composers Pen instrument screen enables the user to set up the basic layout of the score.
This governs the spacing of notes and staves and the positioning of instruments on the music screen.
From this screen it is also possible to select which instruments are printed on the score, displayed on the screen and those required as separate printed parts.
The music screen, showing here a comfortable six lines, is the main part of this program.
All notes, symbols and text are entered here and the majority of the editing also.
The use of a bar-line stave (not shown) ensures that bar-lines are placed automatically every time the screen is refreshed, highlighting mistakes.
Refresh the screen frequently to make mistakes easier to identify.
Composers Pen allows you to verify your work on screen prior to printing.
The screen shows an accurate representation of how the composition will look as a printed score.
Unfortunately the jagged beams and stepped curves print out exactly as they appear on screen.
COMPOSER
Composer is a shareware notation program ideal for composing and playing back melody lines.
Although it is somewhat limited in its applications it is easy to operate and above all it is fun.
The printout to 9-pin dot-matrix gives a clear and readable copy.
The main music screen for entering and editing notes and symbols uses a prompt ‘finger’ with which you latch onto the note or symbol you require.
This is placed between two staves and moved to wherever you want it by using the cursor keys.
Only one note at a time is entered.
It is not possible to enter chords or to enter two notes, one on each stave, within the same note value.
Composer also has a MIDI facility to play back through the PC speaker.
Your composition is replayed one line at a time showing the music in graph form or by indicating the note position on a pianoforte keyboard on the screen.
FAX BOX
Composer (shareware)
Registration: $20.
Testware (U.K.) Ltd., 46, The Avenue, Harrogate, N. Yorks.
Verdict **
Hard Drive II
There's no doubt about it applications are getting bigger.
25Mb for a graphics program, 10Mb for Windows and 10Mb for a Windows Word processor.
Add a few other programs and a game or two and even a 100Mb drive is starting to look a little small.
One answer to the problem is to add a second hard drive.
Geoff Cox shows how to add a second hard drive to your existing system.
A few years ago if you had a machine with a 40Mb hard drive you would have described it as a high specification machine.
Today's with all the space hungry applications that are appearing a 40Mb hard disk is the de-facto minimum for a DOS based machine.
If you're thinking of using Windows then you will need at least 100Mb of drive space.
You can buy Hard drives of the IDE type for around £2 a megabyte so it won't cost an arm and a leg to upgrade if your system's hard disk is smaller than optimum.
If you have an MFM, RLL or SCSI hard disc you can add second drives to these systems in much the same way.
If you are one of the small minority with an EDSI drive you can add up to seven additional drives.
If you buy an IDE drive then you will have to remove the original drive from the computer in order to configure it.
Buying a Drive
If possible both drives on your system should be of the same make and type.
This is because a few older drives don't match the IDE standard exactly.
If you want to add a drive of the same make but a different size you probably won't have any problems.
If your new drive is of a different make you could possibly find that which drive is configured as drive C: could be critical.
If you don't know for sure which type of drive you have check the ribbon cable running into it.
SCSI drives have 50 way cables, IDE 40 way cables and ST506 (MFM/RLL).
drives have two ribbon cables, one 34 way controller cable and one 20 way data cable.
Unfortunately EDSI drives have the same cable configuration as ST506 but the drives are much faster and much larger in capacity, and are therefore rarely met in stand alone systems.
Each drive will also have a power supply connection that could be of either type shown n figure 1.
You should check your PC to make certain that you have the correct type of power connector available.
If you don't have a spare or your spare is of the wrong type this doesn't mean that you can't fit an extra drive.
It does mean that you will have to get either a converter, a lead with a socket of one type and a plug of the other type, or you will need a Y connector., a socket connected to two plugs.
If your computer dealer can't supply them you can easily get the connectors and make them up yourself if you are handy with a soldering iron.
If you aren't find an old fashioned TV repair shop and ask them if they'll make up the leads for you.
When you buy the drive ensure that it is in a sealed anti static bag, at least, and that the fitting instructions are supplied.
This is vital for configuring the drive.
It is also worth asking the supplier to provide fixing screws for the drive.
Incidentally if you have an old RLL or MFM drive it may be a better bet to replace it with a larger IDE drive, they're usually faster and much more reliable.
If you choose to do this obtain an IDE card, remove the old drive and it's card, and insert the new card in a spare slot.
Read the instructions supplied with the card as if there are serial and parallel ports on the card you may need to configure them as LPT2, COM3 and COM4 if those devices are already installed.
Alternatively save a slot and sell of your old serial/parallel card with your old hard dive.
Cable
Strangely enough the thing that most people have problems with when installing a new drive is the ribbon cable.
For IDE and SCSI drives the ribbon cable is a straight through type.
This means that part of the ribbon has not been separated and twisted to provide electronic drive identification.
In most cases the ribbon cable has the three connectors on it that are needed for two drives.
Unfortunately in some cases there will either be only two connectors or there won't be sufficient space on the cable to accommodate the drives in their bays.
In these cases a new cable is called for.
There is a myth that ribbon cables are difficult to make and you have to spend a fortune on getting cables specially made.
As with many myths there's not a lot of truth in it, to make your own cable all you need is the connectors, a length of cable, scissors and a small bench vice.
Not a piece of sticky-back plastic, a toilet roll or a Blue Peter badge in sight!
The photograph shows a typical IDC type connector, this is a SCSI connector (50 way) which is a little larger than the IDE type (40 way) but the fitting instructions are identical.
The connector comprises a body with two rows of insulation piercing blades.
A formed cover with slots for the blades fits over the ribbon cable and retains the it.
Finally there is a strain relief clip.
To fit the connector locate the appropriate position on the ribbon cable.
If you look carefully at the connector body you will see a triangle or other marker indicating pin 1.
The ribbon cable normally has a red stripe marking line 1.
It is essential that line 1 is connected to pin 1 of the connector.
If you are adding a connector to an existing cable check that its orientation matches that of the other connectors.
Ensuring that the connector is exactly perpendicular to the ribbon cable place the whole assembly into a vice and slowly squeeze the parts together.
Finally fold the ribbon back on itself and press the strain relief device into position with firm hand pressure.
Configuring the Drives
All IDE systems can support two drives (a few cards can support four) one master and one slave drive.
The master drive passes instructions to the slave.
This is why some combinations of drives from different manufacturers are fussy about which is the master.
In general though it is better to make your existing drive the master and the new drive the slave.
This means that you won't need to reinstall DOS and make the new disk bootable.
As you know the PC market is very strong on standards, each device type has dozens!
The configuration of hard drives is no different in this respect.
The Seagate drives I used for this article required 2 jumper connections made on the master drive, and all the connectors removed from the slave drive…
Other Seagate drives have different arrangements.
Some Fujitsu Drives use banks of switches for configuration, others use multiple jumpers.
This plethora of configuration options means that you must ensure that you have the manuals for both drives.
Once you have configured the drive as Master or Slave that's all you have to do, in theory.
Some drive have an internal LED jumper that prevents the IDE cards Drive Active LED from lighting unless it is removed.
This jumper is sometimes found behind the front panel of the drive.
If you have any problems with the Hard Drive LED try removing this jumper.
Installing the Drive
Once the appropriate connections are made all you need to do is fit the drive into the case.
Fitting a 3.5 inch drive into a 3.5 inch bay is simply a matter of using the appropriate screws.
The rule here is to use the shortest screws possible, if you use screws that are too long you could damage the drive.
Fitting a 5.25 inch drive to a 5.25 inch bay is equally easy.
Fitting a 3.5 inch drive to a 5.25 inch bay requires an adapter that is suitable for the particular drive.
Hard disk drives are sensitive to static electricity so only unpack it when you are ready to install it.
Take the usual static precautions, earth yourself and the computer, and don't touch any part of the connector or PCB.
Naturally you will have ensured that the mains electrical connections have been removed and that the Power supply box is sealed and properly earthed.
Mount the drive so that its front panel sits behind the front panel of the computer.
Secure the drive with at least four screws and make sure that if you mount it horizontally the printed circuit board is at the bottom.
Most drives only allow a five degree variation from the horizontal or vertical plane so make sure that your drive is mounted as accurately as possible.
Power on
Once both drives are installed connect the ribbon cable to both drives and interface card, and connect the power connectors to the drives.
Power up the machine.
If you don't hear the sound of the drives spinning up to speed then one of the connectors is the wrong way round.
At this point you have to set up the machines CMOS memory for the new drive.
There are as many ways of doing this as there are BIOS types.
IDE drives are intelligent, that is provided that you set up the CMOS to show the new drives capacity you don't have to worry about drive type.
Some BIOS types allow you to define a ‘user’ type which can be set up by entering the number of cylinders, heads and sectors on the drive.
Naturally it isn't that simple.
There are very few machines that will accept that a drive has more than 1024 cylinders whilst many IDE drives have 1500 or more cylinders on each platter.
The secret is to divide the number of cylinders by 2 and double the number of heads.
IDE drives do not need low level formatting so if your BIOS has such a routine, ignore it.
Fujitsu Drives can be low-level formatted without problem but some other drives will be ruined by this action.
If the system won't boot from the original C: \ drive then you may have inadvertently configured the drive as a slave, or the cable may be reversed either on the IDE interface card, or one of the drives.
Try removing the cable from the slave drive and rebooting.
If it doesn't work then try reversing the cable on the interface card.
If it works with just the Master drive in the system and will not work with the slave drive connected whatever the orientation of the cable., change the configuration to make the Slave drive the Master and the Master the Slave.
In most cases you won't have any problems and either drive can be the Master.
Once you have a bootable machine run FDISK to set up the partition(s) on your drive.
I tend to set up 50Mb partitions on every drive as this helps to maintain high performance on the system by restricting the range of travel of the heads for each logical drive.
Once you have run FDISK you should then run FORMAT to lay down the pattern of tracks for each logical drive.
If you use windows it is worth putting applications that you might need to use at the same time on different drives.
This means that the heads stay in more or less the right position when switching between applications, thus speeding things up a little.
Fitting a second drive is an easy task well within the capabilities of the average user who knows one end of a screwdriver from the other.
Facts Box
Identify the type of drive you have by looking at the cable.
IDE One 40 Conductor Ribbon Cable
SCSI One 50 Conductor Ribbon Cable
MFM/RLL One 34 way Controller Ribbon Cable and one 20 way Data Ribbon Cable.
EDSI One 34 way Ribbon Cable and one 20 way Ribbon Cable.
You can identify between MFM and RLL drives by the card type and perhaps the suffix R on the drive.
Many IDE cards have combined serial and parallel printer ports and perhaps a game port.
EDSI drives tend to be large capacity and used in very high performance machines.
Drive connectors and Ribbon Cable Maplin Electronics PLC. 0702 554161
40 way Ribbon Cable £0.54p metre (Cat No.
XR77J)
40 way IDC Header connector £1.75 (Cat No.
FG87U)
Disk drive Power Connector (large) £0.48p (Cat No.
JW65V)
Disk drive Power Connector (small) £0.48p (Cat No.
JW63T)
Socket for large drive power connector £0.56p (Cat No.
JW64U)
Disk Drive Power Cable 32/0.2 Black £0.12 metre (Cat No.
XR32K)
Disk Drive Power Cable 32/0.2 Red £0.12 metre (Cat No.
XR36P)
Disk Drive Power Cable 32/0.2 Yellow £0.12 metre (Cat No.
XR38R)
Buying List
Improv for Windows Release 2.0
Lotus Improv for Windows is the first dynamic spreadsheet for the Windows environment.
Improv provides business an professional users with a unique set of capabilities for dynamic viewing and analysis, and, for building spreadsheets that can be easily reused, modified and shared over a long lifecycle.
Improv for Windows gives users exceptional flexibility, ease-of-use and speed in viewing and reviewing data in spreadsheets, building spreadsheets and analysing multidimensional data.
Its unique ‘dynamic views’ lets users change the arrangement of spreadsheet data instantly, with a click of a mouse, without having to re-enter data and manually reconstruct the entire worksheet.
Improv for Windows also offers unparalleled flexibility to: * Create multiple views of the same worksheet, * Expand summarised data to show detail, and * Hide or display any part of a worksheet for greater clarity.
Improv for Windows also features dynamic general formulas, providing easy-to-read statements of the spreadsheet logic.
This enables anyone — not just the person who created a spreadsheet — to immediately read and understand the logic behind the data.
With Improv for Windows, spreadsheets are reusable and easily modifiable so that more users can gain additional value from a spreadsheet over time.
The multidimensional structure of Improv for Windows supports a robust spreadsheet design, so that users can display, arrange an manipulate up to 12 categories of data with a worksheet at one time.
And its innovative user interface features reduce or eliminate the number of steps needed to perform standard spreadsheet operations.
Features: State-of-the-art Spreadsheet Technolog Dynamic views to instantly arrange, hide, show, collapse and expand spreadsheets or segments of spreadsheets.
User-defined general formulas, stored separately from data, that can be applied to many cells at once, reducing the complexity and increasing the readability and ‘shareability’ of spreadsheets.
Improv spreadsheets are inherently self-documenting.
Multidimensional spreadsheet modelling with up to 12 categories displayable along rows, columns and pages
Ability to link and save up to 100 worksheets in a single file
Ability to create and name up to 16 different views of each worksheet ‘Outlining Plus’ for organising data and viewing summary information and performing drill-down review and analysis.
Full support for Lotus SmartIcons, with one-touch access to Improv commands
Quick access to Lotus Notes or Lotus cc:Mail to send Improv files in workgroup computing environment
User Interface Innovations InfoBox, a floating panel that lets users view and set Qe style (colour, fill patterns, line and text style, etc.) and other settings of any object in a spreadsheet or chart
Right mouse button Quick Menus for common editing commands and access to InfoBox
SmartFill, which automatically populates a category with commonly used data series, such as months, dates, numbers, letters and series
A Create Menu feature, giving users one menu for creating worksheets, charts, scripts, formulas, views, categories, and any other Improv object Formatting.
Printing Reporting A wide range of text, line and background colours Full Adobe Type Manager and TrueType support for wide choice of print features 13 scaleable Adobe PostScript typefaces included at no additional cost
Boldface, italic and underline printing features
Extensive fill colour and pattern options
Print preview to verify page layout and appearance
Page set-up formatting, including headers and footers
Presentation Graphics and Charting
Smart creation of graphs 20 major chart and graph types, including 3D bar and 3D pie charts, rotation of 3D charts, ability to create and print multi-page presentations, linking of multiple dynamic charts and dynamic worksheet tables into presentation windows it also has the ability to annotate presentations with text, drawn images, lines, arrows, ellipses, bitmaps, or OLE objects.
Application Development Tools
Lotus Script, the next generation programming toolkit for spreadsheet users it also has features to edit scripts and attach them to the menu, buttons, or presentation objects, such as bars in charts Lotus Dialog Editor for creating custom user interfaces to Lotus Script programs and Application Programming Interface (API) toolkit support in every package Improv also features calls to external programs; build and include personal custom functions.
Full Windows Support Certified for Windows 3. l
Supports Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) and Object Linking Exchange (OLE) client and server for smooth integration with other Windows application.
Improv for Windows has a suggested retail price of £395 contact: Lotus Development (UK) Ltd Lotus Park The Causeway Staines Middx TW183A0
LIMPET TAPES LTD.
LAUNCHES NEW RANGE OF PLAIN & PRINTED COMPUTER LABELS.
A new range of competitively priced plain & printed computer labels, has been added to the current stationery products and end-of-line labelling systems available from Limpet Tapes Ltd.
Comprising a quality paper on a Kraft silicone backing for assured foul-free printer throughput and featuring an environmentally friendly water based adhesive, the labels are available in white or a custom specified background colour, with optional bespoke printing depicting corporate graphics etc., in up to 2 colours.
For further information contact: LIMPET TAPES LTD Bond House 9A George Street Huntington, Cambs PE18 6BD Tel: 0480 459461 
ACT!
FOR THE HP 95LX FROM SAVTEC COMPUTER TECHNOLOGY
SAVTEC Computer Technology, the Hampshire based ACT! contact software specialist announces the availability of ACT! on the Hewlett-Packard Palmtop PC.
ACT!, developed by Contact Software, is both the US's and the UK's best selling contact software package, and PC and network variants tailored to the UK have been available for some time.
ACT! is a powerful contact manager, and has applications in every field of business and commerce.
In fact, wherever someone needs to keep track of contacts and customers, ACT! provides the ideal user-friendly solution The product is fast to set-up and use, tasks being accomplished through pop-up windows and pull-down menus.
A survey recently conducted in the US established that the average business person spends over three hours a week searching for misplaced information.
That totals four WEEKS a year!
ACT! eliminates this wastage through integrated features including contact tracking, calendar management, report generation, expenses tracking, instant lookup capability and automatically updated contact history.
Many business people are away from their office base for much of the working day, especially those involved in sales and marketing.
This is the kind of application that the new portable version of ACT! has fulfilled.
The Hewlett-Packard HP 95LX provides the ideal hardware platform to take advantage of ACT! 's powerful contact management facilities.
SAVTEC Computer Technology is probably the UK's foremost authority on the implementation of ACT! in the corporate sector, where organisations with large number of users will require expert guidance through the set-up stages and capable support in the future.
SAVTEC provides unlimited technical support free of charge, a factor that most Financial Directors will appreciate!
Training is vital to the successful implementation of the portable version of ACT!, and SAVTEC offers thorough instruction in all the facilities that the package offers.
All enquiries to: Jon Savage.
SAVTEC Computer Technology, Atticus House, 2 The Windmills, Turk Street, Alton, Hants.
Tel: 0420 54137
NEXT MONTH
Beginners Guide — Taking delivery of a new PC?
Chris Hankins shows you how to ensure a trouble free setup and what to do when things go wrong.
Quickies — Mindmaps Plus — a program to structure your thinking and help with problem solving and decision making.
Books — Reading for the new year.
Music Machine Part II — A closer look at some of the solutions on offer in our quest to produce a PC for making and printing music.
In this month's beginner's guide, Chris Hankins explains some of the basic Windows features and controls
There can be little doubt that a sound understanding of DOS commands produces a deeper understanding of the way your computer works.
PC computer users could be forgiven for feeling a little superior and more ‘computer literate’ than their Macintosh or Atari counterparts who use graphical representations of commands (or icons) to control their computer.
There is a certain comfort in the familiar C: \> prompt which makes you feel in control — understanding the way your computer operates.
There is, however, a positive move towards an icon based operating environment for the PC — Microsoft Windows.
At the basic level, Windows is an electronic desk-top which offers you a way to organise your programs.
Beneath this is a system which takes charge of managing computing parameters, leaving each application free to get on with its job.
All Windows applications work in this common environment, sharing many facilities which would be application-specific under DOS.
Version 3.0 and the further improved 3.1 version of Microsoft Windows have changed the face of modern Personal Computing.
The success of Windows is due in part to its ability to keep several applications active at the same time — each in its own screen or window.
As a direct result of this, text, data and pictures can be freely transferred from one application to another.
This is possible because all Windows applications share a common data transfer system.
To you, the user, it means that a series of less powerful programs can be used to produce results normally associated with top of the range software.
You can, for example, combine a picture produced by a painting program with text produced by a word-processing program (or vice versa )— desk-top publishing without desk-top publishing software.
Because Windows applications share common operational techniques, you can move easily between applications without having to learn a different set of commands for each.
The major drawback of Windows as an operating environment is its heavy power and memory requirements.
To make the best use of Windows you will need at least a 386SX based computer with as much memory as you can afford.
Windows has very advanced memory manager which can address any amount of memory to make the system more efficient.
In contrast, many DOS applications are still limited to the 640K of conventional memory — limiting both their power and speed.
Windows can be used on an 80286 based computer, but it will operate noticeably slower and cannot take advantage of one of Windows' main characteristics — Multi-tasking.
When one or more applications are opened at the same time (each in its own window) one application can be chosen to be active whilst the others remain idle but ready for use.
This is multi-loading and saves the trouble of closing down one program to start another.
Multi-tasking, on the other hand, allows more than one application to be active and working simultaneously.
Like it or not, it won't be that long before the DOS prompt is a thing of the past.
Software developers are rushing to produce Windows versions of their best selling software, partly because they see Windows as the way forward, and partly because Windows provides a ready-made set of program development tools for the programmer.
The development tools allow programmers to concentrate their efforts on the finer points of the program without having to worry about compatibility problems.
The control of printers, monitors, fonts and mice are all managed by Windows, making program development that much easier.
Many of the basic Windows techniques are taken for granted in the rush to produce better and better Windows applications — assuming that everyone understands Windows inside out.
This is a little unfair on the great majority of PC owners who do not (or cannot) use Windows yet, and feel in danger of being left behind.
All techniques on these pages refer to both Windows 3.0 and Windows 3.1. (unless otherwise stated).
The screen shots are taken from the 3.1 version.
The techniques are not only common to all Windows operation, but also apply to the majority of Windows applications.
Cut, Copy & Paste
One of the most useful, and all too often under used, features of Windows is the Clipboard.
The Clipboard acts as a bridge between different applications.
It allows graphics, text and data to be freely transferred from one application to another with complete compatibility.
The ‘Print Screen’ key on your keyboard is used by Windows to copy the whole screen display to the Clipboard.
Pressing the ‘Print Screen’ and ALT keys together copies just the active window to the Clipboard.
Some people use the Clipboard without even knowing.
When you need to remove a portion of text or graphics from your work, you can choose to delete it or cut it.
When an item is deleted it is lost.
When an item is cut, it is copied to the clipboard where it can, if required, be replaced, re-positioned or used in another Windows application.
To place an item on the Clipboard without removing it from your work, choose the ‘copy’ instead of the ‘cut’option from the Edit menu.
The ‘Paste’ option positions the Clipboard contents at the cursor position.
The contents stay on the Clipboard giving you time to change applications if you need to.
It is important to remember when cutting and pasting that the Clipboard can only hold one item at a time and is cleared each time the cut or copy command is used.
The Clipboard contents may, however, be copied to a file and reloaded into the Clipboard as required.
The Clipboard contents can be viewed by activating the Clipboard Viewer icon (Clipboard icon in Windows 3.0).
A copy of the Control Panel window has been placed on the Clipboard using the ALT+Print Screen key combination.
This image, which was captured form the Program Manager, can now be used in any other application.
Here it is ‘pasted’ into a word-processing program, demonstrating how the Clipboard can make a program more flexible than its initial design.
The Windows Control Panel
The Control Panel is a set of utilities for controlling and altering the operation of your computer.
The settings you make will be accessed by all your Windows applications — so you only need to make them once unless you alter your system configuration.
The control panel is activated by ‘double clicking’ on the control panel icon.
Double clicking the mouse whilst the pointer is over a selected area is the normal way of starting any application from an icon.
A single mouse click would simply highlight the item.
Double clicking has the same effect as pressing the return or enter key.
A typical control panel window.
Windows 3.0 users will not have the Midi-Mapper and Drivers Icons, and the 386 Enhanced icon is not displayed on 80286 machines.
If you are not happy with the default colours which Windows offers, you can design your own or choose one of the pre-set schemes.
Remember that, as will all Windows settings, changes made here will affect all the applications you run under Windows.
This window shows all the fonts which are installed in Windows and therefore available to Windows applications.
Fonts may be added or deleted from here.
If you double click on one of the font names a sample is displayed on the screen.
Here you can set the speed that the mouse cursor moves across the screen relative to the mouse movement on your desk.
You may also find it useful to change the double-click response speed.
This window allows you to change the date and time which is used by your computer.
It is also useful to demonstrate the choice you are given for data entry in many Windows boxes.
You can alter the numbers by:-1) Highlighting the part you want to change with the mouse and typing in the new value (the old value is automatically deleted).
2) Positioning the mouse cursor on the text line and using the backspace or delete keys to delete the numbers and then typing in the new value.
3) Using the up and down arrow buttons to increase or decrease the highlighted value.
The International window allows you to change date, time, currency, number and measurement formats.
To change options double click on the text window or click on the underscored arrow button.
A list of available options will be displayed.
Click on your choice to select.
The keyboard setting should be set to British if you want to use the pound () sign.
Program Group Windows
Two windows side by side.
Position the mouse pointer within either window area and click.
That window then becomes the active window with its top bar highlighted.
The downwards facing arrow reduces the window to an icon and the upwards facing arrow increases the size of the window to fill the screen.
The window is often reduced to an icon to save clutter in the Program Manager workspace.
Whilst the window is reduced to an icon, none of the program icons within the window can be activated.
When the window fills the screen the upwards facing arrow changes to a double headed arrow which, when activated, returns the window to its previous size.
You can return from the window icon to the normal window size by either clicking on the icon and selecting RESTORE from the menu which pops up, or by double clicking on the window icon.
Selecting MAXIMISE from the pop-up menu moves the window from an icon to full screen.
The bar in the upper left part of the window activates a pop-up menu either by clicking with the mouse or by pressing the ALT and HYPHEN (-) keys together.
This menu allows you to move, minimise to an icon or maximise the window to full screen.
This menu is used mainly for keyboard operation as most operations are quicker and easier with a mouse.
The active Program Group window has a highlighted border which is used for re-sizing.
The top, bottom and side bars are used to alter the window's height and width, whereas the corner section is used to size the height and width together.
When a Program Group window is not large enough to display all its contents scroll bars will appear at the bottom and/or side of the window.
These allow you to move the window contents into the visible area.
You can use the scroll bar in any one of three ways: by clicking on the left/right/up/down arrow boxes, by clicking and dragging the slider box to the desired position, or by clicking to either side of the slider box.
Help is Always at Hand
Most Windows and Windows applications menus have a Help option which calls up an information screen relevant to the task in hand.
There is even a help screen showing you how to use the help system.
The help text is displayed in a notebook type screen in which you can scroll through the items, mark passages of text for easy retrieval with a ‘bookmark’ or add extra comments of your own.
Each help screen has an index from which you may select a topic.
Words which may need further explanation are shown highlighted and, when selected with the mouse pointer, reveal a word definition.
Relevant help can always be called up by pressing the F1 function key.
JARGON BOX
Clipboard — A Windows utility that manages a section of memory for temporary storage prior to transfer.
Double-click — A mouse procedure where the left-hand mouse button is pressed twice in quick succession.
Graphical User Interface (GUI)— A program which runs between the user (you) and the operating system (DOS).
A GUI uses graphical representations of commands and activities which are translated by the program into standard DOS commands.
This lets you perform DOS activities without having to learn DOS.
Icon — A pictorial representation of a program, file or window.
Window — An area of the screen enclosed in a rectangular box.
A window can be the same size as the screen or as small as a single icon.
A window lets you control the information that can be seen at any one time.
RECOMMENDED READING
You Can Do It With Windows by Christopher Van Buren
Published by IDG Books Tel 021 706 6000 Price £18.45 ISBN 1-878058-37-1
Simply Windows by Mary Campbell
Published by Osborne/ McGraw-Hill Tel 0628 32981 Price £11.95 ISBN 0-07-881658-0
Practically Speaking
Speak out!
Have your say in Practical PC's letter's forum.
Anything goes, of course, so get pen to paper (or better still, fingers to keyboard) and write to: Practically Speaking,
Disappearing data
Sir: I feel that I must write to you concerning the Practical PC Direct marketing product, the ‘Handy Fast Rack Dispenser’ that ‘holds 3.5in and 5.25in disks and attaches easily to your monitor’.
The theory behind this is sound, stick it in front of the operator within easy reach, at the side of the monitor and voila!…
Every time the monitor is powered up the de-gaussing circuit fires up and destroys and/or corrupts all your lovely data that's being stored right next to the great big degaussing coil surrounding the screen.
(Not such a bright place to stick it after all.)
Perhaps next to the telephone so every time it rings, no…well perhaps next to…
S.Ashton.
Cheltenham Glos.
PPC: It very much depends on the monitor.
I used to use a similar item — called a Plonker Box at the time — years ago, on the sides of two or three of my computers, and never lost so much a byte of information.
That said, there's absolutely no way I'd stick one to the side of the Eizo T560i I use every day, purely because of the degaussing circuitry that you mention.
Thanks for the warning!
Starting Shareware
Sir: I am writing first to congratulate you all on an excellent magazine, I have been reading Computer magazines for the last 10 years and can honestly say that Practical PC is the most informative and enjoyable one to date.
Secondly I need you to help me out with a bit of advice.
The problem is that I want to start up a shareware library, but I have no idea of how to obtain the shareware titles.
Do I buy them from existing shareware libraries, or is there somewhere I could obtain a complete set of titles from in one go.
My other question involves the distribution rights of shareware titles.
Are there in fact any distribution rights or can any library distribute any title, and if there are distribution rights how would I go about obtaining them?
M.Bateson Chorley Lancs
PPC: Thank you for your kind words — we do try!
Now, obtaining shareware titles.
You could, I suppose, buy titles from other libraries — it does happen, but you're not being very inventive or individual then.
What the better libraries have done is to spend some time contacting shareware authors and acting as their representative.
My understanding of shareware is that it can be freely distributed but requires registration by the user for a clear conscience.
So, in that spirit, you can put together a library from whatever source you choose — just trolling round the many Bulletin Board Systems using a fast modem can net you gigabytes of files, and some really good stuff too.
But, to be fair to your potential customers, who could do this themselves, if they so desired, it seems to me that you have to treat the thing as a business from the word go, and try to bring something different to the market.
Perhaps acting as a UK branch of an existing US shareware outfit might be a starting point — again, others have done it, and now have very successful libraries.
Whatever route you choose, good luck with it!
Grading Up
Sir: Firstly, thanks for an excellent magazine.
I have read three of the first four issues and find it thoroughly enjoyable with lots of practical help and practical help is what I require.
I have an IBM PC clone about 3 years old.
80286 chip, 40 Mb hard disk, 3 and 5 high density floppies, 2 Mb ram and VGA monitor.
I want to progress to a 386 or 486 chip to enable me to take full advantage of Windows 3.1 and DOS 5 and of the increasing amount of software that requires this minimum.
The trade in value of this set up is amazingly (to me!) low and it seems to me that all (all?)
I need to do is replace the 80286 chip.
I don't suppose for one minute that it is that simple but could you please advise me?
I am happy with the rest of the machine.
Can it be done?
Is it worth doing and if so, can you point me in the right direction.
As you will have realised by now, I have no knowledge of the internal mysteries of the machine.
Thanking you in anticipation.
J. Michael Tomlinson Horsforth Leeds
PPC If you are dead set against replacing your motherboard (which is the option I'd go for) then your only alternative, other than buying a new set up, is to go for a processor replacement card.
These are expansion cards that plug into your processor's socket, after you have removed the 80286, and give you access to either 386 or 486 chips.
CTS, the UK representatives for SOTA have a range — contact them on 0235 559944 — and can also, I believe, supply replacement motherboards as well.
A flick through the adverts in the magazine will also show other sources of motherboards.
Replacing the motherboard or fitting one of these accelerator cards is a fairly simple job, if you're confident to do it, but those of a nervous disposition would be well advised to seek assistance from their local dealer, who ought to be able to do the job very quickly.
Monochrome Blues
Sir: I consider myself fortunate in having selected your launch issue from the station bookshop, being attracted by the price, for as a relatively new computer user I find the content both interesting and easy to read and understand.
Unfortunately, unlike the reader in your latest issue, I have been unable to rid myself of the conventional black and white screen in favour of the blue and yellow achievable.
I have followed the contents of the 2 previous issues that have touched upon this subject but without success.
I attach hereto a copy of my DOS Directory plus contents of the CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT and should appreciate your guidance in this respect.
My equipment is an original twin floppy disc drive IBM.
I look forward to your advice in due course and hopefully a more colourful life.
D.J Sales Thamesmead London
PPC: Here follows the CONFIG.SYS and AUTOEXEC.BAT Mr. Sales is using:
In the CONFIG.SYS 
device=ANSI.SYS
In the AUTOEXEC.BAT 
@echo off keybuk date time PROMPT $E[1; 33; 44m @echo on @echo off PROMPT Path
And here's how I'd change them:
In the CONFIG.SYS 
FILES=20 BUFFERS=20 DEVICE=C: \ANSI.SYS
In the AUTOEXEC.BAT 
@ECHO OFF KEYBUK DATE TIME PROMPT $E[1; 33; 44m$P$G CLS ECHO SCREEN COLOURS RESET PATH
That ought to do the trick!
Back issues and Shareware
Sir: I am writing to say how delighted I am with your magazine!
I have just found your September 92 issue, and having spent most of the day with my nose between its covers I shall put it on order with my local Smiths on Monday.
I am 61 years of age and my only link with computers was a brief but satisfying fling with a Sinclair ZX81 some ten or eleven years ago; it was, though, a 16K so I was upmarket!
I have just obtained an Amstrad 1512 PC with colour monitor, keyboard and mouse, which is being retired from the depths of my company's stores.
It is in perfect order and as I am due to take early retirement I am looking forward to spending many hours in its arms.
Having no real computing knowledge I am finding Practical PC an altogether most excellent monthly.
It is more than competitive in price, and the content is just what I need.
If the rest of your Beginner's Guide is to the same high standard as Issue £4 Many of my fears will be ironed out.
I also find Jargon Box and Tip box very useful.
Is it, therefore, possible to obtain back issues — numbers 1, 2 and 3?
I also wish advice regarding something called Shareware, advertised in your magazine.
It seems that I pay an extremely small price for a program from the supplier, and that I also have to pay the author if I wish to use it.
I find this puzzling.
I look forward to hearing from you, and very much hope that you are able to help with the back issues.
T P Shelford Thorplands Northampton
PPC: Back issues are available from our subscriptions department on 091 510 8787, but I'm afraid that issue 3 (the August issue) sold out — there are none of that issue left!).
You're probably not the only one to get confused with the shareware ethos.
The idea is that you are trying a program before you buy it, and the price you pay to the library in no way covers the cost of the program.
Shareware libraries provide you with a program on disk for a ‘nominal’ sum — they are providing the program for free, and charging only for the disk, duplicating and administration, all of which includes a small amount of profit, I suppose.
Then you try it out, and decide whether you want to continue to use it — if it's no good to you, then nothing further needs to be done.
That's the ‘try’ bit.
If you do intend to use it, you register the program with the author, and pay whatever fee he has specified for a licence to continue using it.
That's the ‘buy’ part.
If you're after shareware and don't want to pay a library for a disk full, the only other way is to either copy the programs from a friend or get on-line to a Bulletin Board System and download the programs from there via a modem.
Your letters are very welcome at Practical PC.
Please keep them short and to the point, and, if possible, word processed rather than hand-written (it makes it easier for us to read them!).
We read all you letters, and publish as many as we possibly can.
Unfortunately, Practically Speaking cannot enter into personal correspondence on any topic — all correspondence must be conducted via Practically Speaking.
We will respect anonymity if requested, but, as gesture of good faith, we do need to see your name and address, and, where applicable, a telephone number where you can be contacted during office hours.
We reserve the right to edit correspondence for length and to remove potentially libellous statements, or other matter that may lead to litigation.
This protects you as well as us.
Practically Speaking
Speak out!
Have your say in Practical PC's letters forum.
Anything goes, of course, so get pen to paper (or better still, fingers to keyboard) and write to: Practically Speaking,
Paying through the ‘no's?
Sir: I would like to relate to you an experience I recently had at a computer dealership on Oxford Road, Manchester, which I think may, in part, explain the ever downward spiralling morass computer retailing finds itself in.
I popped into this shop, which incidentally is a shop, not a pile 'em high sell it cheap warehouse, to buy some labels for our printer.
While I was there I thought I'd ask about our system as I believe we need a more sophisticated printer.
I found the shop expensively decorated and empty except for two sales staff, one sitting reading a magazine, the other preventing the counter from falling over.
The salesman I approached was in his early forties and begrudgingly admitted that he had a fair knowledge of the wordprocessor we use.
I asked if it could print in scales of grey upon computer labels, he closed his eyes, shook his head and insisted he didn't know.
Even though I knew what was going through his mind I asked a supplemental, ‘The software does support Grey Scales doesn't it?’.
His reply astounded me, and will ring in my ears for eternity.
Fixing me with a stare he delivered in a monotone these words: ‘We charge for technical support information’.
I spent nine years in Hi-Fi retail and always coached my staff to talk to our customers — their queries, desires and interests were our life blood.
Can you imagine going into a Hi-Fi, VCR or camera shop and in response to a question about Bitstream Processing, Nicam Transmission or intelligent autofocus respectively, you were told the above?
Why don't you start an initiative called something like ‘Getting your Ass into gear’ in which you encourage customers to highlight good and bad service.
Unless something is done, dealer margins will continue in free fall and the customers will continue to shop around for the best price in the belief that service is universally lousy, and that's in nobody's interest.
Ian M Phelps Manchester.
PPC: There's no excuse for that kind of attitude being taken by any sales team.
Like many others, I suspect, I have gone into a shop of whatever description linked to a current hobby, have asked a few pertinent questions, and have then exited clutching some new-bought kit.
It happens all the time — the question is merely an opener to fulfilling a wish to own something new, and merely seeks to confirm that the purchase is a worthy one.
In other words, it often means ‘Give me an excuse to buy that new printer/fishing rod/camera/whatever’.
We will happily publish the bouquets and brickbats, identifying a firm in such a way that they know who they are!
Cleaning Windows
Sir: I have been reading with interest your article on Windows 3.1 in the first issue of Practical PC and I feel certain points about Windows Multimedia capabilities need clarifying.
Although the soundblaster and Adlib cards are mentioned in the same breath when referring to to their support by Windows, I think that it should be pointed out that unlike the SoundBlaster card, the Adlib card (not including the Adlib Gold) can only play MID files via the Media Player, and is not capable of playing the digitised speech WAV files.
Also the ‘I'll be back’ WAV file that you say you assigned to Windows events and the internal speaker driver, are not supplied with Windows 3.1.
You probably acquired yours with a beta test copy of Windows.
However the PC speaker driver is available for download from Compuserve.
Paul B. Moss Upminster Essex
PPC: Guilty on both counts!
We thought we'd made it clear that it was only the MPC (Multimedia PC) versions of either card (that is the SoundBlaster Pro and the Adlib Gold) gave access to both MID and WAV file playing.
We're sorry if we've caused any confusion.
The speaker driver has now found its way onto many private BBS systems as well, and we wouldn't be at all surprised to see it popping up in shareware catalogues very soon.
Be warned though, it doesn't work on all PC speakers — there are one or two in the office that emit a sound of some sort, but so quietly that you need a hearing aid to catch anything at all.
The Basics.
Sir: I was prompted to write to you by the letter from J. Dawson in the July issue.
As a complete an utter novice I am seeking a publication that will explain to me in more or less layman's terms how my computer works and what I should/could be doing with it!
Be careful how you answer that one.
As the mum of a 12-year-old son, we are both learning as we go along how to use the Amstrad 5086, my son concentrating more or less on games and school related programs, myself for the odd game, but mainly word-processing (I have just written my first book), genealogy and cheating on addressing the Christmas cards.
I has taken me a while to to figure out that ‘we ain't got Windows, we got DOS’ so I would appreciate any advice in your columns on the basics — what sorts of programs are suitable for a simple soul like me who needs to knock out the odd poster, magazine or newsletter and something that will look more professional, from time to time.
We have an Amstrad DMP 3160 printer, which seems fine to me, but occasionally I could do with some fancy fonts and am I really looking for DTP?
As a journalist having a career break I do get itchy fingers and long to turn out something that will look good but not cost the earth.
Keep up the good work.
I am finding your mag interesting and am not having to dive for the dictionary too often.
Lynne Cowley B.A.
PPC: The DOS field has a plethora of programs, both commercial and shareware, that will do quite nicely on the machine you have.
It does rather sound as though DTP is where you're heading, and your choices are limited only by the memory in your machine and your budget — in that order.
It's perfectly possible to run a GEM based DTP package — like Timeworks or Timeworks Lite — on your machine, or to use Jetsetter, from Garbo Systems which is one of the better DOS based DTP programs.
Otherwise, I'd suggest you leaf through the many shareware suppliers' adverts and examine their offerings.
You might be surprised at how good shareware programs can be, and there's always the advantage of ‘try before you buy’.
As far as what you could/should be doing with your PC is concerned, keep reading!
We'll be covering all kinds of software and peripherals applicable to you in the coming months.
HELP!
Sir: I am researching the financial workings of the shareware market and would be grateful for the use of you columns to appeal for information.
I would like to hear about shareware authors' experiences regarding payment from users, and their relationships with shareware libraries.
R. Greenslade 15, Pyotts Hill Old Basing Hampshire RG24 0AR.
PPC: Happy to oblige!
Cash across the Water.
Sir: After reading a review in your magazine I decided to send for a shareware copy of Return to Kroz.
I found it so enjoyable that I wanted to register for the complete game.
According to the information on the disk, the price was $7.95 or I could get another two included for $20.
I rang Transend to ask about a registered copy, but they informed me that they didn't register that game, but that I should just write out cheque for the amount a cross out the £ and pout $.
I thought this was odd so I mentioned it to my bank, who were seriously unimpressed.
I then tried another shareware firm who said they could send me registered copies for £40.50.
I estimate that $20 plus a couple for postage would be about £15.
I am all in favour of paying this amount to the author, but I fail to see why a simple clerical task such as cashing my cheque, putting the goods in a parcel and posting it should cost nearly 200% more.
What is the best method of transferring the money to that author and cutting out the profiteers in this country?
Many thanks for a first class mag, even if I do go green with envy at some of the kit!
J. D. Holden Chichester
PPC: We'd estimate that 99% of shareware authors include their own address in the documentation somewhere, and many also include an order form, so the first point of contact is usually plain to see.
Lots of American authors are happy to accept credit cards — there's usually some indication of this — which is my favoured method of direct registration.
However, failing that, an international money order can be drawn in almost any currency — your bank will advise on how best to obtain one in the right denomination.
There's usually a small charge for the service, but nowhere near the amount you mention.
After that, it's a simple matter to send off the money order, together with the order form, and then await the return of the goodies.
Before you rush out, though, we must advise a modicum of caution.
The reputable shareware libraries in the UK do provide a very good service, in that they make sure that a: the author receives his payment, and b: the user receives the goods.
We mention this because it is not unknown for some US authors to encash money orders and neglect to send the goods.
Also, the UK Customs people seem to have a penchant for opening packages with disks in, and whilst I've never heard of anything going missing from such a package, they never seem to have grasped the idea that magnets and x-rays don't mix well with floppy disks.
The choice is yours, but I'd be very tempted to shop around the shareware libraries until you find one that will ask for an amount of money you consider reasonable.
Your letters are very welcome at Practical PC.
Please keep them short and to the point, and, if possible, word-processed rather than hand-written (it makes it easier for us to read them!).
We read all your letters, and publish as many as we possibly can.
Unfortunately, Practically Speaking cannot enter into personal correspondence on any topic — all correspondence must be conducted via Practically Speaking.
We will respect anonymity if requested, but, as gesture of good faith, we do need to see your name and address, and, where applicable, a telephone number where you can be contacted during office hours.
We reserve the right to edit correspondence for length and also to remove potentially libelous statements, or other matter which may lead to litigation.
This protects you as well as us.
PC Tune-up
In part two of our go-faster series, we consider getting even more out of the hard disk — by cacheing.
Getting the maximum data transfer rate out of a hard disk can increase the perceived speed of your computer enormously.
With modern programs, especially Windows applications, taking up massive amounts of hard drive space and producing ever larger files, the old 20 megabyte standard MFM type hard drive's speed is no longer sufficient.
How best to reconcile the need for faster performance and increased capacity?
Read on!
Everybody who buys MSDOS 5.0 gets a disk cache thrown in for free — same applies to DR DOS in its various versions.
The MSDOS variant (which is, numerically, at least, the most popular) is called SMARTDRV, and is almost a necessity if you're looking for faster hard disk performance.
To put it in simple terms, hard disk performance has failed to keep up with the massive increases in processor speeds — you need a disk cache of some description, so we might as well start with the one you get for free.
Entry level
The first level of primitive cacheing we all have is provided by the BUFFERS command in CONFIG.SYS — and really, it isn't cacheing at all— check out the Caches info-box.
From DOS 2.0 onwards, the number of buffers available to DOS has been user-configurable, and fiddling with the value can make a speed difference.
However, buffering relies on the data being access lying contiguously on the hard disk, so unless you de-fragment your hard drives regularly, the effectiveness of buffers gradually diminishes.
Frankly, speed differences are imperceptible on all but the slowest systems, so only the very dedicated need to bother too much with buffering.
You'd be well advised to leave your buffers value at 20 or 30, if you're not cacheing, and forget about them.
The default value for buffers is 0, so if you don't specify any, you won't get any.
You could experiment by commenting out the buffers=xx line in CONFIG.SYS to see whether buffering has much effect on your system, or if you have DOS 5.0 play with the secondary cache it provides.
CAUTION: Do not use secondary cacheing in the buffers= line if you're using any other cacheing program.
To specify a secondary buffer cache, append a second parameter to the command line — a value of 8 is optimum for most systems.
The line will look like this: buffers=30,8 
Cacheing
SMARTDRiVe is the free disk cacheing program provided with DOS 5 (the version you should be using now).
It's actually very effective, although perhaps a little slower in use than some of the more upmarket proprietary programs.
However, since its cost is minimal and most people will have it (a version came with Windows 3.0 and 3.1) it's likely to be the most used of the cacheing utilities.
Configuring it for use is simplicity itself, although there are one or two caveats to observe.
The first of these is that a basic system with only 640k of RAM will be unable to use smartdrv, since it requires either expanded (at least 256k) or extended (at least 512k) memory.
Secondly, it does, in common with most other similar utilities, use up some conventional memory (the precious 640k DOS RAM).
With that in mind, the basic command line for smartdrv resides in your CONFIG.SYS, and looks like this: device=c: \dos\smartdrv.sys
Later versions, particularly the version shipped with Windows 3.1 use two files, smartdrv.sys and smartdrv.exe.
The.
sys file resides in CONFIG.SYS and the.
exe file in AUTOEXEC.BAT.
The reason for this is largely to do with SCSI hard drives and the need for double buffering — see info box.
Either way, tuning smartdrv depends not so much on where it is started from, but the parameters that are used to specify the amount and type of memory that it will use.
Expanded vs.
Extended
We will examine the various different types of memory in next month's installment, but for the moment the following rules of thumb will guide you: 8086/8088 based machines
There's no choice here — you must use expanded memory.
Specify as much as you can reasonably afford to use for a cache bearing in mind any programs you may use that require expanded RAM.
Use as much expanded memory as you can afford for the cache, up to 2048k, and make sure it is above 256k
Command line: device=smartdrv.sys /a xxx (where xxx = the size of the cache)
The command must come after and device drivers you need for your expanded memory card.
80286 based machines
Use extended memory, and load smartdrv as the first device driver in CONFIG.SYS after the HIMEM.SYS command line.
(or smartdrv.exe as the first command in AUTOEXEC.BAT if you're using Windows 3.1).
Use as much extended RAM as you can afford, up to 2048k, but in any case do not try to use less than 256k. 80386/486 based machines
Where the PC has no real expanded RAM, using EMM386.EXE to provide it for cacheing is wasteful of resources.
Use Extended memory and load smartdrv into Upper Memory Blocks if you've got EMM386 active as a UMB provider.
The section of CONFIG.SYS that deals with this looks like this: device=c: \dos\himem.sys device=c: \dos\emm386.exe noems dos=high, umb devicehigh=c: \dos\smartdrv.sys xxxx yyyy (where xxxx is the cache size, and yyyy is the minimum size it can be when Windows 3.0 or higher is running)
Again, do not exceed 2048k, as performance gains, even with exceptionally large hard drives are minimal — less than 1% — above this figure.
The Windows 3.1 version of Smartdrv is self-configuring., It reads the amount of RAM in the system and will allocate up to 2048k depending on the processor type and amount of RAM available.
Using EMM386 to provide expanded RAM for cacheing purposes is a waste of time and memory — so don't do it.
EMM386 emulates expanded memory, and smartdrv will run much faster in physical extended memory than it will in emulated expanded memory.
Buffers with smartdrv
What you lose in memory by installing smartdrv you can, in some measure, reclaim from the Buffers command.
Using a disk cache lessens the requirement for buffers, and so you can safely reduce the number to 10 or less, or sometimes even do away with them altogether.
Only experimentation will provide the answer for you, as each machine and its associated applications is different, and juggling with the number of buffers will have varying effects.
Other Freebies
DOS also provides a few other go-faster bits and bobs, some of which are useful, some less so.
The first of these is FASTOPEN, a utility of a lesser usefulness, although it can, in certain situations, make disk accesses a little faster.
It maintains a list of files and their locations in memory, so that DOS can refer to that to find a file, rather than the file allocation table on your hard drive.
Frankly, it isn't worth the memory space it takes up, as improvements with other than database programs are imperceptible, and access with database files aren't speeded up very noticeably.
For machines with pots of memory and using Windows, though, RAMdrive is a different kettle of fish.
Windows and its applications are notorious for the creation of temporary files — if you've ever crashed out of Windows you may have seen files with the extension.
tmp littering your hard disk.
Obviously, applications are writing these files to your hard drive, and referring to them.
Even adding tons of extended RAM to your machine doesn't stop them from being created, so one of the better uses of a bit of extra RAM is to create another ‘hard disk’ in memory, using the ramdrive program.
For a 386 or 486 with 8 megabytes of RAM, I'd suggest the following: 1.
load all drivers high, using EMM386 to provide Upper Memory Blocks (we'll cover this in more detail later in the series).
2. specify a smartdrv cache of 2MB, loading smartdrv high as above 3. specify a 2MB RAM drive using RAMdrive — load it high with devicehigh 4. in AUTOEXEC.BAT insert two lines: set tmp=d: \ set temp=d: \ (where d: \ is the drive letter for your RAM drive — remove any other similar lines)
The effect of these steps is to give you, effectively, a much faster 4MB machine in which Windows will perform much better — and the difference can be startling, depending on which applications you use most.
Microsoft Word for Windows, for instance runs faster, and printing using Print Manager is speeded up tremendously — you get control of your machine back very quickly indeed, with no annoying hard disk whirring.
Like everything mentioned in this article, it's worthwhile experimenting with RAMdrive — it can use both expanded and extended memory, with the same provisos as smartdrv as regards EMM386, so can be useful on any machine that has enough RAM.
I wouldn't use RAMdrive on a machine with less than 8MB of RAM, though, since 4MB is about the absolute minimum you need to run Windows successfully, and the smartdrv and RAMdrive allocations have to be taken away from the overall amount.
Hardware solutions.
The final cacheing solution is hardware based, and relies on cacheing controllers.
These are available, at some cost, as an add-on, and one or two PC makers now include them as options on their specification lists.
In general, they speed up hard disk data transfer times by at least as much as software caches, but cost is likely to be a factor that you will have to weigh up.
In general terms, if you machine currently has either an MFM or RLL drive, investing in a cacheing controller card for it will be an unwise investment — assuming you can find one, that is.
Far better to go for a new IDE drive, or, probably cheaper, invest in some extra RAM and slap a big software cache onto the machine.
For IDE drives, a cacheing controller can increase throughput by up to 50%, the average figure being around 30%, but efficiency is largely governed by the amount of RAM on the controller card, and its speed.
The same applies to SCSI and ESDI type drives, for which cacheing controllers are available, although ESDI seems to have fallen out of favour recently, so they may be difficult to find.
If cost is a deciding factor, then it is almost as effective, and much cheaper, to add some RAM to the machine and use a large software cache than to change controllers.
If ultimate speed is the aim, then consider a cacheing controller, and stick 8MB of RAM onto it.
It will not be cheap, but it will be blisteringly fast!
Caches
There are two levels of cacheing available in software for the PC user.
The first is called buffering, and really only makes difference on slower systems.
Each buffer you assign in your CONFIG.SYS is allocated 512 bytes of memory (the size of a sector on disk).
Contiguous data from the disk is moved into the buffers and from there read into application RAM.
Since there is no speed difference between application RAM and the are the buffers are allocated, speed improvement is negligible in all but the slowest systems.
The second level is a RAM Cache which works very differently.
At the very simplest level, a disk cache keeps the most frequently used parts of a disk's information in RAM.
Any request for that data is fed to the faster silicon, rather than the slow hard drive, which increases perceived performance dramatically.
In more detail, cacheing utilities are capable of amassing copies of data from frequently accessed areas of the hard disk, which are used instead of the disk versions — and they don't have to be contiguous (though if they are, things get faster still).
As more and more data is read, old data that has been accessed least is discarded to make room for the new.
When data is written to the hard disk, the cache moves it straight to the hard drive, normally, rather than holding onto the data and doing it later.
There are obvious dangers in having changed data in memory rather than on disk, mostly associated with the big red switch.
MSDOS 6 is coming
A lot of what we've discussed in this series implies that you need to buy other programs to get the best out of your system — de-fragmenters, disk compression programs and so forth, but that isn't to be the case, necessarily, quite soon.
Although Microsoft has not yet gone very public on it, MSDOS 6 is due by the end of March 1993, and will include the following utilities:
Disk defragmentation — this will look uncannily like the Norton Utilities Speed Disk program, and since it is being licensed from Symantec (the publishers of Norton Utilities) there's every reason why it should.
Disk Compression/doubling — there have been rumours flying around about this facility for quite some time.
Thus far, the pundits have been betting on Stacker being included in the MSDOS 6 package, since a bundle with DOS 5.0 happened.
Practical PC can exclusively reveal that this will not be the case — the disk compression facility in DOS 6 will not be device driven, but will form part of IO.SYS, one of the hidden system files that form the core of DOS and will be totally transparent in use.
Multiple Configurations — you may remember we reviewed EasyBoot in the December issue of PPC, and considered it to be a great boon.
MSDOS 6 will have a facility called MULTI-BOOT which, according to our sources, will be very similar in its effect.
There will, as part of this facility, be three levels of re-boot included — a hard reset, cold re-boot, and a re-load, which sounds very familiar!
Anti-Virus — again licensed from Symantec, an anti-virus capability not dissimilar from Norton's Anti-virus will be included in the package.
Backup — the old backup/restore routine will be gone forever (we hope) given that a version of the Norton Backup will take its place in DOS 6
Memory Management — it's a fairly open secret that the EMM386.EXE program in DOS 5 was a re-vamped version of QEMM from Quarterdeck Office Systems.
DOS 6 will see it being brought a lot more up to date.
More than that we cannot tell you at the moment, but we will, of course, give you a full (p) review as soon as it is possible.
From what we know, it seems that the prudent PC user will do well to wait a while and see what other goodies DOS 6 will provide and then upgrade as quickly as possible.
Picture This.
Recently acquired by WordStar, the company that established the PCX standard has a new version of its image manipulation program.
David Dorn examines PhotoFinish 2.0 from Zsoft.
Sequels to movies are often less well received than the originals, quite often because they're just a re-hash of the plot with some minor twists.
Even in Rocky 37, you know Rocky will win in the end!
Can the same be said of upgrade releases to software?
Hopefully not!
PhotoFinish was well received when it first hit the market under a year ago.
As a baby brother to the all-singing and dancing Publisher's Paintbrush, it maintained much of the functionality of the more expensive product, but at a vastly reduced cost.
In version 2.0 PhotoFinish more closely approaches the power of Zsoft's flagship product, but adds some very worthwhile enhancements that the ‘professional’ package doesn't yet have.
The simplest view of PhotoFinish is as a manipulator for photographic images.
It is not primarily intended as a program in which to create bitmaps, but rather to touch up and enhance images acquired from other sources, which includes a quite powerful scanning facility.
Almost every scanner you can buy comes with its own software, some of which is passable, and some of which can be downright dire.
Often the file formats for hand scanners in particular depend on the program, and can be obscure — it's not often, for instance, that you see a PCC or CUT file these days, yet some scanners still provide files in those formats.
So PhotoFinish provides a common link between all manner of scanners, from hand-held to flat bed and beyond, and fully supports the new TWAIN specifications for scanners.
For hand scanning, there's the facility to ‘stitch’ scans together to form a larger image than the standard ‘4″ wide by as long as you like’, which is automatic, quick, and accurate.
Manipulation PhotoFinish is at its best with 24 bit images — containing anything up to 16.7 million colours — but very few people have the hardware to display such complex images at the moment.
Even so, it's perfectly possible — nay easy — to open a 24 bit image into a 256 colour environment under Windows (assuming your graphics card supports it — and most do), or, better yet, a 16 bit, 32,000 colour environment, and edit it there.
The image remains 24 bit, and such things as graduated fills, although not faithfully rendered onscreen, are perfectly applied within the file, and will print correctly.
To assist the user to decide which picture to work on, especially when files may have cryptic names, Zsoft has included a viewer utility in this release.
From the File menu, selecting VIEW opens up a window full of thumbnail representations of the images resident in the current directory.
each has a separate thumbnail file, and if one does not exist for any given image, PhotoFinish creates one.
Be warned, if you have one or two large and complex images, you could have time enough to make drink, and regret a cup of coffee before the thumbnail picture has been completed, but next time it will display with alacrity.
As you can see by the screenshot, normal filing operations can be performed from this utility.
Files New to PhotoFinish. but becoming more established in the professional graphics sphere, is JPEG compressed file formats.
Part of the PhotoFinish 2.0 package is a photo-library amounting to some 200 or so colour images, one or two of which may be familiar.
You get about fifty with the package, and the balance when you send your registration card back — as good a reason as any for registering, since images of this quality are usually expensive to buy.
Aside from JPEG, the currently favoured file formats are all represented and usable with PhotoFinish, which can happily convert between one and another.
Summary
PhotoFinish 2.0 is a low-cost alternative to the so-called professional packages which provides the user with a great many of the tools he/she will need to manipulate images for inclusion in DTP or for public consumption in electronic form.
As a cheaper alternative to the likes of PhotoStyler or Publisher's Paintbrush, it comes out well, automating many of the enhancement procedures they include — the screenshot of the auto-enhance facility shows this.
At £145 (+ VAT, of course) it is not badly priced for its power, and gives other packages a run for their money, including its big brother!
Should you be looking for an image manipulation and scanning package, include this on your shortlist.
Verdicts: Usability: **** Features: **** Speed: *** VFM **** Overall: ****
Pros: Excellent scanning facilities and image editing functions.
File viewer, JPEG compression
cons: Pasting a screen dump into a file is unnecessarily difficult
Pizazz Plus
Pizazz Plus is really a collection of three different, yet entirely compatible programs within one box, dealing with screen capture, image manipulation, and printing enhancements.
First up, is Pizazz + Convert, a handy utility for converting one graphics file type to another.
If you've ever wanted to convert a.
TIF file to a.
PCX file, for example, then this is the utility for you.
Whether it's converting pictures into a compatible format for publication, or just expanding your artistic horizons, then this little program is worth a look.
During the conversion process there are a wide range of options available to the user.
These include the ability to rotate or flip the image, change the size, colour and introduce dithering.
All facilities in Pizazz Plus are accessed via sets of user-friendly menus which make it easy to achieve your objective.
The conversion itself is speedy and reliable.
Next on the agenda is the Screen Capture program — Pizazz + Windows 3 Screen Capture.
As you can probably guess from the title, this product is only compatible with Windows version 3.0 or higher.
Once installed and running, Windows screenshots can be captured to user-defined files merely by pressing the PrintScreen key.
The Pizazz + Windows 3 Print Utility is installed at the same time as Pizazz Plus Screen Capture.
This utility allows you to alter images in such a way as to produce the best possible hard copy from your printer.
Before printing, you can rotate the image, alter its height/width, adjust the print shades, position on the page, and the wide range of options even extends to control of printer styles.
The whole package appears to be aimed at the accomplished user as the beginner could have some difficulty.
Problems may arise during the installation procedure when the user is required to answer questions regarding the hardware being used.
Although the User's Guide does give some help, the user should be aware of his/her monitor and printer specifications.
Also, Pizazz Convert is not designed to be installed in Windows, which seems a little odd, considering that its counterpart Pizazz Screen Capture is Windows 3 specific.
Attempting to install Pizazz Convert in Windows, can be a daunting task for the novice.
Two books are supplied with the disks, one of which can be extremely confusing at times as it applies to earlier versions of the program.
The newer booklet takes a hands-on approach and progresses in a far more appropriate manner.
After a short time, running through the menus becomes second nature and the package presents no further problems.
Overall, Pizazz Plus is a useful tool, and a worthwhile purchase.
Windows Power
Even though Windows 3.1's ease of use and functionality is an advance on version 3, there are still ways of making the environment quicker to use.
One such is hDC's Power Launcher.
David Dorn has the details.
hDC has been active in the Windows add-on market for some time, producing excellent utilities to make working in the PC's most popular GUI even easier than it is already.
Power Launcher takes speed of use a stage further, and also prompts the user to think a little more deeply about the way he works.
Power Launcher is typical of an hDC product, in that it is a collection of utilities and programs rather than a single application.
Within the slim packaging lies a host of mini programs (called Microapps), some of which are useful, some almost indispensable and some you can take or leave as the fancy takes you.
Ethos The general ethos behind Power Launcher is to make the task of opening and switching between applications easier and cleaner, not to say quicker.
The non-Power Launcher way of doing things normally involves opening the program group your application is in, finding the icon and double clicking on it, accepting that any other windows you may have open at the time will be overwritten if the application starts up maximised.
With Power Launcher, though, you can customise the way you work.
As the program is installed, you can elect to have Power Launcher entered as a startup program — or place it in the startup program group, which keeps your WIN.INI cleaner — and also allow it to replace the control button at the top left of every application window with its own red and white icon.
Herein lies one alternative method of program launching.
Opening the control icon gives you a series of cascading menus, which you can easily alter to show programs and functions you might want to perform.
As part of this, there is a set of enhanced commands which allow you to set up quite complex command lines for launching both DOS and Windows application within Windows.
I don't propose to enter into a tutorial on the enhanced commands, but take it from me that you can manipulate how a program looks when it opens, and even feed keystrokes to it automatically, have it run macros, and so forth.
It's very powerful.
Better than that, the Power Launcher itself has a timed event facility, which means that you can set it to open an application at a given time — so that file you promised to send to a colleague via modem by ten o'clock on Thursday can be sent automatically, even if you've taken the day off sick (assuming the cleaner hasn't switched your PC off, of course!)
Power Tools And then there are the Power Tools.
My favourite of them is the Power Toolbox, a way of taking program launching and switching out of the Program Manager altogether and putting your own buttons on the desktop.
My most-used applications are now, as you can see by the screen-shot, permanently affixed to my desktop and available by a single click on a button.
Power Toolbox goes further than this, though, as you can define a set of buttons for individual applications, so, for instance, you could design a set for Word for Windows to do things like applying styles to paragraphs, saving files in multiple formats — almost anything you choose.
Again, the enhanced command set comes into play here as well.
What's more, the toolbox will change automatically as you switch between programs, should you so desire, to load the right set of buttons for the application you're in.
The Power Keyboard and Power Mouse programs allow you to alter the way your input devices work — perhaps you want Excel to re-calculate when you hold down <ALT> and click the right mouse button.
Well, you can.
You can also map almost anything to a key-combination on the keyboard — how does <CTRL><ALT><SHIFT><F3> grab you for putting your Word for Windows document into 3 columns?
Me neither, but you can if you want.
Striking Perhaps the most striking change you'll see on your desktop is the toolbar along the top of the screen.
I've annotated the 1024x768 version so you can see what's there and what it does — I'll leave you to judge how useful you'll find it.
For myself, I've grown very used to having it around, and miss it when I use anyone else's machine — it certainly speeds things up.
Summary
And that, really, is what Power Launcher is all about — speeding up the way you use Windows.
Facilities like the screen saver that's built in are redundant with Windows 3.1, but with version 3.0, are useful.
The virtual desktop, which allows you to have as many full-screen applications running without overlapping as your RAM will allow, is a godsend when you're putting complex documents together.
In short, Power Launcher 2.0 provides the Windows user with a level of functionality and speed of use that is difficult not to get used to.
At £100, it would be good value for money, but at £59.95, it's an absolute steal.
You cannot afford to be without this brilliant package.
Info Box Product: Power Launcher 2.0 From: hDC Computer Corporation Tel: 0256 463344 Price: £49.95 Upgrade from V1.x — TBA 
Verdicts Ease of use: ***** Versatility: ***** Speed: ***** Value for Money ***** Overall: *****
Pros: Proves indispensable after a very short time — Power Toolbox is especially nice.
Price.
Cons: It's murder using a machine that doesn't have it loaded once you're used to it!
FIG 1 (Filename POWER1.TIF) The Power Launcher Toolbar (annotations, each button from left)
1
The hDC control button replaces the normal minus sign at the top left of your applications and gives access to the Power Launcher Menus.
2
A command line box for Windows, just for the die-hards, with 3 & 4, the accept and command builder buttons.
Command Builder helps you build complex commands with the enhanced command set.
5
This button doesn't just show you what directory you're currently in, but also pops up File Manager.
6
System Info — see separate figure
7
opens the Virtual Desktop Map, see separate figure Customisable buttons
8
Help!
9
Launches Power Toolbox — see separate figure
10
Launches Power Keyboard, which allows you to map all sorts of things onto your keyboard
11
Launches Power Mouse, which does for your mouse what Power keyboard does for your keyboard.
12
Lanches the Menu Editor for Power Launcher, wherein you can customise its menus to suit yourself
13
EXIT!! gets you out of Windows quickly and cleanly — one click needed.
14
Cascade Windows — the same as <WINDOW><CASCADE> in Program Manager.
15
Tile Windows — the same as <WINDOWS><TILE> in Program Manager
16
Minimise all applications
17
Close all Windows
18
Open a DOS session
19
Open Control Panel
20
Open Notepad
21
Search for a file — opens File Manager with the Search For dialogue box awaiting your input
22
Print — in Windows 3.1, acts as an OLE target.
You drag the file you want to print to the button, which saves having Print Manager open and minimised on your desktop, leaving more RAM free
23
Play sound (if you've got an MPC compatible sound card installed) also an OLE target
24
Minimise Power Launcher
25
Timed Events control
26
Power Launcher Preferences
27
Power Launcher Display and Library Preferences Fig 2 (filename POWER2.TIF) The Power Toolbox Toolbar.
In this case it's mine, and meant for launching or switching between applications.
From left to right, there's Word for Windows, Excel, Talking Windows, Windows Draw, PhotoStyler, D'compress and Arachnid Fig 3 (filename POWER3.TIF) The Virtual Desktop Map.
The virtual desktop is configurable to 8x8 screens, in whatever resolution you're working in.
You move between screens by clicking with the right mouse button on the portion you want to view, and drag the application windows you see here to the portion of the virtual desktop you want them to reside in.
Fig 4 (filename POWER4.TIF) The System Information application at work — self explanatory!
Fig 5 (filename POWER5.TIF) This is where you define the commands behind the buttons on the Power Toolbox toolbar.
The command you can see starts or switches to Word for Windows (the USEEXIST makes the button switch to Word if it's already open, and the IMAX sizes its window to leave the Power Launcher toolbar clear at the top of the screen, and icons clear at the bottom).
Fig 6 (filename POWER6.TIF) Power Launcher's menus cascading, un-touched by human hand in this case.
Of interest is the HIDE option (which appears on all the control menus).
This lets you hide any application, whether open or minimised — great if the boss is coming and you've got a game of solitaire on the boil.
Contraptions
Zack is on his first day working as a repairman for Gadgetco Inc.
He has to repair all of the machinery but this seems impossible since his workmates have borrowed his tools.
The manual that comes with Contraptions is a complete load of old tosh.
Really, does it have to explain about bicuspid mastication rates on a P.M.4 cutter?
I think not.
Luckily for us simple folk the game plot is very straight forward.
Zack must find his tools which are scattered around the factory.
He must negotiate puzzles, spring boards, buttons and other contraptions laying in his path.
Zack is controlled via joystick or keyboard (preferably joystick because keyboard controls are a weeny bit fiddly).
Puzzles are abundant and are only put there to stop Zack walking freely around the 60 or so factory rooms.
(The Health and Safety Department would close the place down if they saw it!)
To give you an idea of how Zack would overcome a barrier blocking an exit, you would look at the colour of the barrier and match it with a coloured button.
If it was a blue barrier then, hopefully, by jumping onto a blue button the barrier would deactivate.
Throwing some levers normally cuts out an electric force field, or jumping onto a steel plate hurls Zack into the air and over an obstruction.
It's a very playable game with some teasing puzzles that could take a while to sus out.
The only thing that ruined the game for me was the time it took to load each room.
I was using a 16Mhz 386 so a faster machine should, in theory, make loading faster.
It only took six seconds to load each room but some puzzles require you to operate buttons in several rooms, so you would obviously be running between rooms for a while.
Putting that aside, I enjoyed playing with the various contraptions which was both fun and time filling (during boring lunch hours!)
The graphics are bold, colourful and it's easy to recognise various objects too.
Sound it minimal (you can turn off the dreadful background music) and effects are rather limited.
Overall, it's a decent game for the curious and mechanically minded PC owner who thinks £20 is a good price.
I do.
Graphics 8
Sound 5
Gameplay 7
Overall 7
Mindscape
TV Sports Boxing
Seconds out and round one!
Join in and have your own boxing career, watch fights and consult your trainer.
It's all happening here in this graphically impressive boxing arcade simulation.
The first thing to do is to create a boxer.
You can model him (sorry, no hers!) on yourself or a boxing hero.
Ultimately, you have control over your boxer's weight, height, reach, skin colour, haircut, face, and numerous other considerations.
Give him a name and home town and away you go.
All new boxers in this TV Sports game start of at the bottom of the pile, ranked at 30.
Ideally you should aim to be number one which is achieved by mauling with other boxers — hopefully in the ring.
Exhibition fights can be arranged between any two boxers (you can fight as any boxer in the league) and take on the toughest or wimpish fighter.
The only way to progress in the game is to have a career.
When you fight a career fight you should always use the same boxer.
As time goes on he will come more experience, stronger, and faster.
Fights can be arranged with your manager and if you don't like your manager you can simply fire him!
You trainer is a nicer guy who can advise you about the next fight.
When you have enough cash you can buy training equipment such as a skipping rope, punch bag or robot boxer!
The boxing match is covered much like a TV fight (hence the name TV Sports!) with ‘live’ reports from a TV presenter.
The fight starts with an overhead view of the ring.
When your opponent is a couple of meters away or more you will always see the ring via the overhead camera.
As soon as you are within spitting distance the shot changes to a close up of both compeditors from the waist upwards.
The graphics look extremely good with 256 colours and such large moving images.
There are six punching moves which can be thrown with either fist.
Your defence is limited to guard up (head) and guard down (body).
This all sounds good and even looks good if you're looking at a still picture in the magazine, but the animation is a tad on the jerky side.
I couldn't see more than three frames between standing still and throwing the punch.
Furthermore, it was difficult to see whether you had hit your opponent or not.
There are punching sound effects and speech (via the internal speaker or sound card) but the boxers react like a stuffed dummy when they've been punch.
TV Sports Boxing is playable if you opt for the management side of the game and simply let the computer fight for you.
The computer can fight on the behalf of both boxers and the outcome is based upon the fighters statistics that they built up during numerous bouts.
Fighting manually is fun after you have mastered it but it gradually seems pointless the more you play.
The best boxing game I've played on a home computer is 4D Sports Boxing, again from Mindscape, which uses 3D vector graphics.
The TV Sports version is fine for the price but only consider it if you are a boxing fan.
Graphics 8
Sound 7
Gameplay 6
Overall 7
Mindscape £19.99
Mario Is Missing!
Yes, the Mario Brothers have wormed their way on to the PC!
You may be expecting some kind of platform game with bouncing mushrooms but instead you need a fair bit of brain power too!
The plot goes something like this: Bowser (an evil character) has captured Mario and has got his evil Koopas (looking just a bit like the Teenage Mutant Nija Turtles) to steal parts of famous monuments from around the world.
You play the part of Luigi, Mario's Brooklyn brother, who must return the stolen items to their correct places and eventually rescue Mario.
The adventure takes place in our world (Earth, that is) and Luigi can find himself transported all over the world.
At the beginning of the game Luigi will see five doors with a Portal behind each one.
A Portal will transport Luigi to a particular city anywhere in the world.
Once he is there he must find out exactly where ‘there’ is.
To do this, you (playing the part of Luigi), can roam the streets and visit various locations.
 Undoubtably you will come across Koopas making a getaway on a skateboard, bike, balloon, or whatever.
Simply clicking on the Koopa with the mouse pointer before he gets away will trip him up.
The beaten turtle leaves the stolen goods and makes a run for it.
The dropped item can be picked up and examined.
It will provide you with a clue to which country and city you are currently in.
On your way round the city you can talk to other people and ask for information by clicking on the question you want to ask.
The locals can be most helpful and will tell you most things you want to know.
If you come across a taxi token, pick it up and use it for a free taxi ride to any part of the city.
This saves time and is a lot quicker than walking.
Keep an eye out for locators which will tell you where to find people, Koopas, and Pokeys.
Their locations will appear on the map which is partly shown at the bottom of the screen.
Pressing ‘M’ will enlarge the city map to fill the whole screen.
Use the map to locate an Information Booth where you can pick up a leaflet and get some extra clues.
If you want to return the stolen object to the rightful owner, the curator, dial his number as listed on the Information Booth.
Naturally, you have a videophone in your pocket just in case.
He'll ask some questions and if you get them right you can visit the landmark.
When you figure out which city you're in, click on the Globulator icon (who thinks up these names?) and then click on the world map to select the correct city.
If you're right, Yoshi will come and get you.
(Yoshi appears to be a giant bird that you can ride, but I've never really got into Nintendo characters!)
Once you are comfortably sitting upon Yoshi, your hungry, but cute, feathered friend will eat the Pokey which stands guard in front the Portal.
Entering the Portal will transport you back to the five doors where you can visit another country and city.
However, make sure you have recovered all of the stolen objects and returned them to their curators.
It may sound a little long winded but after you have read the manual (twice) you should understand the plot and the idea.
Half way through the first city I discovered that Mario Is Missing! is intended for children!
I hastily found the options screen and saw that the level was set to a ‘ten years’ old setting.
There were many other settings including ‘adult’, which I was no way tempted to select.
Indeed, it's a tough game which will certainly educate kids (’ Daaad!
What country am I in?’) and probably educate you too (’ Um, why don't you ask your mum, son?’).
Seriously, it's a fun game to play with cheerful animation and bright colours.
Buy it for yourself or for your kids, it's challenging and secretly educating!
Graphics 9
Sound 7
Gameplay 8
Overall 8
Mindscape £39.99
Alone In the Dark
How scared can you get?
Can you solve puzzles while under attack from Zombis?
How can you survive the night in an evil house?
Will the suspense kill you before the monsters do?
Where's my mummy?
Every now and then a new game appears which sends the press wild with appraisal and is usually followed with a roaring applause at the ECTS annual awards ceremony.
I think Alone In the Dark just happens to be one of those games.
Before I get all excited and explain how the graphics work, I'll give you a quick run down on the storyline: Jeremy Hartwood, a painter, was found suspended by a rope in his old mansion house.
No one knows why, perhaps he worked too hard, had a nervous breakdown, or maybe suicide to escape the evil surrounding his house?
We don't know.
Anyway, you can read the whole story yourself if you decide to buy the game!
You can choose to play as one of two characters, Emily or Edward.
Emily is Jeremy's niece who remembers a secret drawer in an old piano and is offset by her deep curiosity to investigate.
Edward is a private detective hired by an antiques dealer who asked Edward to list all of the valuables in the house.
His tough character keeps him in the house and looks forward to the awaiting adventure.
Which ever character you choose, you'll be able to use weapons and fight using hand to hand combat.
Now for the graphics description.
All of the objects and characters are solid 3D objects which are calculated in real time.
Distant objects are small and get larger when they come closer to the camera.
Being a 3D game, you can view objects from any angle, or indeed yourself!
All camera shots are external and the camera position and angles changes when you move to a different location.
Some angles are quite bizarre, from up on the ceiling, down on the floor, in the corner of a room, or looking in from a window.
This creates a rather spooky atmosphere and because of the many camera angles gives the impression that you are being watched.
The animation of your character is superb with constant movement (even when you are still) and just enough detail to make it seem real.
Movement is smooth on a reasonable 386 machine but slow on a 286.
I used a 486 for speed and the best animation possible (I really wanted to get into this already classic game).
Tension can build up as you open doors and walk round corners.
Sooner or later you'll come face to face with an evil creature.
This too is a real 3D object with moving limbs and a mind of its own.
If you have a weapon, kill it quickly, else you must punch and kick it until it vanishes in a puff of smoke.
While avoiding evil bodies that jump through windows and ambush you when you least expect it, you must try your hardest to find clues to the mystery that unfolds before you.
Read books when you find them, keep hold of keys, explore dark passages, search cupboards and drawers, and above all — find a weapon before the next creature finds you!
Thrilling 'n chilling stuff indeed.
This game from Infogrames deserves much success and I envy the talents of the programmers concerned.
You really have to see this game in action to appreciate the animation and perspective.
Just try playing this game yourself alone in the dark!
The only thing that I don't like is the silly little protection book that contains pictorial passwords which must be looked up after loading the game.
I guess we can't have it all!
The sound effects are great.
There's not so many sounds, which could have killed the atmosphere, but the creaking floor boards add to the already chilling atmosphere.
It's best played with as few a people as possible — preferable by yourself.
Before I go back to playing the game I suggest you visit you're local software store and plead them to show you a demo.
The best yet, nice one Infogrames!
Graphics 10
Sound 9
Gameplay 9
Overall 10
Practical PC Award
Infogrames £44.99
CHILD'S PLAY (AND LEARN)— the BEST OF BRITISH
Good educational software for the PC used to be few and far between — the graphics were normally poor, the interface fiddly and most were totally over priced.
This state of affairs has altered over the last 12 months or so, with some excellent ‘edutainment’ products being released — like Broderbunds Kid Pix and Treehouse, and the high quality software from other US companies such as The Learning Company, Davidson and Sierra.
But get out the Union Jack and wave it frantically — there are some real gems now being released by UK companies Kosmos, School Software of Ireland, Europress (with their latest Fun School products, Paint&Create, and Spelling Fair) and from the Scottish software house, Lander.
We will have a look at the latest volumes in the Fun School series later but first of all its North of the Border to the land where good value for money is a minimum requirement and to the home of Lander Software
This long established company, founded by the charming Professor Ron Lander, have now completely re-written their range of Children's software, and Robin Matthews (and a six year old helper) take a closer look at four products from this hardy Glaswegian outfit.
COUNT AND ADD — This is the latest version of Lander's popular maths primer which has been widely used in schools throughout the UK.
It is designed to be a first maths program for the younger user and is suitable for the 3 to 6 years age group, depending on the level of computer familiarity.
This new version looks and sounds superb with full blown 256 colour graphics and sound support.
It is a delightfully presented piece of educational software, and consists of five separate games which all ‘teach’ basic maths concepts.
They take the user from very simple counting and progress to adding two numbers up to a total of 20.
The entire program can be customised with regard to the range of questions, the number of questions asked, how quickly before on line help is offered and also the type of problem posed.
The earlier Count and Add software is considered by many to be one of the best first maths programs for youngsters, and much care appears to have be spent on this new version.
Its appeal is obvious when shown to anyone in the target age group of ages 3 to 6, and this should be one of the first programs a young user should see on a PC.
Away from the numbers, the second Lander release is SPELLBOUND — this is a very slick and impressive piece of software — a sort of pacey arcade-action game, but designed to develop skills of logic, memory, concentration, problem solving and spelling (plus say Lander ‘spatial awareness, judgement, tenacity and co-ordination!
). That well known evil genius Professor Grime must be defeated, and you are the one for the job.
You need to open up a locked strongroom, and to do this you must retrieve some 5 keys.
These keys are in one of five locations, and to find each key you must solve the problems and puzzles in each area.
This is achieved by collecting letters and words, but in the meantime you will be attacked by all manner of cleverly disguised robots from Prof Grimes lab.
The five locations are well varied and carefully drawn, with each having its own character and ‘flavour’— their names give some clue as to what you can expect:-‘Dungeon Delirium’, ‘Submarine Insanity’, ‘Manhattan Madness’, ‘Alaskan Ice Cream’, and ‘Spaceship Frenzy’.
The programming in this release is really first rate, and its top graphics and controls allow this to claim to be up to arcade standards.
Spellbound also allows multiple levels of difficulty from the relatively easy to the very difficult, and with its word editing features should have quite a long shelf life.
A great piece of ‘edutainment’ designed for Ages 7 up.
Also on the Spelling front is HENRIETTA'S BOOK OF SPELLS — this new GOLD Edition of this well respected children's program is a superb release.
Now with full 256 colour graphics and digitised sound to go with its undoubted educational qualities, this really establishes the Lander range of software at the fore-front of children's software.
Designed to improve spelling, vocabulary, and language skills, the ‘game’ revolves around helping Henrietta (the heroine), defeat Cedric the Skeleton (Villain £1) and Morgana (Villainess £1)— thus allowing you to restore Henry (currently a frog) to his previous self (yes, the ubiquitous handsome Prince).
The features include a Progress Recorder, Attainment Levels, varying levels of difficulty and most importantly an ability to create your own vocabulary lists, and in different languages!!!
In this way the product can be customised to an individual child or groups age — or it can be used as a vocabulary primer for French, German, Spanish, Italian, English or even ‘American English’.
Comes with several thousand words, but with the usual Lander edit facility this is a very flexible educational tool that has a place both in the home and in schools.
Less of an arcade-type game than SpellBound, it compliments it well, and is in its own right a very accomplished release — and is currently one of the best pieces of UK children's ‘edutainment’ software.
Ages 6 up, but the foreign language options allow this to be used in a variety of ways.
Finally is probably the most well known Lander title — HOORAY FOR HENRIETTA.
As per all the other products above the updated version of this well respected educational product now boasts full 256 colour graphics and Soundboard support.
It is an entertaining program helping children to add, subtract, multiply and divide quickly and accurately.
Each maths function has eight skill levels, these can either be manually reset, or monitored by the PC.
The usual Lander features of a Progress Recorder, Attainment Levels etc, plus a totally involved and chaotic plotline involving Henrietta, Hopeless Henry and John the Parrot.
The graphics are of a high standard, the sound is good, the interface is easy for the younger user, and it succeeds in holding the younger users attention.
For Ages 4 — 15, but younger users will need some initial parental assistance.
All the Lander products above are in VGA graphics, support the Ad Lib and SoundBlaster sound cards and run well on 10Mhz plus machines.
Earlier versions of some products will support EGA and/or CGA graphics.
Each of the latest releases are available direct from Lander (041-357-1659) priced at £34-99.
Europress have also been producing children's software for many years — their ‘Fun School’ series is one of the highest selling series in ‘edutainment’although their earlier releases now look a bit crude and dated.
The latest volumes in the series — Fun School 4 takes the range into the high tech age with graphics up to VGA standard, and some limited Sound Board support (Ad Lib and compatibles).
Fun School 4, as it predecessors comes in three varieties catering to different age groups — For the -5's, 5 to 7's, and 7 to 11 yr olds.
Each product consists of a collection of six separate games, ‘teaching’ particular skills.
For example the -5's volume consists of Teddy Paint and Teddy's House (drawing and painting skills), Addition, Fun Train and Teddy's Books (memory and recognition) and Karaoke (sing along to nursery rhymes).
The more advanced 7 to 11 yr olds has Spy Travels and Spy Quiz (geography), Timetable and Exchange rates (maths and logic), and Proportions and Desert Dates.
The -5's release is pretty good, and will hold the young users attention for a reasonable time — parental guidance and encouragement is needed, in particular to fathom out the control keys (see more on this later).
The 5 to 7's is a very fair product, with lots of challenge and variety.
This is probably the best of the range to date and includes Log Cabin and Shopkeeper (basic maths), Library and Basketball (logic and sorting), Opposites and Typing a basic word processor with spelling features and sentence construction.
The 7 to 11's is a valiant attempt with a heavier emphasis on ‘education’ but this age group is more console and arcade game orientated — it may not have the ‘pace’to keep the users interest, without considerable parental encouragement — ten minutes of console for every half hour of Fun School 4?
The graphic presentation in each of the three products is much improved from Fun School 3, but each volume has its own quirks as regards controls and interface — this remains the main grumble as far as this reviewer is concerned.
Of course the younger user is unlikely to continually switch between the three, but continuity of product and of interface is still very important — my six year old expects to find certain controls linked to certain keys — how do you answer the question ‘why doesn't this key to the same as in the other Fun School ones???’.
This is only a small point, the Fun School 4 products have enough going for them to be recommended and are certainly good value for money — BUT to continue to compete with other quality software that is now appearing, this lack of consistency will need to be addressed.
The three Fun School 4 products, -5's, 5 to 7's, and 7 to 11's are available from Europress Software on 0625-859333 priced at £24-99
Sneak Preview Perfect Presentations
WordPerfect is not a single product organisation, not by any means.
Shortly to hit the market from WordPerfect is WordPerfect Presentations 2.0 for DOS (and Windows).
Practical PC has managed to get a sneak preview of what's on the way.
David Dorn puts you in the picture
We don't ever REVIEW beta test software — there's just too much that can change between us seeing early versions and the code being finalised, and that means that what you see reviewed might not be what you will buy.
However, we don't mind PREVIEWING software, to give you, the reader, some idea of what's coming up in the future.
A preview will tell you what the software can do at the moment — we don't go too heavily on any minor bugs or inconsistencies at the preview stage, but we do criticise bad design and form an opinion about whether the software will be up to scratch when it gets released.
Word Perfect's mission statement, in the blurb accompanying the beta-test software, tells us that the idea behind Presentations 2.0 (1.0 was DrawPerfect) was to bring together everything you need in Presentations Software together in one package, including a drawing program, clipart, text handling, charting, graphing and painting.
In the New Features box, you'll see an outline listing of the bits and bobs that go together to make up Presentations 2.0.
This preview will concentrate on some of the more striking aspects of the program.
Putting on a Show The Windows aficionado will be well pleased with the look and feel of Presentations 2.0 — it maintains that 3D kind of look that Windows 3.1 is so good at, to the point where you might just be persuaded that you're actually running a Windows application full screen.
Where it falls down is the support for only 256 real colours in this version, albeit at a resolution of 1024x768 and dithered to over 16 million with the Tseng Labs ET4000 video driver loaded.
Even so, it's very pleasant to see that a goodly swathe of video cards is supported directly.
You get to tell the program which card you're using once the full installation is done and the program has been booted — we assume that the final documentation will handle this in the customary WordPerfect manner, and be very complete on the subject.
Once we'd found this little gem — and other setup options — we managed to coax a wonderfully fast high resolution screen upon which to work out of the system.
Fast, by the way, is the operative word.
The speed is almost enough to lever a Windows user out of his comfortable environment and back into DOS (but some of us will just wait for the Windows version!).
Part of the usability studies that WordPerfect has done on Presentations has surfaced in the setup options., Wherever it's possible, the program can be set to auto-select the correct driver for whatever option you're configuring.
Thus, when you're setting up the mouse, for instance, if you've got MOUSE.COM loaded, Presentations senses it and uses its MOUSE.COM interface.
On the other hand, it can auto-sense a gamut of mice, from Logitech Bus mice to Microsoft mice and beyond.
How reliable this will be is difficult to say, since it couldn't find an old Logitech Serial Mouse we had on the test machine, but always found the pre-loaded mouse driver — but this is beta test software, so there's still work to be done.
Two faced There are two main sides to Presentations — the illustrative side, and the presentation side.
Drawing within the package is as far removed from DrawPerfect as it could be — the tools at your disposal are all there, and easily accessed.
It's a minor point, but as you select a tool, its icon animates, which is quite attractive if not strictly necessary.
Thereafter, the artistic user can both draw and paint.
That is to say that both bitmap and vector graphics are supported a la Corel 3, but a lot faster (and we're told that this being a Beta version, there's a fair amount of debugging code in the software that will slow it down.
That, of course will be removed in the final version, which ought to make it faster still.
Nice!).
To round off the facilities, there is a bitmap to vector utility, called a tracer, which finds the edges in such as PCX files and creates a vector image from them.
On the other side of the coin is the Presentation side of things.
This where Presentations begins to score very heavily.
The vast majority of presentation software, rightly, addresses the task of getting images onto a screen in an effective and eye-catching manner.
Some packages are easier to use than others in this respect.
The Beta release of presentations has come with a quite large amount of pre-drawn template material, which will be included with the final release, and which makes actually forming a presentation very simple.
In essence, you simply need to use an outline of what the screen should show, and the software more or less does the rest for you.
The usability is very good.
You simply select a template, from the extensive gallery, sort out the text you want on each slide in the outliner, and let the software get on with it.
At the other end of the scale, you can control everything, from the background to the text font and colour, size and weight, how each slide makes way for the next, and, innovatively for a DOS product, an accompanying sound track.
Sonorous For the first three months that Presentations 2.0 is on sale, it will come bundled with a SoundBlaster Pro sound card.
We've already reviewed the SoundBlaster Pro — indeed most of us at Practical PC have one in our machines — and know it to be more or less the industry standard for PC sound.
The bundling means that you will be able to play a MIDI sound-track as your presentation unfolds, and to this end, Presentations ships with over 100 industry standard.
MID files (the same kind as Windows 3.1 uses).
We've played most of them, and they're OK.
You can also use the SoundBlaster to record sounds (called Digitising) and have them play back as well.
Each slide can have a sound event associated with it, so you can change the sounds to suit the mood.
This is a new departure and a very welcome one, although, as with everything like this, we have our doubts as to whether end users will exercise good taste and discretion in its application.
Opinion I'm going to stick my neck out here.
The PC world is full of graphics and presentation packages of one kind or another, some excellent, some good, and some dire.
What hasn't happened so far, though, is a DOS application of the Windows environment that really feels like Windows and the integration of sound into a graphics package.
Whether Presentations 2.0 will corner the market in graphics and presentation software remains to be seen, but I for one applaud its user interface and the completeness that this beta version has shown.
It's already fast, and should become faster once the debugging code is taken out.
More  appropot , though, is the fact that a user that knows only Windows would find it easy to use and become productive in.
Because it's a beta version, I don't propose to harp on about any niggles, but will say this — if more DOS applications adopt its user interface and usability as well as its wealth of functions, the death of DOS may be further off than many of us have predicted.
Info Box Product: WordPerfect Presentations (Beta Test version) From:WordPerfect UK Ltd.
Tel:0932 850505 Price: Beta Test — TBA 
Verdicts Ease of Use: **** Versatility: ***** Intuitivity **** Speed: ***** Overall ****
Comment: Looks very promising with a DOS-based look and feel of Windows.
Ought to do well.
Enhancements and Features User Interface Improved GUI interface: dialog boxes, combo boxes, scroll bars, 3-D looks Button Bar, push-button icons, rulers, zoom icon, colour palettes New help system, edit nine drawings/presentations simultaneously New charting module with charting gallery Surface charts, 3-D charts, column pies Text charts, tables, organizational charts More options: grids, tick marks, 3-D view Data entry — Spreadsheet-like chart data editing (insert, move, and copy column widths) Data options: types, formulae, sorting Split-screen mode: view data and chart at same time on same screen.
Edit data, chart updates Presentation Tools Complete presentation in one file Templates and master slides Four viewing modes including a Slide Sorter view Outline mode for planning Speaker notes and handouts Support of sound playback during presentation (MIDI, digital audio) Drawing Improved GUI interface, editing with handles, dragging
New objects: closed curves, smart arrows, freehand objects, rounded rectangles, regular polygons
Editing: skewing, rotating around any point, blending, combining objects, multi-point editing, unlimited levels of undo and redo, edit all objects
Attributes: shadow, gradients, arrow heads, fine ends and joins, patterns
Colours: Support of dithered colours (16 million colors on a 16 color display)
256 colour palette: save and retrieve palettes (colour models: RGB, CMYK, HIS)
Bitmap features: spray can, paintbrush, eraser, fatbit editing
Autotrace: converts bitmaps (scanned images) to vector images
Multiple fonts in a window, WordPerfect characters (dialog like WPwin), word wrap
More WP functions (blocking, line height, super/subscript) Spell checker and outlining Text to a path Output Devices Direct support of colour devices (No GSS from DrawPerfect 1.1)
Color printers (HP PaintJet etc.)
Plotters Film recorders (C13000, W, Polaroid Palette)
Printing Improved black and white output (postscript, laser, dot-matrix) better gray-scale
Supports scalable printer fonts Supports banner printing
Other device drivers Display drivers (including high resolution 256 color drivers)
Mouse drivers Supports over 20 sound cards
Clipart Over 1,000 images
Many new categories Chemical symbols Music Food Clipart viewable in Gallery format Soundclips
Over 100 sound files supplied Music categories Background music Short sounds for emphasis Transitional music
Hot key integration between WordPerfect and WP Presentations for DOS
What is Beta Testing?
There is a number of stages in the production of a software package.
It begins with the concept, where someone has the bright idea in the first place.
The next stage is program design — the concept is fleshed out and the way the user will interact with the eventual program is worked out.
After that comes the initial coding.
Each software house has its own methods of getting the code together — some have one team of programmers working on everything within the package, whilst others have teams devoted to separate bits, the whole lot coming together later down the road.
Neither approach is better than the other.
Once the initial code is written, the testing starts.
At first, it is internal, just checking to see that the code to make two and two add up to four gets the right answer, but as more flesh gets put on the bones of the program, and it begins to look more like a real product, the first of the heavy testing stages starts.
This is all brought under the banner of Alpha Testing — totally internal, with no — or very little — input from end users.
Eventually, the program will be near completion, and the people who have tested it this far will be very familiar with it.
This is when Beta Testing starts.
A select band of end users — not employees of the company — will be asked to participate in testing the product in the real world, on their hardware, which may not be ‘bog standard’.
They are expected to report back to the software house and tell the programming team about any bugs they find, any inconsistencies, and so forth.
The programmers make changes, often relying on data gathered from debugging code built into the software at this point, and a new beta release is sent out to beta testers.
This carries on until the program is as bug-free as it can be, at which point someone makes the decision that the final code for release has been reached.
The version of Presentations we've been looking at is a Beta 2 release, which means that it is very close to being the final code, and it's expected that only bug-fixes and minor cosmetic changes will take place from this point forward.
Quick QBasic by Mike James
If you have upgraded to MS-DOS 5 then you have a free bonus that it almost worth the cost of the upgrade on its own — QBasic.
If you once dabbled with older types of Basic such as GWBASIC, ABASIC, or even BBC or Spectrum Basic then you will love Qbasic's advanced easy-to-use features.
If you have never touched a programming language in your life then QBasic is a great place to start — it is direct and to the point but it will not lead you into bad habits.
Why should you learn to program in this day and age?
Well my first reason would be that it's fun but if you want a justification then all I can say is that it is still useful to be able to produce your own programs that do exactly what you want.
The only real problem with QBasic is that it doesn't come with any sort of printed documentation — this is where we can help.
This short series is aimed at getting you started with QBasic and getting you to write real programs as quickly as possible.
So start here…
Part One Getting going
NOTE: In this article it is assumed that your machine has a hard disk called C: and MS-DOS is stored in a directory C: \DOS.
If this isn't the case then change C and the directory name as appropriate.
The first problem that you have is to find QBasic.
If you have installed MS-DOS 5 then you will find three files QBASIC.INI, QBASIC.HLP and QBASIC.EXE in the MS-DOS directory — usually called DOS.
(Use DIR C: \DOS\Q* to get a listing of files starting with Q in the DOS directory.)
If you can't find these three files then the chances are that someone has deleted then to save space.
In this case the simplest solution is to copy them back from the original installation disks — see Copying QBasic.
It is worth knowing that you can run Qbasic from a floppy only system and using earlier version of MS-DOS all you need are the three files listed to be stored on the current drive.
To run QBasic all you have to do is type QBASIC at the command prompt and you will see the opening screen
If you press Enter then you will see the QBasic Help Survival Guide.
This is a very useful source of information on QBasic and you should look at it later but for now press the ESC key to bypass it and get straight on with QBasic.
At this stage the screen that confronts you should look reasonably familiar.
The menu bar at the top of the screen works in the same way as nearly all MS-DOS menus.
Press Alt and the first letter of the menu option and the sub-menu will drop down.
For example, Alt and F drops the File menu down as shown below
Once you have the sub-menu dropped down you can select from it using the cursor keys to move the highlight bar or by just typing the first letter of the option's name.
Of course if you have a mouse installed you can achieve the same result by simply pointing and clicking on the menu option.
You will also notice that some of the menu options have short cut keypresses listed next to their names.
These can be used instead of the time- consuming pulling down of menus but don't try to learn them — you will soon pickup the ones that you need.
At the moment the opening screen looks a little blank and you might be forgiven for wondering what comes next.
The answer is the traditional ‘Hello World’ program.
Whenever you first encounter a new programming language the ‘Hello World’ program is a good starting point.
The opening screen is in fact a text editor that you can use to enter the commands that make up a QBasic program.
In this case the program is a single command.
Type in: PRINT ‘Hello World’ notice that double quotes (i.e. Shift and 2) are used.
The screen should now look like:
If you make a typing error then you can use the standard keys — the cursor keys to move and the delete keys to delete.
If you press Insert then you flip between inserting new characters and overtyping what is already there.
It's easier for you to experiment to see how it works than for me to go in for a detailed but boring explanation.
Now that you have your program typed in the next stage it to run it.
This is an important idea that you should make sure that you understand.
The command PRINT ‘Hello World’ is an instruction to print the message ‘Hello World’on the screen but Qbasic doesn't obey this command until you tell it to.
In other words, commands are not obeyed immediately but stored so that you can run the program, which is a list of commands, at a later date.
Well for this particular program its date has come!
All you have to do is select Start from the Run menu — by typing Alt-R followed by S or using a mouse or typing Shift and F5 (the shortcut key).
You should see the screen change to something like
This should look familiar to you because it will be the similar to the state of the screen just before you started QBasic.
If you look carefully at the illustration you should be able to see the command that started QBasic and just below it the message Hello World.
So the program has worked after all.
Right at the bottom of the screen the message ‘Press any key to continue’ gives you the clue as what to do next!
Qbasic maintains two screens — the program editing screen and the output screen.
Whenever you run a program it switches to the output screen to show you what the program has produced.
After the program has finished it displays the ‘Press any key’ message to let you return to the editing screen.
Next month: A real program
Ribbon
At this early stage in getting to know Qbasic you can hardly expect to turn out a master work but to leave you with just Hello World until next month would be cruel.
If you type in the following program exactly as listed and run it you will see a fascinating pattern snake its way across your screen.
The pattern is different each time you run the program so you can watch it for hours!
When you have typed the program in use the command Save in the file menu to save it.
You can reload it using Open in the file menu.
Don't worry about how it works at the moment just concentrate on the mechanics of getting it running.
Listing
If you can't wait for next month then you could get hold of a copy of my book ‘QBasic:The Language of MS-DOS’.
My publishers I/O Press have agreed to a discount of 10% on the published price of £14.95 to anyone who mentions they are following my series in Practical PC.
Phone (0969) 24402 or write to I/O Press, Freepost, Leyburn, North Yorkshire, DL8 5BR.
This isn't as easy as it sounds because all the DOS 5 files are compressed.
You first need to make sure that there is a copy of EXPAND.EXE in the DOS directory (use DIR C: \DOS\EXPAND. * to check).
If not then first copy it to the DOS directory using COPY A:EXPAND.EXE C: \DOS
You will find EXPAND.EXE on disk *** 3.5″ and disk *** 5.25″.
The next step is to copy and expand the compressed Qbasic files.
Insert disk *** 3.5″ or disk *** 5.25″ and use the commands EXPAND A:QBASIC.EX—C: \DOS\QBASIC.EXE EXPAND A:QBASIC.IN—C: \DOS\QBASIC.INI EXPAND A:QBASIC.HL—C: \DOS\QBASIC.HLP
Quatro pro for Windows breaks the 1-2-3 mould, taking spreadsheets into a new ‘user friendly’ era.
Kathryn Baron gives it a whirl and doesn't look back.
You can usually find your way around any spreadsheet if you are familiar with the Lotus 1-2-3 commands.
Spreadsheets have typically adopted these commands in order to gain some foothold in the market.
I know the spreadsheet is a working tool, but I hate having to use 1-2-3 and its clones — so many key combinations to remember.
To be honest, Quatro Pro was high on my list of pet hates.
But now?
We have Quatro Quo for Windows which is intuitive, easy to learn and even easier to use.
Quatro Pro gives great control of graph production, you can add a graph to the spreadsheet or even produce it separately with extra text, drawings or clip-art.
All your efforts can be painlessly printed to paper with superb control of the layout.
You've never seen spreadsheets looking so good!
For someone who is definitely not on the pay-roll at Borland, suffice it to say that Quatro Pro for Windows is an exciting product which exceeded my expectations and is a pleasure to work with.
No more impromptu advertising — I promise.
Well, what is so special about Quatro Pro for Windows?
First and foremost, Borland have taken the Windows interface and used it to good advantage.
It includes the usual Windows drop-down menus and a set of handy, user-definable speed buttons which allow frequently used functions to be accessed quickly.
These include buttons for cut and paste functions; text justification, size and style; insert, delete, data sort and column adjustment, and a useful speed sum button which totals any highlighted row or column.
As the mouse pointer hovers above each button, or indeed any of the drop-down menu options, a short description of the function appears in the bottom left-hand corner of the screen making it really easy to produce your first spreadsheet with minimum reference to the manual.
Quatro Pro for Windows uses ‘notebooks’ which are a new concept in spreadsheet applications.
Notebooks provide a way to organize many spreadsheets together in the same file.
Each notebook is made up of 256 spreadsheet pages and one Graphs page, which is page 257.
Each spreadsheet page is made up of a grid of columns and rows.
The Graphs page contains icons, representing any graphs or dialogue boxes that you have created.
The whole notebook is saved as a complete file and would typically contain a large spreadsheet broken down into more manageable sections, sets of related data or similarly formatted spreadsheets.
Notebooks can provide logical organisation of your data.
A large spreadsheet can be made much easier to work with by breaking it up into logical pieces on several pages of a notebook.
Because all pages are saved in the same file data and formulae can maintain their relationships across multiple pages.
When you write a formula that refers a cell on another page, the page name appears in the formula, making it easier to see what you're referencing.
Flipping through the pages of a notebook is quicker than scrolling through a large spreadsheet and makes finding a location or cell far easier.
Notebook pages run from page A to page IV but these names can be changed to something that has more relevance to the spreadsheet.
Cells or blocks of cells are highlighted in typical Windows fashion.
Any section that is highlighted is treated as an object by Quatro Pro for Windows.
Pointing at the object and pressing the right mouse button displays each object's properties.
Object properties can include font, style type, fill or colour palette.
Object properties, once set, can be redefined simply by re-clicking the right mouse button.
Only properties that can be given to the selected object are displayed.
As with all Windows applications, you can also change properties of an object by using the pull down Property menu.
Quattro Pro for Windows has five work areas.
The notebook window is where you can enter and display data.
The notebook window contains all the usual spreadsheet features and is where you do the majority of your work.
A Graph Window is used to build and customize graphs based on data from the Notebook window.
The Graphs Page, the last page of the notebook, is where graphs, text and graphics are linked to build a slide show.
A Print Preview window not only lets you preview your work before you print, but add headers and footers, adjust margins, and choose to print cell numbers, grid lines or formulae.
Finally, the Dialogue window is the workspace in which you can create custom applications to run within Quattro Pro.
Quatro Pro for Windows has powerful graphing and charting features.
Using graphs to analyse your data is easier than examining the data cell-by-cell.
The graph provides an overall picture of the data which makes spotting trend or correlation of data in your spreadsheet.
Graphs can appear as a floating graph in a notebook window or in a separate graph window.
The floating graph updates automatically as you modify the graph in a graph window.
Quatro Pro provides a set of drawing tools and colour palettes to enhance graphs produced in the Graph window.
These tools can also be used to produce text and graphics slides for a business presentation slide show.
Further enhancements can be made by importing third-party graphics or using the Quatro Pro collection of clip art.
If you happen to be a seasoned 1-2-3 or Excel user reluctant to loose reams of data, then have no fear.
Just retrieve the file in the normal way and Quattro Pro will automatically identify the file type by its extension (or the first record in the file) and translate it.
Most macros contained in the original file will still run.
When you save the file it will remain in 1-2-3 or Excel format unless you choose to save it as a Quattro Pro file by changing the file's extension.
The Quatro Pro for Windows program also includes a Database Desktop that uses a utility called the Paradox Engine when it shares data with Paradox, dBASE, ObjectVision, and other Engine supported applications.
This allows Quatro Pro to access directly data from third-party databases.
To set up a database in a notebook, you arrange the data into columns and rows.
Each row of an external database table contains information about a particular item — this is a record.
Each column (or field) contains one classification of the information that makes up the record.
Database Desktop uses Dynamic Data Exchange (DDE) to let you link data in one application to corresponding data in another application by using the Edit and Paste Linked data will automatically update as data is updated in the external application.
Quatro Pro for Windows profits greatly from its multi-page notebook layout, and the Windows environment ensures that it is easy to learn and use.
Add to this easy slide show production for business presentations complete with a goodly selection of transition effects and you very useful piece of business software.
Fig 1 (qpro01.TIF)
The Quatro Pro notebook pages can hold the complete spreadsheet, but, if you can, break the data into easily manageable sections.
It's then easier to use and easier to print out.
Sections of the spreadsheet become ‘objects’ once they are highlighted and their properties easily changed to your preferences.
A user-definable speed bar at the top of the screen holds icons representing frequently used functions.
Fig 2 (qpro02.TIF)
Turning your data in a graph is child's play.
Simply highlight sections of data and they automatically appear in the Graph window.
Quatro Pro provide a complete range of graph types in 2D, 3D and combination styles.
Notice the selection of text and drawing tools ready for you to use to add your own individual style to the graph.
Heading and axis labels are entered during the production of the graph, but it is often useful to be able to add a little extra explanatory text or graphic.
Fig 3 (qpro03.TIF)
All the components of this dialogue box can be freely positioned to produce a custom box for building your own applications within Quatro Pro.
At this stage the components are merely objects, but, once you are happy with the layout, one click on the lightning icon, brings the dialogue box to life.
The idea of tailoring spreadsheet functions exactly to your specific requirements is much more attractive than building a cumbersome series of macros.
Fig 4 (qpro04.TIF)
On the Graph page of the notebook you will find an icon display of all the graphs, charts and dialogue boxes produced either in the Graph window or from within the spreadsheet pages.
Extra icons can be added for building screen shows.
Select the graphs and text charts you want to include in the screen show by dragging their icon over the screenshow icon — simple as that.
Fig 5 (qpro05.TIF)
You can see each slide show in the Quatro Pro light table window.
Here you can rearrange the playing order of the slides and remove unwanted ones.
Use the transition effect menu to set the way each graph will replace the previous one during the screen show or presentation.
Here you can set the speed of the transition effect and the length of time each graph is shown on screen.
Fig 6 (qpro06.TIF)
The graph icon on the Quatro Pro speedbar lets you design a floating graph which may be sized and positioned anywhere on the notebook page.
This is particularly useful for adding explanatory graphs to otherwise incomprehensible sets of figures before printing out.
Fig 7 (qpro07.TIF)
Quatro Pro provide a series of dialogue boxes for sorting, analysing and searching for data.
This dialogue box will search for data within set criteria, extract it and write it to a pre-defined output block.
Fig 8 (qpro08.TIF)
If you are lucky enough to have a colour printer, or you just prefer to work with pretty colours, you can use a set of designer colour schemes designed, it would appear, by the world's great composers.
Colour does, however, make large spreadsheets much easier to understand, and the speed format utility controls not only the colour scheme, but the overall format of the spreadsheet.
You can format your spreadsheet manually, or design your own speedformat routine.
16 million colours on your screen, 50 extra fonts or 270,000 synonyms are offered in this month's quickies selection.
Or perhaps you are thinking of moving house or redesigning the furniture in your living room — here Design Your Own Home Interiors may help.
You could, of course, use a budget drawing package such as Computer Easy Draw for your designing and print a quality laser image with Pizazz Plus.
Help is also at hand for new Wordperfect users with Microref Quick Help.
If all this excites you enough to shout from the rooftops, then why not try Print Partner — a shareware utility for printing signs and banners.
The Oxford Thesaurus Electronic Edition
Price: £99.00
Company: Oxford University Press
Tel: 0865 56767
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: *****
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Very comprehensive thesaurus that surpasses those provided with a word processing package.
Against: Expensive.
Although the majority of modern word processing packages have a built-in Thesaurus, their content is limited and you will often find yourself looking up the word you require in a book.
The Oxford Thesaurus Electronic Edition offers a software solution to this problem by providing access to over 270, 000 synonyms plus a large choice of example sentences and phrases.
Installation of the program is straightforward, but you do need to make sure you have at least 3.5MB of free hard disk space and a minimum 150K of free RAM in order to accommodate it — not a lot when you consider the amount of data contained within.
Once installed you then have the choice of running the Thesaurus as a standalone program or as a memory resident one.
On starting the Thesaurus you are presented with the option of choosing one of two books, Thesaurus or Synonym.
Entering a word to search for in the Thesaurus input box produces a list of comprehensive information about that word, including advice on dialects, writing style and what context the word should be used in.
Choosing to enter a word in the Synonym input box calls up a list of headwords in alphabetical order, one of these can be selected and examined in more detail in the Thesaurus.
A whole word may be entered or a ‘wildcard’ can be used if you are unsure of the spelling of a word.
So for example if you typed ‘c*ne*’ in the input box, the software would come up with a list of seven possible words.
It is also possible to carry out a search by highlighting a word in your original work, cut and paste sections of the Thesaurus into your document and load the program into a DOS Window in 386 enhanced mode for use with Windows.
The Oxford Thesaurus Electronic Edition is very easy to use, the results of a search appear on the screen almost instantaneously and it lacks nothing that the book would have.
This is an excellent software package and presented no problems either on installation or use.
It would, however, be hard to justify spending £99.00 unless it is likely to get a great deal of use.
Face Pack
Price: £79.00 + VAT + P&P
Company: Fontware Limited
Tel: 0329 822857
Range of Features: **
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Good value font package, easy to install.
Against: No documentation.
Face Pack is a budget priced collection of 50 MonoType text and decorative fonts supplied in TrueType format.
The fonts are compatible with all Word Processors, Presentation packages, Desk Top Publishing software and related applications running under Windows 3.1, providing easy access to a whole range of different typefaces as and when required.
The fonts come on two 3.5″ floppy disks and installation is simplicity itself.
From within Windows you open the Control Panel and choose ‘Fonts’, then click on ‘Add Fonts’ and choose the drive from which the software is to be installed.
A Face Pack disk is then inserted into the disk drive and you can either choose individual fonts from the list or select them all before pressing OK to install.
The fonts should then appear in your Windows applications.
With some applications though, you may need to change your printer set up in order to be able to use them.
If you have HP Laserjet IIP installed as your printer, for example, you will have to change to another as none of these TrueType fonts are compatible with this particular type of printer.
As there is no documentation provided other than the installation procedure, which is printed on the box, it is probably best to check with Fontware on this point before buying.
On the whole, however, Face Pack offers a good variety of scalable fonts and is exceptional value for money especially where there is frequent use of DTP.
ComputerEasy Draw for Windows
Price: £99.95 + VAT
Company: Guildsoft Ltd.
Tel: 0752 606200
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: ****
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Good documentation and easy to use drawing tools.
Against: Limited text handling capabilities.
Computer Easy Draw is a competitively priced drawing package for use with Windows 3.0 and 3.1, and has many of the features you would expect from a more expensive program, plus easy to use animation software.
The default toolbox contains tools for drawing rectangles, circles, rounded rectangles, closed polygons, circles, and bezier curves, plus commands such as zoom in, display text, group, ungroup, choose line width, choose line type and an icon for the colour palette.
Freehand, closed freehand, arc, pie wedge, open polygon, and open bezier tools can be called up from a pull down menu or you can add them to your own customised toolbox so that the most frequently tools are always close at hand.
Drawings can be resized, flipped horizontally or vertically, stretched, compressed or rotated, and a useful feature is the ability to set the cursor to move only horizontally or vertically in order to draw straight lines.
A series of drawings may be selected and used in a slide show, making the program ideal for use as a presentation tool You can even import graphics files in a variety of formats from other applications for this purpose.
A palette with 256 colours allows simple selection of colours for lines by clicking the left mouse button and for fills by clicking the right mouse button.
By choosing one of the colours and holding down the shift key, you can then create your own colour, but rather than adding a new colour to the palette this replaces the original.
As all 256 colours are displayed at once, the palette takes up quite a large proportion of the screen, and it would have been preferable to be able to select the ones used the most and create your own custom palette.
Text can be bold, underlined or italicised and the 24 fonts provided may be of any point size.
There are also options for resizing text, fitting text to a path or a curve, or you can import text from a word processing package and paste it directly into your drawing.
These text handling capabilities are adequate for most uses, but the font list is rather limited and the font window doesn't show you what the font looks like before you select it.
There are also some more advanced functions so that the user can achieve special effects, such as the ability to fill text with patterns, shadow, invert, outline and so on, plus a further font list.
Unfortunately however, these functions are poorly documented and it takes quite some time to discover how to use them.
The utility ANIMaxx included with ComputerEasy Draw gives the user the opportunity to animate drawings.
It uses a technique called frame flipping in which a series of still images are changed slightly each time a frame is taken.
When these frames are played back they give an impression of motion.
This is easy enough to use in theory and works effectively.
It is, however, time consuming and requires a fair amount of practice before anything worthwhile is produced.
Although ComputerEasy Draw is more basic than the more expensive packages, you won't be paying for a lot of functions that you will rarely or never use, and it's certainly rich enough in features to make it a worthwhile investment for most everyday drawing requirements.
Design Your Own Home — Interiors £36.25 + £3.50 p&p
Company: Time Project UK Ltd.
Tel: 0203 325921
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: ****
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Takes the heavy work out of redesigning rooms.
Against: Furniture design outdated and Americanised.
If you've ever decided, in a flash of inspiration to change the furniture round in a particular room, you'll know that this is one of the jobs you end up wishing you'd never started.
It usually turns into a frustrating, time consuming and exhausting task, particularly when you move pieces of furniture only to find that they don't fit in the place you wanted to put them.
This is one of the areas in which Abracadata's Design Your Own Home — Interiors may be of help.
The package is basically a DOS based drawing tool with which you can draw rooms, and then place objects within them and move them around until they are in the desired location.
In order to run the software, which is supplied on both 5.25″ and 3.5″ floppy disks, you will need at least 640k RAM; Hercules, EGA, CGA or VGA graphics and a mouse.
To design a room you first select a scale and draw the outline of the walls from the top view.
You may then proceed with filling the room with furnishings.
There is a comprehensive choice of pre-drawn objects supplied with this package and a a pull-down menu includes furnishings for the Living Room, Dining Room, Kitchen, Bedroom and Bathroom, plus a list of other fixtures and fittings.
Each of these objects can be resized so, for example, if you have a sofa that is 4′ 6″ long, you could change the size of the sofa in the database to correspond with that of your own.
All furnishings can also be altered by changing the colour, or using one of the many fill patterns shown along the top of the screen.
For the more adventurous, oval, line, rectangle, hollow line, constrained line, arc, polygon and freehand tools are provided for drawing custom objects, or creating your own fill patterns.
There are also three scalable fonts, that can be changed in size and style, and a large range of printer drivers to enable you to print your finished work.
The completed drawing can be viewed from four different perspectives to give a more three-dimensional view of what your room will look like.
It is unlikely that any of your furniture will look like the pre-drawn objects in the program as it is quite Americanised and a bit outdated, even so the program is fun and easy to use.
The fact that you can place objects of the correct size in position also means that the program will help to avoid the heavy work of moving furniture or fixtures and fittings only to find they don't fit.
This applies whether you are just rearranging a room, thinking of buying some new items, or have just moved in and are starting from scratch.
Pizazz Plus 3.0
Price: £80.00 +VAT incl.
P&P
Company: EB Graph Ltd.
Tel: 081 904 2231/2
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: ***
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Enhances your printed images.
Against: Documentation would be better if it included a tutorial, as it is sometimes quite difficult to follow.
Pizazz Plus is a software package with screen capture and file conversion utilities that will allow you to enhance your printed images.
Installation of the software which is supplied on just one disk, doesn't take long, but it does ask you questions about the configuration of your system such as which kind of computer is being used, the name of the graphics adapter and the resolution.
You will also be asked what type of printer you have (there is an impressive list of 431 supported printers to choose from), and which port it is connected to.
It is therefore important to have all of this information to hand before beginning the installation procedure.
Pizazz Plus is a TSR (Terminate and Stay Resident) program, so once it is loaded it will be there whenever it is needed.
To invoke the program you first start the application from which you wish to print, open up the relevant file, and then press shift and the print screen key.
This captures the screen on which you have been working and brings up the Pizazz Plus Main Menu.
From here you can use the pull down menus to adjust the size, and proportion of your print image so that it will fit wherever you want it on the page, crop the image so that only part of it will be printed, save it as one of a variety of other file formats such as PCX, IMG, TIF and so on, and select the style and print quality.
There are also options to rotate, smooth, set the number of copies to be printed and specify which units are to be used for measurements.
The software supports up to 256 shades of grey, and colour images are automatically converted to black and white for printing, text screens can be converted to graphics, or colour images can be adjusted on screen to further enhance the depth of colour used.
Pizazz Plus can also be used with Windows 3.0 or later instructions for which are documented in the appendices at the end of the manual.
This package is really quite easy to use, but because of the nature of the documentation it is probably best for the beginner to have some experienced help especially on installation.
It does however, make printed images look a lot more professional, and should be ideal for use anywhere where presentation is a priority.
Microref Quick Help WordPerfect 5.1
Price:
Company: Computer Manuals Ltd.
Tel: 021 706 6000
Range of Features: **
Overall Speed: ****
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Offers help for WordPerfect 5.1 on instant and more depth levels.
Against: No significant problems.
Quick Help for WordPerfect 5.1 from Microref is a TSR (Terminate and Stay Resident) program that allows the user to access Help for WordPerfect 5.1 for DOS on two levels: Instant Help and Expanded Help.
Instant Help gives an immediate and concise answer to your query and Expanded Help explores the chosen topic in more depth with step-by-step instructions and some working examples.
The software is supplied on both 3.5″ and 5.25″ disks and once installed the program can be opened while you are still working on your document by pressing ALT and 0 (although you can choose your own Hot Key combination if you wish).
The screen then gives you the option of choosing the level of help required.
You can now move the highlight to the subject that is being queried, press return and view the information.
If you need to look up a command and are not sure under which topic to search, pressing F10 will bring up a Search facility into which a word that is relevant to that particular command may be inserted.
Search responds by finding every instance where this word appears.
You could be forgiven for thinking at first that Quick Help for WordPerfect has very few advantages over the help already supplied with WordPerfect.
Given that it is unobtrusive though, and it is possible to obtain a very concise response to a query, rather than having to read through quite a lot of text before finding the required information, it will at the very least save some time.
Print Partner
Price: £3.00
Registration Fee: £23.50
Company: Testware Ltd.
Print Partner is a simple shareware utility that enables the user to design and print out Banners, Greetings Cards, Signs, Letter Headings and Calendars.
The software comes on one disk and can be loaded and run from the floppy disk drive.
This program also supports twenty-seven of the most commonly used printers, so there should be no problem finding a driver compatible with your own.
Each item has its own main menu which includes options for inserting text, graphics, printing, print multiple copies, preview (with the exception of banners and signs), loading and saving.
If you wanted to make a banner for instance you would highlight banner on the main menu, then choose ‘font’, and choose one of the nine fancy fonts provided.
You then have the option to type in either one or two lines of text, before returning to the main menu.
If you wish to add a graphic to the banner you can highlight ‘graphic’ and choose a picture from the comprehensive list included with the package.
You are not just limited to these fonts and graphics however, as there is also an option to import from other applications or create your own with the simple drawing utility provided.
As this drawing feature relies on the placing of a series of dots on the screen though, it is not very effective and difficult to use.
Apart from the primitive drawing feature, Print Partner is an easy way to design and create your own stationery, banners, signs and so on.
Don't expect to achieve highly professional results from Print Partner, however, this one is best used just for fun.
Grizzled Skipper £279
Computer Resources Management Ltd.
Rang of features ***
Overall Speed ***
Ease of use ***
Verdict ***
Plus Points 24-bit true colour good if your screen can support it
Against — Installed memory too little
The grizzled Skipper is a graphics accelerator card that replaces the standard video driver installed in your computer.
It is capable of displaying photo-realistic 24-bit colour images at a resolution of 640 x 480 pixels, and high resolution, flicker-free displays at up to 1280 x 1024 screen resolution.
Both VGA and Super VGA monitors are supported and the manufacturer's claim that the Grizzled Skipper accelerator board is capable of almost 30 times the speed performance of the standard VGA controller card.
The Grizzled Skipper is supplied with a comprehensive set of drivers on three 3.5″ disks.
These include a driver for Windows 3.1 which support all the Windows 3.1 display modes including the 24-bit, 16.7 million colour and high-resolution non-interlaced modes.
In our own tests we found that the Grizzled Skipper with 512K RAM fitted showed little speed advantage over a Super VGA card with 1MB RAM which is commonly fitted in many high-end machines.
To install the card, you must, of course, open up your system unit casing as the card fits in a spare expansion slot.
The card will not work in unison with another video card so, if you are upgrading an existing machine, you will have to dispose of the original card.
After installation, if the monitor does not work at all, check that the card is firmly pushed into its slot.
If the monitor works but appears to have lost one or more of the red, blue or green colours, the cable connecting the card to the monitor is not making a good connection.
Make sure that the fixing screws are tightened and that none of the pins are bent.The Grizzled Skipper instruction manual is nicely written and covers the the installation procedure in detail.
Why is the card called a Grizzled Skipper?
There is no indication as to why this name was chosen but you may be interested to know that a Grizzled Skipper is a butterfly that, unlike the Grizzled Skipper card, is not at all colourful.
Amongst this month's Quickies hardware selection we have a privacy anti-glare screen, a scanner that can read and spell check a printed document and a small footprint desktop laser printer.
Software includes the virus catching software — DiskNet; a personal data base; MindMaps to keep your brain in good working order, and a program to liven up your Windows icons that can be both annoying and fun.
Mind Maps Plus
Price: £210.33 incl.
VAT
Company: Buzan Centres Limited
Tel: 0250 875929
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: ****
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Easy to use, maps can be converted to a PCX file for use in presentations.
Against: Would benefit from drawing tools and some clip art.
Mind Maps Plus is a new software package based on the creative ‘Mind Maps’ learning and thinking technique developed by Tony Buzan.
The software, which runs under DOS, is intended to assist in analysing and solving problems and help in the building of successful business strategies.
It is hoped that the user will achieve this by learning to use the logical and creative sides of the brain, in order to develop more efficient thinking patterns.
When a new Mind Map is created, the opening screen presents the user with an ellipse, which is to be the ‘focus’.
The focus is then labelled according to the subject of the new Mind Map.
Branches containing important keywords related to the topic are then placed around the focus.
These branches are easily created by entering relevant keywords in the List Panel.
When all the words have been entered, the branches are automatically colour coded and placed around the focus.
Further branches can be added at any time.
The program also features a Notepad with a spelling checker, so that more detailed information can be attached to the branches, and accessed when necessary.
On-screen editing facilities include a zoom mode, so that the user can see part of a mind map in more detail, a colour palette so that the colour of branches and text can be altered, and cut and paste options to allow branches to be moved around.
The intention of Mind Maps Plus is to enable the user to formulate and present ideas in a more accessible and logical manner with the use of both text and graphics.
With this in mind, it seems that the program would benefit from some basic drawing tools and perhaps a small library of symbols and clipart, in order to give the program a more graphical feel.
Also, the software itself does very little toward teaching the user Mind Mapping techniques.
There is a supplementary book included in the package, however, and you would do well to read this first if you want to get maximum benefit from the program.
0423 886415 (24 hour line)
Geoclock UK
Price: £3.00
Company: Testware U.K. Ltd.
Tel: 0423 880471 (Office hours)
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: **
Ease of Use: **
Verdict: **
Plus Points: Reasonably accurate representation of the time of day around the world.
Against: Numerous commands that are difficult to remember.
Geoclock UK is a shareware program that shows a coloured map of the earth together with the time and date (which is based on the time on your PC's clock).
The map also highlights the parts of the world that are in daylight, darkness and twilight at the current time.
This display is updated constantly so that the information shown on the screen is as accurate as possible.
To run the program you will need DOS 3.0 or later, a hard disk and an EGA, VGA or SVGA graphics adapter.
By pressing ‘C’ or ‘P’the user is able to alter map attributes by the entry of a simple command.
It is possible, for example, to change the format of dates and times, map colours, set latitude and longitude lines, show city names and turn off the sunlight display.
Although only four maps are provided with the shareware version, the registered version comes with a least 25 maps and gives the user access to many more features.
These include mouse support, zoom, a distance measurement function, and options for drawing lines and circles on the maps.
There is also a special utility called a HAM Package for amateur radio enthusiasts, in which a user can enter a call sign and the position of the remote station will be marked on the map, together with the local time and location information.
Apart from perhaps being of interest to people who make a lot of overseas telephone calls, and need to know what time it is in New York when its' 11am in London, for example, this program would seem to be very limited in its usefulness.
Geoclock UK is quite accurate and fun to use — so it's well worth having a look at, even if you don't have a real use for it.
Disknet
Price: Single copy: £89.00 + VAT
Site licence: price available on request.
Company: Reflex Magnetics Ltd.
Tel: 071 372 6666
Plus Points: Catches all viruses whether known or unknown.
Against: Relies on third-party virus scanning programs.
Viruses are programs that infect the PC and reproduce themselves.
These programs are at the very least annoying and at their worst destructive.
Unfortunately, they seem to be here to stay.
Infection occurs with the transfer of data and is often passed on via an infected floppy disk.
Disknet effectively stops this from happening, by ensuring that each floppy disk is virus free before use.
The program requires DOS 3.0 or later, and you will also need to have a separate virus scanning program, and a formatted system disk in order to complete the installation.
This is a fairly complex business, so it's important that the installation instructions are followed carefully.
No real harm will be done should you get it wrong first time, but you will have to start from the beginning again and, depending on how much of the software has been installed when the error occurs, things can get rather complicated.
You might find, for example, that the Disknet installation disk itself is denied access because it hasn't been checked (by Disknet) for viruses!
Disknet uses a single computer as a ‘gateway’ PC which means that the machine has been previously tested for viruses, and also has scanner software and the Disknet check program installed.
This ‘gateway’ PC is then used for checking that all incoming floppy disks are virus free.
When the disk is found to be free from a virus infection it is given an electronic signature code.
Should you try to use a disk without this signature there will be an audible warning (you can choose a beep or a siren), and the message ‘Unvalidated disk: please have this checked’ will appear on the screen.
The disk is not allowed access until it has been validated with the Disknet check program.
Two further options are C:CURE and LOCK.
C:CURE gives password protection when booting from the hard disk, prevents hard disk access when booting from a floppy disk and automatically cures partition and boot sector viruses.
LOCK prevents unauthorised Disknet removal.
Disknet gives the user no other choice than to stick to a routine of checking each incoming diskette for viruses.
This is no bad thing as the software provides a very efficient way of preventing a virus from entering the system in the first place.
There are times though, when Disknet can cause a certain amount of frustration.
When in a hurry, or eager to try out the new software you've just received for example, you might forget to validate the disks.
Only to have your memory jolted by a loud and indignant beep.
Seikosha OP-104 Compact Desktop Laser Printer
Price: £699.00 + VAT
Company: Seikosha
Tel: 0753 685873
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Low price, well designed, ease of use.
Against: Only one emulation mode as standard.
The OP-104 is one of the growing number of low priced 4ppm (pages per minute) laser printers aimed mainly at the home and small business markets.
It is designed as a desktop printer, having a small footprint and being light enough to pick up and move comfortably.
Setting up the machine was no problem.
The drum unit, developer unit, cleaning pad and toner cartridge slot neatly and easily into place underneath a hinged top cover.
All that's left to do after this is to connect the power lead and your own printer cable.
The printer offers HP LaserJet IIP emulation and cartridges for five other types of emulation are available as options.
It would have been better, however, if Seikosha had included at least one more as standard.
Still you can't have it all.
Both text and graphics are printed in 300 dpi (dots per inch) resolution, producing print quality that is quite sufficient for most day to day business use.
There are also 14 resident fonts plus the option to add a HP font cartridge if required.
The OP-104 offers three different paper feed modes: manual, automatic and thick paper.
These can be selected with the operation panel at the front of the machine.
A simple to load paper tray is also situated at the front for easy access and the printed copy emerges face down from the paper path on the top of the machine.
Should you prefer documents to be ejected face up, a lever allows you to choose an additional paper path to the rear of the printer.
The machine comes with only 512Kb memory — which isn't a lot by today's standards.
It is a simple matter to upgrade to 2.5MB, however, by installing extra memory modules.
The Seikosha OP-104 lacks the advanced features found on some other laser printers.
This, however, is part of its charm.
It has been well designed for the easy removable of consumables, has a low noise level, produces quality output and is simple to operate.
You really couldn't ask for much more at this price.
Personal R:Base
Price: £99.00 + VAT
Company: Microrim (U.K.) Ltd.
Tel: 0344 869123
Range of Features: *****
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: **
Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Lots of powerful features, good value for money.
Against: Will take some time to learn properly.
Personal R:Base is a DOS based single user database program designed for home and office use.
The program has a pull down menu interface for ease of use.
When an option is chosen a second menu with further options will appear on the screen and so on until all relevant choices have been made.
As a menu item is selected, an explanation of its function is shown at the bottom of the screen, and by pressing F1 the user is further supported with context sensitive help.
Personal R:Base has been designed to be simple to learn and use, which is true to a certain extent, as manipulating data in a pre-created database is almost self explanatory.
On the other hand, learning to actually design a database takes time and, although an on-line tutorial is provided, you would be better off studying the manual to learn each specific task.
As well as providing powerful editing, search and sort functions, the program offers a large variety of more advanced features.
These include generating and managing reports, building and printing labels, and creating and using custom forms.
You can also make complex queries by setting up a set of conditions.
If you wanted to find out which rows show stocks totalling over 25, 000, for example, you would ask the database to look for all rows with a value greater than this using the Query Menu.
There are also five free applications within R:Base: Home Finance, Appointments Calendar, Inventory, Recipes and Shopping list.
These can all be customised to suit your particular needs.
This program contains many more powerful features such as importing and exporting spreadsheet files, and the ability to read and write dBASE III files without the need for translation.
It may not be quite as easy to learn as the manufacturers claim, but if you have the time you will find it to be well worth the effort.
3M Privacy Plus Computer Screen PF400
Price: around £120.00
Company: 3M United Kingdom PLC.
Tel: Action Computer Supplies 0800 333 333
Orion Media Marketing PLC. 081 847 4141 
The Little Red Book Company 0800 521 375
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: N/A
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Gives privacy to those working on confidential documents, or in an open plan office.
There are a number of anti-glare screen filters appearing on the market varying greatly in terms of materials used, style and price.
They are designed to cut out the reflective glare that can be potentially harmful to someone spending long hours working in front of a computer screen.
Some of them may also have a anti-radiation coating, or an anti-static lead.
3M have gone a step further with the Privacy Plus Filter.
It provides the glare reduction, radiation protection and anti-static lead available with other types of screens — plus the ability to give a degree of privacy to the user.
This is due to to the use of a special microlouvre film, which only allows the person seated directly in front of it to see the information displayed on the computer's monitor.
Depending on where they are standing a person looking from either side will see only a partial image or a totally dark and blank screen.
The screen is made from glass, has a sturdy plastic surround that will match the colour of most computer systems, and can be cleaned with a proprietary alcohol based cleaner.
The design of the fittings by which the screen is attached to the monitor is particularly impressive.
They consist of two adjustable arms with rubber pads on, which must first be fitted to the screen itself.
(The diagram on the instruction leaflet is not very clear, however, so this is likely to be one of those times when you take quite a while to figure out how the confounded things fit together, and then feel a bit daft when you realise how easy it is.)
Once the arms are fitted, all you need to do is rest them on top of the monitor, and the screen will stay where it has been placed.
It does this without the use of adhesive or any other kind of fastener, which makes a welcome change from wrestling with the customary bits of plastic, sticky tabs and Velcro.
This screen will not be suited to everyone, as some people will not need the privacy feature and would be better off buying a standard anti-glare filter.
For those who work in open plan offices, or require confidentiality though, it should afford them a fair amount of security.
The Complete PC Page Scanner
Price: £475.00
Company: Blue Mountain Imports (UK) Ltd.
Denbigh House,
Denbigh Road,
Bletchley,
Milton Keynes MK1 1YP.
Tel: 0908 376252
Range of Features: ***
Overall Speed: ****
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Checks spelling while scanning.
Against: Only scans up to 300 dpi resolution.
IBM PC, PC-XT, PC-AT, PS/2 Model 25 or 30 or 100% compatible.
a hard disk, floppy disk drive, 512 KB memory, CGA, EGA, VGA or Hercules graphics.
PC/MS DOS 2.1 or higher.
The Complete Page Scanner works with The Complete Communicator to give you the ability to scan in text and graphics quickly into your PC.
The scanner will take sheets of paper up to A4 size and resolution can be set at either 200 or 300dpi (dots per inch).
The scanner comes provided with SmartScan an OCR (optical character recognition) and image editing utility, that will allow you to see your page on the screen as you scan it in.
Once an image has been scanned it can be scaled from ten to 200% of its original size, rotated or cropped, and then saved in a format such as TIFF, PCX or IMG., for example.
Images can also be exported to popular wordprocessing and desktop publishing applications like Ventura Publisher or WordPerfect 5.0.
Installation is a fairly simple matter, the scanner plugs into the Complete Communicator card, so you don't need to open up the computer.
There was a slight hitch with the installation of the scanner driver, but this seemed to resolve itself eventually, and didn't pose any great problem.
Both the Complete Page Scanner and the SmartScan software are pleasantly easy to use, and an impressive feature is that it will actually check spelling and mark any mistakes as the image is being scanned.
Icon Hear-It
Price: £39.95 + P&P and VAT
Company: Guildsoft Ltd.
Tel: 0752 606200
Range of Features: *****
Overall Speed: ***
Ease of Use: ****
Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Fun to use, inexpensive.
Against: Could be annoying to other people!
Moon Valley Software's Icon Hear-It is a program offering lots of fun utilities for brightening up the Window Desktop.
To run the software you will need Windows 3.0 or higher, a VGA monitor and graphics card, a hard disk with 3MB free memory, a mouse and a good sense of humour.
Features include four hundred icon designs and fifty animated icons that can be added to DOS and Windows applications.
There are also ten Windows Wallpapers, twenty animated cursors that can be set to move across the screen after a certain time, and eight screen savers.
All of these features can have a sound attached, and there is a selection of four hundred different ones to choose from.
You might have an animated kangaroo as a cursor, the sound of a horse when you open up your word processor, and the sound of bursting bubbles when the screen saver comes on, for example.
Additional options include a talking calculator and a talking clock that can be set to tell you the time every fifteen minutes, half an hour or hour.
There is even a talking version of the Windows Solitaire game that cheats by telling you what cards are under the pile, and a special version of Minesweeper complete with explosions.
Icon Hear-It is fun to use and certainly brightens up the Windows Desktop.
There may be a tendency to overdo it and attach sounds to almost everything, however, which can fray the temper of even the most patient colleague after a while.
It is probably best to use just a couple of sounds at a time — or work alone!
MENUWORKS PERSONAL £44.95
PC Dynamics
System Requirements
DOS 2 or higher
Min 512k RAM
Hard disk with 600K free.
Yet another menu system!
So what's so special about Menuworks.
Well the manual is well written in an easy step by step beginners guide format and it's incredibly simple and quick (5 minutes) to install to hard disk.
Having said that, haven't most people got DOS 5.0 and/or Windows these days so why the extra expense of yet another method of file management?
However, in the absence of Dosshell, and as far as hard disk management goes, Menuworks will do very nicely thank you.
You need DOS version 2.0 or higher, with 512 Kb of RAM and an IBM compatible computer to run the program.
So what does it do?
Well like any other of its kind, it's a simple solution for program launching and hard disk management.
What makes it so simple is that, once installed, the front-end of Menuworks will take control on booting, and access to your software is then only a cursor key away.
Away with those laborious command lines at the DOS prompt, Menuworks simplifies file management and maintenance of the hard disk by allowing the user to edit, delete, move, update and search for files quickly with simple function key commands.
It allows programs, DOS commands and batch files to run without changes.
Some of the key features of Menuworks include multi- level security systems for restricting system access and preventing users from making unauthorized changes, on-screen help at all levels, built in adjustable screen saver, easy to use menu editor, high level commands for building complex menu scripts and integrated DOS utilities for viewing directories and finding lost files.
It is compatible with Windows, but if you've got Windows would you need another system of file management? and isn't that where I came in!
The Menuworks disk and manual from PC Dynamics, Inc., retails at £44.95, it's incredibly simple to install and run, but in my opinion, you'd be better off spending your money on upgrading to DOS 5.0.
Nonny Dumville
Requirements
DOS 2 or higher
Min 512k RAM
Hard disk with 600K
Amongst this month's Quickies hardware selection we have a privacy anti-glare screen, a scanner that can read and spell check a printed document and a small footprint desktop laser printer.
Software includes the virus catching software — DiskNet; a personal data base; MindMaps to keep your brain in good working order, and a program to liven up your Windows icons that can be both annoying and fun.
Mind Maps Plus Price: £210.33 incl.
VAT Company: Buzan Centres Limited Tel: 0250 875929 
Range of Features: *** Overall Speed: *** Ease of Use: **** Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Easy to use, maps can be converted to a PCX file for use in presentations.
Against: Would benefit from drawing tools and some clip art.
Mind Maps Plus is a new software package based on the creative ‘Mind Maps’ learning and thinking technique developed by Tony Buzan.
The software, which runs under DOS, is intended to assist in analysing and solving problems and help in the building of successful business strategies.
It is hoped that the user will achieve this by learning to use the logical and creative sides of the brain, in order to develop more efficient thinking patterns.
When a new Mind Map is created, the opening screen presents the user with an ellipse, which is to be the ‘focus’.
The focus is then labelled according to the subject of the new Mind Map.
Branches containing important keywords related to the topic are then placed around the focus.
These branches are easily created by entering relevant keywords in the List Panel.
When all the words have been entered, the branches are automatically colour coded and placed around the focus.
Further branches can be added at any time.
The program also features a Notepad with a spelling checker, so that more detailed information can be attached to the branches, and accessed when necessary.
On-screen editing facilities include a zoom mode, so that the user can see part of a mind map in more detail, a colour palette so that the colour of branches and text can be altered, and cut and paste options to allow branches to be moved around.
The intention of Mind Maps Plus is to enable the user to formulate and present ideas in a more accessible and logical manner with the use of both text and graphics.
With this in mind, it seems that the program would benefit from some basic drawing tools and perhaps a small library of symbols and clipart, in order to give the program a more graphical feel.
Also, the software itself does very little toward teaching the user Mind Mapping techniques.
There is a supplementary book included in the package, however, and you would do well to read this first if you want to get maximum benefit from the program.
Geoclock UK Price: £3.00 Company: Testware U.K. Ltd.
Tel: 0423 880471 (Office hours) 0423 886415 (24 hour line)
Range of Features: *** Overall Speed: ** Ease of Use: ** Verdict: **
Plus Points: Reasonably accurate representation of the time of day around the world.
Against: Numerous commands that are difficult to remember.
Geoclock UK is a shareware program that shows a coloured map of the earth together with the time and date (which is based on the time on your PC's clock).
The map also highlights the parts of the world that are in daylight, darkness and twilight at the current time.
This display is updated constantly so that the information shown on the screen is as accurate as possible.
To run the program you will need DOS 3.0 or later, a hard disk and an EGA, VGA or SVGA graphics adapter.
By pressing ‘C’ or ‘P’the user is able to alter map attributes by the entry of a simple command.
It is possible, for example, to change the format of dates and times, map colours, set latitude and longitude lines, show city names and turn off the sunlight display.
Although only four maps are provided with the shareware version, the registered version comes with a least 25 maps and gives the user access to many more features.
These include mouse support, zoom, a distance measurement function, and options for drawing lines and circles on the maps.
There is also a special utility called a HAM Package for amateur radio enthusiasts, in which a user can enter a call sign and the position of the remote station will be marked on the map, together with the local time and location information.
Apart from perhaps being of interest to people who make a lot of overseas telephone calls, and need to know what time it is in New York when its' 11am in London, for example, this program would seem to be very limited in its usefulness.
Geoclock UK is quite accurate and fun to use — so it's well worth having a look at, even if you don't have a real use for it.
Disknet Price: Single copy: £89.00 + VAT Site licence: price available on request.
Company: Reflex Magnetics Ltd.
Tel: 071 372 6666 Plus Points: Catches all viruses whether known or unknown.
Against: Relies on third-party virus scanning programs.
Viruses are programs that infect the PC and reproduce themselves.
These programs are at the very least annoying and at their worst destructive.
Unfortunately, they seem to be here to stay.
Infection occurs with the transfer of data and is often passed on via an infected floppy disk.
Disknet effectively stops this from happening, by ensuring that each floppy disk is virus free before use.
The program requires DOS 3.0 or later, and you will also need to have a separate virus scanning program, and a formatted system disk in order to complete the installation.
This is a fairly complex business, so it's important that the installation instructions are followed carefully.
No real harm will be done should you get it wrong first time, but you will have to start from the beginning again and, depending on how much of the software has been installed when the error occurs, things can get rather complicated.
You might find, for example, that the Disknet installation disk itself is denied access because it hasn't been checked (by Disknet) for viruses!
Disknet uses a single computer as a ‘gateway’ PC which means that the machine has been previously tested for viruses, and also has scanner software and the Disknet check program installed.
This ‘gateway’ PC is then used for checking that all incoming floppy disks are virus free.
When the disk is found to be free from a virus infection it is given an electronic signature code.
Should you try to use a disk without this signature there will be an audible warning (you can choose a beep or a siren), and the message ‘Unvalidated disk: please have this checked’ will appear on the screen.
The disk is not allowed access until it has been validated with the Disknet check program.
Two further options are C:CURE and LOCK.
C:CURE gives password protection when booting from the hard disk, prevents hard disk access when booting from a floppy disk and automatically cures partition and boot sector viruses.
LOCK prevents unauthorised Disknet removal.
Disknet gives the user no other choice than to stick to a routine of checking each incoming diskette for viruses.
This is no bad thing as the software provides a very efficient way of preventing a virus from entering the system in the first place.
There are times though, when Disknet can cause a certain amount of frustration.
When in a hurry, or eager to try out the new software you've just received for example, you might forget to validate the disks.
Only to have your memory jolted by a loud and indignant beep.
Seikosha OP-104 Compact Desktop Laser Printer Price: £699.00 + VAT Company: Seikosha Tel: 0753 685873
Range of Features: *** Overall Speed: *** Ease of Use: ***** Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Low price, well designed, ease of use.
Against: Only one emulation mode as standard.
The OP-104 is one of the growing number of low priced 4ppm (pages per minute) laser printers aimed mainly at the home and small business markets.
It is designed as a desktop printer, having a small footprint and being light enough to pick up and move comfortably.
Setting up the machine was no problem.
The drum unit, developer unit, cleaning pad and toner cartridge slot neatly and easily into place underneath a hinged top cover.
All that's left to do after this is to connect the power lead and your own printer cable.
The printer offers HP LaserJet IIP emulation and cartridges for five other types of emulation are available as options.
It would have been better, however, if Seikosha had included at least one more as standard.
Still you can't have it all.
Both text and graphics are printed in 300 dpi (dots per inch) resolution, producing print quality that is quite sufficient for most day to day business use.
There are also 14 resident fonts plus the option to add a HP font cartridge if required.
The OP-104 offers three different paper feed modes: manual, automatic and thick paper.
These can be selected with the operation panel at the front of the machine.
A simple to load paper tray is also situated at the front for easy access and the printed copy emerges face down from the paper path on the top of the machine.
Should you prefer documents to be ejected face up, a lever allows you to choose an additional paper path to the rear of the printer.
The machine comes with only 512Kb memory — which isn't a lot by today's standards.
It is a simple matter to upgrade to 2.5MB, however, by installing extra memory modules.
The Seikosha OP-104 lacks the advanced features found on some other laser printers.
This, however, is part of its charm.
It has been well designed for the easy removable of consumables, has a low noise level, produces quality output and is simple to operate.
You really couldn't ask for much more at this price.
Personal R:Base Price: £99.00 + VAT Company: Microrim (U.K.) Ltd.
Tel: 0344 869123 
Range of Features: ***** Overall Speed: *** Ease of Use: ** Verdict: ***
Plus Points: Lots of powerful features, good value for money.
Against: Will take some time to learn properly.
Personal R:Base is a DOS based single user database program designed for home and office use.
The program has a pull down menu interface for ease of use.
When an option is chosen a second menu with further options will appear on the screen and so on until all relevant choices have been made.
As a menu item is selected, an explanation of its function is shown at the bottom of the screen, and by pressing F1 the user is further supported with context sensitive help.
Personal R:Base has been designed to be simple to learn and use, which is true to a certain extent, as manipulating data in a pre-created database is almost self explanatory.
On the other hand, learning to actually design a database takes time and, although an on-line tutorial is provided, you would be better off studying the manual to learn each specific task.
As well as providing powerful editing, search and sort functions, the program offers a large variety of more advanced features.
These include generating and managing reports, building and printing labels, and creating and using custom forms.
You can also make complex queries by setting up a set of conditions.
If you wanted to find out which rows show stocks totalling over 25, 000, for example, you would ask the database to look for all rows with a value greater than this using the Query Menu.
There are also five free applications within R:Base: Home Finance, Appointments Calendar, Inventory, Recipes and Shopping list.
These can all be customised to suit your particular needs.
This program contains many more powerful features such as importing and exporting spreadsheet files, and the ability to read and write dBASE III files without the need for translation.
It may not be quite as easy to learn as the manufacturers claim, but if you have the time you will find it to be well worth the effort.
3M Privacy Plus Computer Screen PF400 Price: around £120.00 Company: 3M United Kingdom PLC.
Tel: Action Computer Supplies 0800 333 333 Orion Media Marketing PLC. 081 847 4141 The Little Red Book Company 0800 521 375 
Range of Features: *** Overall Speed: N/A Ease of Use: ***** Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Gives privacy to those working on confidential documents, or in an open plan office.
There are a number of anti-glare screen filters appearing on the market varying greatly in terms of materials used, style and price.
They are designed to cut out the reflective glare that can be potentially harmful to someone spending long hours working in front of a computer screen.
Some of them may also have a anti-radiation coating, or an anti-static lead.
3M have gone a step further with the Privacy Plus Filter.
It provides the glare reduction, radiation protection and anti-static lead available with other types of screens — plus the ability to give a degree of privacy to the user.
This is due to the use of a special microlouvre film, which only allows the person seated directly in front of it to see the information displayed on the computer's monitor.
Depending on where they are standing a person looking from either side will see only a partial image or a totally dark and blank screen.
The screen is made from glass, has a sturdy plastic surround that will match the colour of most computer systems, and can be cleaned with a proprietary alcohol based cleaner.
The design of the fittings by which the screen is attached to the monitor is particularly impressive.
They consist of two adjustable arms with rubber pads on, which must first be fitted to the screen itself.
(The diagram on the instruction leaflet is not very clear, however, so this is likely to be one of those times when you take quite a while to figure out how the confounded things fit together, and then feel a bit daft when you realise how easy it is.)
Once the arms are fitted, all you need to do is rest them on top of the monitor, and the screen will stay where it has been placed.
It does this without the use of adhesive or any other kind of fastener, which makes a welcome change from wrestling with the customary bits of plastic, sticky tabs and Velcro.
This screen will not be suited to everyone, as some people will not need the privacy feature and would be better off buying a standard anti-glare filter.
For those who work in open plan offices, or require confidentiality though, it should afford them a fair amount of security.
The Complete PC Page Scanner Price: £475.00 Company: Blue Mountain Imports (UK) Ltd.
Denbigh House, Denbigh Road, Bletchley, Milton Keynes MK1 1YP.
Tel: 0908 376252 
Range of Features: *** Overall Speed: **** Ease of Use: ***** Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Checks spelling while scanning.
Against: Only scans up to 300 dpi resolution.
IBM PC, PC-XT, PC-AT, PS/2 Model 25 or 30 or 100% compatible.
a hard disk, floppy disk drive, 512 KB memory, CGA, EGA, VGA or Hercules graphics.
PC/MS DOS 2.1 or higher.
The Complete Page Scanner works with The Complete Communicator to give you the ability to scan in text and graphics quickly into your PC.
The scanner will take sheets of paper up to A4 size and resolution can be set at either 200 or 300dpi (dots per inch).
The scanner comes provided with SmartScan an OCR (optical character recognition) and image editing utility, that will allow you to see your page on the screen as you scan it in.
Once an image has been scanned it can be scaled from ten to 200% of its original size, rotated or cropped, and then saved in a format such as TIFF, PCX or IMG., for example.
Images can also be exported to popular wordprocessing and desktop publishing applications like Ventura Publisher or WordPerfect 5.0.
Installation is a fairly simple matter, the scanner plugs into the Complete Communicator card, so you don't need to open up the computer.
There was a slight hitch with the installation of the scanner driver, but this seemed to resolve itself eventually, and didn't pose any great problem.
Both the Complete Page Scanner and the SmartScan software are pleasantly easy to use, and an impressive feature is that it will actually check spelling and mark any mistakes as the image is being scanned.
Icon Hear-It Price: £39.95 + P&P and VAT Company: Guildsoft Ltd.
Tel: 0752 606200 
Range of Features: ***** Overall Speed: *** Ease of Use: **** Verdict: ****
Plus Points: Fun to use, inexpensive.
Against: Could be annoying to other people!
Moon Valley Software's Icon Hear-It is a program offering lots of fun utilities for brightening up the Window Desktop.
To run the software you will need Windows 3.0 or higher, a VGA monitor and graphics card, a hard disk with 3MB free memory, a mouse and a good sense of humour.
Features include four hundred icon designs and fifty animated icons that can be added to DOS and Windows applications.
There are also ten Windows Wallpapers, twenty animated cursors that can be set to move across the screen after a certain time, and eight screen savers.
All of these features can have a sound attached, and there is a selection of four hundred different ones to choose from.
You might have an animated kangaroo as a cursor, the sound of a horse when you open up your word processor, and the sound of bursting bubbles when the screen saver comes on, for example.
Additional options include a talking calculator and a talking clock that can be set to tell you the time every fifteen minutes, half an hour or hour.
There is even a talking version of the Windows Solitaire game that cheats by telling you what cards are under the pile, and a special version of Minesweeper complete with explosions.
Icon Hear-It is fun to use and certainly brightens up the Windows Desktop.
There may be a tendency to overdo it and attach sounds to almost everything, however, which can fray the temper of even the most patient colleague after a while.
It is probably best to use just a couple of sounds at a time — or work alone
Faster Yet!
To continue our articles on upgrading machines, Geoff Cox takes a look at a new high speed processor upgrade for 386 DX owners and shows how to fit it and how it performs compared to standard 387 coprocessors.
Windows and Graphics Intensive applications demand more and more speed from your computer.
While the ideal solution is a fast 486 computer there are a lot of 386 machines still performing sterling service.
Geoff Cox takes a look at a new upgrade from processor manufacturers Intel that greatly improves the performance of 386 DX machines even those fitted with fast 387 coprocessors.
The Lecture
A month or so ago I sat in an excessively warm room listening to a gentleman from Intel's processor division telling the invited audience of dealers and journalists that 1992 would see a boom in 486 sales similar to the boom in 386 bought about by Windows.
The reason for this new boom would be, wait for it, upgradeability!
The idea was that a 486 user would rush out to buy a new processor for her or his machine as they became available and this facility would mean the death of the 386.
Incidentally it would also reduce competition from other 386 processor Manufacturers, an event that Intel would doubtless find to their liking.
I have to admit that I was cynical about the whole idea, most people do not like the idea of opening up their machine, let alone replacing the processor, however this opinion changed as the next speaker started.
Don McDonald introduced a new Intel ‘coprocessor’ for 386 machines, the Intel RapidCad Engineering coprocessor.
Maths Coprocessors
Maths coprocessors can handle, in a few clock cycles, mathematical functions that main processors like the 386 would require several hundred software instruction cycles to perform.
The reason for this is that the coprocessor is optimised at both hardware and micro code level to perform mathematics.
Fitting a coprocessor to a standard machine can produce a dramatic performance improvement in software designed to take advantage of the special instructions of those devices.
The idea is that when an instruction that is meant for a coprocessor is encountered, the coprocessor handles it leaving the main processor to carry on with other jobs.
When the coprocessor has finished its' task it passes the result to the main processor.
All very nice in theory but there are delays in passing information between coprocessor and main processor.
One solution is to put both processors on one piece of Silicon to minimise transmission delays and timing problems.
This is one of the things that makes the 486 so fast.
The RapidCad Engineering Coprocessor
The Engineering coprocessor is a set of two chips.
in a box containing a chip removal tool, a manual and a test disk.
The larger of the two chip devices contains a 386DX and a 387DX on one chip and replaces the existing main processor.
The second device is basically a dummy coprocessor that some machines need in order to reroute Coprocessor instructions from the coprocessor socket to the main processor socket.
It doesn't do any harm in machines that don't require this rerouting so it is installed as a default.
In common with other Intel coprocessors one device will run at all speeds up to 33MHz, the speed of Intel's fastest 386DX chip.
Intel is firm in stating that this device is not a 486 with 386 pin outs and point out that the 486 has cache and burst I/O characteristics that require a 486 design on the main board in order to work properly.
What they do say is that the close coupling and phasing between the coprocessor and main processor makes a dramatic difference to coprocessor intensive applications, such as CAD, and will make a substantial difference to other coprocessor applications.
Two of my applications tests suggest that the heart of the RapidCad may be a 33MHz 486.
Whether it is or it isn't doesn't matter what does matter is its' performance and to test this you have to fit the device.
The RapidCad is designed as a user upgrade so to see how easy it was to fit and how well it worked Intel made a RapidCad set available to install and use on my trusty Dabs 386. machine.
Removing the old processor
The first step is to remove the top cover of the case.
This usually involves removing three or four screws and sliding or rotating the lip at the front of the cover away from the retaining slot under the case front.
With some case designs this is the most complex part of the whole fitting process.
With the case cover removed the next job is to locate the existing CPU and Coprocessor (if fitted).
How easy this is depends on the manufacturer of your machine.
My Dabs 386DX is in a Midi tower case which places the two chips of interest at the bottom and front of the case, well clear of any obstructions.
However the chips on some machines may be located under disk drives or power supplies or other lumps of hardware.
In this case it may be necessary to remove the motherboard.
There have been a number of other articles in this magazine showing you how to move and change motherboards so I won't go into too much detail about how to do this.
Suffice it to say that the exact method depends on the machine.
Basically you have to remove all of the external connections from the machine.
You then remove the screws retaining the expansion cards and pull these from their slots.
The motherboard can then be removed either on its' back plate or by removing any retaining nuts and screws and lifting the board clear of the machine.
It goes without saying that you should practise safe upgrading by observing all precautions to prevent damage by static electricity.
You will see from the photograph that the Dabs machine is fitted with an Advanced Micro Devices CPU and a Cyrix Fastmath 387DX coprocessor.
These must be removed in order to fit the RapidCad chips.
The chips have to be separated from their sockets without bending any of the pins and once removed they must be stored in an anti-static environment.
One problem that you may meet is that on some boards, the Dabs board is one, both processor and coprocessor sockets are identical.
It's a good idea to mark the motherboard with a felt tip pen, or a label so that the replacement chips are put into the correct sockets.
The RapidCad package includes a chip remover tool, a device like a miniature garden rake and a chip box containing conductive foam.
The tines of the chip remover is carefully slotted into the space between the processor and its' socket and gently pushed and pulled until the chip lifts slightly.
Then remove the tool and insert the tines on the opposite side of the chip and lever until that side lifts.
This process continues until the chip's pins are clear of the socket.
The chip can then be lifted, by its' edges only, and transferred to the box.
Once in the box firm pressure on the top of the device is used to press all the pins into the conductive foam.
You have to be very careful during this entire operation to make sure that you don't touch any of the pins.
Fitting the new chips
Fitting the new components is a little more difficult than removing the old ones.
First you have to locate pin 1 on both the chip and the socket.
On the chips pin 1 is marked with a dot and a cutaway corner.
A cutaway marks the relevant pin on the socket and their may also be a figure 1 painted on the motherboard.
If you get it wrong the RapidCad set may be damaged or destroyed.
On the Dabs board the sockets are oriented with the number one pins pointing at the other socket.
This means that once installed the smaller chip is rotated 180 degrees with respect to the larger chip.
This could cause some confusion so check carefully to ensure that the chips are correctly aligned, and after installation check again.
Once you've got the orientation right carefully line the pins of the chips up with the holes in the socket.
The larger of the two chips fits in the main processor socket, the smaller in the coprocessor socket.
Once the pins are correctly lined up press the device firmly into its' socket.
At this point it is worth mentioning that motherboard should be securely supported under the socket.
A fair bit of pressure is needed to get the chips securely seated and a broken motherboard tends to perform rather more slowly than a complete one!
If the coprocessor socket is the same size as the main processor socket the smaller RapidCad chip should be installed with a complete row of socket holes showing around it.
Testing
Once the chips are correctly installed you can reassemble the machine making sure that all the connectors are replaced in the correct location and with the appropriate orientation.
The stripe on a ribbon cable traditionally marks pin 1.
Remove any floppy disks from the drive(s) and turn on the machine.
A machine that refuses to boot indicates incorrect power supply connections or sometimes a reversed IDE hard disk ribbon cable.
If both floppy drive lights are lit then one floppy connector is reversed.
If the machine doesn't try to access the A: drive, i.e. the light stays off, either the BIOS has been instructed, in the set-up, not to seek the A: drive, or both floppy drive connectors are the wrong way round.
Once everything is up and running drop into the BIOS set-up program and ensure that the Coprocessor field is set to the appropriate value to indicate the presence of a 387DX.
When the machine boots successfully replace the cover and any remaining external connectors.
Intel supply a test program with the upgrade and this is used to check that the upgrade is installed and performing correctly.
Being a suspicious soul I also ran a competing companies test disk on the system.
In both cases the RapidCad exhibited full IEEE compliance even though the Cyrix test program reported it as a 486!.
Speed
I've been using RapidCad for a month or so and It's not given me the slightest problem.
Intel claim that the device has been tested on over 60 systems across the entire range of (Intel) processor speeds.
It has also been tested with over 2100 software programs and has proved to be compatible.
Intel claim a 30% performance increase when using CAD software.
Tests using Auto cad bore this out with an overall 55% increase in shade operations falling to 16% in subtract operations.
This is, perhaps, only meaningful to those using Computer aided design a lot.
Generally the machine had a ‘zippier’ feel especially on Windows.
No it didn't come anywhere near the performance I would expect from even a 25MHz 486 but it was nevertheless fast.
Running Dhrystone (non-math) and Whetstone(math) tests showed an impressive performance gain even on the Dhrystone tests.
This was perhaps due to the improved micro code and hardware layout claimed for the RapidCad.
Whetstones Dhrystones No Coprocessor 133,000 9471 Intel 387DX 2497000 9471 RapidCad 3777000 10199 Is it worth the money?
The answer to this has to be a qualified yes.
In speed terms the RapidCad is pretty close to the theoretical speed of a 486 without burst I/O and cache controller.
It will be interesting to compare this to the speed of the user fittable Cyrix 386 pin compatible 486 device that is rumoured to have a release date towards the end of this year.
Until then, if you really need the additional speed and own a machine with a standard ISA bus and a 386DX processor then at approximately £350 the RapidCad Engineering Coprocessor is technically the second best upgrade.
That said it is considerably cheaper than buying and buying the best upgrade, a 486 motherboard.
If you own a proprietary machine with a non standard ISA motherboard or a machine with an EISA or MCA bus then RapidCad is almost certainly the best performance upgrade you can buy without incurring the expense of a full processor upgrade.
HINT BOX
Static precautions
Most Computer components are static sensitive.
This means that a static discharge such as the spark you sometimes see, and feel, between a key and a door handle, will damage or destroy the component.
The reason for this is that the silicon connected to various pins is as near to being an insulator as makes very little difference.
It only takes a current of a few nanoamps to develop enough voltage to break down the insulation and make a hole in the silicon.
This is not always fatal, but it is never a good idea.
Manufacturers do put static protection devices on chips so the problem is nowhere near as bad as it was but it's better to be safe than out of pocket.
Always work on a earthed surface and touch the ground plane before touching any components.
If you can wear an earthed wrist strap or, at least, a piece of copper wire clipped to the ground plane.
Finally avoid wearing nylon clothes or walking on nylon carpet if at all possible.
If you can't avoid nylon carpet spray it lightly with water to reduce any static build up.
1.
Inside the Dabs 386DX the processor is just visible at the bottom right of the case.
2.
The Original Processor and Coprocessor (shown on the right of the picture)
3.
The chip removal tool in position under the processor
4.
Removing the Coprocessor, the main CPU is stored in conductive foam in the box supplied with the upgrade.
5.
The RapidCad chip set seen from underneath.
The larger processor fits in the main processor slot the smaller in the coprocessor slot.
6.
The installed RapidCad set, notice the different orientation of the two chips on this machine.
Facts Box
Product: RapidCad Engineering Coprocessor
Manufacturer: Intel 0793 431155
Price: £350 approximately
Availability: Computer dealers or contact Intel for information
Photographs
Screen Dumps
Menu.tif Test menu showing that this software thinks the RapidCad is a 486!
IEEE.tif Compatibility tests showing that RapidCad is fully compatible with IEEE coprocessor specifications.
Accelerated Windows displays make for faster working — the Renoir NT accelerated SVGA card reviewed by David Dorn.
Any Graphical User Interface is likely to make heavy demands on a PC, and Windows is probably the heaviest of them all.
For the most part, the PC's central processor is used to perform the calculations that end up as pretty pictures on your monitor, but there is a way to take some of the load off the CPU.
Accelerated graphics cards, like the Renoir NT, perform some of the work in a graphics co-processor, but how well do they work, and what other advantages does the NT have over other VGA cards?
If you've read Practical PC from issue 1, you will know that there have been more graphics standards since 1981 than you can shake a stick at, culminating in today's VGA standard as the required minimum in a ‘bog standard’ machine.
Beyond this we enter the realms of EVGA and SVGA, which, rather than provide 640 pixels wide by 480 pixels high in 16 colours, offer up to 1024x768 in up to 256 colours.
There is, however, a further stage forward.
We now have access to the Sierra RAMDAC on many graphics cards, which allows up to 32,000 colours on screen at any time, usually limited to a resolution of 800x600, and, with the right technology, can actually provide up to 65,536 colours onscreen, albeit at the VGA resolution of 640x80.
One such card is the Renoir NT Windows Accelerator, distributed in this country by Program Solutions (UK) Ltd.
The table shows the resolutions and colour support the card claims, a pretty high specification, capable of almost photographic quality in the 32k and 64k modes.
Its installation is actually quite a breeze, since there is only one jumper on the body of the card itself, and a block of six DIP switches that faces out into the world once the card is installed.
That means you can open up your PC and slot the card in without doing anything (the jumper has the sole purpose of allowing interrupt 2/9 to be used, which, currently is unlikely to need changing from the default) Thankfully, the ring-bound manual supplied with the card is extremely thorough, and covers every likely eventuality.
The DIP switches are concerned mainly with monitor type — you set a block of three of the six switches to indicate the maximum resolution your monitor is capable of — and whether or not you will want to use the 32k colour modes (and you will, believe me!)
Unlike the normal DIP switches, you don't need a small pointed object to change the settings, as the switches themselves are large and easy to manoeuvre with a fingernail.
Once that's done, it's off to the software setup.
Software The essence of any windows peripheral device is its set of drivers — if they're no good, you don't get anything like decent performance from the device.
That said, I've had only one problem with the Renoir NT's driver set.
As with any other graphics card, the drivers for the NT must be installed into Windows, which is done from the Windows Setup program.
For Windows 3.0 users there is a separate set of drivers held on the drivers disk (they actually work under 3.1 as well, but not as fast as the proper 3.1 drivers).
All of the drivers gave very good results with the exception of the 64k drivers on an SVGA monitor.
64k mode is not covered in the manual at all, unfortunately, and even after experimentation — loading the supplied VGA-BIOS program, which improved things a little — it proved impossible to get correct colour values onscreen.
That said, the 32k mode works perfectly, giving exceptional clarity and definition to images with enough colours to warrant its use.
Which is fine for working with 24 bit images, for instance, but it is in the workaday 16 and 256 colour modes that the card is likely to be used most.
The S3 graphics co-processor and its associated chipset is justly acknowledged to be more than useful for speeding up Windows graphics, offloading much of the graphics work from the CPU as it does, and the speed up with a variety of tasks under Windows and applications is very noticeable.
Scrolling through documents is noticeably faster, but the main boost is noticed when moving big chunks around the screen — grabbing a window and shifting it results in a much faster update than you would see with a bog standard VGA card — even a Tseng Labs ET4000 chip set unit (the ET4000 chipset is probably the fastest of the non-accelerated chipsets).
Summary
To move from the card that is already in your machine to any accelerated card, you need to be sure that it is going to do what you want it to do.
If it's better speed, then the card must be faster.
If it's more colours, then the new card must provide a bigger palette without loss of speed.
If it's higher resolution, then the new card must offer a resolution that you will be happy with, without a loss of speed.
With the exception of the 64k mode, the Renoir NT fulfils each of these conditions, and, frankly, I don't consider the bugs in the 64k mode to be a factor in the way I view the card.
The truth of the matter is that it's difficult enough to see the difference between a 32k colour rendition of a picture and a 24 bit one (16 million colours), so it's all but impossible to see any difference between a 32k and a 64k colour image.
I'm assured by Program Solutions that the problem is being looked into, and that revised drivers will be made available as soon as possible, but even without that mode, this card is a winner.
To put it in a nutshell, it's very fast, high res, and gives almost photographic images at 540x480.
It's just a pity that 32k colours aren't available at 800x600 as well.
Once again Transend Services and Practical PC bring the very best of Shareware products direct to your home or office.
You will find in this section many programs, from Home and Hobbies to professional DTP packages, that you are able to try at only 2.50 per disc.
Simply fill in the order form at the end of this section and you could be using your discs the next day.
Many of our shareware readers are now ordering discs every month from this section of the magazine.
They are guaranteed excellent service with prompt delivery and latest versions of the software they wish to try.
Transend source good quality shareware from all over the world, we then review the best of them for these pages every month.
You are able to order copies of these programs, for which you pay 2.50 per disc duplication costs, to enable you to test the full package before you buy.
You are then guaranteed that if you register and receive the full packaged software it will work on your machine and with your printer.
This is the Try Before You Buy concept of shareware and, in our view, is the only way to buy software if you want to avoid disappointments.
For those of you new to computing we have a number of tutorials that will take you through the basics of your computer to those teaching you a new programming language.
For anybody in business the two DTP packages we have, NeoPaint and Envision Publisher, are the most professional packages in the shareware market today and at less than one hundred pounds the pair they are the biggest bargain this year.
Now read the U.K's leading collection of shareware for this month and remember, if you order by phone you can be using the programs tomorrow.
CENTRAL HEATING CALCULATOR
Order Code: 1100 Total Disks: 1
A very practical piece of software.
The package provides you with a means to calculate the number of radiators required to heat a building.
It covers areas such as heat loss and therefore allows you to measure the effectiveness of various insulation methods.
A comprehensive survey is carried out on screen as to the makeup of the building, what the floors are made of and the dimensions of each room.
The questions are concise and well worded so as to avoid endless lists of fact gathering queries.
After a manual survey of a property the user could simply spend 10 to 15 minutes entering the data and selecting the required radiators.
The program supports all graphics standards and does not require a hard disk.
These latter two points mean one could use a small portable or notebook on site to gather facts and make initial outline recommendations.
A good tool for architects or engineers.
VEHICLES
Order Code: 10790 Total Disks: 1
This program was designed and programmed to keep track of your vehicles expenses.
You can store each vehicle by its registration and then call up details as and when needed.
It is really for a business with more than three vehicles to look after and keep track of.
EAZILINK
Order Code: 8310 Total Disks: 1
As a shareware library with monthly deadlines for our advertorial copy we need a reliable Communications package, unfortunately a custom program we used developed a bug and two hours before our copy deadline we were unable to send the data via our modem.
Within 30 minutes of receiving EaziLink we were logged on and uploading our copy.
This highlights how easy EaziLink actually is to get up and running with the minimum of fuss.
The program also comes with a host mode for any budding ‘Sysops’ who wish to try their hand at running a BBS.
GSZ'S ZMODEM
Order Code: 10640 Total Disks: 1
This is another top quality external protocol program for use with your chosen terminal software.
It has two levels of crash recovery and flexible control of selective file transfers.
You can customise it to your own preferences and it comes with an excellent on-disk manual.
IDEA TREE
Order Code: 1400 Total Disks: 1
The concept of random text entry is one that computers find difficult to handle.
People think in the most illogical way,(unless you are of Vulcan decent!) therefore computers are often of little help when trying to organise thoughts.
Idea Tree tries to get around the problem by using a technique called outlining.
You start by entering a basic ‘global’ idea and break it down into smaller and smaller steps.
For example, think of a house, break it down into floors and then into rooms.
You have started with a high level concept and broken it down into component parts.
Idea tree helps you organise your thoughts using this process.
Outliners have developed nicely over recent years and this program is sure to keep up with the trends as they develop.
A fabulous package which helps organise those chaotic lists of ideas or prioritised jobs.
Requires Hard Disc.
TIME LORD
Order Code: 3010 Total Disks: 2
A complete suite of accessories, Timelord is a very user friendly personal organizer, best described as a computerised File-o-Fax.
It has the ability to dial phone numbers and print labels.
Accessories include a diary, an appointments schedule, calculator, calendar, to do list and a reminder facility.
Any tasks not completed by the due date on the ‘to do list’ can be automatically carried over to the reminders list, a facility I found to be very useful.
You may input an unlimited number of addresses which may be called up by name, town, any of two user-defined fields or simply scroll through the list in ‘Rolodex’ fashion.
Timelord also has a document database where you can index all your text files wherever they are on your hard disk giving you the ability to search and browse with the built in report viewer.
I found Timelord to be extremely useful in controlling my time and I am now awaiting my registered version.
Registered users will receive an update to the latest version and a utilities pack which includes data import/export, file rebuilding and reports generator.
Requires Hard Disc.
RAPID ADDRESS
Order Code: 3050 Total Disks: 1
In ten years of programming I now have many companies utilising database applications for names and addresses, every one of them would have benefited by including Rapid Address within the database.
The program allows you to input the postcode of an address and will automatically call up the Town, County and dialling code of that address (You can also insert user defined fields as in most databases).
This saves 50% of the work when inputting into a database and allows for less mistakes.
WINDBASE
Order Code: 10660 Total Disks: 1
This application for 286 processors or better with Windows 3.1 is designed to simplify data collection.
You can customise your data entry forms and at the same time create the database.
You can index on a number of fields to enable faster retrieval.
You can then print in your customised design, Multiple databases are supported.
BILLBOARD
Order Code: 15000 Total Disks: 1
This excellent colouring book program lets your children draw a picture, then colour it in and save it out.
Then you can hit a key and hey presto! the picture is all jumbled up ready for your child to piece it back together again.
It includes animation sequences, 16 colours, ready drawn pictures, load, save, jigsaw and many other features.
This program is better than a great number of Commercial drawing packages for children.
My two children loved to draw and colour with it.
They would then take it in turns to piece together each others jigsaw, guaranteed to keep them happy for years.
Requires VGA.
IQ CHALLENGE
Order Code: 5290 Total Disks: 1
This excellent quiz type program for up to four players is well worth ordering for those evenings you have a few friends round for a couple of drinks.
It keeps track of the scores for each player and the percentages which can be viewed or printed.
It covers six topics including the popular Sport & Entertainment, Science & Computing, Geography and others.
The menu makes it very easy to use and the saving of high scores gives everybody something to aim for.
PC TUTOR
Order Code: 1000 Total Disks: 1
The PC TUTOR is an essential program for all readers who wish to explore the potential of their computers further.
It runs well on all graphics adapter types and has no special hardware requirements.
PC TUTOR takes you step by step through the intricacies of the IBM PC and MS-DOS.
By completing each section you will learn about the keyboard and all the special keys such as INS and DEL.
You may then proceed through exercises in computer terminology which explain jargon words.
The final exercises introduce you to MS-DOS, its basic commands and what it is supposed to do for you on a day to day basis.
After the basic level you will cover more advanced commands which enable you to manipulate information and make good use of storage such as floppy disks.
Finally, batch files are covered in detail explaining why we use these compact command files and what each batch sub-command does.
All in all a very well composed program which is simple to use and educational.
TALKING TEACHER
Order Code: 10830 Total Disks: 2
This is the Soundblaster version of TALKING TEACHER and it is excellent.
It will help your child learn to talk, read, write and spell.
It will also help teach your child computer interaction at an early age.
You can record your own voice for use within the program and change the spelling lists to match your child's weekly list from school.
This is the highest quality educational package I have seen in a long time and is well worth registering.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
THE VOCABULATOR
Order Code: 10820 Total Disks: 1
This program gives you the means of learning a core of around 500 foreign words very quickly.
You can add new words or phrases and change translations to a form which suits your way of remembering things.
It is actually very good and gives you a choice of nine languages including French, German, Afrikaans, Italian, Portuguese, Slovak, Spanish, Tswana and ZULU.
Requires Hard Disc.
DESKTOP PAINT
Order Code: 10590 Total Disks: 1
This is a simple easy to use 16 colour paint package that needs a mouse to run.
It does not have all the features of a full paint package but this means that it will not take up megabytes of hard disc space.
It does have most of the standard features and may be worth ordering.
Requires VGA.
ENVISION PUBLISHER
Order Code: 10470 Total Disks: 2
Envision Publisher is a full-featured desktop publishing program with advanced WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) page layout and composition features that let you design documents in an interactive visual environment.
Text can be scaled from 4 points to 108 points without loss of quality and can be rotated, bolded, kerned or filled with any pattern.
It includes a powerful set of object drawing tools including PCX import and scaling.
It also has full clip board capability.
This program is the best of its kind on the market for page making facilities, it is far better than a number of ‘Commercial’ pagemaking programs that are popular with users who only have a dot-matrix printer.
It will print to laser or dot matrix and with a better quality than our 350.00 pound package does.
If you order this program along with NEOPAINT, our professional paint package (Code: 10460) you would have all your DTP problems solved for less than 100.00 for the registered versions.
Requires Hard Disc.
ICON 3000
Order Code: 10720 Total Disks: 1
Every Windows Icon you will ever need, over 3,000 icons to choose from with no duplications.
These icons are ideal for use with shareware programs such as Icon Show and Icon Tools.
NEOPAINT
Order Code: 10460 Total Disks: 2
At !A shareware paint package that will take care of all your professional needs.
It is so good that we now use it for all our drawing and image manipulation for the artwork you see in this section of the magazine.
It has a colour stamp facility that allows you to create your own images to be copied onto an existing screen without wiping out the background.
It has more facilities than the package we used to use and costs a fraction of the price.
It includes all the standard tools, of which most of them work in Zoom mode.
It can invert, flip, rotate, scale, stretch, smudge and anything else you might want it to do.
It includes PCX and GIF in its file formats, works with Hercules and above in 2, 16 or 256 colours and can print to laser or dot matrix.
You can convert colour images to 256 grey scales and work with multiple images but best of all, it doesn't need Windows to run which means it is easy to install and use.
This is the best package to become available on Shareware in a long time.
There are already loads more Fonts available with more becoming available every week.
Requires Hard Disc.
NEOPAINT FONTS (1)
Order Code: 10480 Total Disks: 1
Approximately 20 extra fonts for the excellent Neopaint paint package to enable you to produce even more varied DTP work.
NEOPAINT FONTS (2)
Order Code: 10490 Total Disks: 1
Approximately 20 extra fonts for the excellent Neopaint paint package to enable you to produce even more varied DTP work.
PCX DUMP
Order Code: 10760 Total Disks: 1
This is a basic screen capture program that lets you capture any part of a screen into a PCX file.
You would run this program first, choosing the hot keys you wish to awaken it with.
You would then run your latest game and at the right moment press the hot keys, it will then save the screen out to a PCX file for you to load into your paint package.
Requires EGA.
PROCADD
Order Code: 10670 Total Disks: 2
This simple to use comprehensive CAD package for DOS gives you all the tools you need to create complex drawings.
It has all the standard tools seen in any other CAD package with one great exception, the registered version uses the CorelDraw 3.0 interface.
This means that drawings can be created with the necessary detail unavailable in CorelDraw, you can then import your drawing into CorelDraw and add any enhancements such as 3D effects and fonts.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
ASTROLOGY AND BIORHYTHMS
Order Code: 1230 Total Disks: 1
The areas of Astrology and Biorhythms are of interest to people from across the world.
These two programs are an introduction to these schools of thought as implemented on the IBM PC.
The astrology program provides detailed information as to the position of the planets on a given date, information on what the likely personality and interests of a person born on a given date will be and finally information on rising signs.
The biorhythms program is simple and easy to use for those who know the subject but are not computer boffins.
The documentation for these programs provides a fascinating history of the subject.
Programs such as these are now being used around the country to provide computerised horoscope and printed biorhythm charts.
Watch out Russel Grant!
BANNERIFIC
Order Code: 10750 Total Disks: 1
This is a very simple program that lets you type in a line of text and details of print size and orientation, it will then produce a banner on your dot matrix printer using the line of text.
Very good for those one off Happy Birthday! messages when you have forgotten to get a card.
COLORSCAN
Order Code: 10610 Total Disks: 1
A unique idea indeed, scan in colour images with your black and white scanner!
You need, among other things, 3 coloured cellophane filters, A Scanner guide, Pencils, Clear Tape etc.
You then scan your image using each of the filters in turn saving out the images.
The program then brings the images together to make one colour image.
Even though I suspect the author works for Blue Peter the idea is a quite good one and computer hobbyists will enjoy using this package.
The manual is very well done and would be of interest to anyone dabbling in graphics.
Requires VGA.
FLOAT CARTOON MAKER
Order Code: 10810 Total Disks: 1
This little mouse driven program will allow you to create backdrops and actors to make your own cartoon production.
Roger Rabbit it is not!,
It uses text based graphics and the demo production should have less detail to be more impressive.
It is however an interesting program that takes you through placing the actors to shooting frames.
You even get to decide when to say ‘Cut!
That's a Rap’.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
KWS KNITWEAR DESIGN
Order Code: 7470 Total Disks: 1
KWS Knitwear Design is an asset for many home computer users who are knitting clothes by hand or machine.
You are able to input new and popular patterns to be stored at a later date for use again and again.
You input the data only once, you can then print out any number of patterns for different sizes of garment in inches or centimetres.
Now Dad can have an identical jumper to his son without having to roll it up at the bottom or trying to fit two arms into three sleeves.
KWS will also tell you how much wool you need to buy so you no longer need to knit many scarfs to use up all your spare wool.
This program is a very professional program written by an experienced home Knitter using machine and by hand so you know it will contain all the necessary features.
BRIX
Order Code: 10540 Total Disks: 1
Any game that tests my logical mind is always a winner with me, and this excellent game of Brix is top of my list.
It is an arcade puzzler game that tests your ability to think fast and move quickly.
The idea is to pick up individual blocks, move them around and drop them next to matching blocks to make them disappear.
When all the blocks have gone you move on to the next level, sound easy?
Well the first few levels are just to get you used to the game, but, the other 100 levels will test you to your limit with the addition of elevators, boiling acid, lasers, lava acid and anti-grav.
This game has excellent graphics and sound blaster support but does need a 286 or better to run.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
CAPTURE THE FLAG
Order Code: 9040 Total Disks: 1
For those not impressed by arcade shoot 'em ups comes this excellent version of the popular outdoor sport.
A challenging game of strategy graphically portrayed in such detailed graphics as to leave me speechless.
You must capture your opponents flag (the computer can be your opponent) before he gets yours.
You can also capture the opponents team players.
The animation is silky smooth and flicker free as your players run around the vast countryside scenario.
In real life the playing are would be the size of a small village and every inch must be searched if you are to capture the flag.
The on-line help is once again beyond belief, appearing automatically when you are most likely to need it.
Reminders on how to use the controls, how to seek out the opponents players and beat them up, and how to move across the terrain are all supplied.
These can quickly be removed so they don't get in the way during the game of an experienced player.
Get your friends round to see this one today.
The commercial quality makes it a market leader!
Requires VGA.
COMMANDER KEEN IN KEEN DREAMS
Order Code: 10000 Total Disks: 1
Commander Keen has the largest fan club of any other shareware game available.
Transend has scoured the world from Norway to the U.S.A. in the search for more Keen Games.
We found this latest version from Gamers Edge in America, along with many other titles form ID Software, now known as the lost collection of ID Software.
Your Hero is Back and needs help to rescue the captured children being held by the Vicious Vegetables.
We fell about laughing at the jogging carrots, head butting parsnips and other whacky characters as we jumped, climbed and ran about the many levels.
A well aimed flower bomb soon put paid to the battling vegies, but only for a few seconds to give you time to pass, save the children and leave quickly.
Shin up the fireman's poles to heights never reached before but before careful the potato doesn't bash your head in at the top.
Game players every where are now queuing up for a copy of this excellent graphical game with breathtaking colours.
Requires EGA.
DEATH WATCH
Order Code: 9000 Total Disks: 1
Based in the city of Locklaven this VGA animated adventure places you in control of a party of four mystical characters.
Developed in the style of Eye of the Beholder this game is easily the best role playing adventure available on shareware.
A mouse makes the game more playable but is not essential.
The icons displayed on the screen can be used to move your characters around the world or invoke actions such as casting a spell.
The quality of graphics in Death Watch is breathtaking and adds greatly to the atmosphere of fantasy and adventure.
Suitable for all ages this is sure to be one of the most popular adventure games this month.
Requires VGA.
FORD SIMULATOR III
Order Code: 5670 Total Disks: 4
The best Ford simulator yet, in fact I will go so far as to say that they could not bring another one out to top this one.
The VGA graphics on the opening screens and of the cars themselves are amazing.
You are able to look at all the Ford 1992 series of cars currently available in America.
You can get all the details of what's under the hood, how much they cost and then take one for a test drive on this full VGA driving simulator.
Each car behaves differently so you never get tired of using the program.
The disc includes over 2.5 MegaBytes of files which is understandable when you see the gloss paint on the bodies of the cars, you can even change the colour of each model.
Well worth adding to anybody's library.
Due to the size of files this program is only available on 3.5″ discs.
Requires Hard Disc & VGA.
KUNG FU LOUIE
Order Code: 10650 Total Disks: 3
Punch, Kick and fight your way through the first four levels of Kung Fu Louie to face the ultimate challenger ‘Martial Art’(Art being short for Arthur in this case).
After defeating ARThur ten years ago he has now decided that you, Kung Fu Louie, should be shown a little humiliation unless of course you have what it takes be Master.
This program was written by Raphael Salgado, who is himself a first-degree black belt, so he could use a Karate program that he enjoyed and was realistic.
Well worth ordering, especially for its Soundblaster support.
Requires EGA.
MARIO VGA
Order Code: 5250 Total Disks: 1
This is an excellent adaptation of the Mario Brothers game.
The game play is smooth and the graphics are as good as any other platforms type game.
The task is to collect coins and to tip up the tortoises and spiders that crawl out of the pipes along the platforms.
By jumping and bumping your head under the platform the tortoises are walking, on you can tip them onto their backs, they are then helpless to move.
All you have to do then is get up there to knock them off.
Beware! if you take too long they remove their shell, change colour and are even harder to keep up with.
This game is well worth adding to your leisure library.
Requires VGA.
OTRA
Order Code: 10620 Total Disks: 1
This game is based on the Simon game that was a hit with kids all over the U.K. a number of years ago.
You start with a group of nine panels of different colours and musical notes.
At the start one of these panels will flash and play a note, you must then repeat the sequence, the computer will then repeat the sequence back and add a note etc. etc.
Where this game wins over the hand held version is that points are awarded and a top ten table is held.
SCRAMBLE
Order Code: 2000 Total Disks: 1
An excellent computer version of the popular board game Scrabble.
You have the option of 1–4 players, or if you prefer the computer can play with you.
The documentation on disk with this program comes with full instructions and details of installing and loading.
It even deals with possible technical problems.
The EGA graphics are very well done and make the game every bit as enjoyable as the board game.
The disk comes with the necessary programs to decode the 33,000 word dictionary, to allow you to edit, and to re-encode it for use with Scramble.
This enabled me to put in all the words I consider legal and thus go on to win the game.
Using a mouse is optional but it does make the game more playable.
Requires EGA.
SECRET AGENT
Order Code: 3390 Total Disks: 1
Another Apogee winner.
As secret agent 006 and a half your mission is to parachute down to a high security island and secure the plans to the ultimate satellite laser weapon.
To do this you must bypass dozens of traps, overcome hundreds of multi talented guards and robots and use all your skill and logic to find the blueprints.
I found it very difficult for the first few hours, but after watching the robots and using my skill at cheating I was able to watch somebody else to find out how to complete each screen, of which there are lots.
Secret Agent is an excellent scrolling adventure game that should keep you playing for weeks.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
SHERLOCK
Order Code: 9360 Total Disks: 1
This is a must for everybody with a home computer, and the one at work if your boss is away.
It is a very addictive game of logic, deduction, and lots of lucky guesses when you first play.
The author has thought of every thing, you can even play in tournament mode to pit your wits against family or friends.
To play you must deduce where 36 different images appear on the grid by studying a series of clues.
It will take you one game to get used to the types of clues, using hint as often as you like, but then you have another 65,534 games to play before you have exhausted the possibilities.
You can configure the colours you play with and even edit the tiles to give you other pictures to look at.
You do need a mouse to run this program but it is that good it is worth buying one just to play.
Requires EGA.
STARFIRE
Order Code: 10770 Total Disks: 1
An evil Alien Race has sent a huge number of invasion ships towards earth, carrying weapons capable of destroying entire planets!
This shoot em' up game has very good graphics and supports sound blaster.
It does however need a 286 or better to run.
I found it very difficult to get past the first fleet but when I did the game became more enjoyable especially as the 256 colour graphics match most games out today.
Requires VGA.
TEGL MONOPOLY
Order Code: 1780 Total Disks: 1
This TEGL product does great justice to the game of Monopoly.
Good use of animated VGA graphics and pop-up windows with property information make this a must for fans of the board game.
The American property titles do not detract from the game which can be played by up to fifteen players at the same time.
A game that can be played by all the family is quite rare so this is sure to be popular among readers.
The pull down menus make the game easy to play and the smooth animation help keep the interest of younger players.
Requires VGA.
THE CATACOMB ABYSS
Order Code: 20000 Total Disks: 2
EGA Graphics owners cursed when they saw that Wolfenstein 3D required a minimum of VGA to display its 256 colours.
Wolfenstein was nearly Transend's best selling game of ‘92…
Nearly!
All must now step aside and make way for The Catacomb Abyss from U.S.A's Gamers Edge team.
Our librarian passed me the disk ready for review, I ran it and nervously waited for the title page.
Impatient as ever I skipped the help and went straight for the action!
Caught unawares I was dragged helplessly into the nightmare world of The Catacombs.
My soundblaster convinced me that there were footsteps coming from behind me.
I wheeled around to see a 3D abhorrent Zombie attempting to maul me.
Quickly I hurled two magical fireballs, both hit the creature of the night square in the chest reducing him to a pile of smouldering bones.
I darted for cover, blasting a hole in a wall with another fireball.
Beyond the rubble stood a chest of treasure with more healing potions and firepower beneath its lid.
A Screech, and in the distance appeared a bat, another fireball took care of it…
The Catacomb Abyss — More than a game…
IT'S REAL!
Requires EGA.
WORD CONVERT
Order Code: 10800 Total Disks: 1
Word Convert solves the kind of puzzles seen in many magazine competitions where a given word is converted into another by altering one letter at a time.
It will work for words of any length and comes with a 64,000 word file that it uses to solve the problem.
It has a options menu that allows you to block words, create puzzles and reverse them.
XWORD
Order Code: 10690 Total Disks: 2
This Windows 3. x crossword program is simply excellent.
The installation is very professional as is the actual program, but what else would you expect from leading leisure company SIERRA.
You are presented with a blank crossword and a list of clues, and as you click on a square the relevant clue is highlighted.
For crossword fans everywhere this program is a must and you can even set the difficulty levels.
Requires Hard Disc.
BASIC TUTOR
Order Code: 2130 Total Disks: 1
When many of you received your computer a language called BASIC was possibly supplied on a disk, buried deep in the packaging.
As novice programmers many of us are introduced to the world of computer languages via BASIC.
As the language reads like English it is simpler than most to teach in early school years.
The BASIC tutor takes you from the start to an intermediate level at a comfortable pace.
It is not the objective of this program to make you a complete guru, and you would be best advised to keep your BASIC manual close at hand.
The environment you will be working in to learn is called GW-BASIC, as this is the most common version of BASIC for the PC.
Early steps explain the common words used and how one builds programs using these words.
This is an excellent interactive tutorial as you can try each of the described commands as you go along.
A practical approach that will be welcomed by all students of this popular language.
AS EASY AS
Order Code: 7080 Total Disks: 1
This is the latest version of the worlds best known shareware spreadsheet, namely version 5.01c.
With thirteen graph types, array manipulation facilities and full mouse interface As Easy As is going to take some beating.
These facilities are sure to impress expert spreadsheet users, especially those with experience of Lotus 123.
The comprehensive on-screen manual will teach novice users how to use the more commonly used features.
As Easy As can also simulate a 3D working spreadsheet by dividing its 2D sheet into ‘PANELS’.
Each panel then becomes a spreadsheet in its own right.
Pull down menus offer easy access to the multitude of facilities and options can be selected by mouse or keyboard.
TUTOR 123
Order Code: 10550 Total Disks: 1
This is an interactive tutorial to teach the novice PC user the fundamentals of Lotus 1-2-3.
This is a very good program but, if you are not a novice to spreadsheets or computers, you will find it frustrating as it will be too slow for you.
You do not need Lotus 1-2-3- to run it.
DISKSPACE
Order Code: 10710 Total Disks: 1
This little utility for Windows 3. x is excellent for keeping track of your hard disc space.
It continually updates so that you can see the exact amount of bytes free along with a graphical representation of the percentage free.
It will save you accessing the file manager program as often.
Well worth adding to your windows utilities.
RUNSINCE
Order Code: 10680 Total Disks: 1
For those of you who find it necessary to re-boot your system more than once a day this utility is invaluable.
You can set certain programs in your autoexec.bat file to run only once a day, every 4 hours, every week or every 3 minutes, in fact any combination of time at all.
So if your virus scanner was set to check once a day it would not run it every time you boot up, only the first time you booted up that day, excellent!
SHAPESHIFTER
Order Code: 10780 Total Disks: 1
ShapeShifter is a very sophisticated program designed to make the task of converting files from one archive format to another much easier.
You can even scan for viruses that would normally be missed by a standard scanner because it would have been hidden away in an archive file.
This utility has too many features to list and is definitely worth getting.
TRIX WAVE
Order Code: 10700 Total Disks: 1
This is a very useful utility for converting all your VOC, SND and MAC sound files into WAV files for use with windows 3.1.
You can now play your favourite sounds while using Windows.
PRO-CR
Order Code: 10730 Total Disks: 1
The first Shareware Optical Character Recognition Program.
It is an excellent program that will convert a scanned file in PCX or TIFF format into Ascii text for use in your wordprocessor.
It works with an HP Scanjet Directly which means you can store the text file as it scans.
All you need to do then is spell check it and print it out.
It is brilliant for those using Fax cards who wish to change the contents of a Fax and re-print it.
Everyone using a Scanner who could not afford the high prices demanded by commercial Optical Character Recognition packages will be delighted with this.
TYPE WRITE
Order Code: 10740 Total Disks: 1
This program will make your non-laser printer operate just like a typewriter so that every time a key is pressed it is sent to the printer.
This may seem like a backward step but for those users who only have a computer system and printer this program is ideal for completing any form that will fit in your printer.
You can still print from a file of course.
The Software Magazine — Editorial Review Parameters
If a magazine is entirely devoted to Software Editorial and Reviews then the need to focus on the detail increases with it.
There are many aspects of Software that is totally ignored in a mixed hardware/software editorial environment.
In a Software only environment the true richness of an application can come to the fore with the exposure of relevant facts and figures.
Here is a purely personal set of preferences as to the parameters that should be included in the new editorial guidelines.
1:
Hardware/Device Support — CPU Types 8086/80286/80386/80486 — Screen Types & resolutions — Mouse Types — Printer Types.
2:
Memory Space required — RAM required for application, some products just want 640K, others want a an extra amount of memory, Extended or Expanded RAM to operate efficiently.
3:
Operating System Support — version of MS-DOS/DR-DOS needed for the application, plus CONFIG.SYS & AUTOEXEC.BAT changes.
4:
Disk Space required — Megabytes of disk space required for application, increasingly important as some applications may even require a storage upgrade!
5:
Disk Sizes included in the application package — 5.25inch and/or 3.5inch disks.
It's very frustrating having to order different size disks when you've already bought the product!
6:
Number of disks included in application package — this figure could also include data as to low density or high density disks.
7:
Time to install application — number of minutes taken to install application on target machine, which should also be noted as MHz of CPU and Hard Disk access time is also relevant in installation time.
8:
Technical Support behind the application — Everybody sells software, only a few support it well.
The Software Magazine should be the only publication able to focus a spotlight on support, an area where users really perceive value in an application.
9:
Upgrade Policy — The more enlightened software companies provide a logical upgrade path for users.
When an application receives a major change in code, often to correct previous errors, users should not be expected to re-buy the product to pay for the inefficiency of the authors.
10
: Performance and Fitness for Role (FFR)— Almost every software licence, constructed in California and sold in Europe, states that no application is guaranteed to do anything, worse still if it doesn't perform it's almost your fault for buying it!
The Software Magazine should enforce a FFR rating in every application it reviews.
RINGING ALL THE BELLS…
There are those who say that the PC is the best and most versatile ‘meccano’ kit ever invented.
There are sites all over the world designing pieces of software and bits of hardware to add-to, join with and go into PC's.
The latest add-on for the PC is a combined Modem/Fax/Answering Machine, a variety of which is the ‘Teleputer’ a review copy of which has been kindly provided by hardware specialists Solwise Technical Services of Hull.
This was a very early version, although it worked an absolute dream the cards are not yet BT Approved.
This procedure takes sometime so, at the time of the review the Teleputer is of a ‘non-BT- approved’ product.
The Teleputer is a full card, taking out an eight-bit expansion slot, is easily installed and is supplied with comms software and at an additional cost fax software.
For the technically minded the modem is a fairly standard 2400 send and receive Hayes compatible, with V.42bis/MNP5, V.42/MNP2-4 error correction, CCITT V.22bis, V.22 and Bell 212A,103.
For the none technical, these figures mean that it is not a super quick modem, but has features that improve data transfer and have error correcting protocols.
If you need a modem to link into say Compuserve and pick up and collect messages this modem is ideal — if you are uploading and downloading big files over long distances you need a quicker modem.
The modem software is Bitcom, which allows file transfers using most popular protocols and fits the modems spec well.
The FAX, again for the technically minded is a Send 9600/Receive 4800 and will send any of the following file types from your PC directly to any Group III fax machine:-ASCII, TIF, IMG, BMP, CUT, PCX, DCX, Word Perfect 5. x files.
Fax modem cards were reviewed in the ‘Faxing without Paper’ article in September's Issue (Vol 1 Issue 4) and then Teleputer can use most common FAX software, including WINFAX and BITFAX.
The former is making quite a name for itself, as it works well under Windows and as its device driver can be set up as a ‘printer device’ within Windows, the output of almost any Windows application that produces output to a printer, can be ‘diverted’and sent as a FAX.
This means that using a program like WINFAX, you can combine document and data from a variety of Windows applications — a letter from word processing, a graphic from your paint program, a design from DTP, a graph from the spreadsheet etc and send them off in one FAX.
Outgoing FAXES are produced in much better quality than normal FAX machines as there is no ‘scanning’ of the original document — the only disadvantage is that you cannot send an existing document, unless it has been previously sent to you, or you key it into Word processing or Desk Top Publishing.
As this software runs under Windows, FAXES can be sent/received in background, and there are versatile ‘phonebooks, FAX books, Transmit and Receive Logs and Scheduling software to send your FAXES when it is cheaper.
If you do not run Windows, there are DOS based versions of both WinFax (DosFax) and BitFax.
The third component of the ‘Teleputer’ and integrated into the modem and FAX is the telephone answering machine.
You will already have the telephone line connecting into the Teleputer card to drive the Modem and Fax.
The answering machine is a logical development and really does work rather well!
Firstly, the Teleputer software works under Windows — both the FAX software and Comms software could be a DOS version, but the Teleputer needs the big ‘W’.
You then configure the ‘OPTIONS’ menu to answer in one of three modes:—
1.
Answering Machine
2.
Modem /FAX
3.
Answering Machine /FAX
You then minimise the application and carry on with your other computing.
If in Answering machine mode, your caller will receive a recorded message and be told to leave his message ‘after the tone’.
The message is initially held in memory, and when the call is finished is written to disk.
If the Teleputer is in Answering Machine /FAX mode it will automatically detect a FAX only call and divert that to the FAX software.
If this call is a ‘telephone call’ a different message will tell the caller ‘to press any button to leave a voice message, or stay on the line to send a FAX’.
This caters for those with a combined telephone /press a button to send a FAX machine.
In the third mode the Teleputer will automatically detect a FAX and divert it to the FAX software or sense a modem call and send that to its software.
As far as the Answering Machine side is concerned, the length of incoming messages can be set, and you can record your own messages.
The recorded messages can be replayed until deleted, via either the telephone handpiece or an external speaker.
The messages can also be accessed from a remote telephone, via password access, and the recorded message itself can actually be changed.
A single password protected voice mailbox exists where you can leave, or update a message that only certain users can access.
Included with this versatile piece of kit is a phone book and auto-dialler, with a welcome re-dialling facility, a Voice Scheduler with a voice alarm, reminder and to-do-list, plus an all year round scheduler.
You can even program it to ring your mum, on her birthday, in three months time when you are on holiday and say in your own voice ‘Happy Birthday, Mum!’.
Hardware installation is straightforward, although you may have to reset the comm port jumpers on the IDE controller — COM 2 seems the safest bet for the Teleputer.
Software installation is easy, especially for the Windows versions and for both hardware and software you should be up and running within 45 minutes.
In summary, the modem is fine for occasional and ‘short’ use.
The FAX is superb for sending any number of FAXES and (unless you have a dedicated line) for receiving occasional FAXES.
If you are sharing a FAX line with the telephone you really need someone to ring you first to say they are sending you a FAX.
The Answering Machine is a fully featured jobbie, but requires that the computers system unit at least is switched on, and that Windows and the Teleputer software is running/minimised.
The main point of interest is the price involved.
The cost of hardware is falling every week, until recently the modem itself could have cost over £400!
Combined ‘Standalone’ Answering Machine/Faxes cost about £500 and an external 2400 modem around the £200 mark.
It is possible, from Importers like Solway to buy the FAX/MODEM only cards for under £100, and the Teleputer cards should be shipping soon, and Steve Mace from Solway believes they could be as cheap as £150!!!
If you have heavy use of any of the three items it is likely you will buy dedicated machines — if you have an existing PC, and need these hi-tech services occasionally this could well be your next purchase.
Solway Technical Services are at 216 Willerby Road, HULL HU5 5JW, and are on Hull 0482-41567 or on FAX 0482-473616.
Room with a View
Gil Benson puts a new face on his Windows based machine with Xsoft's Rooms for Windows
Program Manager, the default shell for Windows doesn't suit everyone's way of working, and it is true to say that the Windows desktop can become cluttered with myriads of overlapping windows and dialogue boxes.
Xerox (the ‘X’ in Xsoft) was the company responsible for the world's first GUI (it says here), so you might think they know a thing or two about how to dress up Windows…
The idea behind Windows is to have a number of processes running at one time, each in its own clearly defined area of the screen — and for the purposes of this review, I'm counting Program Groups as tiny processes.
Inevitably one windows will overlap another, and many are the times I have found myself moving windows aside to get to a particular application or dialogue box.
Minimising applications or processes is just one answer — lots of my colleagues habitually minimise Program Manager in order to relieve screen clutter, but moving between minimized apps can be a pain as well.
Enter Rooms for Windows, a shell that takes the metaphor of a building to give not just multiple desktops, but also multiple environments, each of which is called a room.
Offices It works in this fashion: If you were working in a suite of offices, you might, if you were so inclined, have one office dedicated to word processing, one for drawing, another for accounting and so on.
A layout of that kind would have the advantage that you could leave your work out on the desk in the room and go back to it later — you wouldn't need to tidy up before you started on another piece of work, because you'd go to another room to do it.
And you could move about rooms as the fancy took you, of course.
Rooms for Windows works in exactly the same manner.
You place applications in rooms (metaphorically and virtually speaking) and move between rooms to work with them.
That's the simplest way I can describe it.
In actuality, it's very little more complex than that, and what complexity there is adds to both facility and functionality.
The main view, if you can call it that, consists of an overview of the rooms you have on your system.
One is called the Overlay room, and anything you have in this room is repeated in all others.
Thus, if you want to have, say, CLOCK.EXE running in all rooms, you put it in the Overlay Room.
The mechanics of putting an application in a room are very simple too — as are all the best ideas.
Every room has a Back Door which has a menu attached to it, from which you can create buttons, doors, and rooms (a rabbit warren, even!)
Buttons control applications, as you can see by the screenshot, so you don't need to have the full weight of Program Manager in each room — only the applications you want to use there.
This means you can also tailor rooms for others to use so that they can't get at applications you don't want them to use.
Furniture Back to the plot.
Once you've decided which applications you want in every room, you can then furnish each room with its own applications.
Actually, it's a very pleasant way to work — I've set up one room for word processing and another for screenshot manipulation, so I can switch back and forth between the two whilst I'm writing captions.
I also set up a room for the program under review, so I can just click at the side of the screen and move to it.
And that's only one way to navigate.
You can specify a door to take you directly to another room, and just double click on it to get to another application.
You can click on an empty space on the desktop and bring up the Task Manager.
Or you can use the Back Door to hop between two rooms — it takes you back to the room you were in last.
It's all clever, and simple to get used to.
Close the door There are, of course, certain constraints.
One room must run Program Manager, whether in a window or minimized, but further instances in other rooms can be closed without exiting Windows.
This is because Rooms is an application, rather than a true shell, and needs Program Manager in order to run.
You can close the door, but you can't put out the lights.
Aside from that, it's a system that adopts a metaphor that everyone is familiar with and implements it in an intuitive way.
In my opinion, it makes organising your work in the Windows environment a lot simpler, and saves you from screen clutter, even on a 1280x1024 screen.
Oh, and there's also a by-product.
When you move out of your Games room, your current game of Solitaire is totally off-screen.
There's no way the Boss can tell!
FAX BOX
Product: Rooms for Windows
From: Xsoft Published by: GST
Price:
Verdicts Performance ***** Ease of use ***** Value for money ****
For Very simple to use, gets rid of screen clutter
Against Not to everyone's taste.
To save or not to save?
by Janet Swift
In times of economic difficulty it's not only debt that causes problems.
If you are trying to save for some future expenditure, be it retirement, school fees or just that new car or holiday that would be so nice, then finding the right plan matters.
With such low interest rates for savers it is important to analyse just what you are getting at the end of the plan's life and this is just what this month's spreadsheet is all about.
Annuity
In the jargon of finance an annuity is just a regular flow of cash into or out of an account.
Of course this regular flow usually attracts interest and this affects the balance in the account.
A mortgage is an annuity where you pay the building society a regular sum that eventually reduces the balance of debt to nothing.
A savings plan is also an annuity but in this case the cash that you pay in builds up to a sum that you receive at the end of the plan's term.
Step One
The first stage in building any spreadsheet is deciding where the basic data will be stored.
In this case the basic data of a savings plan is simply the amount per month that you are prepared to save, the likely annual interest rate and the number of years for which the plan continues.
You can see that labels have been entered for these three values in A1, A2 and A3 and one for the result in A4.
The column width has been increased to accommodate the longest label.
Step Two
The formula for calculating the final value of an annuity is usually called something like FV — standing for Future Value.
In the case of 1-2-3 it is: @FV (payments, interest, term)
You have to make sure that the period of the regular payments is measured in the same unit of time as the interest and the term.
For example, if you are saving on a monthly basis, the interest rate should be a monthly rate and the term should be measured in months.
In the case of this spreadsheet the final formula is @FV (B1, B2/12, B3*12) which should be entered into B4.
Notice that the interest rate is divided by 12 to give the rate per month and the term has been multiplied by 12 to give the period in months.
You can see the result of saving £10 per month for 5 years at 6% per annum is £697.
Step 3
Adding some formatting to the spreadsheet not only makes it look better but makes it less likely that you will enter the wrong data for the percentage.
Cell B2 has been set to percentage format with two digits after the decimal place and B4 has been set to currency.
Step 4
Just presenting the final sum is quite interesting but it doesn't really help you get a feel for how well the investment has worked for you.
Adding a line that works out the total amount paid in and the interest received at least puts it in perspective.
To do this enter +B1*B3*12 into B5 to calculate the total amount of money paid in and +B4-B5 into B6 to work out the total interest received.
You should also format the range B4…
B6 as currency.
Now the amount received doesn't look so wonderful with £600 coming from the regular saving and the measly £97.70 coming from interest earned.
Step 5
What seems to be missing from the analysis is some measure of how much the savings plan is actually giving you over and above your initial hard earned cash.
There are many ways of estimating the quality of the benefit at the end of the plan but one simple one is to calculate an earnings ratio, given by the interest earned over the total sum — which is best expressed as a percentage.
The spreadsheet is now getting complicated enough to want to insert a couple of blank rows (\Worksheet, Insert, Row) between the more basic calculation and the other data.
The formula for the earnings ratio is simply +B7/B6 entered into B9 and to show this as a percentage all that is necessary is to set the cells format to percent.
The earnings ratio for the £10 for 5 years at 6% is 16.28%.
If you change the term to 10 years you will discover two things: first the column of results isn't wide enough and second, after increasing the column width, you find that the final amount is £1,638 including £438 interest and the earnings ratio is more than double, at 36.57%.
Step 6
If you play around with the savings plan spreadsheet you will quickly discover that the earnings ratio isn't dependent on how much you put into the plan every month, only on how long you save for and the interest rate.
So if you want to make your money grow look for a good interest rate and save for as long as possible.
For example, if you had started a savings plan in 1900 for £1 per month at 8% interest you would receive £249,033.53 in 1993 with an earnings ratio of 22214.83%!
But wait I hear you cry in 1900 £1 was worth a lot more than it is today!
The solution is to take inflation into account.
This isn't as difficult as you might think.
If you insert three blank rows at the top of the spreadsheet you can use B2 to record the average inflation per year that you expect for the life of the savings plan.
To allow for this inflation all you have to do is calculate the value of £1 now in so many years time and use this as a correction factor.
If the inflation rate is i% then at the end of one year £1 is worth 1* (1+i%), after two years 1* (1+i%) ∘2 and so on.
Adding a row just below ‘Value at term’ and entering the formulae +B7/ (1+B2) ∘B6 into B8 does the job.
Now if you calculate how much the final value of £1 saved for 93 years is, you find it is only worth £1,103 in 1900 prices assuming an average of 6% inflation.
In this case it is still difficult to appreciate the worth of the savings plan because we don't think in 1900 prices when the sum of £1010 (the amount gained in interest) would have seemed like a fortune!
However this little problem doesn't occur if you are investigating a new savings plan because the correction for inflation brings the value back to today's values.
Step 7
The correction for inflation has only been applied to the final sum.
To get a true feeling for the plan it should also be applied to the Principal because although you have been paying a fixed amount in each month the value of this has also decreased due to inflation.
To allow for inflation on the principle insert an extra row (11) and enter @FV (B4, -B2/12, B6*12) into B1.
Then to calculate the value of the inflation-adjusted interest insert row 13 and enter +B8-B11.
Finally enter +B13/B8 into B15 to calculate the inflation adjusted Earnings ratio.
With these changes, and after setting suitable formats, you can see that amount actually deposited by putting £1 per month away starting in 1900 is only worth £199.
In other words, the value of money decreases so much that the eventual outlay of £1,116 over 93 years is only equivalent to just short of £200 in 1900's currency — weird stuff money!
Step 8
Now let's use the spreadsheet to look at a real savings plan.
If you save £50 per year for 10 years and the company offers you a return of 10% per annum then you will receive £9,147 — a sum that appears very comfortable.
But in 10 years time this will only feel like receiving £5,107, even though you have paid in £6000!.
However it isn't quite as bad as it looks because the amount that you will have paid in will only feel like £4,520.
Step 9
Even though the spreadsheet will act like a financial calculator and tell you all about your savings plan there is something to be said for actually seeing your money grow.
To make this possible it is easy to add a table showing the balance for each of 25 years.
All you have to do is fill column D, starting from D2 with the numbers 1 to 25.
This is easiest to do using the /Data, Fill command but you can enter the values manually if you want to.
Next enter the formula @FV($B$4, $B$5/12, D2*12) into E2 and copy it from E2 to E3…
E26.
This gives the total in the account at the end of each year.
Enter the formula +E2/ (1+$B$2) ∘D2 into F2 and copy this down the column from F2 to F2…
F26.
This gives the balance in the account in terms of the value of money at the start of the first year.
Step 10
The final step is to define a graph.
Use the /Graph command and set the X data series to D2…
D26, the A series to E2…
E26 and the B series to F2…
F26 and make sure that you select a line graph.
Now you can see the way your savings grow, with and without adjustment for inflation.
This makes it quite clear how the gap between apparent and real earnings increases with time.
SuperCalc 5.5 by Janet Swift
SuperCalc 5.5 represents an important move towards a graphical user interface and this is very good news for every SuperCalc user who likes using a mouse — or who is prepared to try out a mouse for the extra shortcuts that make SuperCalc 5.5 easier to use than its predecessors.
SuperCalc 5 — an overview
SuperCalc is by anybody's standards a mature spreadsheet — it pre-dates Lotus 1-2-3 — and is a reliable and efficient program.
In terms of spreadsheet functionality SuperCalc 5.5 is the most powerful DOS spreadsheet available.
It outperforms the DOS versions of Lotus 1-2-3 by virtue of its flexible approach to 3D spreadsheeting and its extensive range of graphs and charts.
The respect in which it lags behind competing products — recent versions of 1-2-3 and Quattro Pro — is in its printing and presentation facilities — often referred to as ‘spreadsheet publishing’.
The new features in Version 5.5 include a ‘what you see is what you get’ preview facility and extends its support for fonts to dot matrix printers.
Even with these extras it is still less capable for spreadsheet publishing than its higher priced rivals.
So if you definitely want to combine spreadsheet ranges with charts and other graphics — arrows, annotations and so on— SuperCalc is not to be recommended but if you want a powerful DOS spreadsheet, which is capable of professional looking results and highly informative graphs, then SuperCalc 5.5 provides all the features you need and is a bargain at only £79.
What's new in version 5.5 — a guided tour
Until now SuperCalc lacked mouse support and its users found it perfectly possible to do without it.
Having used version 5.5 for only a few days I could never go back.
A spreadsheet makes operations like totalling a column of numbers or producing a bar chart a straightforward operation — SuperCalc 5.5 makes them incredibly quick and easy due to the icons in its new Tool Bar.
You can use these to move around the spreadsheet and even to select functions using its Function Assistant but even more exciting are the new features that are introduced by icons.
For example, having entered sales figures in the table shown in the screen dump, I used the new Auto Summation icon to fill in both the row totals and the column totals in a single operation.
To do this I simply highlighted the cells containing the data and the cells immediately to their right and the two rows below them (PRESUM.TIF).
I then clicked on the Auto Summation icon and the results were instantly inserted — and because I had left an empty row between the data and the row in which I wanted the totals, a ruling was automatically added.
The welcome feature about SuperCalc 5.5's Fast Graphing facility is that when you include text that you want to use as the first and second titles and as the graph legend in the range you highlight, they will automatically be added to the chart that results when you click on the icon GPH.
This means that SuperCalc does more for you than any other similar fast graphing facility I have come across — including those in Windows spreadsheets.
After highlighting the range shown here (PREGRAPH) and clicking GPH this was the chart produced (GRAPH).
Of course, you can alter the appearance of the graph — by selecting different fonts, by increasing the size of the legend or by specifying a 3D display, for example , by using the usual //Graphics menu — but if you just want a feel for your data and a starting point for further embellishments then Fast Graphing is very useful.
It is well worth exploring the //Graphics menu as it contains a lot of powerful features that allow you to present and interpret your data with a great deal of control.
It has a wide selection of charts for use in business including Area and Hi-Lo charts.
Its dual chart is an attractive option in that it allows you to link two pie or bar chart charts or a pie and a bar chart — as illustrated here (DUALGRPH) It also offers Word charts — a variety that it is unusual to find in a spreadsheet but very welcome given that you can use the graphics facilities of SuperCalc 5.5 to prepare slides suitable for use as a presentation to an audience.
If you want to create 35mm slides you can use the driver provided in the product and then send your file on disk to one of the CA authorised bureaux that are distributed nation-wide.
When it comes to technical charts it has a combination of graph types and options that make it suitable for analysing scientific as well as business or financial data.
For example, its Radar charts are suitable for displaying measurements involving angles — such as the response of an aerial — and it includes a wider range of fit types for plotting points or fitting trend lines than most spreadsheets and has options such as moving averages.
SuperCalc 5.5 has extended the use of fonts in printing spreadsheet ranges so that the facilities that were previously limited to laser printers now apply to most dot matrix printers.
Perhaps even more important is the inclusion of a preview facility since before you could not see the effects you had selected until printing out.
Applying fonts is still a two stage process — you can set up a default font and up to seven others using the /Global, Spreadsheet, Fonts menu.
The choices of typeface available are limited to Courier, Line Printer and three Bitstream fonts — Swiss, Dutch and Courier.
(SETFONTS) Once you have made your choices (separately for Portrait and Landscape Mode) you can assign fonts by referring their numbers using the /Output, Attributes, Fonts command.
This allows you to Clear and Set fonts to any range.
As well as fonts you can use borders around a range and can shade a range and can therefore achieve pleasing results.
(PREVIEW) Another printing enhancement worthy of mention is Print-to-Fit to select the point size for printing so that the range selected fits on a page.
Until now SuperCalc has lacked a ‘best fit’ option for setting column width and this has been rectified in this release.
The effect of using the Fast Best Fit option on a range is to make every column accommodate the longest entry — be it a label or a number — without any spaces to spare.
As you can see, if you have a row of consecutive labels the effect is very crushed up.
(BESTFIT)
If you were once a SuperCalc 4 user you may have noticed the omission of Cell Noter when the product was upgraded.
It has been brought back in 5.5 but is no longer a.
Instead it is an add-in which once attached can be invoked by pressing Shift and a function key.
It enables you to attach a text message in any cell and its menu allows you to edit, copy and move notes and to find a string within your existing notes.
(CELLNOTR)
The other add-in bundled with SuperCalc 5.5 is Silverado.
This is another welcome return as having been available running under SuperCalc 5 there has been a period in which this was no longer available.
You may be wondering what this add-in with a name that offers no clues does — it is a database add-in that extends SuperCalc's existing database facilities to include an easy to use entry form, record storage on disk and even relational databases.
This gives SuperCalc an impressive extra capability.
Finally, it is worth returning to the feature that puts SuperCalc first among DOS spreadsheets — its multipage and multiple spreadsheets.
Any spreadsheet can include more than one page and you can use commands and formula between and across pages — for example you can write a sum that adds the contents of the same cell in a number of pages as in the example shown here where the fourth page of the spreadsheet summarises three month's sales collected on the three previous pages.
(MULTIPAG) Equally you can open more than one spreadsheet at a time and can use commands and write formula that make cross references, an ability that also extends to spreadsheets that are not open but are available on the current disk.
Multipage and multiple spreadsheets have been made easier to use in version 5.5 by the inclusion of icons that let you move forwards and backwards between pages and spreadsheets — these are the double arrows in the third section down in the Tool Bar.
The only problem with multipage spreadsheets uses to be the difficulty in nipping around them.
This is so much easier with the mouse — with more than one page displayed you can just select cells and jump to them — and I would certainly urge every user of SuperCalc 5 to upgrade without hesitation.
Further Reading
Janet Swift is author of ‘SuperCalc Professional’ and ‘The Expert Guide to SuperCalc 5’(published by I/O Press,(0969) 24402).
To mark the launch of SuperCalc 5.5 she has prepared a 16-page booklet covering all its new features in more depth than was possible in this article and this is available FREE to readers of Practical PC.
Just send a large stamped addressed envelope marked SC5-Practical PC to I/O Press, Freepost, Leyburn, DL8 5BR.
Computer Self-service
If you have trouble with your PC, don't despair, the cure might be simple and cheap.
Don Bradbury recounts experiences and passes on some tips.
Few things are as instantly heart-stopping to a computer user as the time when his machine starts to behave erratically.
The first recognition that response is not as it should be immediately conjures up visions of lost working time, expensive repairs, frustrating delays and, perhaps most evocative of all, the thought, ‘how long is it since I last did a backup?’
Yet sometimes an unusual occurrence does not spell disaster.
It is true that some attention is normally indicated and this may involve a certain amount of expense, though not necessarily a king's ransom.
One thing is certain; glitches are not inherent to, or to be expected of, an electronic device, nor a mechanical one for that matter.
If you do notice something unusual which you are sure is not a software problem, then you should take a careful look for the cause or things will just get worse, possibly with more serious consequences.
After all, you wouldn't continue driving your car with the oil pressure light aglow now would you?
Floppy troubles.
Take the case of a floppy disk drive's sudden failure to read a disk when previously it had shown no proclivity to such failing.
If you get the dreaded DOS message ‘General failure reading drive A. Abort, Retry, Fail?’ the first thing you should suspect is contaminated read/write heads.
After a period of use the heads may well have picked up sufficient debris from the disk surface to prevent a reliable reading of the magnetic information on the disk.
The probable cure is obvious and simple, you must clean the heads.
This does not normally involve dismantling the disk drive, you just insert in the drive a special disk to which has been added a small amount of a cleaning fluid.
This can be purchased at any computer supply store (it's basically isopropyl alcohol), then you must activate the disk drive.
Within a minute or so you have one fully rejuvenated disk drive, hopefully.
The whole solution to this problem might cost you less than £10, and even that outlay is allowing for lots of future use.
Cleaning a floppy disk drive should be part of a regular maintenance procedure.
Perhaps as often as once a month, depending partly on the amount of dust in the air, you should get out the drive cleaning kit and service the heads in the way I've described before trouble starts.
A simple DIR command, applied three or four times, will normally do the trick.
But better still, I find, is to use the public domain utility program Clean2.com which activates the disk drive for the required thirty seconds or so, and also sweeps the heads across the disk to make use of the whole surface of the cleaning fabric.
DIR will not do this, of course, it will just hover the heads over the position where the directory area would normally be found.
Should you be unfortunate enough not to find a solution by this means, then you may have lost the alignment of the disk read/write heads.
This, I fear, does involve specialist attention, and cannot normally be attempted by the average DIY man.
An out-of-alignment head is usually caused by a bump — a rather big bump — to the computer.
A clue to confirmation would be to think of any recent accident in this regard.
If you have dropped the computer, maybe only a few inches, and the failures started after this, then give your local repair man a ring for a quotation without delay or you could write a file to the disk which cannot be read back by another machine, or your own for that matter, when the heads have been realigned to their correct setting.
Incorrect floppy types
You should not anticipate reliable floppy disk reading if the disk is not of the correct type, or if it has not been formatted using the correct procedure for that particular disk drive.
Even if it has, you should not always expect reliable reading of a file on a 5.25 inch disk when it has been written on a 1.2MB drive and you are attempting to read the file on a 360K drive.
The reason has to do with the track width on the 1.2MB drive being narrower than on a 360K disk, and the failure of the latter's drive heads to read from such a narrow track.
If you find yourself in this difficulty, first try to get out of it by using only compatible drives.
If you can't, then try, several times if necessary, to make file duplicates using the COPY command's facility to rename a file whilst copying, such as COPY FILE.BA1 FILE.BA2, to try to get at least one successful read on the lower capacity drive.
If you are successful the file copy will hopefully be written in a previously unused part of the disk.
There might also be slight differences in the quality of the disk surface in the two areas, or a slightly stronger magnetic trace on certain tracks.
Whatever the reason, this often works.
Another possible reason is if the same file had previously been written on a 360K drive; it's wider track confuses the low capacity drive's read heads when reading the higher capacity drive's over-printed trace.
Failing that, I have known what was, at first attempt, an unreadable file, to be readable after simply reinserting the disk in the drive.
This probably has something to do with the precise alignment of the track under the read heads.
3.5 inch drives seem less prone to problems, but you could try any of these ways of getting yourself out of trouble if you use both formats.
Fixed disk problems
The type of heads contamination mentioned above with a floppy disk drive cannot occur on a hard disk because it is sealed from external air-borne dust, and the disk is assembled in conditions which are scrupulously clean.
The disk surface is also normally of high quality and is unlikely to shed its magnetic layer, at least not for several years.
If one of these drives starts to give trouble then there is generally some other reason.
Over the years I have had a few interesting experiences with computer hardware.
Generally these have been associated with disk drives of one sort or another because complicated mechanical devices are often not as reliable as electronic ones.
The outcome is sometimes illuminating.
I used a PC which would periodically refuse to recognise the hard disk following a period of perfectly normal operation, and crash with a ‘General System Failure’ report.
After much detective work I traced the fault to one push-on connector on the lead from the power supply unit which was not tight enough.
It could make or break with vibration or thermal expansion as the machine warmed up.
The connector just needed nipping together a little.
Another machine would sometimes read the files in one particular directory and sometimes it wouldn't.
After repeated checks on the viability of the disk surface with utility software I concluded that there were some marginal sectors, on the border of usability and passed by the system during formatting.
A temporary ‘repair’ was effected by installing the same files in a differently named subdirectory, leaving the originals on the disk as redundant disk space.
Later, I applied one of my favourite PD utilities called Hdtest to mark all bad sectors, but most of the disk space used by that directory was recovered.
Hdtest takes a long time to complete its task; I just leave it running overnight.
It does a thorough job of not only testing each part of the hard disk but it also saves any data on the disk while doing so by reading all usable tracks into memory before reformatting the track and then writing it to disk again in the same place — provided it was usable.
Hdtest is not applicable to every time of hard disk, so you should check before using it.
UPS is vital
After a spate of database crashes, and suffering the frustrating and time-consuming business of repeatedly reconstructing files and indexes, I was forced to consider that the mains supply to this particular computer was simply not clean enough for the computer to use.
The supply also had to power some huge electric motors, and some of these were constantly switching in and out.
Nothing is more conducive to inducing mains spikes than heavy duty switch gear.
It is possible to have neighbours running mains welding equipment, for instance, which can also cause the same problems.
These mains spikes sometime consist of surges of thousands of volts, albeit for very brief periods.
However, a surge in voltage of this nature, short-lived or not, may be carried on the mains to other equipment in the vicinity.
If this equipment is a computer, the spikes may inject spurious ‘data’ directly into the files without a word of warning from the software or the operating system.
Although that sort of thing is nominally catered for by most electrical equipment, using spike suppression and smoothing circuitry, I reckoned that this particular computer was not up to the job of coping with the dirty mains, and so an uninterruptible power source was thought to be the only feasible answer.
These UPSs work on the principle of interposing a rechargeable bank of batteries in the mains supply, between the power socket and the electrical device.
Any mains spikes are largely smoothed out while recharging the batteries, and a very clean 240 volts supply is reformed by an oscillator to power the computer.
The load on the UPS has a maximum rating, typically around 250 to 500 watts for a PC, and this must not be exceeded or the UPS will be overloaded.
The UPS has another advantage; it not only provides clean power, it is uninterruptible power, as the name of the device implies.
This means it can tolerate an actual break in supply because it will run for a time on the batteries.
The one I selected guaranteed 10 minutes of power backup, but I found it could run for over 20 minutes before it signalled that it was out of storage capacity.
That's generally ample time for you to close down a database without panic, and to switch off the computer in an orderly fashion.
The time you have to carry this out naturally depends upon the actual load you put on the batteries, that is, how much gear you have hanging off it and the total power consumption of this hardware.
Some uninterruptible power supply units can set you back several hundred pounds but smaller units, suitable for one PC, are relatively cheap.
My UPS solved the database crash problems and I consider it was worth every penny.
Peripherals failure
Occasionally it can happen that a peripheral device in your computer may fail and bring the whole installation to a halt, even if you do not use that particular facility.
I had an Amstrad 1640 machine which booted up every morning without a complaint.
It ran as smooth as clockwork; hard disk, floppy drive, monitor and printer port.
But after a period of warming up, the computer would not reboot in either soft (Ctrl/Alt/Del) or hard (‘big red switch’) mode.
DOS reported that there was an ‘Error: system serial port’ problem, which was annoying because the serial port was not being used.
This was actually caused by an integrated circuit failure, though an intermittent fault such as this is less likely than a total failure.
It might also have been caused by a dry soldered joint, that is, one which can make and break with expansion when warm.
Such failures would be difficult to trace without specialist equipment so most of us would be prepared for a bill, or at least the hassle of a return under guarantee.
But, if you can isolate the component, it might be possible to swap it for a new one at minimum cost.
There are other possibilities that might be checked in such circumstances before dispatching the computer.
One is to disconnect the CMOS-backing or other built-in batteries for about five minutes in order to check that it is not a previously cleared fault which is being ‘remembered’.
Another is to check that there is not an intermittent break from a loose fitting power lead to the floppy disk drive perhaps.
Give all lead terminals a gentle but firm push onto their connectors (with the power disconnected, naturally).
While you're looking at the power supply situation, take a minute to check that the mains plug does not have any loose connections.
The current drain of a typical PC is not high, but connections loose enough to allow make and break in the power supply could be disastrous.
When early Amstrad computers carry out their self test at boot-up, a message ‘Please Wait…’ is put on the screen.
During this time something like eighteen checks on the system are made and the dots appear as these tests are progressed.
If any fault is found, the production of the dots stops and a report is given of the fault.
This generally has something to do with the actual failure, but it is possible that the fault is not accurately reflected in this message, so don't assume that the problem is pin-pointed precisely every time by these messages.
The dust bug
On another machine I had, which was operated in a rather dusty atmosphere, an intermittent failure report from the operating system seemed totally inexplicable except for a light layer of dust which had been deposited over everything inside the system box.
A careful dusting off of the electronics, and a pull off and push back for every ribbon and power connector, restored reliable operation.
This too is worth a try if it's not obvious what else might be amiss, but you have to be very careful when dusting off the components.
I think it is best to suck it off with one of those tiny battery-powered vacuum cleaners you can get for about a tenner these days, as I did in this case.
Depending on what type of dust it is, it just might short out a vital area of the motherboard.
Summing up
When all is said and done, there may be no way to avoid the momentary grip of fear descending on you when unusual things start to happen on your computer, but I hope to have shown that this should not necessarily start a panic.
In fact, if you think things through, and consider all the evidence carefully, you just might find yourself fixing the difficulty yourself.
I'm not saying you will always be successful or that it will never cost you a penny, nor am I advising those almost too timid to open a can of beans to tinker with a complex and potentially dangerous machine if they feel it's beyond them; we all have our limitations.
What I am advising is that you consider acquiring some well-proven software (I can recommend PC-Tools or the Norton Utilities, for instance) for the occasions when a little home diagnosis is required, and learn how to use it.
Then weigh the evidence which confronts you and decide what help you need, if any.
Don't be afraid to seek advice from any contacts you may have in the field.
Maybe you have cultivated a good relationship with your dealer.
He will be anxious to retain your custom so you might give him a try first.
Failing that, there is a chance that you might find someone sympathetic to your plight at an agency dealing with your particular model of computer.
Consider also the computing press agony aunts who generally have a wealth of experience; they will possibly make some useful suggestions which you hadn't thought of.
Finally, don't rush off to buy a UPS or other expensive item, convinced that your neighbour's lawnmower is ruining your mains supply, or some such thing, until you have taken advice on the matter.
And do be careful if you decide to open up the box yourself to have a rummage around.
Electrical equipment can be lethal; particularly is this so with monitors where thousands of volts lie lurking when the mains are connected.
These really are dangerous and I wouldn't touch them myself.
You might consider getting a local electrician or TV repair man to take a look at these before sending the computer away for a specialist repair shop's attention.
But let's hope that will not be necessary.
Hardware
Mysterious NiCads
Q
Your answer to a question from T.D Smart in the Q&A section of the July edition of ‘Practical PC’, contained some information that could cause damage to the NiCad batteries of your readers who follow the advice.
You should never under any circumstances fully discharge a NiCad battery.The reason is that a sure way to destroy a NiCad cell is to reverse charge it.
If you fully discharge a battery, the cell with the least capacity will become reverse charged.
It is because of this fact, that ‘DEAC’ the manufacturer states that if a battery is being discharged at the 110 rate you should not discharge it to a voltage of less than 1.1 volts per cell.
I was responsible for the development of battery operated equipment at A.E.R.E. Harwell for a number of years.
The main cause NiCad battery failure in my experience, was leaving the equipment on overnight.
The most successful solution to the problem of battery failure was to use a single cell and a DC to DC converter, then there was no chance of the battery becoming reverse charged.
Fully discharging a single NiCad cell does it no harm, as you state in the article.
This solution is only appropriate in low power applications.
The battery in your readers equipment could be a NiCad and it would be ruined if he had left it on, just as surely as if it had been a lead acid battery.
K. Witsey, North Woolwich, London 
A
Your letter makes so much sense that I cannot understand the recommendations of so many manufacturers to regularly fully discharge NiCad batteries.
To make sure of the facts I went back to a 1985 Wireless World (May & June) series to read up and it seems you are completely correct.
As long as the basic construction of NiCad batteries hasn't changed, I can see no justification for complete discharge and agree that it stands a good chance of being harmful.
The details of how to best look after a NiCad battery are much too complicated to go into in the answer to a letter and there isn't much that an innocent user can do to help anyway.
Now this only leaves the mysterious problem of the advice that comes with nearly every NiCad driven appliance.
For example, an electric toothbrush that I bought states categorically that it should be completely discharged at the end of each month and my portable's manual gives the same advice.
Help!
Can anyone explain the divergence of theory and advice?
Q Composite monitors
Having graduated from a BBC machine to a PC I have found your magazine the best for me because I like the practical side as well as the computing.
The problem; I have a monitor which requires separate inputs for vertical hold, horizontal hold and signal.
Bull Electrical in Sussex have a kit that converts the composite video into the three outputs.
I wonder if you are familiar with this type of thing and could it be applied to computer video outputs.
If not is this too difficult a task for a building project for your magazine?
S. J. Barbero, Blackwood, Gwent 
A
Converting composite video into separate signals is relatively easy but I'm not sure why you want to do it.
All PC video cards already supply separate H and V sync signals and so would work with the monitor that you have.
A bigger problem that converting between video standards is that fact that most older monitors are simply not up to working with the high resolutions that the PC needs.
If you are thinking of feeding a composite source into the monitor, from a video recorder say, then the problem would be one of matching scan rates as well and this does get complicated.
On the subject of practical, electronic-type computer projects I have to say that I too miss them.
Many years ago I used to write for a magazine called ‘Electronics and Computing Monthly’ which was killed, even though it had a good circulation.
Since then there has been very little about electronics and computing to be found.
I'm not sure whether practical, i.e. using a soldering iron, construction projects, are within Practical PC's scope and readership but if readers are interested why not write in and sway the editorial decisions!
Q Amstrad mouse
I have an Amstrad PC2086 with a VGA monitor.The mouse cursor does not appear in VGA mode although the mouse still works if I can guess its position.
There is no problem in the other modes.
Mouse.com was supplied but not Mouse.sys and there is no mention of Mouse.sys in the manuals.
VGA programs sometimes supply their own version of a cursor but others are unusable.
Is there a software fix for mouse.com or do I need a serial mouse?
John Mitchell, Intake, Doncaster
A
This one is a puzzle because I used a PC2386 for ages without any mouse trouble but there was an update to the driver issued soon after I started using it.
If your 2086 is a vintage model then it is worth checking with Amstrad for an upgrade to the mouse driver.
Incidentally the Amstrad mouse driver is only MOUSE.COM and don't try using other mouse drivers because they definitely don't work.
I also wouldn't switch to a serial mouse until you have checked that the driver is up-to-date.
Still it's nice to know that there is a way of achieving 100% industry compatibility and serial mice are very cheap at the moment.
Q&A Update
Many thanks to the readers who wrote in to tell me how many heads the Tandon TM262 had.
As it happened I too found it in a list of drives the day after answering the letter.
The TM262 has 4 heads, 615 cylinders, with no write precomp and is an MFM drive.
Thanks in particular to Alan Bosworth (London) who sent me a table of Tandon drives and Mike Newsome (Worthing) who took the trouble to fax the details!
Q
Issue 1 (June) Janet Swift presented a spreadsheet on monthly mortgage payments.
In working through it I noticed an error in Step 7 but I not been able to correct it.
Please could you find the error as it will be of great use to myself and others.
Douglas Louca, Lincoln.
A
Yes the gremlins crept in at typesetting here and removed minus signs and one *.
The correct formula for 1-2-3 should read: @IF(PRINCIPAL>TAXTHRESH, @PMT(PRINCIPAL-TAXTHRESH, INTEREST, TERM) + @PMT (TAXTHRESH, INTEREST* (1-RELRATE), TERM), @PMT (PRINCIPAL, INTEREST* (1-RELRATE), TERM))
Our apologies to all our readers who have been struggling with this.
Q
Thank you for your interesting article on mortgage payment calculations.
Having succeeded in making your formulae work for Lotus 1-2-3 and for As-Easy-As I tried to do the same in Excel.
After hours of brain searching work I arrived at a formula that produced some sensible — but not accurate figures.
Could you tell me where I have gone wrong and why the formula has to be written differently for different software.
Peter Edwards, North Cheam
A
As you have obviously discovered for yourself, Excel formulates its PMT function differently.
The version of the formula required is:
=IF(PRINCIPAL>TAXTHRESH, PMT (INTEREST, TERM, -PRINCIPAL+TAXTHRESH) + PMT (INTEREST* (1-RELRATE), TERM, -TAXTHRESH), PMT (INTEREST* (1-RELRATE), TERM, -PRINCIPAL))
The reason why Excel is different is that it distinguishes between a making an investment and borrowing money.
In Excel PMT (interest, term, principal) calculates the amount would pay you if you borrowed principal for term at interest% per annum but returns it as a negative quantity — i.e. the amount you pay.
PMT (interest, term, -principal) works out what someone would pay you if you lent them principal and this is positive.
Excel always treats negative money as cash out and positive money as cash in.
Q More keyboard problems
How do I get the on the screen without having to use the Alt key and 156 on the numeric keypad as there is a on my 102-key, enhanced keyboard above the 3 character.
Also is it possible to swap the characters’ and S on the keyboard.
Graham Miller Hamilton
A
As long as you are using MS-DOS 3.3 the answer is fairly simple.
As you can see a pounds sign when you type Alt 156 you must already have the correct code page (i.e. national character set loaded) and so all you need is the command: KEYB UK
You can type this at the command prompt or include it in the Autoexec.bat file.
To find out which keyboard layout is active simply type KEYB at the command prompt.
On my machine this produces: C: \>keyb 
Current keyboard code: UK code page: 437
Active code page not available from CON device as long as you have a standard UK keyboard, with the pounds sign over the 3 key, then ‘Current Keyboard code: UK’ is what you are looking for.
Other keyboard types need different country key mappings and some don't even have a pounds sign!
I can't think why you want to swap the’ and S keys but you can make any key produce any symbol you like and so swapping over is just a special case.
To make this work you must have the line DEVICE=ANSI.SYS in the Config.sys file and the file ANSI.SYS in the root directory.
If ANSI.SYS is loaded then you can program any key to produce any character using the command PROMPT $e[’ old-key’;’new-key’p and yes I know this looks odd and there isn't a printing error — the characters really are $e[ two codes and p.
So to program the S key to produce a’ you would use PROMPT $e[’S’;’’’p and to produce an S from the’key PROMPT $e[’’’;’S’p
To make use of these you might as well put them in a batch file.
For example, Switch.bat PROMPT $e[’ S’;’’’p PROMPT $e[’’’;’S’p
Now for the bad news.
On my machine at least the re-programming doesn't work for shifted keys and what you actually get is the 2 key producing the S. I have fiddled around with different forms of getting ANSI.SYS to do it but so far I have failed.
Now I know I could do it by getting a little deeper into things but can anyone think of a pure MS-DOS way of doing it?
The next problem is that not all programs make use of the ANSI.SYS so don't expect the key swap to be honoured by everything.
Q Driving a printer
I have recently bought a Panasonic KX-P1124i to use with MS Works on my computer.
The printer manual suggests that the supported printers offered by the software be, in order of preference: Panasonic KX-P1124i first and then Panasonic KC-P1124.
The printers listed in MS Works do not include KX-P1124i, and using KX-P1124, the second choice, does not allow all the extra fonts available in the (i) model to be used via the software.
Can you tell me if there has been a supplementary update disk issued to enable KX-P1124i to be used to its full potential.
If not, is there any printer whose range of fonts would more nearly coincide with that of KX-P1124i?
Gordon Clapperton Fraserbugh, Aberdeenshire
A
There isn't a driver for the i variant of the printer and I'm not sure there ever will be.
It is one of the facts of the computer world that there have always been far too many different printer types for the programmers to support and printer manufacturers have never managed to catch on to this simple fact.
Personally I would be pleased to find a driver that works with any variety of the printer I had — after a life of driving everything as an Epson FX-80 that would be progress!
Q Clipper for fun?
I have noticed some very good front ends in Shareware similar to that produced using Pascal, can you please advise me how I produce the same quality of software.
If I just bought an off the shelf package like Turbo Pascal or Microsoft Pascal could I without having to buy add on libraries produce this type of effect.
I have no experience of using Pascal but I'm sure I could learn to program in this language.
I tried using C some years ago without much success.
I have for the last ten years been writing software using Clipper database and would like to improve the front end on some of the software.
Can Pascal object code be linked to Clipper as C can be or indeed can any object code like basic be linked to Clipper.
I am a hobbyist and write programs for fun so front end software like that produced by Bits and Pieces for Clipper is way out of my budget.
Mr G A Hudson, Radford, Coventry
A
I don't think I have ever encountered anyone who claimed to use Clipper for fun!
Clipper is a difficult language and growing more and more like C all the time.
C is also a difficult language unless you are planning to use it full time and certainly not something to indulge in for fun.
If you want to learn a language that will get you somewhere quickly and without much effort then I would advise Pascal — Turbo Pascal being my favourite — or Basic, and QBasic in particular.
Both of these languages are capable of doing what you want and don't try to blind you with computer science.
Why not have a look at the Qbasic series starting this month to help make up your mind!
I have several directories on my hard disk which I cannot delete/erase.
If I select MS-DOS Shell and attempt to delete the unwanted directories, I get the message: ‘You cannot delete a non-empty directory…’ but according to MS-DOS Shell the specified directory states: ‘No files match file specifier.’
If I use the DIR command on the problem directory there are no files listed but in response to the RD command I get the message: Invalid path, not directory, or directory not empty
I also use WordPerfect 5.1.
Which has the ability to delete files and directories if empty.
However, while WordPerfect reports: c: \LITE\PCPROBE \*; * has no files.
if I attempt to delete PCPROBE I get: ERROR: Directory is not empty.
I also tried your answer to a similar problem as detailed in your August 1992 issue, p 197: c: \DOS>attrib -r -s -h\c: \lite\pcprobe \*; * but to no avail.The message in this case was: Parameter format not correct — -h\c: \lite\pcprobe \*; * 
J Roberts, Woolton, Liverpool
A
You certainly have a hidden or system file still in the directory.
The problem with the ATTRIB command is simply that you need to replace the \ between the -h and c: \etc. by a space i.e. c: \DOS>attrib -r -s -h c: \lite\pcprobe \*; *
However given that you have the MS-DOS shell (assuming it is MS-DOS 5 and not 4) you can check up on hidden/system files by using the command Options, File Display Options and then check the box: Display hidden/system files
After this you will see all hidden and system files in directory listings within the shell.
If you then select the hidden/system files you can modify their attributes using the command File, Change Attributes and then selecting the attributes that you want to clear.
Once again we bring you the latest shareware reviews available here at Transend Services.
Shareware is rapidly becoming the most effective way to market computer software.
Whether you are a novice or advanced computer user you will find programs and information that will be of use day after day, and at affordable prices.
This section is just a small number of the titles available through Shareware, ask for the current catalogue when ordering.
Shareware is the most modern of all marketing techniques used in the computer industry today.
Authors in countries around the world are constantly releasing software for business and pleasure use.
The most effective way to guarantee rapid distribution is to let people try the program out before asking them for payment.
Imagine if your local electrical store allowed you to take a TV home for a month to sample its quality before parting with your money, you would be sure you had made the right decision before it cost you the earth.
This is basically the Shareware concept.
As one of the U.K's leading shareware distributors we take programs from around the world, assess them for quality and general appeal, and print detailed reviews for you to read.
We bring many new titles into our library every month, so you won't be reading about the same programs every time you pick up your copy of Practical PC.
Generally, the programs are the most up-to-date versions and have been extensively tested.
Transend scan all titles in the library for all known viruses, so you can rest assured that our disks are secure.
To order simply read the reviews and note each of your selections on the order form at the back of this section.
Your disks will be despatched on the day we receive your order and you can start using the programs immediately.
After an assessment period, which is typically ninety days, you must decide if you wish to use the program on a more permanent basis.
If so you must register the package, Transend can help with many popular packages and save you the trouble of sending orders overseas.
FORMGEN
Order Code: 1390 Total Disks: 1
A very powerful forms design package that will help computerise the collection of information.
The key to getting quality information from people, via forms, is a clear format.
With Formgen you will be able to design your form on screen, making changes as you go along to perfect it, and finally print out for copying.
The program allows you to draw lines and boxes as well as shaded areas.
Support is provided for many popular printers as well as some laser printers, so quality of output will not be a problem.
An excellent package which could be used by many companies and individuals involved in the collection of data.
Requires Hard Disc.
FORMGEN FILL
Order Code: 1350 Total Disks: 1
The shareware package Formgen has been around for some time now and is a proven system for designing forms.
However, it seemed a shame to be able to design the forms using the computer and not be able to complete them on the same machine at a later point.
For this reason the authors released Formgen Fill, a package which does allow you to enter details on a predefined form.
The whole thing works quite well, displaying the form on screen so that you can indicate the position of fields which are required to be filled.
Each field is given a use, ie is it for text or numbers, and a length.
After the form has been completed it can be printed out for filing.
An excellent addition to one of the shareware greats.
Requires Hard Disc.
INFORMATION PLEASE
Order Code: 8290 Total Disks: 1
This program is essentially for anyone who has textual information such as product descriptions, catalogues and memos and then find, view or print them by a keyword search.
You can link a graphic to each text record which makes it ideal for storing part no's and descriptions or even staff records with images.
You can input text from the keyboard or an ASCII file.
Search, display and print entries allow keyword or full text search that allows multiple AND and OR criteria.
The program comes complete with an example help system for DOS disk problems.
MANAGEMENT TRAINING
Order Code: 8380 Total Disks: 1
This tutorial disk teaches Communication Skills, Interviewing Techniques, Decision Making, Time Management, Employee Evaluation and Motivation and other skills.
In fact it is everything a manager needs to know so if you are bucking for promotion you need this disk.
EAZILINK
Order Code: 8310 Total Disks: 1
As a shareware library with monthly deadlines for our advertorial copy we need a reliable Communications package, unfortunately a custom program we used developed a bug and two hours before our copy deadline we were unable to send the data via our modem.
Within 30 minutes of receiving EaziLink we were logged on and uploading our copy.
This highlights how easy EaziLink actually is to get up and running with the minimum of fuss.
The program also comes with a host mode for any budding ‘Sysops’ who wish to try their hand at running a BBS.
FLACKWARE ZMODEM
Order Code: 8050 Total Disks: 1
There are many top quality terminal programs available through shareware.
Most of these make use of an external protocol program to receive or send programs to and from other computers.
Flackware's Zmodem is simply the best implementation we have seen of this powerful file transfer system.
Zmodem guarantees error free downloads and crash recovery if your modem goes off.
ODYSSEY
Order Code: 8330 Total Disks: 1
Odyssey is another excellent shareware communications package, easy to use with a pull down menu system and context sensitive help at any time.
Once installed with the correct settings you can be talking to other computers within minutes.
Odyssey also comes with host mode which means you can set your computer to wait for incoming calls.
If you are new to comms you cannot go far wrong with
Odyssey.
IDEA TREE
Order Code: 1400 Total Disks: 1
The concept of random text entry is one that computers find difficult to handle.
People think in the most illogical way,(unless you are of Vulcan decent!) therefore computers are often of little help when trying to organise thoughts.
Idea Tree tries to get around the problem by using a technique called outlining.
You start by entering a basic ‘global’ idea and break it down into smaller and smaller steps.
For example, think of a house, break it down into floors and then into rooms.
You have started with a high level concept and broken it down into component parts.
Idea tree helps you organise your thoughts using this process.
Outliners have developed nicely over recent years and this program is sure to keep up with the trends as they change.
Requires Hard Disc.
LABELS PLUS
Order Code: 8120 Total Disks: 1
An easy to use address label program that prints an address and return address label.
Label has the unique feature of adding advertising lines to the envelope.
The program use five files each which can store one thousand records.
You could easily categorise your addresses into five sections.
The manual can be read on screen so getting help is a key press away!
Requires Hard Disc.
WINDIAL FOR WINDOWS
Order Code: 8100 Total Disks: 1
The quality of this Windows telephone book is absolutely unquestionable.
It features Hayes modem support for telephone dialling so you can store address and telephone details and get the computer to dial the number for you.
Also features manual dialler so you can call friends who are not in your telephone book.
Full Windows 3.1 aware including TrueType font support.
Requires EGA.
4–9 YEAR OLDS (2)
Order Code: 2020 Total Disks: 1
The second compilation disk of 8 programs aimed at the 4 to 9 year old range.
These programs are colourful, educational and fun to use.
They deal with the Alphabet, Simple Math, Time Telling, Shape Matching, Drawing and Games.
This is an ideal set of programs to introduce your children to computers and will keep them amused for months.
I found that after 2 hours of playing the small adventure game called Wumpus my friends youngest child lost all her worries about pressing the wrong key, except that she kept falling down the cavern when she did.
AMY'S FIRST PRIMER
Order Code: 1810 Total Disks: 1
This wonderful program was written for a little girl called Amy.
Exercises cover shape matching, letters and numbers.
The CGA graphics are large and clear and use the basic colour capabilities of the CGA monitor very well.
Children of 5 years upwards should do well with this program given a little supervision from an adult or older child.
Requires CGA.
DR MOTE'S COLOURING BOOK
Order Code: 8110 Total Disks: 1
The best idea in shareware for a long time has been the production of colouring books for younger children.
This will prove to be a favourite with kids five years and upwards.
The program displays a black outline drawing and your child simply uses the mouse to choose a colour and then points at the area to fill in.
Excellent fun and a good icebreaker for the kids.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
JAPANESE FOR BUSINESS & TRAVEL
Order Code: 4260 Total Disks: 1
Another of our language tutorials that greatly benefit any user wishing to learn a foreign language.
Japanese for Business & Travel is an introduction to Japanese (the course assumes the pupil has no prior knowledge) and is composed of questions about vocabulary, grammar and culture.
Challenging though the course is, the lessons are laid out well for the beginner and the tests can be the fill-in type or multi-choice.
The author is quick to point out that Japanese is one of the ten most difficult languages on earth to learn.
Registered users will receive an audio tape to help with pronunciation.
PC TUTOR
Order Code: 1000 Total Disks: 1
The PC TUTOR is the number one ‘Teach yourself’ program and is essential for all new users.
It runs well on all types of PC as it has no special hardware requirements.
By completing each exercise you will learn about the keyboard and all the special keys such as INS and DEL.
You may then proceed through exercises in computer terminology which explain jargon words.
The final exercises introduce you to MS-DOS, its basic commands and what it is supposed to do for you on a day to day basis.
After the basic level you will cover more advanced commands which enable you to manipulate information and make good use of storage such as floppy disks.
Finally, batch files are covered in detail explaining why we use these compact command files and what each batch command does.
All in all a very well composed program which is simple to use and educational.
PC-CAI
Order Code: 8280 Total Disks: 1
PC-CAI is an award winning Computer Assisted Instructional tool that is ideal for anyone wishing to develop a computer driven tutorial on any subject using colour, graphics, animation, questions and answers.
It is very flexible and is ideal for use in schools and colleges.
You can input any graphical images required from any PCX files.
Here at Transend we created a very colourful ‘rolling demo’ for instructions on how to make the coffee for all the staff which, although light hearted, demonstrated the power of this program.
Requires CGA.
BITFLIK FOR WINDOWS
Order Code: 8020 Total Disks: 1
Windows 3.0 and 3.1 both come with many BMP files containing small to medium size graphic images.
These images can be used as desktop wallpapers, if only you could decide which to use.
Bitflik scans a directory for all BMP files and displays them like a slideshow, one after the other pausing briefly between each one.
Easy to use, pick a different picture every day!
Requires EGA.
DANCAD 3D
Order Code: 1830 Total Disks: 6
A very comprehensive computer aided design program which encompasses aspects of 3D drawing.
Dancad has recently been upgraded to this massive version making it the most comprehensive CAD package available through shareware.
The program provides facilities such as automatic dimensioning, detailed zoom and the ability to independently rotate elements of the drawing.
The program can be used for 2D drafting but really comes into its own in 3 dimensions.
Support is provided for all popular IBM and Epson printers but more impressive is the post script support.
Dancad really is proof, if it were needed, of the professional quality of shareware marketed products.
Requires Hard Disc.
GRAPHICS WORKSHOP
Order Code: 1620 Total Disks: 1
Graphics workshop is a shareware leader in the area of image manipulation.
Programs such as this are essential for anybody building a library of scanned images, gem drawing files or other formats.
The program can load any of a dozen formats and convert the image to any other output style.
This means being able to take images received from a Macintosh and save them in a format known as PCX which programs such as CorelDRAW can import.
Support is provided for super VGA users and facilities for image smoothing and cropping are also provided.
Again this is a stunning offering through the shareware concept and one which I am sure will prove to be popular.
Requires Hard Disc.
IAN BENT (TT FONT)
Order Code: 5800 Total Disks: 1
This strangely named font is another in our range of True Type Fonts for Windows 3.1.
It is our most recent addition to this popular range of disks which are being ordered by new users of Windows 3.1.
ICON SHOW
Order Code: 8060 Total Disks: 1
This powerful utility for windows will allow you to pinch icons from other peoples Windows 3.0 and 3.1 programs.
Windows also uses special procedure files known as DLL's which can be used by many windows programs at the same time.
These often have many icons buried deep inside.
Now you can take any icon and use it for other Window programs including your own!
Requires EGA.
WESTEND (TT FONT)
Order Code: 5790 Total Disks: 1
Another font in the True Type Range for Windows 3.1.
This disk contains the West End font and will once again increase the range of fonts available in your windows drawings or publications.
True Type Fonts are high quality type faces which appear smoother whether drawn small or large.
Fonts under windows 3.00 varied in quality as size changed so Microsoft put this to rights in the latest version of there graphical operating system.
YARDEMO
Order Code: 8070 Total Disks: 1
As a novice user you may not be aware of the graphics quality your P.C. is capable of.
If you have a Soundblaster card the YAR demo will display a beautiful VGA colour screen and play an equally good Soundblaster music sequence.
One of many shareware titles that support Soundblaster.
Call for a catalogue and discover the world of computer digital sound.
Requires VGA.
911
Order Code: 8300 Total Disks: 1
911 is the number you would dial for emergency in America hence the name of the program.
While waiting for an ambulance it is possible that first aid carried out immediately would save a patient from choking or bleeding to death.
911 is6packed full of first aid information on the correct procedures on a wide variety of injuries.
Every home, office and factory should have a copy of this excellent program for immediate access to first aid information should an accident occur.
Although this is an American program injuries are the same the world over, as are the treatments.
AMATEUR THEATRE
Order Code: 7320 Total Disks: 1
This is a simple to use menu driven program for any amateur theatrical organisation, it will enable you to keep track of all your scenery, costumes, props etc.
Of course, when you first get the program you have to type in all the data, the whereabouts of all your equipment, whether it is on loan to another company etc.
Once that is done you will always be able to lay your hands on any props or costumes at a moments notice.
If you want a trouble free performance, get your hands on a copy of this program.
Requires Hard Disc.
ASTROLOGY AND BIORHYTHMS
Order Code: 1230 Total Disks: 1
The areas of Astrology and Biorhythms are of interest to people from across the world.
These two programs are an introduction to these schools of thought as implemented on the IBM PC.
The astrology program provides detailed information as to the position of the planets on a given date, information on what the likely personality and interests of a person born on a given date will be and finally information on rising signs.
The biorhythms program is simple and easy to use for those who know the subject but are not computer boffins.
The documentation for these programs provides a fascinating history of the subject.
Programs such as these are now being used around the country to provide computerised horoscope and printed biorhythm charts.
Watch out Russel Grant!
BIBLE STUDENT
Order Code: 8240 Total Disks: 7
This is an excellent program that allows you to load the UK version of the entire King James version of the bible.
It has very fast reference and search facilities and it will allow you to open multiple windows for comparisons.
It has on-line help and is able to run from floppy drives to save you storing the large text files on hard disc.
It allows you to extract text to file or printer for later reading or including in your own word processing documents.
Every household should have a bible and what better way to look up favourite passages quickly than on your computer system.
EDNA'S COOKBOOK
Order Code: 8210 Total Disks: 1
This program will help you keep track of all your recipes and let you view, modify or print them.
You can collate all your favourite recipes from different books, magazine cuttings and scraps of paper all into one easy to use database.
All your recipes can be sorted into different categories such as starters, sweets, main etc., each category can then be split further.
If you are really serious about cooking you can order ‘Freds Recipes for Edna's Cookbook’ which is on 4 discs Order Code: 8220 which includes 3,500 different recipes for you to browse and use from Breakfast and Sandwiches to Meats, Poultry, Seafood, Pasta, Gravy's, Vegetables, Beverages, Cakes and many others.
FAMILY HISTORY
Order Code: 1280 Total Disks: 3
The topic of genealogy is growing in popularity every year as people search out their roots.
Computers are an excellent tool for people with this interest as researchers often want to recall information on a person and add to it.
Computerised databases are just the job for any record storage as many of you may know.
Useful features have been added to this database in particular to handle the relationships between individuals.
The program is easy to use with help being displayed constantly on screen.
Good use is made of the function keys and the screens are well laid out.
Basic information about individuals such as date/time/place of birth and similarly date/time/place of death.
Links can be made between individual records for spouse, child and parents.
The reports are available in formats which have been approved by the Latter day Saints.
Requires Hard Disc.
INJURY & DISORDERS
Order Code: 8320 Total Disks: 1
Injury & Disorders is a program that no home should be without.
It is full of information on various ailments from Aneurysm to Wilm's Tumor.
It gives you all the symptoms (not literally) and early warning signs.
It can tell you what the disorder is and the best course of action should you have any of the symptoms.
This is an excellent database of medical knowledge that should be an asset to any household or office.
KWS KNITWEAR DESIGN
Order Code: 7470 Total Disks: 1
KWS Knitwear Design is an asset for many home computer users who are knitting clothes by hand or machine.
You are able to input new and popular patterns to be stored at a later date for use again and again.
You input the data only once, you can then print out any number of patterns for different sizes of garment in inches or centimetres.
Now Dad can have an identical jumper to his son without having to roll it up at the bottom or trying to fit two arms into three sleeves.
KWS will also tell you how much wool you need to buy so you no longer need to knit many scarfs to use up all your spare wool.
This program is a very professional program written by an experienced home Knitter using machine and by hand so you know it will contain all the necessary features.
PARENTS
Order Code: 8400 Total Disks: 1
This is a genealogy program for Windows 3.0 or higher, Parents allows you to enter and store vital information such as names, birth, marriage, date of death and place of death etc.
All of this information can then be easily organised and related together to form your family tree.
You can also print the detailed information and your immediate tree.
RECIPE MAKER
Order Code: 8410 Total Disks: 1
Recipe Maker is an application designed for windows 3.0 or above that helps make the weekly meal planning, grocery shopping and recipe organising much easier.
With the help of recipe maker you will be able to plan out each meal for an entire week and in just minutes have a complete shopping list needed to make those meals.
Recipe maker allows you to enter and store all your recipes so as time goes on it will become even easier just to highlight the meals needed for the week.
THE HOME FINANCE MANAGER
Order Code: 5010 Total Disks: 1
This package is one of the more promising packages I have seen in the Shareware market for handling home finances in the U.K. if you only have mono display.
I feel it needs a few points tidied up such as data entry checking, i.e. only allowing a maximum of 8 characters to be typed into a date field and being able to press Esc to return to menu at any time during data entry.
Should you try this version and register you will receive regular updates anyway so I believe it is worth a look.
The Shareware version doesn't allow you to sort any records and will not carry out automatic standing orders, which is a shame as it is difficult to evaluate a program that is not fully working.
The good side is that it is easy to use, you can transfer money between accounts, you can record debit card transactions and many more.
TODAY
Order Code: 8270 Total Disks: 1
This windows program for displaying horoscopes is one of the best I have seen.
I am not normally a follower of the daily horoscopes in magazines as I could not see how one small horoscope could possibly influence so many millions of people born under a particular starsign.
This program however calculates the angles to the Natel positions (the position of the planets at your day of birth) that influence your horoscope.
It will then display the relationship between the planets and your horoscope for that day.
You can configure it just to display the horoscope if you wish and you can have the weekends horoscopes automatically displayed on a Friday.
The registered version is configured for your time and place of birth which makes it even more accurate.
If you think I am trying to influence you into sending for this excellent program, part of my horoscope said ‘You may feel a need to influence people and gain recognition for your talents’.
ALICE IN WONDERLAND
Order Code: 8200 Total Disks: 1
Alice in Wonderland is a text adventure game based on the very famous story 2f a young girl who finds herself in a strange land full of strange creatures and strange places.
For those who have read the book the game will be easier but it is not a necessity.
Despite the title and story line this game is not for the young due to the complex mapping and problem solving of the adventure game.
ALIENS ATE MY BABYSITTER
Order Code: 4440 Total Disks: 1
This is a special edition of the Commander Keen series from Apogee and the best one yet.
As ‘Billy Blaze’, the adventure begins when your babysitter is kidnapped by Aliens from Fribbulus Xax, she is on the main menu for dinner!
With your parents due home soon, how will you be able to tell them that the ‘Aliens Ate My Babysitter!’?
This smooth scrolling, flicker free graphical adventure game is a must for your collection and as with all later Apogee games this comes with soundblaster support.
Requires EGA.
BARTS LAW DEMO
Order Code: 8420 Total Disks: 1
This program is only a playable demo, which means you only get to play the first level.
However, the first level graphics combined with the soundblaster sounds make it a good disk to have.
You control a gunsight with your mouse and shoot at targets on a range.
Very playable but without soundblaster it is a simple target game.
BATTLESHIP
Order Code: 1080 Total Disks: 1
The good old fashioned game of battleships, well not quite.
The author has cleverly brought battleships bang up-to-date (pardon the pun).
Presented in VGA colour graphics and using a mouse, the game looks good and is easy to play.
However, the tactics have become more devious.
In this computerised version of the classroom favourite each opponent has the ability to plant mines, sweep for mines or even have submarines that dive.
Islands can also be placed around the playing area with the result that every game can be different.
A very impressive range of innovative features certainly refresh this otherwise flat game.
You play against the computer which makes the game even more interesting.
Certainly one to add to the collection of board games available on shareware such as monopoly and chess.
Requires VGA.
BOLO'S ADVENTURES 2
Order Code: 5630 Total Disks: 1
If you have tried Bolo's Adventures part 1 and you are thinking that just maybe the author has run out of difficult problems to set for you, well think again.
I found the problems in Bolo's Adventures part 2 just as hard if not harder, although I can't really tell because I haven't even come close to finishing part 1.
In part 2 the author has given you the option of turning off those infuriating flashing lasers and electric grills, which I found helped me to think a little easier but, alas, didn't help me in solving the problem.
Add Bolo 2 to your collection of brain teasers and give your brain a good work out.
Requires EGA.
CORNCOB 3D
Order Code: 8160 Total Disks: 1
Good Shareware flight simulators are a little thin on the ground (or in the air) so, we were delighted to find this one.
A hard disk is preferable although you can run Corncob from a high density floppy.
It is 1949 and you are in control of a standard front-line ground attack plane, you have a choice of missions on which to embark.
Your objective is to complete your mission and return to base in one piece.
The Author has paid a lot of attention to detail in the use of controls and instruments.
It has excellent graphics and flight simulation, you can even leave the plane and walk around it if you wish.
Corncob is one of the best Shareware flight simulators I used and will provide hours of entertainment for any would be Hero.
Requires VGA.
CUNNING FOOTBALL
Order Code: 8180 Total Disks: 1
Cunning football is an American football simulation game which can be played against the computer.
It has an option for automation so you can watch the computer play both sides and note which plays are called to help you learn the rules.
The fun starts when you control a team and call all necessary plays, which in my first try resulted in my team performing worse than an infants rounders team against the superbowl winners.
Requires EGA.
EGA STARTREK
Order Code: 1800 Total Disks: 1
I almost had a Vulcan mind melt when I saw the colour graphics on this version of Star Trek.
The screen is extremely well laid out and help is always at hand as there are many commands for the game.
Your mission is to boldly go about the galaxy destroying the Klingon forces which possess many new tactical weapons and abilities.
As you complete more games and improve your skills the game gets more difficult, the Klingons get more intelligent.
One of the best versions of Trek available on shareware.
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
FANTAVISION
Order Code: 8090 Total Disks: 1
Ever wanted to produce your own animated cartoon?
Yes?
Well get Fantavision, this shareware product is the business as far as animation goes.
The demonstrations provided on the disk will convince you of this fact in minutes.
Easy to use full colour graphics drawing tools and animation sequence director are all provided.
Best disk seen for a while!
Requires Hard Disc & EGA.
JILL OF THE JUNGLE
Order Code: 8250 Total Disks: 1
This excellent game from Epic MegaGames puts them hot on the heels of Apogee for the number one spot in games programming.
Its many levels of scrolling screens and action packed adventure will happily measure up to any of the Commander Keen games.
CGA, EGA or VGA modes are utilised depending on your hardware, it also has very good soundblaster support.
You control our heroine Jill as she battles with different creatures in her search for weapons, gems and health giving food.
A nice touch to this game is the ability to sample all the sounds heard in the game at the touch of the keys.
You will not be disappointed with this disc and on registration will receive two extra4 volumes.
Requires CGA.
JOUST VGA
Order Code: 1420 Total Disks: 1
See those gladiators fly.
Fly?
Yes, they roam the skies on their trusty steeds, well Ostrich's actually.
Joust against your opponent with this hilarious VGA arcade action game.
The knights of the sky zoom around on the back of the ostrich which flaps its wings whenever you tap your ‘flap’ key the more you tap the higher he goes.
Prang your opponent with your lance to turn him into an egg.
You must smash the egg quickly or else it will hatch out again and hound you until you get the knight again, or he gets you.
A very fresh addition to the arcade section, great fun and one that can be played over and over again.
Requires VGA.
JUMPMAN LIVES
Order Code: 8190 Total Disks: 1
Fly your rocket ship to Saturn, enter a top secret institute of technology, find and deactivate the deadly TechnoBombs on 12 levels to save the planet from being blown into another Galaxy and then fly home for tea.
Jumpman lives is another excellent game from Apogee which gives you the arcade action of video games combined with the brain teasing problems to be solved before carrying on to the next stage.
This disc is a must for all game fans and for those with adlib compatible soundcards your in for an even bigger treat.
Supports true 256 colour for those with VGA but will play on all other graphics cards.
Requires CGA.
KAEON
Order Code: 8350 Total Disks: 1
This excellent graphical arcade game comes with some of the best soundblaster support we have heard.
You can configure the game to be as easy or as difficult as you wish.
Basically, you control a rocket ship through a series of scrolling levels firing at various objects and enemies.
The graphics are extremely good and make this game well worth ordering.
Requires VGA.
KILOBLASTER
Order Code: 8260 Total Disks: 2
Another excellent game from Epic MegaGames, this time an excellent arcade type game with addictive qualities.
It has the usual Epic features such as excellent graphics, ease of use and soundblaster support.
You control the spaceship on the screen blasting at alien craft for all your worth.
You can move up, down, left and right to dodge incoming missiles and collect extra strength weapons by flying into falling fruit!(in space?).
Another two volumes are available on registration which will definitely be worth paying for.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
MIDNIGHT OIL
Order Code: 5220 Total Disks: 1
When the sane members of your family are tucked up in bed and arcade games are too much for your shattered nerves a game of Patience will help you relax.
Midnight Oil follows the rules of Three Shuffles and a Draw where the cards are dealt into eighteen piles of three cards.
You may move cards off in ascending order from Ace to King to their respective piles off the playing area.
Alternatively cards may be moved from pile to pile if they match the suit of the card underneath and have a lower face value.
At any time you can draw one card from below any pile, that is to say it doesn't have to be on top of the pile.
This can only be done once but can often solve a stale-mate position.
Similarly the deck can be shuffled and re-dealt a maximum of three times.
Again this can help to get the game moving again.
Strong tactics are a must to get to the completion of the game but simple rules mean you can be playing moments after installation.
The graphics are excellent, well laid out and of a good size.
A Microsoft or compatible mouse is required.
Requires EGA.
PC PRO GOLF
Order Code: 8230 Total Disks: 2
There is not a golfer among us who would not be out on the green every day if the weather and our partners would allow.
This shareware release allows us to enjoy the challenge of coming in under par at any time of the day whatever the weather.
You can select your club, direction and strength of swing and away you go, watching out for the trees and bunkers of course.
The disc comes with a demo of the course builder you get with the registered version which allows you to place trees, houses and bunkers anywhere to make the course difficult or easy according to abilities.
Requires Hard Disc & CGA.
POWER CHESS
Order Code: 1440 Total Disks: 1
Power Chess is as expected a computer implementation of the famous strategic board game.
It is often said that chess helps broaden the mind, promoting logical thought and forward planning.
This chess game works on all graphics boards and the pieces are drawn well so as to avoid straining the eye.
When you spend long periods studying the board the latter point becomes quite important.
There are many example openings and complete games provided on disk for study.
The computer plays reasonably well, planning 5 moves ahead at certain points in the game.
SHOOTING GALLERY
Order Code: 1710 Total Disks: 1
An excellent recreation of the funfair type shooting range with an extra six levels after the first screen.
The other levels include ‘quick draw’, ‘skeet shoot’ and my favourite ‘shoot out’.
You control the gun sights movement with your mouse and the idea is to aim at the moving targets using your mouse button to shoot.
Points are awarded for direct hits and speed.
In shoot out you are in a wild west street with various characters appearing from behind sheds and windows.
The trick is to shoot the baddies without hitting any of the townsfolk.
The baddies of course shoot back costing you time and points.
This is a superb program highly addictive, beautifully created and often fast and furious.
For anyone with a mouse and minimum EGA monitor this game is well worth getting for its super smooth graphics.
Requires VGA.
SUPER ZZT
Order Code: 7450 Total Disks: 1
More action from the Epic Megagames crew, this is the latest version of ZZT, the object orientated adventure game.
This one will also work on most IBM compatible machines with DOS 3.0 or higher, although the author informs us that it is not compatible with many Tandy 1000 computers.
The graphics are much improved in this game and it also uses a scrolling screen, which means you get to where you are going a lot faster.
More adventures + more problems = more fun.
TEGL MONOPOLY
Order Code: 1780 Total Disks: 1
This TEGL product does great justice to the game of Monopoly.
Good use of animated VGA graphics and pop-up windows with property information make this a must for fans of the board game.
The American property titles do not detract from the game which can be played by up to fifteen players at the same time.
A game that can be played by all the family is quite rare so this is sure to be popular among readers.
The pull down menus make the game easy to play and the smooth animation help keep the interest of younger players.
Requires VGA.
A86 MACRO ASSEMBLER
Order Code: 1190 Total Disks: 1
Without doubt this package is one of the all time greats of shareware programming.
Widely used around the world, A86 is the number one comprehensive assembly language programming system.
The package comes with a debugger and the documentation covering both sections of the system is comprehensive.
A86 is an extremely high performance assembler as it can compile 1000 lines per second of assembly language code.
Macros are a well supported feature of A86 and certainly help you make your code more readable for others.
On the more technical side the assembler has support for 80286 and 80386 processors whose extended instructions give rise to even higher performance software.
A86 is the assembler for power users and is well supported.
Requires Hard Disc.
PERSONAL C COMPILER
Order Code: 8370 Total Disks: 1
For those new to ‘C’ programming this is an excellent compiler to try out with our ‘C’Tutor disc code: 1530.
You can compile your first programs as you learn to help you decide if ‘C’ is the language for you.
The disc comes with a linker, function library, floating point support and an assembler so you can produce object files.
One of the best ‘C’ compilers in the shareware market.
PONZO C TUTOR
Order Code: 1530 Total Disks: 1
When people write tutorials they usually do so as people who possess great knowledge about the subject they are discussing.
By the time they have reached such mountainous heights they have forgotten what was difficult about learning the subject in the first place!
The author on this occasion sheds new light on the subject of ‘C’ programming.
His point of view is that of a beginner and he makes the pitfalls and their solutions quite clear with respect to this popular programming language.
Taught in universities and colleges around the country, ‘C’ is here to stay and is being used every day to produce Windows programs and the like.
If you wish to follow the same route successfully you will need a reference of some sort and the Ponzo C tutor is a very good source of information.
RS232 TUTOR
Order Code: 1310 Total Disks: 1
If you wish to learn more about the way in which your computer can communicate with the outside world then the RS232 tutor would be a good initial step.
The package explains the complexities of serial communications using on screen tutorials with animated sections.
Programs such as this are an invaluable source of information and can be used time and time again.
Topics covered include handshaking, status registers and word format.
If you are thinking of connecting up two computers or exploring the world outside via modem then get this disk first and get primed up!
CLYSMIC BUTTON BAR
Order Code: 8340 Total Disks: 1
A very good utility for windows 3.1, this button bar can be placed on either side of your screen and set so it is always visible.
This means that you do not have to minimize current applications to open up another one.
I found it very useful when working with desktop applications as I jumped from one application to another with the minimum of fuss.
Clysmic is very configurable and enables you to free space on your program manager screens.
ERROR
Order Code: 5510 Total Disks: 1
Have you ever been working on a program late at night that throws up error codes with a number such as‘ERROR CODE 201’ which means nothing at all to you.
You would then have to wade through the manuals before you could continue.
That was the problem facing the author of this utility, which is why he wrote this little program that lets you type in the error code, the description is then printed to screen.
e.g. ‘ERROR 159’ would return ‘ERROR CODE 159 IS A CRITICAL ERROR — PRINTER OUT OF PAPER’.
EZ DISKLONE
Order Code: 8030 Total Disks: 1
If you need a fast efficient and reliable way to copy your shareware disks then EZ Disklone is the system for you.
This extremely fast disk duplicator uses Extended Memory if present to hold an image of the disk being copied.
The image is then written to a target disk at high speed and verified if required.
Easy menu driven system, a breeze to use for novice users.
VIRUSCAN-95 & CLEAN
Order Code: 1290 Total Disks: 1
The McAffee virus tools are now famous across the world being used by thousands of companies and individuals alike.
With strict procedures and a great deal of cooperation it is likely that you will not receive a virus.
However, as it is difficult to know the history of every disk you are presented with then it is better to be safe than sorry.
The VIRUSCAN utility hunts for viruses which are described in a disk based document called VIRLIST.TXT which comes with the package.
Briefly, the program searches memory, then the boot sector of your disk then every single file for an infection of any kind.
A report is then provided on screen to tell you if a virus was found.
A corresponding clean-up program is supplied which scans for viruses and removes them, often by having to delete the infected program.
The virus utilities are a must for every computer user concerned with computer security.
WINDIR
Order Code: 8360 Total Disks: 1
Another excellent utility on the shareware market is WINDIR, for use in windows 3.0 and above.
This utility allows you to move around your hard disk and copy, move, rename and delete files without leaving the windows environment.
It is very friendly and easy to use, far better than the Windows file manager.
WINDIR also allows you to view graphics files such as PCX or BMP and of course you can run any executable file through it.
A utility every Windows user will benefit from.
GALAXY LITE
Order Code: 8170 Total Disks: 1
One of the well known and most popular Shareware programs Galaxy Lite is easy to use and full of features which make it ideal for those new to word processing and old hats like myself.
It supports all modes of display and many different printers with an easy to use installation routine.
You can also print documents in the background while editing a second document which saves you from waiting around while your printer catches up with your typing speed.
QWRITE
Order Code: 8150 Total Disks: 1
QWrite is the perfect word-processor for those new to PC computing.
The menu bar at the bottom of the screen provides access to basic document editing facilities.
The screen is clear with a good colour scheme for those with colour monitors.
We would recommend this disk highly to beginners as its uncluttered presentation will ease you into the world of word-processing.
WORD PROCESSING FOR KIDS
Order Code: 8390 Total Disks: 1
This word processor will help your children come to grips with computers and word processing.
It is very easy to use with on-screen help and it uses a large type font, you can also change screen colours.
It is supplied with some stories on the disk that could be used by age 4 and upwards.
It will definitely give your child the edge when they start to learn word processing at school.
Requires CGA.
Shareware Discussion Section
The concept of Shareware is still not understood by all.
This is in spite of 1992 being the tenth anniversary of shareware's conception — not that far behind the IBM PC itself.
The reason may lie with how shareware evaluation products are obtained, there being generally two methods.
Those who download files from bulletin boards are usually in tune with the overall concept.
As for the other popular route — disks by post through a shareware library — things may not be so clear cut.
Despite the best efforts of responsible disk vendors, and the on-disk documentation, I am sure many still regard shareware as ‘free’ software.
It's all down to confusion rather than deliberate ignorance, so it's worth covering the whole idea of shareware, how it differs from other types of software such as public domain, and what the user's obligations are both legally and morally.
The generic label shareware covers a marketing concept rather than a particular brand of software.
The actual products are not necessarily in any way lesser — or for that matter, better — than their commercial counterparts (although, in truth, a number of programs released as shareware can at best be described as ‘limited’ from a commercial viewpoint).
The difference is in the way money changes hands.
A commercial package is paid for before use.
You read the reviews, make up your mind and stump up the cash.
If you don't then like the package, or find it doesn't fulfil one of your requirements, hard luck.
Shareware authors, however, release their products on an unsuspecting world with no up-front payment.
At least, that's the case when downloading from a bulletin board.
Buying a disk from a library requires a payment to be made, but this only covers the distributors costs for the disk, advertising, business expenses, catalogues and the like, plus a reasonable profit for providing the service.
The user can now evaluate the package to its full.
Run the program on your machine, with your particular hardware combination and with any other support programs you may use regularly.
Does it work?
Will it fulfil all your needs?
Is this the best solution for your way of working?
If so, all the author requests is payment to be made.
If you don't like it, the cost is too high for its usefulness or for any other reason whatsoever, you need only scrub the disk clean by reformatting and what have you lost?
Not much compared with a redundant commercial package wasting shelf space.
That is the key behind shareware.
You try it, you buy it or you bin it.
Normally a shareware author gives around one month to evaluate a package.
Some fix no real limits to the evaluation period, only stating that if used for productive work it must be registered.
Others may offer additional incentives for you to part with your money.
This may include a printed manual, extra functionality in the registered version and product support by telephone or fax.
Overall shareware products are cheaper, purely because the authors needn't spend vast amounts in advertising, fancy packaging and dealer incentives to shift their stock.
The user benefits not just from the ability to try a package before paying, and not just from a lower price.
You usually find shareware authors are very responsive to suggestions and ideas.
New features can be quickly implemented and with a fast turnover of product updates.
The illegality of shareware use shouldn't be played down, just because authors don't have the same clout as the commercial software giants.
If you use a shareware package beyond the documented restrictions, you are without doubt guilty of breaching copyright.
It's against the law, period.
That aside, the moral aspect is important.
I always ask shareware users to put themselves in the place of the author.
If you had written that package, would you be angered by people using it without paying?
It's for this reason that shareware hasn't to be confused with public domain (PD) software.
Even in this respect confusion arises, sometimes among the authors themselves.
All too easily any freely usable software is lumped under the PD banner.
In fact PD programs are those released with no restrictions at all.
By their very nature the program source code is provided, usually with documentation disclaiming all responsibility in its use.
The public can use, abuse or change the software in any way they see fit.
The majority of ‘pd’ programs, however, are actually Freeware.
It still costs you nothing to use, but the author retains copyright to the package.
You can't therefore change the software in any way, include it in another program or package or resell it without the author's consent.
Even more confusion can come from the proliferation of Otherwares.
Bannerware, for example, is effectively the same as Freeware.
Charityware resembles shareware, but rather than paying the author directly you are asked to make a charitable donation and inform the author.
There's even something called PostCardWare.
In this case you register the product with a picture postcard!
Shareware Reviews Section
HyperDisk
One of the best ways of adding go-faster stripes to any PC is disk caching.
More so if your hard disk is yesterday's technology (there are still a good number of 65 millisecond access Seagates and Miniscribes in use), as the difference between memory and disk read rates is astonishing.
Even if memory is limited, with only the odd few 100 K's of free RAM spare, caching makes a big difference to the speed at which you can work.
That's not to say disk caching is only for the impoverished.
The latest in 486 machines with bags of RAM can benefit just as much, particularly when using resource hungry applications like Microsoft Windows.
The principle is simple.
Whenever a disk sector read occurs, a copy is also held in the cache RAM buffers.
Come the next time that sector is needed — assuming it hasn't been discarded to make way for more recent data — it's pulled straight out of RAM rather than through the comparatively slow disk system.
Recent MS-DOS and Windows users will already have an example, SMARTDRV.SYS.
Although much improved in version 4, I've always preferred HyperDisk.
This shareware disk caching utility has more bells and whistles than the Microsoft freebie, not least of which is the ability to cache floppy drives too.
Add to this the numerous configuration options, hot key support for changing parameters once loaded and something called Staged Write, and you have a real winner.
The latest version I've seen is 4.32, issued this May.
It supports conventional, XMS and EMS memory for its buffers and can be installed as either a device driver or TSR program.
HyperDisk actually comes in several flavours.
Each is tuned to a particular processor and configuration, covering generic PCs through 286 and 386 based systems, with variations on the methods of EMS and XMS memory access.
What I find most appealing are the hot-key combinations, not withstanding the 52 command line options which control just about every aspect you could imagine.
These hot-keys allow the enabling/disabling of major features even after loading.
Most important is the Staged versus Write Through toggle.
HyperDisk can be set so disk writes don't immediately happen.
Data is held temporarily within the cache until either a time delay expires, the computer is idle or the cache becomes full.
This may not at first seem particularly useful.
However, many disk writes are shortly followed by another to the same sector.
If no data has actually been written to disk in the meantime, further speed increases are gained.
Selecting this option is not, though, recommended for the weak-hearted or those with troublesome computers.
A hung PC could mean vital data lost forever.
Given the vast range of options HyperDisk supports, it should suit everyone's tastes.
I can do no better than give it my full recommendation.
Product: HyperDisk 4.32
Contact: HyperWare, RR£1, Box 91, Pall Mall, TN 38577, USA Tel: 0101 — 615 — 864 — 6868
Registration: US$49 personal use, US$69 business use, US$8 shipping.
Brix
I came across Brix on the Compulink (CIX) bulletin board the other day.
Since downloading the file I've had severe difficulty tearing myself away from this game, such is the enjoyment and frustration I've had from it.
It's a strategy puzzle game based on blocks.
The rules are quite simple — you match two or three blocks with the same design by moving them together, or by allowing one to fall to make a pairing.
The touching blocks disappear, possibly opening up new paths for moving the next block.
The target is, of course, to clear each level of all blocks.
Sounds too easy?
Well, it isn't.
Once you realise that some blocks need to be matched early, in order to gain access to others, things get tougher.
Then you must ensure that a single block isn't orphaned and unable to be matched.
To further complicate matters, it's sometimes necessary to move blocks to a safe place first, but again taking care to get them in the correct sequence for later use.
Add to this the elevators and hidden traps for the unwary, and it all makes an excellent challenge.
The game consists of 112 unique puzzles in all, grouped as four puzzles per level.
The lower levels are initial introductions to the skills required, each cleverly put together so that you must learn the relevant block-shifting and matching techniques.
Things get harder the further you reach, and as you're working against the clock there's no sitting and thinking for too long.
Other nice features include some good VGA graphics (you do need VGA and an AT class machine, but not a mouse), a two player mode and bonus points for learning some neat moves.
Brix was written by a German author eager to teach himself graphics programming techniques on the VGA.
As a first attempt it really shines, and for free it must be worth getting hold of.
If you insist the author will accept some form of payment, for which you can obtain the puzzle editor and create your own new levels.
With luck Brix should now be doing the rounds on the bulletin boards and available from disk libraries shortly.
Product: Brix
Author: Michael Riedel, Germany Registration: Freeware Minimum hardware: VGA colour, AT class machine.
PKLite
PKWare have recently announced an update to PKLite, the executable file compressor from the same stable as PKZIP.
There can be few who haven't heard of this latter file archiving tool.
But compressed ZIP files aren't the easiest of things to handle on a day-to-day basis.
PKLite offers an alternative by compressing only executable files, that is the.
EXE and.
COM files you run from the command line.
The advantage is that executables have full access to the computer when loaded.
You see, data files are just dumb chunks of information, parts of which are read into memory as required.
If compressed, data stays compressed.
But PKLite is sneaky and adds a new piece of code to any compressed program file.
When executed this loading stub takes charge and rebuilds the original program file within memory.
This results in compressed files that run transparently, albeit with a marginal time overhead for code expansion.
In fact, on a fast PC with an average hard disk, it can be quicker to load a smaller file and decompress rather than to load the full-sized equivalent.
Even so, any extra overhead is hardly noticeable.
Version 1.15 adds little in functionality over prior releases.
Most changes concern the registered package which offers a special security feature, although there are a number of small bug fixes and support for even larger executable files.
PKLite is very easy to use.
Unlike its generalised cousin, PKZIP, it has so few command line switches you can actually remember them all.
These affect the likes of backup file creation during compression, the removal of redundant information in the code (such as symbolic debugging records), conversion back to the original file and overlay handling.
The latter is an important consideration.
Programs that use overlays load these after first running.
It's generally impossible to compress such files — the program sees each overlay as corrupt data.
For similar reasons Windows executables are left untouched.
Overall, however, a good number of your executables can be reduced to as much as half their original size.
Taken over an average hard disk this could give around a 15 per cent saving in space.
Or to put it another way, an extra 6MB free on a 40MB disk.
Product: PKLite 1.15 Contact: Shareware Marketing, 3a Queen St, Seaton, Devon, EX12 2NY Tel:(0297) 24088 Registration: £29
PARENT'S GUIDE TO EDUCATIONAL SOFTWARE AND COMPUTERS
Lynn Stewart and Toni Michael
Computer Publishing Enterprises
Lynn Stewart, the teacher and software ‘expert’, and Toni Michael, the computer writer, have got their heads and talents together to write this small (yes aren't computer books getting bigger and bigger these days) booklet for parents.
There's several chapters convincing you that your kid really needs a computer at home (but you know that or you wouldn't have bought the book!) and there's a danger of ending up convincing yourself that your offspring could become educationally subnormal unless you get a computer immediately.
After the ‘how your child's life can be enriched’ section, there's advise on the basics like deciding what you want the computer to do, finding the software to do it, finding a computer that will run the software and shopping for the best deal on service and support.
By chapter 4 you'll find you've progressed to in-depth explanations about specific software (databases, desktop publishing, shell, music, simulations etc) but it's a gentle progression with refreshingly little computerspeak (honest) and a brilliant idiot's guide to jargon at the back of the book just in case!
There's loads of unbiased tips on how to ensure your child gets the most out of the computer and the software.
In fact there's several chapters dedicated to software, particularly educational software and Toni Mitchell is obviously passionate about her subject…‘in 20 years of teaching I have never seen any teaching tool or method that captures the imagination and excites the enthusiasm and interest of the children as much as quality computer software.’
I'm a comparative newcomer to this computer age that many people of my generation would rather try to ignore…but you really can't…and as an owner of a computer and an 8 year old, I found it a good read and picked up lots of new tips on home entertainment/education as well.
WORDPERFECT FOR WINDOWS…
POWER MACROS
Kris Jamsa
£35.95
ISBN 0471 57120 2
WordPerfect for Windows Power Macros is one of those weighty (500+ pages) books/manuals and although designed for the ‘couple of steps up from a basic knowledge’ reader, I didn't find it got me into the harder bits gently.
You're straight in there with ‘Understanding WordPerfect for Windows Macros’ in
Chapter 1.
So we're into Macros straight away, and by the end of the chapter you'll have created and used two of your very own with the help of the usual ‘this is what you do’ step guide and those oh-so-reassuring screen diagrams.
At the end of every chapter there's a review of what you've just learned and a few questions to check that it's really sunk in (and a mini glossary of any new terms/jargon you may have picked up on the way.
You'll either find it helpful or a little condescending, depending on how clever or stupid you are (I LOVED it).
When you've ploughed through Using the Play Macro Dialog Box, Assigning a Macro to the Macro menu, to the WordPerfect's Button Bar and to a Key Combination, believe me, you'll be ready for some light entertainment.
Under the tempting title of ‘Having Some Macro Fun’, you'll be introduced to the delights of creating an office memo, playing a guessing game, creating a snooze alarm and getting into fortune cookie macros (honest).
If you survive and really understand Part 1, you'll fly through Part 2 which gets into assigning user input to macro variables, building macros using subroutines and creating menu-driven and message-based macros.
No fun and frivolity as a treat at the end of Part 2 I'm afraid — it's straight into Part 3.
Written by Kris Jamsa, it promises to reveal all his trade secrets and shortcuts and to have you recording, playing back, editing and printing macros ‘faster than you ever thought possible’…and it comes with a disk filled with ready to use macros for beginners (yes but will they understand the book?) as well as high performance macros for WordPerfect power users.
WINDOWS 3.1 SECRETS
Brian Livingstone
IDG Books
£36.95
ISBN 1 878058 43 6
It's hailed as the completely revised and expanded edition of the international bestseller.
Expanded it is — you need a degree in weightlifting just to pick it up!
It's part of the Info-World Secrets series of books, and author, Brian Livingston, is well known for his extensive experience with Windows installations and applications.
Having given you a useful guide on how to actually use/read the book, there's a quick look at the differences between Windows 3.1 and 3.0 (and a review of Windows terms)…and then you're ready for what follows, which is an absolute goldmine of insights, surprises, undocumented features and functions, and, of course, ‘secrets’!
It's in 5 main sections — A: an in-depth look at Windows itself., B: optimising your Windows start-up., C: exploiting your hardware., D: configuring your system and E: a guide to the best in Windows shareware.
As Windows sorts out the (hardware) men from the boys, there's a large section of the book dedicated to exploiting your disc drives, keyboards, mice and pointing devices, modems, networks, printers and video boards and monitors and I found that section particularly impressive.
A word of warning, though, you may feel tempted to sell up and upgrade (ouch).
The pages (990 of them) are full of helpful screen diagrams but I missed the ‘idiot's’ step by step command style that I've convinced myself I need in a manual — but then Windows 3.1 secrets isn't FOR idiot's.
The appendix is some 60 pages in itself and includes details of Windows technical support and Compuserve, Windows Information Resources and a very detailed Index.
The book (Windows Bible?) comes with three 5 ¼″ disks packed with over 40 shareware programmes and is a must for serious programmers.
Brian Livingstone's Windows 3.1 Secrets is priced, I think, very reasonably at £36.95.
It's published by IDG Books Worldwide, Inc. and (if you care about that sort of thing) the text is printed on recycled paper!
A Sound experience
Tired of Amiga and Mac users taking the mickey out of the pitiful beep your PC makes?
We check out a sound card that will make them eat their words — the Laserwave Plus.
There is a growing trend towards enhancing the basic PC insofar as its sound capabilities are concerned.
The plain fact is that the feeble PC beep, usually allied to a tiny (and tinny) speaker is the laughing stock of the computer world — almost every other type of computer has sound capabilities that make the PC more to be pitied than laughed at.
Until, that is, the proud owner installs one of today's high quality sound cards.
Fitting a sound card to a PC is not a difficult task — we've covered the installation of expansion cards enough for anyone to be able to do it, and the Laserwave Plus is no exception.
As you can see from the photo, there's little to fiddle with on the card — no jumpers to mess about with unless you really want to, because all IRQ and DMA settings are software configurable.
The hardened jumper-fiddler can do it the hard way, of course, but the software approach is by far the easiest — so you can plug it in and forget it, you won't need to whip it out and fiddle with it.
The software installation is as straightforward as installing the card.
The manual is very explicit on the subject, and covers everything you're likely to need to know in quite some depth, including an enlightened explanation of IRQ, DMA and port assignments.
Within the tome, you will, like me, discover that the Laserwave Plus is, in truth, a Mediavision Pro-Audio Spectrum card in sheep's clothing (and at a much reduced price).
Kitchen Sink Three high density disks' worth of installation (and a cuppa) later, you'll have a veritable plethora of programs to peruse.
As part of the card's software, there is a DOS sequencer, to drive a MIDI keyboard or synth (a MIDI adapter cable is available as an option), more Windows 3.1 sound mixers than anyone could possible want, a delectable sound sampler, and a utility to allow the more serious-minded user to add both synthesised music and sampled (digitised) sounds to presentation packages.
On top of that is a utility that lets you play Amiga MOD files (these are four-track digital sound samples that Amiga users are quite proud of, seemingly, and having heard them, you'll see why).
That's just the software.
Hardware-wise, the Laserwave Plus offers two sound inputs for microphone and line input, a CD sound connector, for multimedia applications, and a SCSI CD Drive interface — and the drivers are included for same.
There's also, of course, an output for a pair of stereo speakers that is capable of providing 4 watts per channel and a joystick interface.
The only thing missing is the kitchen sink!
Sound Quality The synthesis of musical sounds is taken care of by a Yamaha sound chipset capable of stereo output with bass and treble equalisation.
To get the best out of this setup, it's best to use a decent pair of speakers — the better they are, the better the sound quality.
Without getting into the Hi-Fi magazines' territory, using a pair of dual cone active speakers, the sound quality from the on-board synthesiser is very pleasant, with few harsh tones and a definite bass boost being audible.
In DOS mode, bass and treble are controlled by a command line mixing facility called PAS which allows the user to control not only the overall volume, but also the relative volumes of mic input, digitised output, synthesiser output, CD output and bass and treble.
Windows 3.1 users will no doubt be aware that their chosen environment allows for various sound inputs and outputs, including MIDI and sampled sounds (MID and WAV files).
The drivers and utilities supplied with the Laserwave Plus install into Windows 3.1 (or Windows 3.0 with Multimedia Extensions) with no fuss — you don' even have to open the DRIVERS section of Control Panel to do the job, as there is an automatic install routine that does it all for you.
After that, the world is your oyster, as they say.
You can see from the screen dump that there are mixers aplenty to choose from, and a sound sampling utility that can accept sounds from any of the input ports on the card.
A caveat here.
On a 286 machine with 2MB RAM (the minimum configuration for a Multimedia PC compatible machine) the Pocket Recorder will refuse to run — it really wants a 386SX and 4MB RAM, which we consider to be a realistic minimum configuration for an MPC machine.
Give it that, and you can fiddle with sampled sounds to your heart's content, and in a much more usable utility than Windows 3.1's default sound recorder.
Summary
As the sophistication of PC software continues to increase, more and more packages, both leisure and ‘serious’ support add-on sound.
Some, including all Multimedia packages, demand a sound card.
Try playing lemmings with the PC's beeper, and then try it out on a machine that is sound-equipped, and you'll never want to play it again until you have better sound.
The same applies to many other games.
Even Windows 3.1, and the up-coming Windows for Workgroups is enhanced by having decent sound capabilities — embedding of sound annotation to documents, and even voice mail, make co-operative working more productive.
I certainly would not like to do without my own sound card now that I've had one for some time, and I'm seriously considering changing it for a Laserwave Plus, purely because I find its configurability and standard of sound to be better than the one I already have.
You may gather from this that I strongly recommend you to add some decent sound to your PC, and can recommend the Laserwave Plus highly.
Info Box
Product: Laserwave Plus
From: Program Solutions (UK) Ltd.
Price: £159
Verdicts Ease of Use: ***** Versatility: ***** Intuitivity **** VFM **** Overall ****
Pros Excellent sound output allied with a wide variety of inputs and good software Cons None.
Step by Step to Mastering Spreadsheets
by Janet Swift
Tracking Records
One aspect of a spreadsheet that is often underutilised is its database facilities.
This is not entirely surprising because the steps involved are rather different from the familiar ones used in other spreadsheet tasks.
However, they are in fact quite straightforward and often easier than those involved in a dedicated database package.
In short, a spreadsheet can provide a workable method of record keeping.
The example here is a catalogue of CDs but you could easily modify the template for any inventory.
The program used in the following example is Lotus 1-2-3 (specifically 1-2-3 Go which was reviewed in last month's Practical PC) but other versions of 1-2-3, or similar spreadsheets such as As-Easy-As, work in exactly the same way and it is very easy to modify the steps shown here to work in SuperCalc or Excel.
Step 1
When you think about a spreadsheet database the idea to have in mind is of an active list — one that can be asked to supply any of the details you have typed into it.
The first step is to decide what headings you want in the list and to give these meaningful names.
These are the Fieldnames but in many spreadsheets the cells in which the first row of data is entered are just as important, if not more so than the names themselves.
You probably want to use the first few rows of the spreadsheet for a general title plus notes to yourself about the date of creation and date of most recent revision so enter the headings you want in row 9 of the spreadsheet using short labels but ones that you will find meaningful in the reports you will want to create later on.
Notice the use of the underscore character in column D to join two words together.
Step 2
Even with only the headings entered some columns obviously need to be widened.
It is also the time to format column C to show dates and column H to currency or fixed format with two decimal places.
As this is a spreadsheet it will be easy to make any changes needed later so do not worry about exactly how wide columns should be.
Even having formatted column C to show dates you have to enter them using a date function.
The date shown in cell C2 could be entered either as @DATE(92,7,12) or as @DATEVALUE (’ 12-Jul-92’).
If you have a lot of different dates to enter, either use a keystroke macro — something that I will cover in a future Step-by-Step (but see ‘Further Reading’) or just enter the same date, say @DATEVALUE (’ 1-Jan-90’) in the first cell, copy it down the column for as many rows as you expect to need and then edit it (using F2) to enter the real dates.
This saves repeatedly typing the @ function and the punctuation.
If you want to enter the current date you can use @NOW but to fix this date (so that it does not change to the current date next time you load the spreadsheet you will have to convert it to a value.
If you don't know how to do this see this months Tips.
Step 3
Now enter your data.
The good thing about a spreadsheet is that you do not need to worry about the order in which you list items — you can sort on any field later.
But do remember to make use of the facilities on offer — for example, you can use the Copy command to save typing the same or similar details.
Step 4
Another useful facility in Lotus is search and replace.
This means you can just type an abbreviation instead of difficult-to-type names — so type Tc for Tchaikovsky and Shos for Shostakovich — and expand them later.
Step 5
Obviously, entering data can be done whenever there is more to add — and you can add columns as well as rows — but you will need to update the database definition accordingly.
This is my cue for showing you how to go from a list to a database and this is done using the /Data, Query, Input command.
This prompts you for the input range and you type this in or select it by pointing.
Step 6
The power of a spreadsheet database is in the ability to select just those records you want.
To do this you have to specify criteria and you do this in an area designated the as criteria range where you enter the fieldnames you want to use in a search.
It is usually convenient to enter all the fieldnames and the easiest way to do this is simply to use the /Copy command to copy them.
The other tip is to use an area of spreadsheet that is well away from the Input range but easily accessible.
I would normally set up an area to the right of the input range but for ease of taking screen dumps I have here gone lower down — do not copy my example in a real database that is going to grow bigger!
Having entered the fieldnames you use the command /Data, Query, Criteria to specify the range containing them and the row directly below (to be used to enter the conditions) as the Criteria range.
Step 7
Now to enter a selection criteria.
The simplest is to match a text string.
So for example, to find all the recordings of music by Bach you would specify a condition meaning composer equals Bach.
To do this simply type Bach directly under the fieldname Composer in the criteria range.
When you do this what you will see in the cell is either a 0 (meaning False) if what is actually in B10 isn't Bach or 1 (meaning True) if it just happens to be Bach.
You can then use one of the location commands.
This time use Find which highlights matching records in the Input range.
Once you have explored the first match — which you can do using the left and right arrow keys, press the Down arrow to find the next record (pressing the up arrow goes to the previous record).
If you hear a beep when you press one of these arrow keys then there are no more records to be found.
Step 8
Instead of just inspecting records within the Input range you can define n output range so that all the records found as a result of the search are gathered together into a separate table.
Again this has to be set up by copying fieldnames and by again using the /Data, Query command and this time specifying as the output range an area that includes this and as many rows as you intend to use — in this case A65…
G90 has been used.
You can also use partial matches by using wildcard characters and you can specify multiple matches.
If you want two matches to be satisfied simultaneously you put them on the same row in the criteria range.
If you want one type of match one or another then you specify them in different rows.
For example to find all the recordings with Symphony in the title composed by Sibelius together with any recordings by the Royal Philharmonic (R P O) you would enter Symphony* (or just *Sym) in A61, Sibelius in B61 and R P O in F62.
You would also have to remember to respecify the criteria range to have row 62 in it.
Having done this give the command /Data, Query, Extract and the output range will fill with matching records.
Step 9
Rather than complete or approximate matches you can also specify conditions using the arithmetic operators = < > and so on.
In this version of 1-2-3 you have to substitute the cell reference of the first cell in the corresponding field when you do this.
So the formula to find all CDs costing more than £10 would be +G10>10 and it can be written anywhere in the criteria range.
Remember that it is not just numeric values that can be used in such conditions.
For example to find all the CDs purchased before 1992 you could use date arithmetic.
The condition to specify would be: +C10<@DATEVALUE(’ 1-Jan-92’)
It is important to note that the criteria range must not have any blank rows so reset it to be just a single row before giving the new Extract command.
Step 10
Finally, one of the most of the commonly performed database operations — and one that is useful in many non-database situations — is sorting into order on one of more fields.
For example, to arrange this database alphabetically by composer and by title within composer you would use column B as the Primary Key, column A as the Secondary key.
Always save your file before you sort it and be careful to include in the Data Range all the rows and columns that you want to sort but no others.
Notice for example that this range starts in row 10 and not in row 9!
Further Reading
If you want more details of the techniques discussed here using Lotus 1-2-3 or SuperCalc then see ‘Lotus Professional’ or ‘SuperCalc Professional’(by Janet Swift, published by I/O Press Phone (0969) 24492 for details,
Curate's (nest) Egg Accounting software is the forte of North-Eastern firm Sage, and the Geordie boys have a new Windows and DOS product on the market.
Fellow Geordie David Dorn audits Sage Sterling +2.
Accounting software has traditionally been the province of the DOS aficionado — there's not a great welter of Windows products such as you would find with, say, word processing or graphics packages.
Sage Sterling +2 gives the potential purchaser the best of both worlds, though, since it includes both DOS and Windows versions.
The question is, how well does the new version stand up to Windows?
Like it or lump it, the world is slowly turning on to Graphical User Interfaces, whether they be Windows, the Apple Mac's operating system, or the Next — not forgetting OS/2 v 2.0, of course.
PC Software houses are turning on to Windows more quickly than the users — there aren't many who don't have a Windows product in their portfolios these days — and Sage has joined the band of the enlightened few who package both DOS and Windows versions together with its second foray into the GUI market — Sterling + 2.
To fully understand the workings of Sage accounting software, you have to look first at the DOS versions it already has under its belt.
They are very successful, probably the most used PC accounting software in the country.
Sage has an enviable reputation for knowing how to deal with accounts — ask any accountant — and, it seems, accounting firms are happy to give discounts to businesses who present their books in Sage format.
That has to speak highly for the way in which the software does its internal calculations and comes up with the answers.
RTFM Unusually for a reviewer, the manual was the first thing I took out of the box and examined.
It's thick and copiously illustrated, with screen shots here there and everywhere.
Everything you need to know to get either version of the software to run is in there — but the problem is finding it.
More of this later.
Windows was the environment of choice — the DOS version works identically as far as the mechanics are concerned, except that pretty Windows graphics are replaced by character based displays.
Installation takes next to no time, there being only one disk with the software on.
It's a touch disappointing when a Windows product comes on one disk, especially one that costs as much as Financial Controller — you rather get used to having eight or ten high density disks to feed into you machine.
This isn't a grumble, by the way!
As the install routine proceeds, you're asked for your company details — name and address and so forth, but, strangely, not your VAT details.
More of this later as well.
Once it's out of the way, you get to run the software — but read the READ.ME file first, as there are changes, at least in the version I've looked at, from the manual, and quite important ones.
The main menu is a matrix of buttons with large and colourful icons on them.
In 640 x 480 VGA, these appear as Sage intended them, but on my 1024x768 SVGA display (the emerging standard) something has gone awry with screen fonts, the first indication of which is the fact that the descriptive text on the buttons overwrites the icons slightly.
This is echoed in the body of the program when text is truncated along the bottom of letters, and doesn't fit into its boundary boxes at all well.
In 640x480, it's fine.
Sage's R&D department is aware of this problem, and is in the process of sorting it out.
Facilities It would be difficult to find a more complete package of accounting facilities than are presented in Financial Controller, but be warned, there are very few concessions made to the tyro book-keeper in terms of jargon, which is strangely at odds with the ethos of the program.
For instance, to record a payment you've made, you fill out a cheque onscreen.
It's very intuitive, and can be tied to the invoice you've previously entered (as you receive it, like all good book-keepers do!) very simply by choosing a supplier and then the invoice.
Similarly, to raise an invoice (ie. bill somebody) you fill out an onscreen invoice.
If you don't have a customer account for the person or company being billed, you're prompted to start one — and it's easy to do, at least at a simple level.
It's only when you think you might want to do something a little more complex and powerful with the information you're storing that things become more jargonised and complex, and having a help system that is not context sensitive is of little assistance.
In fact, it's in idiot proofing that the program, whether DOS or Windows version, is let down.
There are two ways to get an invoice (from you to a customer) onto the system.
One is from the INVOICE button, which is where you sort out the bills you want to print and send out.
The other is in the CUSTOMER section, where you can enter details of an invoice you have raised by other means.
The problem is, as you access customer transactions and might want to raise an invoice, it's intuitive to click on the INVOICE button in that section, thinking, not un-naturally, that it's the right thing to do.
And so it is if you don't want to print it.
If you go through the process and complete the invoice, and only then discover your mistake, you've blown it.
There's no way the real invoice generator can access your non-printing invoice to print it, which, given the Windows environment particularly, is a great pity.
It means you have to treat the first invoice as an error, and possible invoke the DOCTOR (which has been with most Sage products for ages) to correct things, and then go and do it right.
It's the kind of mistake you'll only make once or twice, I suppose, but it would be simpler if, when you enter the CUSTOMER invoice section, the program asked whether you wanted to print the invoice, and gave you the option of which one to use, or asked whether the invoice had already been raised.
Windows?
In fact, it's the idiot-proofing that lets the whole program down.
Before I go further, let me say this.
The Sterling + 2 range is extremely powerful, and its accounting functions cannot be faulted, from stock control right through to its reports.
It has a very efficient and accurate VAT return facility, and includes functions for everything you need to run anything from a small to multi-national company.
Were I just looking at the DOS version, I'd be pretty happy with that, but it's with the Windows version that major flaws appear.
Aside from the steep learning curve the program presents, which is almost acceptable in the DOS environment (ask any WordPerfect user), one of the recurring niggles has to do with compliance to established Windows norms.
In a list box, for instance, it's normal for a click to select an item, and a double click to select it and open it for whatever process you're at.
Likewise, control clicking (holding down the CTRL key while you click) allows you to select multiple items for processing and shift clicking highlights everything from the last highlighted item to the one your pointer is over as you shift click.
Not in Sterling + 2, it doesn't.
If you produce an invoice, and on reading it onscreen discover that you have entered £350 instead of £250, almost every Windows user will expect to drop a text cursor over the offending 3 and change it to a 2.
You can't.
You have a dialogue box to go through in order to amend the entry, and you can only get to it by double clicking on the item's stock code.
It's far from intuitive, and galling to waste as much time as it takes.
Little departures from established norms keep cropping up all over the program, forcing you to refer either to on-line help or the manual, neither of which, frankly, is up to scratch.
Sage is currently re-vamping the online help system to make it context sensitive, and I'm hoping that they'll also look at idiot proofing and the application of the Windows interface.
Curate's Egg.
Like the Curate's Egg, though, not everything in this particular garden is brambles, to mix metaphors.
When you're concerned with purely accounting functions, and once you've learned the program, it's an absolute joy to have as a tool.
Management accounts are easily accessed, and allow criteria selection to make listing aged debtors (a sadly increasing race of accounts departments that don't pay their bills on time) and so forth very easy.
Raising letters to selected customers and suppliers is also amply catered for.
The new method of showing the information for a VAT return (it looks just like one of the horrid things) is more than just useful, it's a Godsend, and once you've got into the methodology, invoice raising and bill paying as well as stock control become very quick and easy.
So, for accountants and those that can receive plenty of training and can get to grips with the program, it is very powerful and as complete a set of tools as you'll see.
For the accounts illiterate, it presents a very steep learning curve, and some re-learning if you're an established Windows user.
It's very difficult to know how to sum the whole package up.
On the one hand, it's very powerful.
On the other, it's full of not so nice surprises.
On one hand, you can use either the DOS or Windows package on the same data.
On the other, you have to use a word processor or text editor to change the layout of any of the forms the package can produce, and can only use one font in any one document (which is hardly in the spirit of Windows).
On the one hand you've got everything, accounting-wise, you need to run a large company now, and on the other, the bits that make what you send to other people look professional are coming ‘real soon now’ in a later release.
Summary
As you can see, I've never had as much difficulty in coming to a conclusion about any piece of software.
Had I just seen the DOS version, I'd have been a little niggled about some of the design parameters, but very impressed at the functionality, with an overall favourable opinion.
As it is, I have reservations about the application of the user interface in the Windows version, and will have to wait to see what the next version brings before I can make up my mind any more firmly than I can at present.
Sterling +2 Financial Controller is, then, like the Curate's Egg — good in parts.
Get a good demonstration before you make up your own mind.
The Stylish Way
— Don Bradbury
Style analysers can give on-the-spot text analysis and tuition if your grammar is not up to the mark or your style is a little untidy.
Don Bradbury takes a look at three offerings from the shareware category.
Overview
It is partly because of the ease with which getting your ideas onto paper has been made so simple by the PC and word processor that extra care now has to accompany the typing of every paragraph.
Improving the layout of a page, or correcting the odd error or two, is now so simple that it is very easy to fall into the trap of poor style, loose grammar, or idiomatic phrasing.
Of the attempts to provide writers with a PC-based style analyser, standard commercial channels proffer a few but their cost may be considered inordinate for such a duty and so one looks to shareware offerings because they are frequently better buys.
Readability Plus, Maxi-Read, and Styled are the subject of this review.
Without tears
Readability Plus entered the shareware arena after a successful period as standard commercial software, but publishers Scandinavian PC Systems thought it would reach more potential users from the shareware catalogues.
In addition, while it is now offered as an entry program, it is also being used to promote its stable-mate, Corporate Voice.
Page 2
The program is concerned with evaluating the text's construction — sentence length, average word length, and so on— but it is different from other style analysers in the way the results are reported.
While there is some textual output, most of the analysis is presented graphically.
This makes it fairly easy to grasp the meaning of the program's overall appraisal of your work, but only after you have gained familiarity with its meaning.
This is not an unduly difficult task but it does demand a little effort.
The main menu offers a selection of activities (fig 1), the main one being option 2 where you specify the text file you have prepared.
The prime report is in the form of a ‘tear chart’(fig 2), where analysis of the sentences in the text is presented as a series of points on an XY graph (box 1) of the number of long words in a sentence plotted against the total number of words in the sentence.
An ideal model can be summoned for comparison (fig 3).
The chart shows an outlined range into which, ideally, all the points would fall.
Those points that fall outside this envelope can be further analysed directly by pointing to a particular location.
When selected, the first line of the suspect sentence is reproduced on the screen for identification and your further consideration.
While useful, I think it would have been preferable to show the entire sentence, but you can at least note the identified points and refer to the main body of text later.
The text analysis is reported according to its intended readership.
This can be specified from a range including a general category, children's book, newspaper article, advertising copy, novel, magazine article, technical manual, government report, or ‘bureaucratic’.
The last three categories are not offered as examples of good text construction, but rather the sort of thing to avoid.
Page 3
Readability Plus lets you identify parts of the text to ignore, such as tables of data, and also you can tell the program of specific word processing formats that could confuse the analysis.
Word Perfect, Microsoft Word, Wordstar and Wordstar 2000 files may all contain embedded markers that are additional to the ASCII text and should be ignored for accurate analysis.
Also calculated are various indices of readability, including Flesch-Kincaid, Flesch Reading Ease, Gunning's Fog Index, and the LIX factor.
A series of bar charts and summaries offer no less than seventeen different analyses (fig 4), and one of these charts is shown in fig 5 where an ideal model is conveniently offered as a super-imposition.
To the max.
RWS Associates' Maxi-Read analyses are totally different and somewhat less sophisticated compared with Readability Plus.
They may, however, be more intuitively understood.
It too uses a partly graphical presentation of results after the analysis is complete, and while it still references factors such as average sentence and word length, also included is the proportion of certain types of word such as personal pronouns.
Many will consider this important because these can add warmth to appropriate types of text.
There is an evaluation of the Flesch Index, but mainly the analyses stress actual word usage rather than sentence construction per se.
The Flesch readability assessment was developed by Rudolf Flesch, and it uses a value of 50% to represent text of average readability among average adults.
Lower values indicate reduced readability.
Page 4
Reading grade level, also reported, is derived from the Flesch Index.
A value of twelve is US high school graduate grade, while sixteen represents college graduate standard.
If you really let things slip, Maxi-Read reports a figure of 999 as a flag to indicate that sentence complexity is far too high.
The average adult is taken to understand text written at eight to ten grade level, and popular newspapers and magazines are written with this degree of readability in mind.
The Flesch Index, the percent of personal and so-called ‘sesquipedalian’ or complex words, and the average syllables per word and words per sentence, are all presented as graphic symbols, while the major plot is a readability summary.
After the text analysis, and if requested, Maxi-Read stores the sesquipedalian words for display in the hope that you will try to find alternatives.
Many of these are quite unavoidable, commonly used words, especially in technical circles like computing.
You just ignore them.
With regard to readability, if the proportion of personal pronouns in the text is 5 to 10%, this program thinks the tone is sufficiently warm and friendly.
But certain types of script could not tolerate that proportion and these must inevitably suffer in rating if you use a fixed format text analyser like Maxi-Read.
However, even the best text analyser is only a guide, and you will have to use some common sense when applying it.
You have to view the style analyser's report in conjunction with your subject matter.
Maxi-Read allows any text file and path directive to be specified for analysis, but you can also input text directly into the program for consideration.
It can handle Wordstar files as well as simple ASCII text.
Page 5
The main menu (fig 6) presents some options additional to starting the text analysis, and figure 7 shows the next screen where a request is made for input specifying the required forms of output and the text file specification.
Figure 8 shows an example of Maxi-Read output, using the same file as in the Readability Plus review, the Magazine.txt file.
A distinctive style.
Louie Crew is Director of Writing Program at The Chinese University in Hong Kong, and he has produced the off-beat Styled text analyser, our third and final contender.
Its documentation is very idiosyncratic, and clearly reflects Crew's own ideas of what constitutes good text.
While his program also analyses word types and their use, it is geared more towards the analysis of sentence construction.
This is seen as the crucial factor in readability.
The main menu (fig 9) lets you analyse for word length, punctuation, syntax, or nominalization; in Crew-talk, ‘Symptoms of cholesterol’.
Nominalization analysis (fig 10) highlights specific parts of the text by using bright characters, inverse video, or by darkening.
Here, forms of the verb ‘to be’ are put into inverse video, and those that are believed to ‘hide action’are put on the screen for your consideration.
The ‘skin of the text’ is word length, and this is indicated by replacing each word with a graphic character of equivalent length while preserving the original punctuation.
Words that are longer than ten characters are shown in inverse video and then percentaged for that sentence.
Next, the word count for the sentence is totalled.
Crew believes you can more easily judge sentence complexity from such a graphic view.
Page 6
Then we come to punctuation analysis (fig 11).
This is ‘the pulse of the text’, Crew claims.
Each punctuation mark is put into a flashing mode, and another graphic character replaces each word.
In addition, the program tallies the number of punctuation marks and calculates the average space between them.
Syntax is ‘the skeleton of the text’, and in this analysis, possible coordinators, subordinates, and transitionals are found and put into high intensity video.
Again, a graphic character is substituted for each word to give a better idea of sentence complexity.
So the chief objective of Styled is to give you a visual impression of the text.
But the program can only describe; it offers no remedies.
The author acknowledges that some types of text are necessarily more complex than others, and this depends on the subject matter.
Decision time.
There can be little doubt that the analysis of text for word and sentence length, punctuation, as well as the use of certain types of words and the over use of others, are all valuable.
A PC-based analyser is ideal in that it is impartial, on-hand, and quick, but due allowance has to be made for the particular type of text.
Readability Plus does try to take it into account and scores points in that regard.
Its graphical summaries of the analyses are neat and comprehensible, and its many forms of text analysis will cover most people's requirements.
Page 7
Maxi-Read presents, in essentially one screen if you ignore its overspill (and possibly overkill) analysis for complex words, a useful summary of some important factors in text construction.
While its report is not so comprehensive as that of Readability Plus, it might be valued for a more succinct appraisal.
Styled is probably just too quirky for some potential users.
It offers a useful analysis for those who would like to view everything with the ‘padding’ removed, and I concede that could be many readers.
But its reports are not as comprehensive, they have to be requested singly from the main menu (which means multiple passes of your text through the analyser) and the reports may not offer the intuitive help that the other programs give you.
It is important to bear in mind that these PC-based style analysers are only a guide to good textual construction.
They cannot report nonsense in your writing, they do not judge accuracy, including spelling, nor can they detect incorrect word usage.
But as appraisers of well constructed sentences, over-use of long words, and in some cases the degree of action in your style of writing, they have their place.
Your choice could depend on what you think your deficiencies are.
An XY graph plots points alone in a two dimensional graph relating two factors.
No continuity is suggested between the points; each simply reflects the relative position.
The XY graph is a popular way of visualising of group of data points in this way.
A path directive is the way you tell the PC operating system or the software in use where to locate a particular data file or program.
It may be in Page 8 the form C: \dir1\file1 or if the search is to be confined to the current disk it may be simplified to \dir1\file1.
An ASCII file consists of pure text; letters or numeric characters alone.
Many word processors add markers as printer commands or character enhancers and so on, and if you do not have the facility to identify these, or strip them out, they can interfere with the accuracy of a program like a text analyser.
Take Ten
SVGA monitors
The largest cost component of an upgrade to SVGA is the monitor not the video display board.
SVGA monitors vary in price from £200 to over £500.
Is there any difference?
The answer has to be yes — you do get something extra if you pay more — but can you live without it?
I looked at 10 no-frills SVGA monitors to see which ones I could put up with.
Instead of using complicated measurements involving colour purity, resolution etc. to compare their performance I simply used each monitor for a day.
What more direct method can you think of?
At the end of the test I have to say that I would have been reasonably happy to work with any of the monitors on a long term basis.
The monitor that I would pick if money wasn't a consideration was the Sampo Alpha Scan — a superior monitor for a reasonable price.
However if rock bottom price matters I would be very satisfied with the CA&G VG1460 or the AOC CM-335.
All of the monitors reviewed came with tilt and swivel stands and a complete set of cables.
Notice that some are capable of non-interlaced operation which gives a virtually flicker free display but you also need a video card that can work with non-interlaced SVGA.
Low radiation?
You may notice that the radiation that monitors emit is coming under scrutiny with manufacturers making special low radiation monitors — at a price of course.
What is this radiation?
It isn't nuclear radiation but electro magnetic and magnetic fields that are causing the worry.
All monitors and TV sets give off high levels of electro-magnetic fields at all frequencies and there have been one or two studies that suggest these might be harmful.
At the moment there is no hard evidence that they are — but they might be.
If the risk was very great or obvious then, given the number of people using monitors and watching TV for long periods, then the effects would be more obvious.
If you are worried about this problem then it is worth knowing that the radiation decreases in strength very rapidly with distance and most of it comes out of the back of the monitor.
This suggests that you should sit at arms length from your monitor and shouldn't site desks so that people sit near the back of monitors.
On a practical point I noticed that the colours weren't as bright on the low radiation monitors that I used.
Personally monitor radiation comes very low down my list of environmental risk factors that are worth worrying about — but I shall continue to consider the evidence.
Dear John,
Here is the three page (2400 word) shareware section for the new magazine.
I have included a number of screendumps so you can choose which ones you would like to use.
PIX-A relates to the F117A program.
I have not managed to convert the image to PCX or TIF format using Pinch & Punch.
It therefore requires conversion.
PIX-B relates to PCX SuperShow and the same comment made above applies to this one.
TTFONTS.TIF — is a dump of some of the TrueType fonts from IkonWorks
TYPING.PCX — is a dump from Touch Typing Tutor for Windows
JOBHUNT.PCX — is a dump from JobHunt
Once the format of the new magazine has been worked out I should be able to submit my copy in a more usable format.
As regards shareware pricing, more and more distributors seem to be offering catalogues on disk combined with ordering information.
This allows the user to list a number of programs which will fill up a complete disk, or more than one disk.
Therefore, the costs of each program as mentioned in the reviews is not entirely accurate as users may be able to add a few more files to the disk to fill it up.
Also, it may be worth pointing out that most shareware distributors offer a policy whereby users buying more than a certain number of disks pay less per disk.
The precise nature of this scheme varies from one company to another.
Regards,
Mark P. Houghton
Deluxe Games II.
Comes on 14 3.5″ 720k disks
Disk formats: 3.5″ 720k only
Registration: variable
System requirements: IBM PC, EGA, 640k of Ram and a hard disk
Hard disk space required: variable
Cost: £15.95 (+ £1.25 P&P)
This is a massive selection of 70 DOS games on no less than 14 disks complete with an install program.
A must have item for the 
PC games fanatic!
Contact: Benetech Systems
PC-Type version 4.0.
Comes on 4 720k 3.5″ disks
Cost: £12
Disk formats: 3.5″ 720k, 5.25″ 360k
Registration: £59
System requirements: any PC with 384k of Ram and a hard disk or two 3.5″ disk drives.
Hard drive space required: 2403k
Registration brings: manual, cheap upgrade path
Despite its low registration price, PC-Type is a fully featured program which offers such features as mailmerging, graphing, headers/footers and a search/replace facility.
A spellchecker is also available based on a 100,000 word US dictionary.
The program does not have mouse support but this is not a problem as the menu options are accessed via the F2 key.
Context sensitive help is also available and a full manual is provided on disk.
The graphing feature is particularly impressive and allows tables of data to be converted into a number of different graph types.
They include bar, pie, line, chart and scatter.
An equally unusual feature of the program is its multiple window capability.
This allows up to ten different files to be open at once in up to four different windows.
Different parts of a single file can also be viewed in different windows.
For long documents, PC-Type allows a single document to be created from multiple files and tables of contents, and indexes can be generated.
The headers/footers options are also powerful.
They can be placed on all, odd or even pages and they can include time, date and page numbers.
Headers and footers can also be turned off when not required.
These are just some of the many features offered by this very able program.
If you thought that shareware had little to offer serious business users then a look at PC-Type may do much to change your mind.
Contact: TestWare
F117A Nighthawk Stealth Fighter 2.0
Comes on 3 720k 3.5″ disks.
Cost: £9
Disk formats: 3.5″ 720k, 5.25″ 360k
Full working program available for £38.15
System requirements: any PC with hard disk and VGA display.
Hard disk space required: 1212k
This is a full working demo of a MicroProse program and is exclusively distributed by Testware.
F117A is a fully featured flight simulator with excellent VGA graphics and joystick or keyboard control.
Full sound support is also given and both Ad Lib and Roland sound boards are supported.
The only difference between this demo and the full commercial version is that you are limited to a single theatre of operations.
In this case it is Libya where the mission is to destroy a SAM radar installation and missile boat.
Before the mission you receive a briefing about the mission and can also choose to visit the hanger, maintenance room and CO's office.
However, the real action is when you jump into the cockpit and zoom off down the runway to strike a blow against the evil Quadaffi.
The flight action is superb although it can take a long time to get to grips with all the features of the program.
Superb VGA graphics make sure that this flight sim is unmissable.
Contact: TestWare
PCX SuperShow 2.0
Comes on 2 720k 3.5″ disks
Disk formats: 3.5″ 720k, 5.25″ 360k
Cost: £6 (inc P&P)
Registration: £59.50
System requirements: any PC with hard disk, 384k Ram, CGA display with 256k videoram.
Registration brings: screen capture utility, 24 fonts, manual, music &.
VOC files 
Hard disk space required: 1429k
SuperShow is a multimedia presentation program which allows the creation of 256 colour screen presentations using graphics in PCX format.
The graphics can be displayed on screen for any length of time and each graphic can be accompanied by SoundBlaster or.
VOC files which can be played either through a sound board or the PC speaker.
There are 36 basic screen fade options supplied although these can be customised by the user.
Two dozen screen fonts are also supplied.
The program is based around a very simple menu based script editor.
It allows the user to create their own show and preview the show at any stage to check that it works as expected.
A free runtime version of the program is also supplied which means that shows can be distributed to others without any royalty payments having to be made.
The program is surprisingly powerful and even allows scripts to be written so that mouse or keyboard input can be made as the show is run.
This makes the program fully interactive and would be ideal for use in displays or exhibitions.
It is even possible to create a script that records how often an interactive screenshow is accessed by members of the public.
Another possible use for the program would be as an educational or training aid.
The counting and scoring options are particularly useful in this respect This allows the program to keep track of responses to true/false or multiple choice questions.
SuperShow is an excellent example of Shareware at its very best and may prove to be invaluable to both the business and educational user.
For such a professional product, the registration price of £59.59 is an absolute bargain.
Contact: TestWare
Job Hunt
1 720k 3.5″ disk
Registration: £15
Cost: £2.35 (+ £1.25 P&P)
Disk formats: 3.5″ 720k
System requirements: any PC with 256k Ram and hard disk.
Hard disk space required: 318k
Registration brings: peace of mind!
If you are looking for a job there is no reason why you cannot keep track of everything with a notepad and a pen.
But the advantage of this program is that it gives the job hunter a degree of direction and discipline which the pen and paper approach does not.
Job Hunt uses a text based windows-style environment and uses mini databases to record contacts, agencies, job applications, job interviews and questions/answers.
A text editor is also included for writing your CV.
A variety of information can be recorded and catalogued including contacts, agencies and job applications.
The program can also improve your performance at interviews by allowing you to record what went well and what didn't.
You can also record a list of questions to ask at interviews and also make a note of which responses you felt were weak.
Overall, the program is easy to use and can help you to be organised in your jobhunting.
With the current state of the UK economy and the level of unemployment any tool which can increase your chances of getting that perfect job must be well worth the money.
Contact: Benetech Systems
Touch Type Tutor
1 720k 3.5″ disk
Registration: $24
Cost: £3.50 (inc P&P)
Disk formats: 3.5″ 720k only
System requirements: any Windows 3. x compatible PC One of the results of the PC revolution is that the traditional typing pool is quickly disappearing as more managers type their own correspondence and reports.
The problem with this is that many managers and other PC users have never received formal keyboard training.
Consequently, their keyboard skills can hardly be described as an aid to efficiency.
Touch Typing Tutor is a Windows program which can be used as a training aid for the novice or as a method for the more accomplished typist to improve their speed and accuracy.
For the novice the tutorial mode provides eight graduated lessons.
During each lesson the PC assesses the performance of the typist and identifies characters which prove to be problematic.
Typing Tutor then begins to provide test sentences which include those problem characters.
This forces the trainee to improve their performance.
After each set of lessons bar graphs can be generated to illustrate the progress made.
For the more advanced user the speed mode allows typists and companies to measure typing speeds.
This feature should appeal to temping agencies assessing potential employees.
There are five different tests which allow typists to be tested against various styles of text.
They are general, medical, legal, techno and custom.
For those lighter moments there is also a game mode.
The object of the game is to move the person who seems to be trapped on a moving conveyor belt heading toward a rather fearsome looking spear.
A letter appears above the person and typing the letter allows the person to jump away from the spear.
As more letters take its place, you must enter them correctly until the person makes it all the way to the end of the belt and thus to safety.
Whilst the program can never replace a formal training course, it is still a very useful training method for both novice and experienced typists.
The only potential drawback is that unlike a training course, this program will only be of use if the user has the discipline to use it on a regular basis.
Contact: Omicron Systems
Windows Common File Dialog Extensions Library
Registration: £10 + VAT
Disk formats: any disk format
System requirements: Windows 3.1 compatible PC
Hard disk space required: minimal
Registration brings: fully working version which does not disable itself 45 minutes after Windows 3.1 is booted.
This utility file is a replacement for the COMMDLG.DLL which resides in the Windows System subdirectory.
The standard file is accessed by many applications to provide the dialogue box which allows files to be opened and saved.
On occasion you may begin to open a file and find that you would prefer to rename the file or delete it.
Normally this requires a visit to the File Manager.
This new version of the file allows users to carry out some of the tasks normally done by File Manager without having to switch applications.
Whenever a file is opened or saved a number of extra buttons appear in the dialogue box.
These allow the user to delete and rename files or make a backup copy.
New directories can also be created.
However, not all applications draw on the COMMDLG.DLL for their file open/save dialogue box and therefore these options will not always be provided.
I would heartily recommend this piece of shareware to any Windows 3.1 user.
Contact: PMK Systems
TrueType fonts
System requirements: Windows 3.1 compatible system
Hard disk space required: variable
Disk formats: 3.5″ 1.4Mb only
Cost: prebuilt disks from £4.95 to £6.95 depending on amount of disks bought.
Uses can also use the catalogue program to select their put together their own disks for £8.95 per compressed megabyte.
Although Windows 3.1 came supplied with its own font manager in the shape of TrueType, only a few faces are supplied and this may be a problem for anyone running wordprocessing and desktop publishing software, particularly if the software does not supply any extra faces.
A number of software vendors such as Bitstream, Adobe and Microsoft themselves can supply extra fonts but they may cost more than the budget user can afford.
For such users, shareware TrueType fonts can be invaluable.
IkonWORKS are a specialist Windows shareware distributor.
They supply five font collections with around 36 fonts on each 1.4Mb disk.
There are plenty of unusual faces such as IGLOO LASER and ROUNDED RELIEF which are more suitable for posters and leaflets.
However, there are also plenty of serif and sans serif faces which can be used more widely for body text and headlines in ordinary business documents.
Contact: IkonWORKS
Friday 1.5
Comes on 1 720k 3.5″ disks
Registration: £39
System requirements: any PC with a hard disk
Hard disk space required: 159k
Registration brings: pop-up thesaurus
Price: £1.90 (inc P&P) 5.25″ 360k disks also available for £1.60
Friday is a DOS based personal information manager (PIM).
The shareware version installs as a TSR which only takes 35k of memory and is accessed with a SHIFT-ALT-F keystroke combination.
The program handles appointments via the calendar screen.
A contacts database can also be created and a contact record can be linked to a calendar entry.
Therefore, it would be possible to enter ‘Meeting with John Taylor’ in the noon timeslot for December 3rd.
John Taylor's contact record could then be linked with that calendar entry.
Registration of the program brings a number of extras including a non-TSR version of the program for users with machines low on memory.
A calculator is also provided.
Overall, the program is very useful and easy to use.
The fact that it can be run as a TSR is also a big plus 
Contact: Red Dragon Shareware
Mac utilities disk 7043
Comes on 1 800k disk
System requirements: variable
Hard disk space required: variable
Cost: £2.35 (inc P&P)
This disk contains a number of utilities which require decompression to the hard disk using StuffIt which is provided.
Boomerang — is a utility which adds to the file open/save dialogue box.
It automatically remembers folders and files which have been opened or saved and allows easy access to them, either via pop-up menus, command keys or a wildcard file search.
This utility also remembers the last file open/save dialogue box.
When this dialogue is opened again, the same folder or file selection is presented and the scroll bar is in exactly the same position.
Accu player/Sample cursors — provide over a dozen alternatives to the wristwatch which appears on screen when the Mac is ‘working’.
Disinfectant 2.3 — is an anti-virus program.
Whilst viruses on the Mac tend to be less destructive than those found on the PC they are still annoying.
This program helps by running automatically once the Mac is restarted.
It can check all floppy disks loaded and can also scan the hard disk against a list of known viruses.
What it does not do it provide the user with any way of removing any viruses found.
DisKeeper 1.3 — is a hard disk management utility which may be particularly for network administrators and those users with very large hard disks.
The program lists identical, empty, special, orphan and invisible files and folders.
It also lists folders containing a single file.
CDEV shrinker — is a handy utility for those users unable to run
System 7.
It simply turns icons into a menu list.
This means that items can be found quickly and less scrolling is required.
Lotus Symphony Release 3.0 by Janet Swift
When Symphony was originally launched in July 1984 it was the first integrated business software package and the fact that it comprised a spreadsheet, word processing, database, graphics and communications led it to be acclaimed as having a good user interface and being a very complex and powerful program.
Eight years on Symphony Release 3 has just been launched and Janet Swift examines how it measures up to today's standards — looking at it from the viewpoint of existing users and those who are contemplating buying new business software.
Release 3 for upgraders
If you are already committed to Symphony, the fact that it is still being updated and supported is in itself an important fact.
The most significant enhancement is the inclusion of Wysiwyg add-in which does allow reports from the spreadsheet to be rather more stylish.
Symphony Release 2.2 relied on the Allways add-in for its spreadsheet publishing capability but transition from one to the other has been made as smooth as possible.
The advantage of Wysiwyg is that you do not have to keep switching from one to the other.
You can work in the graphics mode and perform spreadsheet operations.
But whereas other recent Lotus DOS products such as 1-2-3 Go and 1-2-3 Release 2.4 come with Wysiwyg already attached and invoked so that the spreadsheet is automatically in graphics mode, when you install Symphony you have the option of using separate text and graphics mode or of combining them which the installation routine warns may be slow.
I decided to give the combined mode a try since I was using a fairly fast 386DX — it was still painfully slow so I reverted to separate modes.
It is certainly worth taking advantage of the Use-Wysiwyg command on the Services menu but notice that it can only be used in SHEET mode.
It allows you to take advantage of fonts, lines, borders and shading and can therefore greatly enhance the appearance of a worksheet both on the screen and on paper.
Do bear in mind that while you can only use Wysiwyg in SHEET mode you can always Retrieve something you think of as a document into a SHEET and embellish it there.
You can also use Wysiwyg to import pictures.
While any.
CGM metafiles will do, Symphony Release 3 comes with a ready made supply.
(FONTMETA)
Probably the most important aspect of this add-in is that it enables you to embed live graphs in your worksheet.
(EMBEDGPH) While on the subject of graphs, Symphony now allows you to use 12 series in a graph and there are eight new chart types.
(NEWGRAPH)
There are other add-ins that are either new or improved in this version.
Viewer, the add-in that lets you see the contents of files still on disk, has been improved and now allows the import of ASCII text and now lets you save the current worksheet and retrieve a new file in a single command — so reducing the risk of +:F7 you loosing the work you had just been doing before using it!
Symphony's new Audit add-in is the same as that included in 1-2-3 since Release 2.3.
Its purpose is as a tracking and diagnostic tool.
For example it lets you highlight all cells containing formulae.
You can also use it to see how cells are related to one another and to discover circular references.
(AUDIT)
The final add-in is unique to Symphony as it a memory management tool that lets you temporarily turn off its currently unused components in order to increase the memory available.
This appears to be much needed.
It is also well worth having expanded memory — luckily the same add-in converts extended to expanded memory and supports data storage in memory above the 640K, conventional memory, limit.
Symphony for Newcomers
According to one magazine the name Symphony was ‘an allusion to the product's likeness to a chamber music group’.
The idea presumably being that the different instruments could all get along together and could equally well do solo turns.
In fact Symphony does not really work quite in that way.
Its basic structure is the spreadsheet and all the information entered into the word processor and the database is in fact stored in a spreadsheet.
If you are a newcomer to the product, Symphony now provides a very good introduction to itself in the form of its online tutorial.
Parts of this are not interactive — you watch and learn — but there are also practice sessions which is ‘hands-on’— you do the typing and see the results in action.
The spreadsheet at the heart of Symphony is not unlike 1-2-3 and it has almost as extensive range of commands and functions.
In other words, it is a comprehensive and powerful facility for collecting, manipulating and analysing data of any type.
It is tempting to think of it as a number cruncher, but as Symphony itself demonstrates, a spreadsheet is equally capable of manipulating text as numbers and dates.
With the addition of the new graph types in this release Symphony's GRAPH environment also offers similar charting capability to Lotus 1-2-3 although it is rather more cumbersome in use than 1-2-3's latest versions which have a quick graph facility.
In Symphony you have to fill in two settings forms — but there is a Group facility which allows you to specify all the series to be charted in a single operation and similarly lets you assign all the legends in a single step.
The breakthrough in this version is that you can combine a live chart within a spreadsheet display and carry on working on the spreadsheet without having to switch modes.
(See my comments for Upgraders about Wysiwyg).
Symphony's FORM environment presents a simple-to-use data entry form (DATABASE) for any database you care to define.
When creating a database you start in the SHEET environment and set up the fields you require, specifying their length and type — which can be label, number, date, time or computed (in which case you +:F7 do not enter data but let Symphony calculate it on the basis of a formula.
You can easily set up default entries to save effort when entering data or include data validation checks to prevent mistakes being made.
Symphony also includes the @BASE add-in which lets you work directly with database files on disk and therefore extends Symphony's facilities to working with multiple databases and with files of virtually unlimited size.
It is the DOC environment in Symphony that is its weak point.
If you have used any up-to-date dedicated word processor you will soon realise that while you can do all the most vital tasks — including spell checking and outlining — the methods are cumbersome.
This is a result of the mechanics being inextricably linked to the spreadsheet structure — as this example of moving a block demonstrates (WORDPROC).
You can use Symphony for letters, invoices and even reports but it would not be my first choice!
Symphony also includes a Comms package for communicating with other computers via a modem.
Once you have the additional hardware and/or telephone services you require you can use its facilities to access online services, bulletin boards and so on.
How useful including this software is debatable since it has a limited range of file transfer protocols.
It is tempting to dismiss Symphony as yesterday's software on the grounds that it now looks very unexciting even as a DOS product.
However the very fact that the product has been around for so long and is so well established in the corporate market place that makes it a worth taking seriously.
Over the years it has attracted add-in products, including collections of templates, and this means that it can be sometimes be used as a complete solution to common business problems.
Facts Box
Testing the performance of machines isn't particularly easy.
Very often manufacturers quote a Landmark speed which is supposed to provide a measure of performance.
It does, it measures exactly how well a machine performs the Landmark tests.
The obvious best measure of a machines performance is how well it performs the tasks you bought it for.
This means that a 50MHz 486 performs only a little better than a 16MHz 286 if you are only doing simple word-processing.
Of course on Computer Aided Design (CAD) or large Spreadsheets the 486 outperforms all comers.
What is needed is a performance measure that gives some idea of how well a machine performs on non-maths applications (such as text editing) and on maths intensive applications (Spreadsheets etc.)
Two performance measures were developed to do just this;
Dhrystone
Measures the non mathematical performance of the machine.
The test repeats a large number of operations that, as far as possible, do not involve any mathematical operations.
Whetstone
Measures, as far as possible, the mathematical performance of the machine by repeating a series of mathematical routines, without any non mathematical routines.
This is a nice idea but naturally it is impossible to completely separate mathematical and non-mathematical routines, and there are overheads such as writing to the screen which can affect the results.
There will also be differences between the way routines are written, Although not measured by the Whetstone or Dhrystone tests Hard disc transfer rates and screen update speeds can affect overall machine performance dramatically.
What all this means is that in common with all other performance figures Whetstone and Dhrystone should be regarded as performance indicators rather than as absolute measurements.
Organise your Windows Program Manager with your own tidy Window boxes.
Chris Hankins shows you how.
It can be so annoying, when using a colleagues computer, to be faced with a mishmash of open windows obscuring program icons and other boxes.
This is almost always caused by closing Windows in a hurry and leaving the ‘Save Settings on Exit’ option selected.
You may also find icons which do no more than invoke an error message because the associated program or file has been erased from the harddisk.
A tidy Program Manager can make Windows easier, and much more pleasurable, to use.
The nice thing about the Program Manager is that if you tidy it once, you will always be presented with an organised opening screen, provided, of course, that you do not instruct Windows to save changes at the end of each session.
Although it is often treated as a little more than a menu system, the Windows Program Manager is a flexible organising tool for the Windows environment.
It is always running in the background as you work in other applications, ready to switch between applications or control a multitasking session.
The Program Manager will organise your programs and it may also be used to organise graphics and document files linked to program files.
Files linked in this way will be automatically loaded when the application starts.
Tidying your Windows Program Manager will take only a few minutes and might save hours of frustration in the future.
Routines detailed in this step-by-step guide can be used with Windows 3.0 or 3.1.
When Windows is first installed, you will be presented with a Program Manager screen something like this.
The ‘Main’ window is opened and the other windows are reduced to a window icon at the base of the Program Manager screen.
Unless you have only very few Windows applications, or enjoy looking at the background (which may be changed to something prettier) enlarge the Program Manager to fill the entire screen.
This is done by clicking the mouse pointer either on the top right-hand upward pointing arrow or the extreme top left-hand dash.
The latter pulls down a menu giving you the option to ‘maximise’ the window.
Double click on the ‘Applications’ icon to open the Applications window and all the installed application icons will be displayed.
Double click on the remaining window icons to open all the windows.
You will find that each new window overlays the previous one.
Windows can be moved to different positions by clicking and dragging the top coloured bar or re-sized by clicking and dragging any corner of the box.
Note that only the active window has a coloured top bar.
Clicking anywhere within a window makes it active.
It is a good idea to make your own Windows boxes to hold programs and files of a similar nature.
To create a new program group box, click on FILE and choose the NEW option.
You will have the choice between a new program item and a new program group — choose new program group.
Give this new group a name, I have used ‘Graphics Programs’ in this example.
The name you type in will be displayed in the top bar of the new window box.
Leave the ‘group file’ box blank, Program Manager will name the group file for you.
A new program group box is formed which you can size and position.
Click and drag all your graphics program files into the new box.
You can take the Windows accessories programs as well as those you installed yourself.
You might, for instance, want to put Windows PaintBrush in with your other graphics programs.
The ‘arrange icons’ option from the ‘Windows’menu acts upon the active window only.
You can select this to automatically arrange the icons within your new box, Windows will arrange the icons to fit any shape of box.
Repeat the process for other groups of programs such as word-processors, spreadsheets and databases.
You could also create program groups to hold, for example, private and business files.
Unwanted empty program group boxes can be deleted either by pressing the DEL key when the box is active or by selecting DELETE from the FILE menu.
If your Windows Program Manager is not too crowded you may, by sizing and arranging, be able to display all the program groups and all the icons at the same time.
The TILE option in the WINDOWS menu arranges the program boxes side by side to fill the Program manager window.
The size of these ‘tiles’ depends on how many program groups you have.
Those that end up too small to view all the icons they contain can be ‘maximised’ before use.
The CASCADE option form the WINDOWS menu arranges the program group boxes in a cascade fashion with only the title bars showing.
When using the cascade option the program group box which is active becomes the box at the front of the cascade.
If you select each program group in reverse priority (using the cascade command each time) the boxes will be arranged in diminishing priority with the most important at the front.
Any or all of the program group boxes can themselves be reduced to icons by clicking on the downward facing arrow in the top right-hand corner of the screen or by selecting MINIMISE.
Use the minimise option on program group boxes which are little used or when the Program Manager is particularly crowded.
If you prefer the individual icons to be displayed but there is not enough room on screen, remember that the Windows desktop is far greater than the size of the screen.
Move one of the program group boxes off the edge of the screen and scroll bars will appear allowing you to scroll through the full area of the desktop.
Don't forget to choose the SAVE CHANGES option before closing Windows to save your new layout.
Deselect the SAVE CHANGES option for normal use so that you start each new Windows session with your preferred layout.
Linking files and programs
Several copies of the same program icon can be placed within program group boxes.
Each can be associated with a particular file so that it is automatically loaded when the application is activated.
Icons are duplicated by holding the CTRL key at the same time as dragging the icon to its new location.
Select PROPERTIES from the FILE menu give the new icon a descriptive title such as‘logo’, and add the associated file name and path to the program command line.
If you want to change the graphics image that Windows uses for the icon, click on the CHANGE ICON option button and select one of the many icon designs on offer.
The Ti'Ko Computer Corporation sees the 386 computer as a thing of the past
Ti'Ko, the West Lothian company with the Japanese sounding name, has decided to drop 386 based computers from its range.
This is the first manufacturing company to take this step, arguing that the price differential between the 386 and 486 is now small enough for the 386 to be disregarded.
The Ti'Ko 486 range starts with the PT425SX at £999 — a machine based on the 486SX processor.
We take a look at what is regarded by Ti'Ko as the entry level machine for serious computing.
The PT 425SX, one of Ti'Ko's new range of 486 based machines, is available with a 43Mb, 130Mb, 245Mb or 425Mb harddisk drive.
If first impressions count, this is a winner.
A quality keyboard, low-radiation monitor, Microsoft mouse and a stylish system case.
Ti'Ko have, for some reason, reverted to placing the mains power switch at the back of the unit as an integral part of the power supply.
The Ti'Ko range is not only remarkable for its price, it also boasts a technological breakthrough in graphics speed.
This is by means of the Ti'Ko superboard which connects the motherboard processor directly to the graphics card avoiding the AT bus.
Ti'Ko claim that this significantly increases graphics handling speeds which can be up to 18 times faster than the conventional 486 super VGA configuration.
Items supplied as standard with every computer are Microsoft WinWindows 3.1, DOS 5.0, a Microsoft mouse, mouse mat, keyboard and a 14″ SVGA non-interlaced low-radiation monitor.
There is also a free three year Maintenance Plan, where you are given next day on-site support with the option of claiming £50.00 compensation per day should Ti'Ko fail to meet this obligation.
The pressed steel system unit case is bulky by today's standards and takes up quite a lot of desk space.
There is, however, plenty of room for expansion.
Two floppy drive units are fitted (3.5″ and 5.25″) with room for more in the two free drive bays.
The back panel has two serial ports, a printer port, a games port and video socket — all clearly labelled.
The motherboard has seven 16-bit expansion slots, five of which are free for future expansion, an Intel 80486SX CPU (Central Processing Unit) with a clock speed of 25MHz and 2Mb DRAM (Dynamic Random Access Memory) upgradable to 32Mb.
A 102 key tactile keyboard has keys that give out an audible click when depressed.
Ti'Ko's literature claims that the keyboards are the best on the market and provide fatigue free operation.
A feather in the cap for Cherry the manufacturers.
The graphics card is a ProDesigner Orchid IIs, with 1Mb video RAM and supports refresh rates (the rate at which the screen is drawn from top to bottom) up to 72Hz.
The maximum display resolution is 1024 x 768 with 256 colour, and the card comes with a disk containing the graphics drivers and some useful utilities such as XMODE which will allow you to emulate different video modes to suit the of software you are running.
Other items supplied with the PT 425SX, and included in the price, are TK Check Diagnostic Software, the Microsoft Productivity Pack, Free Hot-line Support for Life and a series of clear and nicely presented user manuals.
This is a very fast, reliable machine, and with the security of the after sales support that Ti'Ko are offering plus the range of bundled items supplied with the PT 425SX, for the price you can't go wrong.
The bus is a circuit which carries data between the various parts of the computer.
When a card is plugged into an expansion slot it accesses the main processor through a bus on the motherboard and external to the card.
The speed at which this bus can pass data (typically 10MHz) is restricted to make it easier for card designers to achieve compatibility.
With processors now running in excess of 40 MHz, the external bus is becoming a severe limitation.
There are moves to incorporate a faster bus locally on the card, this will allow data to be passed to the processor at a speed to suit the card design.
As yet there is no accepted standard for the local bus and, until a standard emerges, machines, such as those in the Ti'Ko range, may suffer from future compatibility problems.
43Mb £999.00
103Mb £1099.00
245Mb £1299.00
425Mb £1899.00
Ti'ko 425SX
Price:
Company: Ti'ko Computer Corporation Ltd.
Range of Features: *****
Overall Speed: *****
Ease of Use: *****
Verdict: *****
Plus Points: Fast, quality PC, very good value for money.
Excellent Maintenance contract.
Step-by-Step Spreadsheets
Accounting for Time
If you need to discover how you spend your time then you will find this spreadsheet very useful and even if you don't then it contains some helpful tips for handling dates and times.
I have used Lotus 1-2-3 here but you could follow a very similar procedure in SuperCalc, Excel, Symphony, MS-Works and many other packages.
Step 1 — Setting up a template
The preliminary step as usual is to label columns for the data they are going to contain.
People need to account for their time for many different reasons and so your final template may look quite different once you have tailored it to your needs.
The example here is for a self-employed professional who charges for time spent on a number of projects and at a variety of rates.
Next you have to decide when to enter the date and time information — do you want to use the spreadsheet like a time clock where you record what you are doing at the time you do it or will you use it to maintain a post-hoc record and enter dates and times in batches.
The problems with the two methods are different so we will go through each in turn — in fact you may well find it convenient to be able to use both methods.
Step 2 — Using @NOW
The @NOW function is the one that is useful when you use a spreadsheet as a time clock.
If you are using Lotus 1-2-3 and enter this function in a cell however you will not find the result very informative.
What you see is a number like 33856.61.
This is a date and time serial number and corresponds to the time given by your computer's system clock at the point you pressed the Enter key.
The number up to the decimal point is the date serial number and is the number of days since 1st January 1900, while the numbers after the decimal point give the decimal fraction of the current day since midnight.
Step 3 — Formatting a date
In order to display a date in 1-2-3 you need to set a date format.
The command required to do this is: /Range, Format, Date
At this point you see the choices shown on the screen here.
There are in fact more than five ways to display a date as you can alter the default settings for Long International and Short International using the command: /Worksheet, Global, Default, Other, International, Date
Returning to /Range, Format, Date — the first three choices show the month abbreviations Jan, Feb and so on and are therefore easier to read.
Having formatted the range A5…
A45 to date format 2 the entry for @NOW appears as a meaningful date (in my example 09-Sep) and if I now move down a row and type @NOW again it will instantly be displayed as the current date.
Step 4 — Formatting time
Column C and D need to be formatted to show times.
The command is very similar: /Range, Format, Date, Time and then there are four choices.
The first two display times up to 12.00 with AM/PM added to distinguish between morning and afternoon while the two international formats rely on the 24-hour clock.
For this application I have chosen short international to give a 24-hour display without seconds.
Again, once you have formatted C5…
D45 to show times you can press @NOW and see the current time.
Step 5 — Filling times and dates together
The problem with using @NOW is that when you recalculate your spreadsheet @NOW will change to be the new current time.
To stop this happening you need to convert the time to a fixed value.
The easiest way to do this is to do it as you enter it by typing @NOW and then pressing F9, the recalculate key before you transfer the entry into the cell by pressing Enter.
Pressing F9 evaluates what is on the entry line and this changes it from a changing value to one that is fixed.
An alternative way of stopping date and time values from changing if you have already made a lot of entries into a spreadsheet is to use the /Range, Value command and specifying the relevant range of cells when prompted ‘Convert what? and then pressing enter twice so that the same starting point is used for ‘To where?’.
You may have noticed that as @NOW gives both the date and the time you only need enter it once to fill both column A and column C in a single operation.
One way that looks as though it works is simply to enter the formula +A5 into C5 and then copy from A5 to A6…
A45.
The problem with this is that although all that shows in column C is a time, the cell really contains the whole date serial number and this will mess up the arithmetic discussed later (see Step 8) to calculate duration.
So what you have to enter in C5 is just the decimal part of @NOW — so the formula required is: +A5-@INT(A5) which subtracts the integer part of the date serial number, leaving just the decimal fraction.
Step 6 — Get rid of unwanted zeros
The other problem with this method is that column C shows 00.00 in rows there is not yet an entry in column A. To remove all these spurious zeros all you have to do is to use the command: /Worksheet, Global, Zero, Yes which displays blanks in place of 0s.
Step 7 — Entering times and dates
There will be times when you do want to enter a date or time concurrently with the event being recorded so you need to know how to do this.
Although in spreadsheets like 1-2-3 and SuperCalc you can type in an entry like Sep-11 this is just a text entry and so cannot be used in arithmetic — which is the whole point of a spreadsheet like this.
To enter a valid date you have to use a date function @DATE (yy, mm, dd) in 1-2-3 and EDAT (dd, mm, yy) in
SuperCalc — EDAT means European Date.
So to enter 11-Sep (into a cell already formatted to display a date in this way which A7 in our example is) you have to type in: @DATE(92,9,11)
To enter a time use @TIME and enter the figures in the format hh, mm, ss so for 09:00 to be displayed in C7 type: @TIME(9,0,0) 
Missing steps
Typing in date and time formats is tedious so the next logical steps for any reader whose spreadsheet requires this primitive method of date entry (i.e 1-2-3 Release 2. x, AsEasyAs, SuperCalc 5 and so on) would be to write a couple of simple keystrokes macros so that you could reduce the typing required to the minimum.
However space does not permit me to digress into this topic.
If you are interested in time saving keystroke macros in 1-2-3 and SuperCalc then I refer you to my books listed in
Further Reading.
Step 8 — Time arithmetic
Row 5 of our example spreadsheets shows that our professional spent from 14.56 until 15.12 on the first task listed and given that he charges for services by the hour what we require in column E, Duration, is a fraction of an hour.
This is of course very easy since what the spreadsheet has stored in cells C and D is a time serial number.
So calculating Duration needs a simple formula to work out
Stop time minus Start time but then this needs to be expressed in hours — rather than as a fraction of a day.
This just requires the raw difference to be multiplied by 24.
So the formula to enter into cell E5 is:(D5-C5) *24
The brackets in this formula are important so do not leave them out.
Step 9 — Posting the results
The next step is the most complicated introduced here.
If you do not understand how it works and you want more information about the method used then I again refer you to the books I have written on 1-2-3 and SuperCalc.
Put briefly and simply what is required is to write a formula that will allocate the time spent to the appropriate project column where it is then multiplied by the relevant charging rate to show the amount of money due from the client.
What the formula has to do is to compare the title of the project in column B (which has been left blank until this point) with the column labels in columns F, G, H and so on.
This is done using the @IF function to match the appropriate text entries.
Where there is a match the number of hours in column C is multiplied by the hourly rate.
This amounts of money charged per hour is information which is currently missing from the spreadsheet.
The simplest way to remedy this is to replace Rate 1, Rate 2 and so on by their monetary values and this is what has been done here — notice that cells F3, G3, H3 and so on now contain values and that these cells have been formatted to display currency.
The formula to enter into F5 is: @IF ($B5=F$2, $E5*F$3,0)
A rough translation into words of this formula is: IF B5 = F2 is TRUE then multiply E5 by F3 and put the result in the cell; if it is FALSE then put 0 in the cell.
As we have already set zeros to blanks (in Step 7) the outcome of the match being false is that the cell is left blank.
The formula looks very complicated because it suddenly introduces cell addresses that mix relative and absolute references.
This is done so that the formulae will still be correct when you copy from F5 to every other cell that is going to be required.
A dollar sign means this stays fixed.
So rather than B5 — which would change to be C5 when copied one cell to the right — we use $B5 so that the reference to the project in column B remains fixed.
Similarly if the formula referred to F2 and F3 the references would change to F3 and F4 when the formula was copied to the next row.
Since the label and the rate are given in rows 2 and 3 these references have been changed to F$2 and F$3 so that the row part cannot change.
It is worth knowing that you do not have to type in the dollar signs for yourself.
Instead you can use the F4 key to cycle through the four possibilities for expressing a cell reference.
Do this on the entry line by placing the cursor at each cell reference in turn and pressing F4.
You press F4 three times to change B5 into $B5 and twice to change F2 into F$2.
Step 10 — Finishing touches
The spreadsheet currently looks a little fussy by showing durations to six decimal places.
The simple fix for this — and for the amounts shown in columns F and so on— is just to format the range of durations and projects (i.e E5…
N45) to be fixed with 2 decimal palaces.
The command for this is: /Range, Format, Fixed, 2, E5…
N45 
Further Reading
Janet Swift's ‘1-2-3 Professional’(L9.95) and ‘SuperCalc
Professional’(L17.95) provide the information she could not include in this article due to shortage of space.
Contact I/O
Press on (0969) 24402 or FREEPOST, Leyburn, DL8 5BR) for full details.
Finding Files in Word for Windows
If you know you have a file, but can't remember where it is, you can find it using the Find File option in Word for Windows.
The Find File option can be found in the File menu, and is also an option from the File Open dialog box.
The utility is very powerful; you can choose which directories to look at, and which details should be shown.
The display is rather like the File Manager, in that you see the names of the files at the left hand side of the screen, and the chosen details at the right hand side of the screen.
Exactly what is shown can be any of the last time and date the file was saved, the summary information, the file statistics, or the contents.
You can set which details are shown by clicking the Options button.
The way you limit which files are shown is through the Search button.
Clicking this brings up another dialog box, where you can set which directories should be chosen, and specify the details that should select the file or files.
Choosing the directories to be searched is simple.
Click on the Edit Path button.
You will see the directories on your disk, and can add and delete directories using the Add and Delete buttons.
How the files are selected depends on which boxes you fill in on the dialog box.
You might fill in a creation or save date, to pick out files either before or after that date.
You can fill in who saved the file, the title, and so on.
The most general (and useful) box is the Any text option.
You can put any text in here that is in the file for which you are looking.
Once you have filled in all the details, the button Start Search puts your search into action.
You will see a dialog box counting up the number of matches, before you are returned to the original display showing files at the left, and details at the right.
Once you have the list of potential matching files, you can locate the actual file in one of two ways; firstly, you can open each file in the list one at a time, and check whether it is the one you really want.
If the number of files selected is too large, or you think that you have missed an important file, you can alter the Search options.
Usually, carrying out a search creates a new list of files, but you can choose either to add to the list found so far, or to search only in the list that has already been selected.
Setting the DOS prompt
In MS-DOS, the default prompt shows you the drive letter and a greater than sign, as in C>
You can make this tell you much more about your machine by using the command PROMPT.
There are several options that you can use in the PROMPT command.
For example, one of the most useful is to include not only the drive letter, but the current directory.
This is done by PROMPT $P$G
You can also have the prompt show the current time and date, by using PROMPT $D$T$G
This would show the date, followed by the time, followed by >.
You can see the version of MS-DOS that you are using by including $V, and there are also several options for including special characters such as the backspace or carriage return line feed.
You can include text, so that the prompt says something like What next, Fred?
To do this you would use PROMPT What next, Fred?
Notice that you can use this to fool people into thinking that they are no longer in MS-DOS.
The most common example of this is to see a menu printed, followed by a line saying Choose an option 1–8 (or whatever).
No matter what key you press,(except for 1 to 8) the same question is asked.
Of course, the truth is that the prompt has been set to PROMPT Choose an option 1–8
This looks even more convincing if the final option on the menu is 8.
Return to MS-DOS 
The Find File dialog box shows the file names currently selected at the left of the screen, and the file details at the right.
You can change the file details shown to any of the choices given by pressing the Option button.
ww3.pcx Which directories will be searched can be set by pressing the Search button, and then changing the Search path msdos1.pcx Having set the prompt to show the text ‘What now Fred?‘, the next command sets it back to show the current drive and directory
Excel 3 — MAC
At the beginning of the New Year — or perhaps in a couple of months time at the beginning of the new financial year — there is often a need to set up a spreadsheet that shows a time series.
You do not need to type in all the dates for yourself — the spreadsheet will do it for you.
Although the following example is using Excel 3.0 on the Mac, the same procedure applied to Excel 3.0 on the PC.
Type in the first date in the series — here I want a Week Ending sequence for every Friday in the year.
Next select the range to be filled.
As my starting date was in A2 and there are 52 dates to be entered this means selecting A2:A53.
If you are using an extended keyboard there are alternative methods to just using the mouse to select the area.
My preferred method is to select the initial cell, press F8 and then using the Formula Goto dialog box to type in the address of the final cell.
Notice that the selected range has to include the starting point of the date sequence.
Then use the command Data Series.
You will notice in the dialog box that appears that the Type is already set to Date and that the Date Unit box is not greyed out.
There are four options: Day, Weekday, Month and Year.
As the step required here — week — is not one of the possibilities available it has to created using a step of 7 days.
So type 7 into the Step Value Box.
Here we want the Series in a column so check Columns in the box at the top left.
If you have selected 52 rows you do not need to enter the Stop Value but if you experience any difficulty in selecting the exact range mark out an oversized range and type the final date required in this box.
This spreadsheet is to be used to keep weekly scores for 16 boys and the problem it posed is that when you want to type in scores for weeks in the second half of the year or for Harry, Ian and John and so on whose names are entered to the right of the spreadsheet, you can no longer see the row and column labels — unless you freeze these titles.
To do this use the Mac's split bars.
When not in use these are tucked away in the Split boxes at the top right and bottom left of the screen and appear as black bars above and to the left of the arrows at the ends of the two scroll bars.
(You do need to have Scroll Bars on display to use this facility.
If they are not visible use Options Workspace and check the Scroll Bars box.)
When you put the pointer over a Split box it changes into a double headed arrow and as you drag it into the worksheet it drags a thick bar with it.
You can position this wherever you want a split — in this case to the right of column A and below Row 1.
Once you have split bars in position you will find that the command Freeze Panes appears not greyed out in the Options menu.
(This option only appears if you have Full Menus selected so if it is not in the Options menu first activate Full Menus) Use Freeze Panes to fix the position of the Split bars.
If you later want to remove the Split bars first Unfreeze Panes and then drag the split bars to their home positions.
WordStar — PC — DOS
WordStar makes it easy for you to add up numbers in a document.
All you need to do is mark the block that contains the numbers using Ctrl-K-B to indicate the start of the selection and Ctrl-K-K to indicate its end.
The selection can contain more than just the numbers you wish to sum so you could have in your document Apples 20; Pears 25; Oranges 36 and having marked the passage you would use the command Ctrl-K-M (Block math) and see a message:
Sum of the numbers in the block is: 81
If you want to insert this result into your document press Esc and then =.
If you have a document with columns of numbers you can sum the columns independently by using WordStar's column mode.
To switch this on type Ctrl-K-N.
After this when you use Ctrl-K-B and Ctrl- K-K you will find that just the area below and to the right of the block's start and above and to the left of the block's end will be highlighted and pressing Ctrl-K-M will sum only numbers in this area.
Faxing Marvellous
What do you make of software that combines traditional faxing, PC faxing and OCR?
The concept of faxing from a PC is not new — fax cards have been available for a number of years, usually accompanied by their own proprietary software.
With the advent of Windows 3.0, however, it has become easier to write software to take output from any Windows document and treat the fax modem as a printer.
In essence, that's all a standalone fax really is — you could say it was a poor quality copier that prints out its copies somewhere remote from the scanning part.
The same applies to a fax card or fax modem.
You can treat it as a printer, but one that prints its documents elsewhere.
All that's really required is some software that controls how your documents are printed, and to whom.
The Beta version of Ultrafax from WordStar/Zsoft we've been pre-viewing is the link between your Windows applications and the rest of the world's fax machines, but offers more than just the facility to print your documents remotely.
Lists In common with most other fax software, Ultrafax allows you to maintain lists of fax numbers and contacts to be used as a dialling directory.
It allows for the user to create groups of numbers to send any given document to — for broadcasting faxes, where the same fax is sent to lots of different places, a task that can take forever with traditional fax machines.
You can also use the program's Optical Character Recognition facilities to read an incoming fax and convert it into editable text.
Could this be the start of the paperless office?
Any other PC equipped with Ultrafax can also send and receive files, as you would with a modem, which is a bonus.
Since file sending is quicker than fax sending, it's also possible for two Ultrafax equipped machines to fax between themselves quicker, and therefore more cheaply, using this file send facility.
In Use Since this a preview, based on Beta software, we expect there to be some odd little quirks and funnies in the program, and that it will run slower than the final release version.
That said, the phone book handling makes maintaining groups and individual numbers very easy.
The same applies to sending a fax — you just select FAX Document from your printer setup menu in any application that will print, and when the fax send dialogue box (fig2) appears, nominate the recipient(s).
That's all there is to it.
It's easy to control, including the scheduling aspects — you can delay a fax send until a specific time, sending all your faxes for one day after 6pm, say, in order to take advantage of off peak telephone rates (or after midnight, if you have a midnight line).
Received faxes are handled just as easily as well.
You can elect to print faxes on receipt, or view them first.
If your hard disk is a short of space, you may have no option but to print, but most people will have the space to save a fax as it is received, thus saving paper if it's one they don't need to print.
Opinion There's not really the space to get into depth on Ultrafax, but it looks as though the release version will satisfy any user's requirements.
The user interface is intuitive, and its facilities very good.
Even with this beta version, no major problems have surfaced, so we expect the release version to be very solid and robust.
The list of fax cards and fax modems with which the software will work is extensive, and covers just about every piece of kit we can think of, which is reassuring.
If you're really set on it, you can scan a printed document via your scanner and send that too, using the software as a traditional fax machine.
We're really quite impressed.
Info Box Product: Ultrafax (beta version) From: WordStar UK Ltd.
Tel: 081 643 8866 Price: £99 + VAT 
Verdicts Ease of Use: **** Versatility: ***** Intuitivity **** Speed: N/A (beta) VFM **** Overall ****
Pros Everything you need in the way of FAX facilities with a pleasant way of working Cons Nothing significant
Delta Personal
A great many databases are used for tasks such as order processing, where the data structure has the particular format of a main record with one or more linked records.
The main record might hold details such as the customer's name and address, the date of the order, the payment method, and so on.
The linked records hold the details of what is actually ordered.
Delta Five, from Compsoft, is a multi-user database designed specifically with this type of task in mind.
Whereas in most databases you have to go to quite a lot of effort to create the linked structure, in Delta Five it is expected that your databases will have this structure, and you have to work quite hard not to conform!
Delta Personal is not so much an upgrade, more a cut-down version of Delta Five.
It has very much the same facilities as Delta Five, but is single-user rather than allowing several people to work on the same data, and also has a lower limit on the number of records, transaction files, and so on; nothing that would really present a problem, unless you were trying to use the system for a fairly large system, in which case you should be using Delta Five.
Text Bite: Cut down single user version of transactional database.
Product: Delta Personal
Supplier: Compsoft
Tel: 0420 89 545
Price: £99
Machine: XT, 640K RAM, hard disk, DOS 2.11 or higher
CA-dBFast 2.0
If you are a Windows user who wants to be able to use your dBASE format files (and applications) under Windows, you will not find it very easy.
Many of the Windows databases will access your.
DBF files, but the existing investment in applications will be lost.
In other words, if you have spent a long time writing programs to carry out tasks, you will have to start again from scratch.
CA-dBFast from Computer Associates is a way around this problem.
It is a Windows database that uses the xBASE language for its programs.
The early versions of this package were subject to quite a lot of criticism, mainly because the user interface of dBFast made little or no use of the fact that you were working in Windows.
This meant that you had to type everything, including the definitions for forms and reports, making dBFast more primitive in this aspect even than dBASE III Plus!
Two major changes to CA-dBFast version 2.0 are the addition of a visual applications designer, and the inclusion of CA-Ret, the report writer.
Using the applications designer, you can design forms, menus, and reports in full Windows fashion, using point and click, as well as drag and drop.
Once you have used the designer, you can take the code it produces and edit it in the usual way.
CA-Ret is being included with various CA products, and is a full writer, which is available in its own right.
The package is WYSIWYG, and uses point and click for choosing and placing fields, graphics, and text in reports.
Links can be defined between data tables, and the records for the report can be chosen by adding search and sort criteria.
The resulting SQL query can be viewed and modified if necessary.
In addition to the applications designer and CA-Ret, the other major changes to the system are the inclusion of a source level debugger, and an improved program editor, which can be used to edit up to 8 programs at once.
The database management interface has also been improved, so that you can carry out actions such as creating and modifying database structures, browsing, editing, and appending records, in a full screen interactive environment.
Text Bite: New user interface for Windows xBASE development package
Product: CA-dBFast 2.0
Supplier: Computer Associates
Tel: 0753 577733
Price:
Recommended Machine: Windows 3.1, 640K RAM, 286 or better
Lotus 1-2-3 Release 3.4
When it was first available 1-2-3 Release 3 was a product that was before its time — a 3D spreadsheet that allowed file linking and more than one program to be open at a time.
It was not the huge success that Lotus Development had anticipated mainly because it demanded hardware that seemed excessive at the time — an AT with at least 1MByte of RAM.
Less than two years after all the fuss about Release 3 Lotus 1-2-3 for Windows — needing at least a 286 with 2Mbyte of RAM minimum and nobody thought that hardware specification was out of the way!
Release 3 did however a band of loyal users who liked the ability to create multi-page spreadsheets and some of its other special features — my own favourite is Automatic formatting which means that Release 3 is one of the easiest spreadsheets ever in which to enter a date.
The product however had begun to lag behind its 2D counterparts and this update brings it back in line, giving it very similar features to those in Release 2.4 — hence the jump in the numbering from 3.1+ to 3.4.
So if you are a 3. x users should you upgrade?
I would because having used spreadsheets both with and without a mouse I know that lots of spreadsheet operations are easier with one.
I therefore welcome the inclusion of SmartIcons that extend the range of operations that you can easily do with the mouse.
You can now move between the pages of a spreadsheet just by clicking on icons that move up and page and down a page.
There are over SmartIcons and some of them introduce new facilities.
For example, there are two sum icons — a 2D sum that sums the cells to the left or above the cursor and can even fill in the row and column totals for a block; and a 3D sum that consolidates data in the pages behind it — so you can do cookie-cutter sums on a whole range in one go.
If you want a DOS version of 1-2-3 that offers the power of 3D spreadsheeting plus an easy-to-use graphical user interface then Release 3.4 is worth considering.
New features in this release include 3D effects in graphs and a range of coloured.
CGM files — like the one shown here.
Product: 1-2-3 Release 3.4
Supplier: Lotus Development
Tel:(0753) 532044
Price:: £475
Price of Upgrade: £99
Hardware Requirements: PC AT, at least 1MB RAM
PC Works 3.0
PC Works 3.0 is an enhanced version of Microsoft Works (known as MS Works) which has established itself as a very popular integrated package.
There is a lot to be said for ‘one-stop’ software that provides all the facilities you need to get you going with your computer and by combining a word processor, a spreadsheet and a database Works allows you to start using a PC without needing anything else.
It also includes a Comms package but in order to take advantage of this facility you need a modem in your computer.
The new DOS version, PC Works 3.0, does offer significant enhancements over its predecessor, mainly by making it easier to do a number of commonly required chores.
For example, it includes a number of supplied templates so that you can create useful spreadsheets or produce stylish documents using ‘fill-in-the- details’ methods.
For even more assistance investigate its Wizards.
There are five of them, a name and address database, a mail merger, an address label printer, one for searching within a database and an automatic report generator — again for obtaining information from a database.
The other new facility is an online diary, Calendar, which allows you to keep track of your appointments.
The most obvious enhancement in the four main modules is the new Toolbars.
These are as similar as possible between the different modules which makes it easier to use common features such as formatting.
Even though this is a DOS program is has many of the characteristics of a Windows user-interface — drop down lists, dialog boxes and so on— and it is very easy to use with a mouse.
It is perfectly possible to use with just the keyboard but there are advantages in all the modules of being able to point and select.
When it comes to functionality the two points worth mentioning are the inclusion of string functions in the spreadsheet and the ability to incorporate graphics into the word processor.
PC Works 3.0 is a good bargain for anybody new to computing on a DOS-only machine and it is also well worth upgrading to if you currently use MS Works.
Lots of users have a need for a simple address book type database and PC Works 3.0 now provides a Wizard to help you set one up to your own requirements without having to go into all the jargon of fields and field types.
Product: PC Works 3.0
Supplier: Microsoft
Tel:(0734) 270000
Price: £145
Price of Upgrade: £49
Hardware Requirements: any PC, 512Kb RAM
Ventura 4.1
Ventura for Windows is one of the two leading Windows DTP packages, the other being PageMaker.
Ventura is an excellent package to use if you want to create long and fairly regular documents like technical manuals or books.
It isn't so good at irregular layouts of the sort often used in advertising — but it can be used for this purpose.
Its basic approach is to use frames to hold the various elements of a page layout.
You can write the text and draw illustrations using other applications packages and then import them into frames that are positioned and sized on the page.
Frames can be set to repeat on every page, with allowances for left and right pages, and this is one of the reasons why Ventura is so good a long regular documents.
Another is the ability to assign named paragraph styles to text.
If you want to use Ventura to enter text directly then you can as it has basic editing facilities and a spelling package.
You can also draw lines, rectangles, circles, etc. using the built in tools.
It also has a good equation editor.
A book length layout is best handled as a multi-chapter document but Ventura will manage this for you by auto-numbering pages, figures and tables and by building a table of contents and an index automatically.
Although the very latest version of Ventura is only a minor upgrade in terms of version numbers it marks a major change in the product.
Version 4.1 has a new Windows interface complete with customisable icon button bar, a floating menu that pops up when you click the right mouse button, interactive tab settings, more levels of zoom and TrueType font support.
If you are already using Ventura then these changes will all make your work more efficient and easy.
Included in the package are Ventura Scan and Ventura Separator which allow you to do reasonably professional colour DTP.
If you want a fully professional colour system then you need to add Ventura Colorpro to the team.
If you can afford it Ventura 4.1 is a good choice for serious DTP applications.
Product: Ventura 4.1
Supplier: Xerox
Tel:??
Price:
Price of Upgrade:??
Hardware Requirements: 386; 4Mb RAM
VENTURA.PCX CAPTION The new Scoop page!
Designworks 1.2
Designworks is one of the few budget drawing packages that isn't derived from a larger, more expensive product.
This means that rather than having to be deliberately cut down and low on features for fear of competing with its big brother, it can try its best.
And for the price its best is very good.
There are a full range of drawing tools — lines, rectangles, general curves- good editing facilities, multi-layer editing and gradient fills.
The package handles text well and can be used to create advertising sheets and one-page layouts.
The latest version works with TrueType and Adobe fonts and comes complete with a copy of Adobe Type Manager.
It is even sophisticated enough to perform spot and process colour separations to a PostScript printer — a feature that also separates it from the majority of budget drawing packages.
Although it stores drawings in its own.
ART format it makes use of clipart in the.
GEM format.
It also imports and exports to the three main dialects of the.
GEM format — Draw, Artline 1 and Artline 2 — needing an upgrade from the now no longer supported Artline or who use an application that works with.
GEM files.
It will also import and export a good range of standard formats.
Designworks is an economical package but you still need a reasonably powerful machine to run any drawing package.
Unfortunately Designworks doesn't support interruptible redraw and this can be a nuisance if redraw times start to take a minute or more.
The solution is to make use to layers to separate out the drawing into smaller sections that can be worked on and redrawn in a reasonable time.
A very good drawing package and one that is getting better all the time.
Product: Designworks 1.2
Supplier: GST
Tel:(0480) 496666
Price: £149
Price of Upgrade: £19.95
Hardware Requirements: 386
DESIGNW.PCX CAPTION Designworks can be used to produce advertising sheets.
Drafix CAD Ultra 4.2
Drafix CAD is an MS-DOS based CAD drawing package that has long been the choice of users who have been unwilling to pay the price demanded for the industry standard — AutoCad.
This isn't to say that Drafix CAD is an AutoCAD clone because it isn't.
Indeed its user interface is judged by some to be better and more logical than AutoCAD's.
As well as the full list of standard drawing tools it offers a helpful range of positioning aids which cause points to ‘snap’ to particular positions — mid point, perpendicular etc.
It includes full dimensioning and editing facilities for all types of 2D drawing.
You can also use up to 256 drawing layers, 8 line styles and 16 pen colours.
An unusual feature for a mid-range CAD package is the ability to generate a bill of parts from attributes assigned to objects in the drawing.
A good macro language is also a provided for anyone wanting to automate particular drawing operations.
The latest version includes enhanced digitiser support — a digitiser overlay is included in the box!
(However you can still work very well with a one, two or three button mouse.)
You can customise the digitiser menus and trace scaled drawings.
The program has also been speeded up by increasing the re-draw performance by around 25%.
You can now use expanded memory to edit larger/more complex drawings and use it over a network.
Installation has also been improved with the provision of a wider range of up-to-date device drivers — but it is still worth checking that your particular video, printer or digitiser is supported.
One of the best MS-DOS based 2D CAD packages.
Product: Drafix CAD Ultra 4.2 Supplier: Roderick Manhatten
Tel:(071) 978 1727
Price: £495
Price of Upgrade: £89 to £189
Hardware Requirements: PC 640K
ULTRACAD.PCX CAPTION: Drafix CAD Ultra is good at engineering drawing and general CAD.
Powerpoint 3.0 for the Mac
Presentation software has now developed a very distinctive approach in which the user simply has to combine their own information, message and logos with an appropriate selection from the wide range of supplied backgrounds that are designed complete with colour palettes and suitable fonts.
This makes it possible for anybody to create a professionally polished performance that can then be shown to an audience using either the Mac itself, 35 mm slides or overhead projector foils, backed up with printed handouts and speaker notes.
It is five years since Microsoft originally launched PowerPoint for the Mac and recently it had been outperformed by Aldus Persuasion and CA-Cricket Presents.
Now PowerPoint has all the features required by up-to-date presentation software — including a comprehensive range of slide templates.
The new features includes an Outliner which differs from those in other packages in that it is WYSIWYG — so you can see fonts, point sizes and effects as you work.
It now offers charting by way of Microsoft Graph and you can include a chart on a slide as you would any other graphics object.
Microsoft Graph offers 84 graphing styles but a number of commonly required types are supplied among PowerPoint's Time Savers.
These are specialised graphics objects that you use rather like clip art — copy them on to your own slides and then customise.
As well as 15 graphs and twelve types of tables, there are flow charts, Gantt charts, organisation charts and calendar displays for the months up to December 1994.
This is an important upgrade and PowerPoint Version 3.0 is recommended to old and new users alike.
Product: PowerPoint 3.0
Supplier: Microsoft
Tel:(0734) 500741
Price: £345
Price of Upgrade: £99
Hardware Requirements: Macintosh II; System 7; 4MB RAM
CAPTION — Powerpoint 3 allows you to create stylish and informative slides adorned with graphics and charts with the minimum of effort
Changing Up.
Which version of your software are you using?
Is version 5 available while you're still using version 3?
Do you know how to upgrade your software to the latest version for the least cost?
David Dorn investigates.
It's very rare for any software to be releases in only one version.
Like paintings, programs are never finished.
What might have been first visualised as a basic low cost word processor might have transformed into a full blown all bells and whistles application that has spreadsheets and databases built in, yet, if you're still using the first release, you could be losing out.
Just about all the major software companies have an upgrade policy.
With some, it's along the lines of ‘if you want the latest version, go out and buy it!’, with others, it's ‘if you're a registered user of the product, you can upgrade to the latest release for the cost of the disks, or even download it from our Bulletin Board System.
Others, of course, are in between the two extremes.
Microsoft's Attitude
99.9% of all IBM PC compatible owners have a Microsoft product — I'll bet you a fiver.
Chances are it's MS-DOS (even if it is badged Compaq or Zenith or whatever, Microsoft wrote it), but there are a fair few other packages out there as well.
Talking about DOS, although there are no firm figures, it's also a fair bet that there are still machines running DOS 2.1 and 3.2, never mind 4.01 and the myriad other flavours DOS has gone through, their owners reasonable happy, but beset by problems that DOS 5.0 sorts out.
Microsoft, not un-naturally, would rather like its users to keep abreast of latest developments and use the latest version of all its products — it makes support that much easier, apart from anything else.
Microsoft, of course, is not alone in this desire.
So, what it the Microsoft policy on upgrades?
Perhaps it is exemplified by the very fact that there is a Microsoft Upgrade Centre in the UK, whose job it is to make it easier for the end user to upgrade to the latest release of any product.
Here's how the centre sees you going about it;
Stage 1.
Register the products you have bought.
By registering the product, you are added to the mailing list, and will be notified of any new versions, bug fixes and so forth, usually well before you read about them in any of the nation's magazines.
If you don't, then how do you find out about new versions?
OK, you've registered, and a leaflet arrives telling you that there's a new version of DOS available.
How do you upgrade?
Stage 2.
Contact the Microsoft Upgrade Centre.
All you need in order to be able to take advantage of a low-cost upgrade is a proof of purchase (registration counts) which might be the first page of your manual for the product you already have, your sales invoice from the dealer that sold you the product (a photocopy will do), a copy of the setup disk (they're serialised, you see), or, for Windows, a copy of the invoice for a machine that comes complete with Windows.
The upgrade is normally taken care of by the Upgrade Centre itself, but Mike Murphy, MD at the centre, told Practical PC that he's quite happy for a dealer to do the upgrade for a client, by acting as a sort of middle man.
The proofs of purchase remain the same, of course, but the dealer is in a position to take care of installation and so forth for those of a nervous disposition.
WordPerfect
WordPerfect in the UK has an ongoing upgrade policy — the company likes to see its users keeping abreast of the times, and offers upgrades to new versions of its programs at reasonable cost.
The latest of the upgrades to be offered is for WordPerfect 5.1 for Windows.
As you will have seen in last month's review, an ‘Interim Release’ has been issued, which addresses some inconsistencies with the primary release of the program.
WordPerfect UK's attitude to upgrades to the interim release is very simple.
It costs £7.05 + VAT, unless you have a specific problem with the initial release that the interim release solves, in which case your upgrade is free of charge.
Again, like Microsoft, WordPerfect UK would rather that you contacted them for an upgrade.
In the case of the interim release upgrade, don't just send your cheque, but also include program disk 1 — other magazines it seems, have managed to omit this vital piece of information.
WordPerfect is also a subscriber to the competitive upgrade system — see the box — and will often be found offering what is normally high priced kit at a rock bottom price to persuade you to move to their products.
The importer's view.
There is another end to the market — the low-cost US import, which firms like Guildsoft specialise in.
You'd be hard pressed to see how a package costing, say, £49.95 could possibly have a special upgrade price, but Guildsoft manages it.
One of the partners at the firm told me ‘We try to persuade the software houses we represent over here that it is important to keep users using the latest version of the software, but our upgrade policy has to be dictated by what the vendor will agree to.’
In general, major upgrades (ie. from version 2. xx to 3. xx) will be chargeable, since there's usually a manual revision, and in some cases a completely new package.
The best example of that is the Alpha 4 database programs, which normally sells for £345, but for which only £49 needs to be paid if you're a registered user — it's gone from version 2 to version 3, and has had a complete change of documentation.
However, Guildsoft's preference is not to charge for what are called minor upgrades — a version change from 2.11 to 2.30, for instance.
Instead, they ask users to return their disks for upgrade, and will notify them that an upgrade is in the offing.
What they can't do is upgrade everyone automatically — the cost would be too great.
As for upgrades via dealers, they usually happen when a competitive upgrade offer is on.
As Guildsoft puts it ‘You can't ask your current users to accept a lower standard of service than users of other products that you're trying to attract!’
What YOU need to do.
The message is very clear.
First and foremost, you really should register every bit of software that you buy.
Whether it be Microsoft, WordPerfect Guildsoft or any of the other software houses and importers, they can only let you know when an upgrade offer is on if they know who you are.
Practical PC, obviously, also features news of new versions and any upgrade facilities, but by the time we can let you know, the offer may be closed.
The downside to registering might be that you get unsolicited mail every so often, but that practice seems to be on the decrease, and only genuine upgrades seem to be notified.
The next thing to remember is to keep all the paperwork involved with any purchase, especially the invoice.
That's the kind of thing you can use as proof of ownership.
All the companies I've spoken to accept an invoice as proof of ownership when it comes to either competitive or normal upgrades.
Finally, whatever else you do, if you want to keep up with the very latest versions of software, it's pointless pirating.
Apart from the obvious illegality of such an act, you're at a very great disadvantage in the use of the software — no manuals etc.
Likewise, upgrading is going to be impossible.
The only other thing to consider is whether it's worthwhile upgrading at all.
From my viewpoint, major upgrades have to be worth the few pounds it might cost.
Inevitably there will be much improved functionality, and more features — you only have to look at the difference between DOS 4.01 and DOS 5 to see that.
Competitive upgrades, too, seem to be a low-cost route to owning premium priced software, so it's often worthwhile taking advantage of them when they're there.
If, after reading this, you're still stuck, my best advice would be to contact your local dealer, from whom you bought the software in the first place.
If you bought mail order, then the first point of contact is the software house or importer concerned.
Whichever direction you go, you can keep up to date on your software for very little outlay.
You can't say the same about your car, now can you?
Competitive Upgrades
In an industry that is becoming ever more competitive, market share is everything.
One way of ‘stealing’ another company's loyal users is to tempt them into using your product by way of a massive discount.
Called ‘Trade Ups’, the idea is to provide proof of purchase of a competing product, for which you get to buy the ‘better’ product at a very low price, probably only a few pounds more than existing users can upgrade for.
Most of the major software houses have offered competitive upgrades at one time or another, and see it as a good way to gain a bigger market share.
Registering
The benefits of registering cannot be overstated.
It's a very simple procedure, and usually doesn't cost you even a stamp.
All you need to do is fill in the registration card that comes with your software or peripheral and pop it in the post box.
The software company takes care of the rest.
One of the objections to registering that users have voiced in the past is that it can lead to mountains of junk mail landing on the doormat every week.
With the current legislation of Data Protection, this is becoming less and less likely.
Also, many firms include a tick box that tells them (if you tick it) that you don't want to receive mailings from other companies.
They may not then pass on your details to any third party.
The benefits can outweigh the cost in time considerably, of course.
Some companies offer low-cost and free upgrades only to registered users of the product in question.
If you're not registered, and want the latest version, you've got to pay the full whack (less any discounts the dealer might offer you).
Bug fixes are quite often sent out as a matter of course to registered users — non-registered users might never get to hear about them, and be stuck with bugged software.
Our advice is: Always, always register every product you buy!
Changing Up
Still stuck with DOS 2.1 or WordPerfect 4.2?
David Dorn examines the mechanisms for upgrading to the latest version of your software at the least possible cost.
State of the Art Stop Press
The new XtraPro colour 486S/25 notebook paid a very brief visit to the PPC offices on a whistle-stop tour of the magazines.
From what I could see of it, the notebook seemed well designed.
The LCD screen was bright, colourful and scrolled smoothly which is unusual for colour LCD screens.
The notepad weighed in at 3kgs, including battery, which makes it easy to carry around.
The keyboard is well laid out and has a positive feel, very much like my desktop PC.
The neat little track ball mouse built into the keyboard is a joy to use and more responsive than the larger versions I have used.
As for the speed of the machine I cannot comment as lack of time with the machine did not allow us to perform our usual tests.
Overall, the machine looked good.
If you're looking for a state-of-the art power notebook and have deep pockets this is the notepad for you.
Machine:
XtraPro Colour 486S/25
Processor: 80486SLC
Clock speed: 25 MHz
Hard Disk size: 60 Mb-120 Mb
Memory: 2Mb-8Mb
Battery: NiCad 20.4 Watt
Operating Time: 2.5 hours
Recharge time: 2–3hours fast charge
Display type: LCD 9″ diagonal 16-256 colour VGA 640/480
Software
Dimensions: 11.5″ W x 8.6″ D x 1.8″ H
Weight: 3Kg
Extras: Modem/Fax, Trackball, Ethernet network card.
Price: from £1995.00
24 months warranty.
A video link to the outside world gives the computer ‘eyes’ and brings new meaning to the phrase ‘What You See Is What You Get’.
Pictures play an important part in desk-top publishing, business presentations and the like.
Although there is an abundance of pre-digitised art commercially available, it is far better to produce your own pictures which are directly relevant to the text and not just illustrations.
Photographs can be taken and scanned to produce pictures, but a video camera cuts out the photographic process and allows real-life images to be included in documents at no cost other than the initial outlay.
VidiPC form Rombo Productions is a video frame grabbing package which transforms a video image into a digitised format.
This can be saved to disk, displayed on your computer or included in documents.
The kit includes an expansion card and both DOS and Windows control software.
The card fits into a free expansion slot on the motherboard.
In some cases there will be an input/output clash with other fitted expansion cards in your system.
(DOS uses an input/output address to map the location of each expansion card.)
The input/output address of the VidiPC card can be easily changed by setting a jumper switch on the board.
To use VidiPC you will need at least a 286 AT computer with 640Kb of RAM and a hard disk with enough room to store several images.
A VGA or compatible graphics card is required but, as VGA provides for only 16 colours, the image on screen will appear stippled.
This does not effect the quality of the stored image file, but if you require an on screen display of the final image, a SVGA card displaying 256 colours will be needed.
You will, of course, need a video source which can either be a video player or camera.
If you only require mono images for eventual in-house mono printing then a video player is quite adequate as VidiPC can capture mono images ‘on-the-fly’.
Ideally, a still video image from a video camera or camcorder would be used.
This allows real-life 3-D objects to be digitised in both black and white and colour.
VidiPC 12 sequentially samples the red, green and blue components of the video signal.
The resultant data is then merged by the software to produce the digitised colour images displayed on your screen.
Each image can take up to a megabyte of memory to store and can be saved in TIFF, BMP, PCX, LBM or RGB formats.
This is the Windows version of VidiPC.
Video images may be previewed either in the icon boxes at the bottom of the screen or in the main window.
You can experiment with various resolutions and controls to obtain the desired result.
Each video grab is displayed in the icon boxes and can be displayed in the main screen simply by clicking on the box.
Mono pictures are previewed as (jerky) moving images which can be grabbed in real time.
Colour video images must be still as a series of grabs (red, blue and green) are needed to complete the picture.
The DOS version of the program shows the preview picture in the main window.
Here modifications can be made to improve the quality of the image.
Once grabbed the image is placed in one of the monitor screen boxes where it can be reloaded into the main screen if required.
This picture is taken from a VGA 16 colour monitor.
In this mode the quality of the picture on screen is only a representation of the saved image.
FAX BOX
Vidi PC
Rombo Ltd
£179 inc VAT
Range of Features****
Ease of Use ****
Speed ****
Verdict ****
For — Easy to install
Against — Documentation is poor.
The battle for the platform
In the inch wars, Ryvita helps you win — so goes the old advert punch line, but which of the two main Graphical User Interfaces is likely to be the one to give you the best operating environment?
David Dorn considers Windows vs OS/2 V2.0
Since 1981, when the IBM PC fist saw the light of day, its users have always had DOS, in one flavour or another.
Current trends, though, are towards the Graphical User Interface (GUI), which, it's claimed, make computing tasks easier, makes applications easier to learn, and increase productivity.
In the beginning, the Apple Macintosh showed the way to do things, with its whole operating system being based on Windows, Icons, Mice and Pointers (WIMP).
But there have been others.
Currently, the major battle for supremacy is between IBM's OS/2 version 2 and Microsoft's Windows.
Each owes much to the other, but one will be the more popular.
Without a crystal ball, it's almost impossible to say which it will be, but we can offered some informed opinions.
Even without a crystal ball, one thing seems certain.
In the not too distant future every PC sold will come with a graphical user interface as standard, whether that be OS/2 or Windows.
At the moment, the choice is quite clear — you either want an environment that gives you a GUI over a DOS, or you want an OS (operating system) that is a GUI in its own right.
Or you don't want a GUI at all(in which case, you may be in for a shock by this time next year!)
The GUI over DOS option is Windows, currently in version 3.1.
Practical PC has already reviewed it, and pronounced it excellent, looking forward to Windows NT, which will be the OS that is a GUI (don't worry, all will be explained.)
Frankly, other GUIs of this type don't really have a look in — there's GEM, of course, and GEOWORKS, but neither now has the support of third party software houses to make their purchase a realistic option — a shame, really since both have plenty to offer.
Windows NT, however, is a different beast, albeit in similar clothing.
It's due to arrive within the next few months, and is Windows without the need for DOS as a base upon which to work.
Early versions have been shown to various journalists, and promise a level of functionality that vanilla Windows can't offer.
There are limitations, though.
Firstly, it's a 32 bit operating system, which means that it will run only on the 386 and above.
286 users will have no chance to use it, and will have to be content with Windows over DOS if the GUI is where they want to be.
OS/2 is different again.
It is available now, but has not had the take up that Windows has enjoyed — one cynical comment has it that of the less than half million copies actually in use, the better part were given away — and yet it is a very capable operating system with some excellent features.
Without giving it a full review, an overview is in order.
OS/2
OS/2 version 2 is claimed by IBM to be ‘a better DOS than DOS and a better Windows than Windows’— and that's true, up to a point.
The phrase really ought to be changed, though, to read better ‘Windows 3.0 than Windows’ 3.0.
It's a large operating system that needs a hard drive to hold the extensive files that come with it, but has many redeeming features.
One of the most exciting is the happy demise of eleven character file names — the old 8 and 3 construction of filename and extension can be done away with by opting for a 32 bit High Performance Filing System (HPFS) which allows long file names — things like ‘letter to bank manager about my loan’ which have much more meaning than ‘Letloan.doc’, for instance.
It's also very configurable, and can reside on a PC in a dual OS system quite happily — in which case you might want to stick with old style filenames.
Full DOS sessions are provided — in other words you can run a DOS program as though it was running under MSDOS — as are Windows 3.0 sessions, with the same proviso.
Some Windows programs won't run under OS/2, because of some technical bits and bobs and the way they use memory — we'll hopefully be able to point this out in future reviews — but the majority are fine.
In fact, OS/2 provides a method of ‘migrating’ both DOS and Windows programs to OS/2 such that you don't need to open either a Windows or DOS window in order to run them — it's clever and makes using your current software that much easier.
Environment
OS/2 is essentially an object orientated working environment that uses the 386 family of processors to allow very sophisticated multi-tasking.
Object orientation means that everything, from a program to a file, is an object, and you would work on a file rather than in a program — it's an attitude, a state of mind, and can be emulated in Windows 3.1 to some extent by associating file extensions with applications and using object linking and embedding, a form of which appears in OS/2.
That said, the working environment in OS/2 is different enough that I found myself trying to unlearn the way I work at present and trying to use the system the way IBM meant it to be used.
As an aside here, OS/2 requires a minimum of a 386SX processor, 4MB of RAM, a mouse, and a recommended minimum of 60 megabytes of hard drive, with at least 15 megabytes free space and preferably lots more.
That stacks up to a quite well specified machine, and you'll find file operations, particularly, slow on a 20MHz SX if you opt for the HPFS.
In use I found it to be very acceptable (to quote Prime Minister Major) and it ran all the DOS and Windows packages I threw at it — and here's the rub.
There aren't many OS/2 v 2 compliant packages available at the time of writing, which is where we get back to the battle, I suppose.
Winning the battle
If winning one battle meant you won the war, IBM would have it all sewn up by now, but that's not the case.
Windows NT has been dubbed ‘Windows Not There’ by some cynics, because it hasn't made an appearance on the marketplace yet, but when it arrives, it ought to have many of the better features of OS/2 version 2, and, if my information is correct, be able to run programs for that environment as well as native Windows programs and DOS applications.
Essentially, we will have two operating systems that can run each other 's programs, each of which works in slightly different ways.
But the differences will be more than that.
Currently Microsoft is writing Windows NT not only for the Intel processor, but for others as well.
That means that you will be able to run an application on a number of different processors and have it look the same and work the same on each machine.
It has been predicted that you'll only need to buy one box, and that install routines will work out which processor the machine is based on and do whatever's necessary to make the program work.
That's impressive if it's true.
The fact is, there are millions of copies of Windows 3. x out there at the moment, and one survey has it that 33% of business PC users are currently computing under Windows.
That's a great increase on the 9% another survey quoted barely six months ago, and shows the kind of growth we can expect to see.
As well as that, computer manufacturers have grown accustomed to buying the DOS for their machines from Microsoft, and many now pre-load Windows 3.1 onto their machines as well.
It doesn't take much of an imagination to see them supplying Windows NT instead of, or as well as , DOS when the time comes.
IBM will, of course, supply OS/2 with its machines, but its market share has fallen rapidly with the advent of low-cost clones, so the number of users out there may not be as high as might have been the case a few years ago.
Also, previous versions of OS/2 have not been that well received either by the press of users — it was, to say the least, memory and disk hungry, and came in a number of flavours so that it was difficult to know quite which one you needed.
Balance
If it was simply a matter of the operating system, I'd have said that it didn't much matter which of the two you chose to go with.
Both Windows as it stands (and the NT version to come) and OS/2 are perfectly acceptable working environments.
The problem comes in with applications.
Windows has thousands, whereas OS/2 seems to be bereft of the kind of volume of applications that would signal it acceptance as the standard operating system.
As Steve Gold pointed out last month, IBM does its best to roll out long lists of third party software houses that are developing OS/2 v 2 software, but I don't see much, if any, for review.
On the other hand, if you go to any computer show, you'll see hordes of software and hardware manufacturers running Windows and Windows applications.
That rather speaks for itself, wouldn't you say.
Hype
The final variable in the equation is hype.
To advertise or not to advertise, that is the question.
Many pundits publicly opine that Windows would never have sold as many copies as it has without the massive publicity campaign that Microsoft put behind it.
Maybe so, but IBM hasn't exactly been quiet on the soap box either — look around and you'll see plenty of advertising from them — which is where the ‘better DOS than DOS and a better…’ quote came from.
What you don't see so much is third party software houses advertising their OS/2 wares, and I see precious few press releases on the subject of OS/2 software.
And the winner is……the user.
No matter who finally has the lion's share of the market, the eventual winner will be the user.
Competition is so great between the two giants of the industry (and I haven't even begun to think about Unix and the Mac operating system, never mind the combined IBM/Apple OS) that, behind the hype (of which I predict there will be much) there will be a rock solid operating system developed, and it will be just what the doctor ordered.
My own feelings are that Microsoft will win the war with Windows NT, and that IBM will keep a sizable core of committed users for OS/2.
Even so, I have no intention of changing the habits of a lifetime.
As always, I shall back both horses in the race and keep OS/2 on at least one of my machines — and a Mac in the spare room, just in case Apple surprises us all and starts to sell reasonably specified machines at sensible prices.
In Praise of GUIs
Graphical User Interfaces are the best thing that has happened to computers.
If you are not convinced by this, think about walking around a foreign airport, where you don't speak the language.
How do you find the baggage retrieval, information centre, or duty free shop?
It is doubtful if you look up the word for baggage retrieval, and then look for a sign with those words.
No, you look for a picture showing a suitcase.
Computers are like a foreign country in many ways.
They have their own language and customs, laws about what you can and cannot do, and you have to fit into that society.
GUIs provide the padding to the bare bones of the system.
You don't have to learn the phrase to make a particular program work, you simply click on its picture.
GUIs also force the people who produce the packages to act in a certain way.
If you are using Windows, then it should be that choosing the option File Save will save your work.
You won't have to remember if it is function key F10, Ctrl-KD, or /Keep.
Life is hard enough without computers making it harder.
Use a GUI, and treat your computer as a tool, not as a five year mission.
d'Compress
There are several reasons why you might want to use a data compression utility; the main two are for the purposes of backup, or for sending files to someone else, either on a disk or via a modem.
There are several very popular pieces of software available for this, in particular PKZIP and ARC.
The problem with such software is that it runs under DOS, and you want to work under Windows.
Of course, you can run the programs in a DOS window, but it seems something of a regressive step.
d'Compress is a compression program that runs under Windows, so giving you the advantages of drag and drop, point and click, and the avoidance of that nasty DOS thing.
In addition to backup, you can also use d'Compress to scan for viruses on your machine, as well as using the program to view graphics files.
However, the main thrust of the program is the ability to create compressed files.
The default version of compressed files that are produced by d'Compress is.
ARJ files.
This is one of the most effective compression methods, producing smaller files than rival formats such as ARC, ZIP or LHARC.
In our tests, the.
ARJ files were between 10% and 20% smaller than the equivalent.
ZIP files.
If you have a need to produce files in another format such as.
ZIP, and you have the DOS based program necessary to produce it, you can produce the compressed file from within d'Compress, by adding the program to a list that can be launched from within d'Compress.
If the package is PKZIP, you don't even have to do this, just make sure that your PKZIP directory is in your AUTOEXEC.BAT path.
The advantage of using d'Compress as the launch pad for other programs is that you can use the facilities of d'Compress to gather the files together, a stage that would otherwise have to be done in the DOS window.
d'Compress has a lot of options that you can alter to suit your exact needs — you can choose between maximally compressed files, or files that are compressed in the shortest time, for instance.
As well as creating ordinary compressed files, you can even create self extracting versions.
These are, of course, useful if you want to send a compressed file to someone who has not got the same compression program, so cannot de-compress the file at the other end.
d'Compress creates a.
EXE file, and running it will automatically de-compress the files back into their original format.
One of the best options in d'Compress is the ability to back up your hard disk onto floppy diskettes.
You can back up your entire hard disk, or choose an individual directory and, if necessary, its sub-directories.
As each diskettes is filled, you are prompted for another.
If a compressed file is too large to fit onto a single diskette, it will automatically be split across as many diskettes as are needed.
The main complaint that I have about d'Compress is that it does not use standard DOS key and mouse commands.
For example, if you try to select a group of files by using Shift and click, you simply get the two files at the ends of the group, as if you had used Ctrl and click.
This, and other similar non-standard methods make d'Compress harder to use than it need be.
However, it is an awful lot better than having to go out to DOS each time, so I still recommend it.
Product: d'Compress
Price:
Supplier:
Tel:
BeckerTools 3
BeckerTools is a set of utilities that give you better or extra disk and file utilities under Windows.
The utilities allow your to do a hard disk backup, de-fragment you hard disk, undelete a deleted file, format and copy diskettes, view the contents of files, and so on.
The package also comes with a data compression utility that works ‘on the fly’ so that it expands your files while they are being used, before re-shrinking them once you have finished using them.
Note that we did not test this particular part of the utilities.
Another utility, Shell, is an improved version of the File Manager, with more use of icons, and the ability to design composite filters for selecting the files that you view, such as after a certain date, as well as starting with B or with an extension of.
DLL.
The package also comes with Blackout!, a screen saver with password protection, so that you can leave your screen so that no-one else can see what you have been doing.
If it worries you that you have to type or select options from menus in the File Manager, then BeckerTools will overcome most of these problems.
It also offers several utilities not provided by the File Manager, and it certainly looks a lot prettier.
Product: BeckerTools 3
Price:
Supplier:
Tel:
Book Look:
Title: Windows for Dummies
Author: Andy Rathbone
Publisher: IDG Books
ISBN: 1-878058-61-4
Price: £15.95
Pages: 324
Before beginning to use a computer, many people imagine that it will be very difficult, and panic rather because of this.
Windows for Dummies is one of a range of ‘Dummies’ books from IDG; others in the series include Excel for Dummies, DOS for Dummies, and so on.
The aim is to provide a book that tells you about an aspect of computing, while still being understandable and enjoyable.
Windows for Dummies succeeds pretty well at this; it tells you what you need to know, and for the most part keeps away from jargon.
It also usually manages to avoid being patronising, though this is difficult.
Technical items are boxed out, and tips and reminders are flagged with icons.
Sequences of actions are shown in numbered steps, and everything is split down into the smallest possible steps.
You could get quite a lot from this book, either by reading it as a whole book, or by dipping into it either as you need to know something, or simply keeping it handy and reading the occasional topic when you get bored.
I have a few minor caveats about Windows for Dummies.
Firstly, while it goes to great lengths to be friendly and avoid jargon, because it is an American book, you do need to be happy with US slang speech to enjoy it, and sometimes even to understand it, as in ‘Obtuse code-word sorters divvy those’, ‘Most DOS programs are text-based critters’, or ‘To counter this bad trip, the Windows programmers created a communal work place where all the programs could groove together peacefully’.
While I found this amusing (if rather regional), a real beginner in computing to whom I lent the book found it very off-putting.
Personally, my only real complaint is that a bright yellow book with WINDOWS FOR DUMMIES in big black letters on the front is not the ideal reading if you want to look suave and sophisticated.
I recommend covering the book with a brown paper cover if you are easily embarrassed.
Living in an imperfect world by Mike James
The perfect computer is one of the myths of science fiction.
Any computer user soon discovers that sometimes hardware, and more often software, is extremely fallible.
The all too common crash becomes the daily round.
Yet some people seem to learn to live with imperfection and others find it an impenetrable barrier.
There is a skill in coping with real life software and once you realise this fact you can start to live with your computer in something a little closer to harmony!
If you know something about the deeper inner workings of computers then you can make use of this fact to guess what sort of things might cause a program some difficulties.
But, even if you don't know anything about the deeper workings, you can apply some common sense guidelines to the same effect.
I'm not saying that any sort of program crash is forgivable.
In principle all programs should strive for perfection and if you find a bug you should report the problem so that it can be fixed.
In the meantime however you still have to live with the imperfect and the jargon for this is ‘to find a work-around’.
To help you here are my five best tips to living with imperfect software:
1) Are you using it correctly?
Always remember that programs are tested by people who know how to use them.
Therefore they are likely to be more reliable if used correctly!
If you find that something that you are trying to do results in the program crashing then, before you start to curse the programmer, you should first try to find out if what you are doing is reasonable.
It may be legal but did what do you think the chances are that the programmer who created your application anticipated the way that you are trying to use the program.
Take a look at the examples in the manual and see if they look anything like what you are trying to do.
The programmer will at least have tested the examples used in the documentation and so you can expect these, and procedures like them, to work!
2) Typing on the cracks!
An interesting little problem often occurs in the early days of using a new program — fumble fingers.
When you know a program you tend to press the correct keys to give commands cleanly and neatly.
When you first start using a program you are unsure of the keystrokes and tend to fumble.
The result from the program's point of view is that it receives an odd collection of keypresses, probably a set that it never received during testing.
A particular problem arises if you don't type very well (or at all).
In this case the tendency to hit multiple keys by typing on the cracks also causes problems.
Give yourself time to settle down with a new program before you draw the conclusion that it is so buggy as to be unusable.
Try to press command keys accurately.
This also gives you the chance of identifying precisely the command the caused the problem.
Also see the box ‘Trouble with Ctrl and Alt’.
3) Pushing the envelope.
Many users have unrealistic expectations of what the software will do.
As a result they push it beyond its design — a bit like trying to fly a plane at twice the speed and height that it was designed for.
Often the only result is that the application will run slow but sometimes it will crash.
Even the running slow can be a serious problem because instead of waiting for it to finish a task you start pressing more keys — which gives it even more to do!
If you have to load an application close to breaking point then at least be patient with it.
4) Running out of resources
Most programs are tested on big powerful computers and they are tested in conditions where there are enough resources — memory, disk space, printers even — to do the job successfully.
Many programs will crash or behave strangely if they suddenly run out of disk space or memory.
Some even act strangely if you haven't got a printer connected!
Always make sure that there is space left on a hard disk before you start running a program and do what you can to maximise the amount of RAM available.
If you are using a multi-tasker try not run a large number of programs at the same.
Shut down programs that you are not using and avoid running multiple copies of the same thing!
5) Find out why
The most important aspect of living with imperfect software is to discover exactly what conditions cause the crash.
It is only when you know what causes the system to crash can you start to work on ways of avoiding the problem.
Keep a notebook if it helps and make sure that you make a collection of the situations that cause a program to crash.
To pin down the problem you should treat your machine like an experiment.
Change only one thing at a time and notice if it stops crashing or not.
Don't fall into the trap of trying to be too clever and changing a lot of different things at once— then if the problem goes away you still don't know which of the possibilities was causing the difficulty.
Once you know the cause you can take steps to avoid the problem.
Often you can simply just not do whatever it is.
You can even try to find ways of making the set of conditions impossible to create by disabling some aspect of the program.
Trouble with Ctrl and Alt
Are you sure that you know how to use the Ctrl and Alt keys?
Many users panic when asked to press Ctrl or Alt and another key and treat it as some sort of test of agility!
It isn't and you don't have to stab at the keyboard so as to press both keys at exactly the same time.
The Ctrl and Alt keys act like alternative shift keys.
All you have to do is press the Ctrl or Alt key and while holding it down press the second key.
Then release the second key and finally release the Ctrl or Alt key.
It really is exactly like using the Shift key.
Are you jinxed?
Have you noticed that some people seem to be able to crash their machine and lose all of their work at very regular intervals.
Indeed it is a testimony to the value of computers that these poor souls still continue the struggle with the machine.
So are these people specially gifted at making a machine crash?
The answer, surprisingly, is yes!
This isn't superstition, it is just that some people seem to attack computers in a way that brings out the worst in them.
In its early days software is tested by programmers and expert, hand picked users, who tend to be reasonable about they way they use machines.
Once the product hits the real world it has to cope with users who are not so well behaved or gentle — hence the totally new crop of errors.
The ideal solution would be to use such people as software testers but the world isn't that well organised!
Don't always blame the software
An interesting question is whether any particular crash is due to the hardware or the software that you are using.
A definite identification of a hardware error is usually easy — for example a disk error is rarely caused by software.
However when software crashes without much of a clear message it can be difficult to work out what is at fault.
The best clue to the source of the error is that software tends to fail in logical ways.
A software crash generally happens when you try to do something in the same way — i.e. the crash is repeatable.
A hardware error on the other hand happens in a more or less random way.
The only exception is the sort of heat fault that makes a machine malfunction after it has been switched on for a given time or when the room warms up.
This split isn't perfect because it is possible for some complex types of software error to produce what looks like random failure because a particular set of rare events have to occur.
Still the repeatable-random distinction is a good start.
Scanning Words
It can take a good typist ten minutes to re-type an A4 page of text, and a poor one even longer.
David Dorn examines Calera WordScan Plus, which can do the same job in about a minute.
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) has advanced over the years from being a very imprecise science that needed special fonts (you might remember printers being equipped with OCR A and OCR B).
There are now programs on the market that can almost read as well as humans — almost being the operative word, of course.
One such is the latest incarnation of WordScan from Calera, WordScan Plus 1.1c.
WordScan Plus (WSP) is what is known as an Omnifont system — it is designed to recognise virtually any typeface you might encounter in a business or commercial publication.
It is also capable of reading text produced on a dot matrix printer, or from the output from a fax card.
It arrives on ten disks, not all of which are needed, and, being a Windows application, installs very easily.
Seven of the ten disks are language modules.
Different languages have varying alphabetic characters — the French have lots of accents, as do Germans and Dutch, whilst some European languages don't use letters that others do.
Each language module under WSP consists of not only the character tables, but also a dictionary, which WSP uses to improve recognition accuracy — see the How does OCR work box.
In Use There's not an awful lot to getting WSP to work.
You open the application, set it to read text, set the page orientation, tell it if the document you're scanning is poor quality — like dot matrix print — and where it is.
Click on ‘Automatic’ and off it goes.
A few moments later, you should have converted a printed page into a text file you can load into your word processor.
Microsoft Word for Windows users can go one better, and scan text straight into their documents, since WSP comes complete with a macro (and its installation facility) to let you do precisely that, cutting out the need to save a text file and insert it into the Word document.
Using WSP really is that simple.
You can fiddle with brightness settings, depending on which scanner you use — and WSP supports most — should you need to, but we have found little need to adjust the settings unless a page of text has been particularly light or very dark.
Fax scanning Since the essence of OCR is a scanned image, WSP can cope with three types — direct scans, from a scanner connected to the PC, scanned files that have been created previously, and Fax files.
It supports Tagged Image File Format (.
TIF), PCX and so forth, which means that, even if the scanner you have is not directly supported, you can save a TIF file, for instance , and recognise text from within that.
The same applies to Fax cards, most of which have the option to save an incoming fax to a TIF file.
Text Boxes One of the really useful facilities we've found with WSP is its preview of a scanned page.
On this, you can draw boxes which contain the text you want recognised, up to 100 in all (which is far too many for an A4 page!).
This means that you don't have to wait for WSP to read all the text on any page and then edit out the unwanted bits, but can tell it exactly what you want read in the first place.
You can also create templates for often-used page formats, which perform the same task, and speed up the job of reading multiple pages.
This is likely to be useful if your scanner is capable of handling more than one sheet at a time, since you can rad a whole batch of pages at a go.
Flatbed scanner users (like us) have to feed the sheets in by hand (but can read text from books without photocopying them first — swings and roundabouts) but retain the facility to read multiple pages.
Summary
The beauty about Calera WordScan 1.1c is that it is easy to use, and has turned in some very good results while on test.
Its omnifont recognition algorithms teamed up with the use of the dictionary have given us a recognition rate we'd estimate at between 98% and 99%, and all without having to teach the program what any letters are, which we consider to be very good.
Its ability to be teamed up with Word for Windows to scan text straight into the latter is also very useful, and has proved to be a time saver (now you know why we like typed letters for the letters page!).
Considering the program's capabilities, its controls are far from complex, and its use is intuitive and simple.
That scores very highly with us indeed.
How does OCR work?
We humans enjoy the ability of being able to read all kinds of ‘fonts’, from scrawled handwriting to beautifully printed Times Roman and all points in between.
We can also recognise a letter, character or figure from just a part of the whole, or even a collection of dots that approximate what the letter should look like.
We make intuitive assumptions based on the information we can see, and our brains compare the shape with what we have seen before, information stored in vast memory banks that far exceed the RAM capacity of even the best endowed PC.
The PC has only a limited amount of memory in which to store all the possible patterns, and, in fact, can never ‘remember’ the wide variety of shapes that even a young child will have seen.
What it can do, though, is use a formula for recognising printed characters.
Each shape it sees is compared to a set of stylised representations of the alphabet, and the one with the greatest number of matching parts is chosen as its best guess at the letter the shape is supposed to be.
That any software can do this at all is pretty amazing.
That WordScan can achieve 100% with some of the tracts we've fed it is testament to the programmers' ability and the use of a dictionary.
Just as we can make assumptions about a letter we cannot read in handwritten script by its position within a word that looks familiar, so WordScan Plus uses a dictionary to enhance its suggestions as to what a given shape might be.
To give you an example, suppose the software has read a string of letters which it has interpreted as ‘5inging’.
A reference to its dictionary would help it realise that it is unlikely a word would begin with the character ‘5″, but, in all probability should read ‘Singing’.
Doubled Glazed WordStar
Everybody has heard of WordStar, the original mid-word capital wordprocessor.
The latest version is WordStar for Windows 1.5, the Windows 3.1 compliant successor to the original venture into the Windows world from the company.
David Dorn investigates its processing prowess.
WordStar (the company) was quite late into the Windows market, and then came into it with an OEM deal.
The original product was WordStar Legacy, a licensing deal with NBI, and it has to be said that Legacy did not receive unanimous acclaim.
To say that its reviews were mixed is to understate the case — the cons far outweighed the pros.
But Legacy was more of a stopgap than a serious WordStar product, a tester, you might say.
WordStar used it as a base from which to build WordStar for Windows, a process that has continued with this latest release, which adds Windows 3.1 compliance amongst other things.
Latest news is that development will not stop here, either, since WordStar has acquired Zsoft, and intends to incorporate much of that company's technology into what must surely become its flagship product once more.
From the very start, one must realise that WordStar for Windows 1.5 is meant to be more than just a word-processor, but is perhaps more aptly billed as a document processor.
This is not a description that applies to WordStar alone — most of the Windows based word processors aspire to this kind of characterization, but WordStar as a company has paid a great deal of attention to the graphics side of the equation, and this includes fiddling with text to get the most impact from it.
More of this later.
Installation
The six 1.44MB high density disks take little feeding into your machine, and the install routine doesn't require much effort on behalf of the user to complete.
As is normal in an installation for a review, I chose to accept the default ‘complete’ installation, that simply prompts you for your serial number (and didn't accept the original V1.0 serial number that was already on the system) and gets on with the job of copying everything over.
A doddle.
About twenty minutes later, there it was, up and running.
Probably the first thing that strikes you is the layout of the screen — there are dotted lines indicating the text's margins, and as you type your purple prose, you notice that every space is marked by a little spot.
You also spot that the paragraph ends are marked with a little bent arrow, and that each paragraph is preceded by a short line.
I hate pointing out niggles so early in a review, but I'm afraid I have one here.
You see, I find paragraph end markers to be useful, but I can do without the rest of the clutter.
The small space markers between words are a pain, making it difficult to read text under about 10 point, and the short paragraph start markers make the letters they're over blurred.
So, off to Preferences to sort it out.
All of these markers are lumped together under the title ‘Paragraph Symbols’, and if you want one, you get the lot.
Bad news if you only want the end of paragraph markers and not the space dots.
Niggle over.
In use
That aside, the rest of the main editing screen is as clear as you could wish.
The ruler bar contains the most used functions — buttons for tab types, ellipses, justification, line spacing and so forth, as well as underlining and super/subscript and columns formats.
To the left of the screen are the major frame tools, one of the better endowments of the Legacy engine which is still used in V1.5.
The idea of using frames in a word processor is, perhaps, a little novel, although Ami Professional uses them for graphics and tables.
They're more often thought of in the DTP world, where they are more or less mandatory.
This points out the bridging nature of WordStar for Windows — it really is an amalgam of word processing and DTP concepts, and is likely to develop further towards the DTP arena as subsequent versions are released.
So, how can you use these frames?
Naturally enough, you can use them for graphics, but with a twist.
Whereas most Windows word processors allow you to import graphics onto the page, and some let you draw onto the page, WSWIN allows you to treat text — in any font you have available to you — as a graphic.
So, you can rotate, stretch and generally fiddle with text as if it was a square or what have you.
This makes for some pretty useful functionality — you can print a red ‘Top Secret’ at an angle over the corner of a document, if that's your bag.
I find this particular facility to be more usable than Word For Windows' text fiddling tools, purely because you can use any font you wish, as long as it is installed in Windows.
With Word's facility, you're stuck with the fonts it supplies.
You can also use frames for creating tables automatically, a facility which, again, is well handled and simple to use.
Enhancements.
All of these facilities were in version 1.0, of course, but 1.5 includes the necessary enhancements for Windows 3.1.
This necessitates OLE (object linking and embedding) functionality and common dialogue boxes — i.e…the pleasant way you navigate to a given file with the pretty yellow folders.
Unfortunately, that does not seem to extend to the font drop-down, which gives no indication of which type of font you're using.
Ideally, that shouldn't be important, of course, since both TrueType and Adobe fonts ought to perform equally well (I don't want to get into an argument about which is better here), but adherents of one or the other will want to know which they're using — and when you've got over 200 fonts on your system, as some folks do, you can't always remember which is which.
Obviously, there is full TrueType support as well.
Drag and drop launching is a new feature, and part of the Windows 3.1 ethos.
This means that you can pick up a file from File Manager (or another compatible file handling shell) and drop it onto the minimised WSWIN icon, at which point the application opens with your file ready for editing.
Very useful.
WordStar has also extended the number of graphics filters in the package.
These now include all of the established PC file formats — PCX, BMP, TIF, WPG, DIB, and so forth, as well as a separate facility for placing EPS — Encapsulated PostScript — files onto the page.
I have found no problems with any of these import filters.
Pleasant Touches
As much as I hate comparative reviews — I can never really justify deifying one package at the expense of several other perfectly good packages — WSWIN has facilities that I find to be very attractive and useful.
Amongst these must be the facility to zoom in and out of text, all at an editable level, such that you can magnify, say, three point text to take up as much of the screen as you choose, or, conversely, diminish 72 point text to as small as you can read in order to edit it.
Apart from the novelty value of this, there is the advantage of speed of execution.
Subjectively, it takes much less time to display thirty lines of 72 point text at a magnification level of 15% that it would take to scroll through to find the bit you want to edit at 100% magnification.
I suppose that's only useful if you habitually use extreme point sizes for large tracts of text, but it has advantages in other ways.
WSWIN is one of the few Windows based word processors that doesn't have a page preview facility — and it doesn't need it.
You simply use the zoom levels to give you what is effectively a page preview.
It's actually very fast to do it that way.
In fact, I have been pleasantly surprised at the speed of WSWIN 1.5.
Its ancestor, Legacy, seemed to me to be very slow and cumbersome, whereas this incarnation lacks nothing in the speed department.
Ease of use is also apparent in the ruler bar, when it comes to moving indent and tab markers about the place.
The whole idea of WYSIWYG is that you can see changes happening as you do things.
Thankfully, it's not taken to extremes in WSWIN.
Thus, you drag the second line indent marker to the right, drop it, and the change happens — all much quicker than it takes to read this sentence.
Other Windows word processors show the text re-aligning in real time, which slows the process down a little.
On balance, I prefer the WSWIN way of doing it.
Exactly the same applies to applying columns to the text, although I cannot find a way of having mixed numbers of columns without using frames — much like every DTP package I've come across, as it happens.
But one of the most pleasant of functions is that you can select a sentence by triple clicking on a word within it.
It would have been even better had a Word for Windows style drag and drop edit facility been included with that, but, for the moment, you have to content yourself with good ol' cut and paste, I'm afraid.
Perhaps WordStar will see fit to implement a drag and drop edit in the next release — please?!?
Summary.
WordStar has probably got the longest pedigree of any of the current word processing packages, harking back to CP/M and beyond.
Many people have found its traditional keystrokes to be somewhat less than mnemonic, an opinion I tend to subscribe to, if I'm to be honest.
WordStar for Windows 1.5, however, is as far removed from the DOS WordStars as it is possible to be.
The control over text and graphics it allows is immense, and some of the functions that differentiate it from the rest of the Windows word processor league are particularly appropriate for a word processor — sentence selection being a case in point.
After all, the sentence is one of the building blocks of a piece of prose, so it makes sense to be able to work with whole sentences rather than having to highlight each word within one manually.
The user interface follows accepted Windows methods whilst retaining a strong individual identity, which is no bad thing, and shows that not all Windows applications need to be clones of each other.
So, to round it all off, when WordStar for Windows was first launched, a certain magazine got hold of a beta version (a test version) and ‘reviewed’ that, giving it an ‘Editor's Choice’or ‘Gold Seal of Approval’or some such, which was, at that point, undeserved.
As I have already intimated, I have strong reservations about billing any application as ‘the best’, but this much I can say.
WordStar for Windows 1.5 is a very capable and usable application that competes with its contemporaries extremely well.
It has all of the facilities you need, and a few nice bells and whistles thrown in.
As such, you would do yourself a major disservice if you did not consider it when next you purchase a Windows word processor, and, were you unfortunate enough to overlook it, you would doubtless kick yourself when you did finally get to see it.
This might well be the word processor that puts WordStar right back on the map in the word processor stakes.
Recommended.
Wyse DECISION 386SX/25C Model 120
Price: £815.00
Company: Wyse Technology (UK) Ltd. 1 The Pavilions Ruscombe Park Twyford Berkshire RG10 9NN
Lynne Patterson takes a look at the Wyse 386SSX/25C and is suitably impressed.
Despite the fact that the 486 based PC's are gradually coming down in price the evidence suggests that the 386 is still the preferred entry level machine.
The attractively priced Wyse DECISION range is designed to give optimum performance with Windows and other powerful applications, and provides plenty of room for future expansion.
Despite the entry level price of this 386SX based PC, the first impression it gives is one of quality.
The elegant slimline desktop case has been designed to be pleasing to the eye, and overall the machine seems to be well finished off.
To the right of the front panel the power and reset buttons are cleverly moulded to fit in with the contours of the case.
A drop down flap conceals the 3.5″ floppy disk drive and the blanking plates, giving the front of the case a tidy and uncluttered appearance.
These covers often seem to be added for effect rather than functionality.
This one however, is actually very sturdily built and snaps shut with a pleasing click, unlike those on some other systems that look flimsy and are easily broken.
At the back and one parallel and two serial ports, together with PS/2 type sockets for the mouse and keyboard and printer and video ports.
These are all labelled, not with the usual words, but with symbols, so you have a diagram of a keyboard over the keyboard socket for example.
A spacious interior houses the motherboard with an Intel 386SX processor running at 25MHz and four SIMMs sockets with 2MB RAM supplied as standard (expandable to 16MB).
SVGA video memory is also on the motherboard and has 512K DRAM supporting up to 1024x768 resolution.
This is expandable to 1MB for high resolution 256 colour support if required.
For future expansion there are six free slots.
Unfortunately though, these will only allow for three full sized cards to be added as three of them are partially obscured by the cables coming from the back of the hard and floppy disk drives.
There is still room to get half or three-quarter sized cards in however, so this does not present too much of a problem.
The 125MB Western Digital hard disk drive, has a quite respectable average seek time of 14.2 milliseconds with a 725k per second data transfer rate, making it a good choice for Windows users.
Two free 5.25″ drive bays allow for the additional internal devices such as extra hard or floppy disk drives, for example.
An unexpected feature is the design of the power switch.
There is thin plastic rod running from behind the switch onto the front of the machine straight into the power unit, presumably to avoid the usual tangle of wires.
Clever idea, but there is a feeling that this could be broken if not treated with care.
When replacing the case for example, it took several attempts before it was positioned correctly, and the power button worked properly again.
For security a lock on the front locks both the system and the keyboard.
A rather unusual feature though, is a spring loaded padlock connection at the back that will allow you to fix the system to the desktop!
The system also comes with a colour monitor, Microsoft mouse and high quality (if noisy) keyboard as standard, plus Windows 3.1 and DOS 5.0.
The Wyse DECISION 386SX/25C is ideal if you intend to use with Windows, and other powerful and demanding applications, and offers enough scope for future expansion to make it a worthwhile long term investment.
Although the price is low the design and quality of the machine is outstanding.
It was love at first sight with this one!
Squashed Disks
Instead of installing an extra drive, David Dorn installs Xtradrive, IIT's disk doubling utility.
It is one of the facts of life that no matter how large your PC's hard drive is, it's never large enough.
A few years ago, a hard drive was a luxury.
A while later, 20MB would suffice admirably, and probably leave a great chunk unused for many people.
In this day and age, 100MB is average, and people quite often discover that they've got only a few kilobytes of space left, and usually at the most inopportune times.
Little wonder, then, that disk doubling utilities have become so popular — Digital Research even included one, SuperStor, with DR-DOS 6.0, and Microsoft is including its own proprietary compression utility with MS-DOS 6.0.
Enter IIT with Xtradrive, a very simple to install and use utility that, roughly, offers you a doubling of your disk capacity without the need to fiddle with hardware.
How it works Installing Xtradrive is child's play.
The single high-density distribution disk slips into the drive, you type INSTALL, answer the usual ‘is this where you want it’ questions, and off it goes.
a while later you have two drives where previously there was one, and twice the disk space.
It's that easy.
Installation time is largely dependant on how much disk space the files you have already take up, since what's already there is squeezed to make room for the extra drive, and squeezing takes time.
As part of the installation routine, a device command is placed in your CONFIG.SYS, and other system configuration files are altered — if, for instance, you are running Windows 3.1, then it's possible that the virtual memory utility contained therein uses 32 bit disk access to write to and read from your permanent swap file.
Because Xtradrive requires a device driver, which means that it is a system level device, bypassing DOS and the BIOS to go straight to the hard disk would result in the swap file not  benefiting from compression.
SO, the install routine alters an INI file to turn 32 bit disk access off.
To be brutally frank, I had my doubts about this aspect of Xtradrive's performance.
It seemed to me that the swap file should reside on an uncompressed drive to gain maximum speed benefits — Windows can be slow enough without hampering its performance any further.
In practice such doubts were totally without substance.
The 386SX machine Xtradrive was installed on showed no tendency to run Windows any the slower — in fact there seemed to be a positive speed benefit, which could only be due to the quicker load times compressed files must enjoy.
Utilities Xtradrive is one of those bits of software you can install and forget — in every test we've thrown at it, it has been totally transparent to the user — but even so, there are some interesting utilities included with it.
Although it works nicely with such as Norton Tools Disk Edit, it contains its own defragmentation utility, as Norton's Calibrate and its ilk don't like to run with device driven hard disks.
This isn't as sophisticated in its looks as many defragmentation utilities on the market, but does the job where others would obviously fail.
Defragmentation is not a daily job anyway, so sophistication of user interface is of minor significance.
Another of the useful utilities, especially for laptop users, is the FREEZE program.
This permanently uncompresses a hidden or system file that is unmovable under normal usage (like Compaq's HIBRN8.DAT, which is produced when the Compaq LTE goes into sleep mode, to restore the machine to life exactly where it was when it shut down).
This is specifically for this kind of file, which is accessed by a machine without reference to either DOS or the BIOS.
Compatibility With the exception of certain disk-fiddling utilities, as previously mentioned, Xtradrive exists very happily with everything we've thrown at it, and has not yet provided any cause for palpitations or sticky moments of any description.
It spots already compressed files (ZIP and ARJ and the like, as well as LZH compressed TIF files and so forth) and just passes them through to the hard disk unaltered.
It operates with QEMM, Quarterdeck's memory management utility, and can even cope with QEMM's stealth mode, as long as the disk parameter tables aren't masked out.
If that is a problem,(limited to a few versions of the AMI bios) a full fix involves doing without Stealth in QEMM, which may be a trade off ardent QEMM users do not wish to make.
That aside, Xtradrive handles memory managers automatically at install time, making the necessary adjustments without user intervention.
Summary
Until MS-DOS 6.0 arrives on the scene sometime near March 1993 and we see what disk compression it offers, Xtradrive seems to provide probably the simplest way to get more capacity from your hard disk.
It offers none of the support for removable drives (floppies and Syquest volumes) that Stacker provides, which some will doubtless miss, but is purely and simply (and simple is the watch word here) a device for squeezing more data onto a fixed disk drive.
At that task it succeeds very well, and gives the user no problems at all.