

Spirit of Scotland
Scotch Whisky is inseparable from Scotland…of all the spirits mankind has distilled, refined and enhanced from nature's huge store of goodness, Scotch Whisky is the noblest…a distillation of the natural riches with which Scotland is so abundantly endowed…clear waters tumbling down from the hills and across the moors, though peat and over granite…fields of golden barley…the cool, pure air.
Scotch Whisky…the world's leading natural drink…can only be called Scotch if it is distilled and matured in Scotland…a natural drink…distilled in a land of great natural beauty…it takes nothing from nature which nature will not readily replace.
Centuries of skill
Few would venture to assert the precise moment at which Scotch Whisky was first distilled.
What is certain is that the ancient Celts practised the art, and had an expressive name for the fiery liquid the produced…uisge beatha…the water of life.
To them its power to revive tired bodies and falling spirits, to drive out the chill and rekindle hope was a gift direct from God…which may not be entirely fanciful, since the art of distilling is said to have been brought to Scotland by the first Christian missionary monks.
Since then the Scots have perfected the art and, using the elements so generously provided for them by nature, distilled the whisky which today is inextricably woven into Scotland's history, customs and culture.
For generations the Scots kept their whisky to themselves, distilling it in homes and farmhouses throughout the Highlands, Islands and glens alike.
Then came the Government, determined to tax it.
For more than a hundred and fifty years, the wily Scots continued to distil their whisky, smuggling it down to the towns and cities, and outwitting the hated excise officers and revenue men, who are today the stuff of legend.
By the mid-19th Century, distillers had legalised their businesses, and the foundations of today's Scotch Whisky industry were laid.
DISTILLERY In the beautiful Highlands of Scotland, the crafts and traditions of distilling and maturing Scotch Whisky have evolved from generation the generation.
And it is no accident that the distilleries are found in such picturesque settings, close to the barley, the peat and the water essential to the process of making Scotch Whisky.
There are two kinds of Scotch Whisky: malt whisky, used as an essential ingredient in the creation of blended whiskies, or bottled as single malt; and grain whisky, combined with malt whisky to make the famous blends.
PEAT CUTTING Part of the magic of Scotch Whisky is owned to the mysterious qualities of peat, which is cut from the moors and carried to the distilleries.
There it is added to the fuel in the kilns where the malted barley is dried.
GERMINATION Malt whisky is made from malted barley, water and yeast — the barley first steeped for two or three days before being allowed to germinate — either spread out and turned by hand in the time-honoured fashion on the malting floor, or by mechanical methods in modern plants.
KILN FLOOR To arrest germination, the malted barley is dried in a kiln.
As the smoke from the fire gently filters upwards through the drying malted barley, the peat gently imparts its distinctive aroma, which will in time find its way through to the finished malt whisky.
Scotch Whisky is distilled by one of two processes.
There is pot still whisky, made in distinctively shaped, swan-necked copper pot stills.
And there is patent still whisky, made in a continuous process.
For centuries the pot stills used to make malt whiskies have been made from copper, in traditional shapes which vary from distillery to distillery.
The varying shapes contribute to the individual character and flavour of the whisky produced, and are crucial to the wide range of whiskies enjoyed by connoisseurs the world over.
MASH TUN in the distillery, water is added to ground malted barley in a mash tun, to convert the starch into sugar.
The mixture is then transferred to a fermenting vat where yeast is added and fermentation converts the sugar into alcohol.
MALT WHISKY STILLS In the unique copper pot stills, distillation of the new spirit takes place.
Malt whisky is distilled twice; and only when the spirit reaches a high enough standard is it collected by the stillman in a spirit receiver.
GRAIN WHISKY STILLS Scotch grain whisky, made from maize or wheat with malted barley, is distilled in a continuous process in the two tall columns of a Patent or Coffey Still — named for Aeneas Coffey who developed the system around 1830.
Again, the quality of the spirit finally collected depends upon the knowledge skill and experience of the stillman.
MATURATION Now it is the turn of time to work its miracle — the new spirit is filled into oak casks and stored in cool, dark warehouses where the long process of maturation begins.
Scotch malt whisky and Scotch grain whisky must, by law, mature for a minimum of three years — in practice, most mature for much longer — five years, ten, fifteen, sometimes more…a lingering period during which Scotland's cool, clear air steals through the porous oak of the casks and charms their contents, contributing to the smooth and golden character of each distillery's unique creation.
BLENDING It is in the blending room that the mature Scotch Whiskies are combined with each other, finely balancing the characteristics and ages of the individual grain whiskies and malt whiskies.
The art of blending is to produce a whisky with a distinctive flavour which will remain consistent, so that drinkers the world over will recognise and be able to enjoy their favourite blend.
A blend is a careful and judicious marriage of anything from 15 to 50 single whiskies of different ages, compiled to a secret formula.
It is the blender's nose which is the final judge.
He will have spent long years mastering this art.
BOTTLING The blender's task completed, the whiskies he has chosen are blended, then returned to casks to marry together for several months and finally bottled.
The Scotch Whisky has reached the end of its long journey down the years in perfect condition, ready to be despatched to whisky lovers around the world.
The companionable spirit
Travel Scotch Whisky travels well.
Available in 190 markets worldwide, the international traveller need never be without the companionship and comfort to be derived from a dram.
Dining out The character and wide range of flavours of Scotch Whiskies make the perfect companion to a meal, taken as an aperitif — either straight, or with water or soda, or with a variety of mixers, with or without ice…taken during a meal…and taken as the perfect after-dinner drink.
There is no drink more hospitable than Scotch Whisky, wherever you are in the world.
Business hospitality When business is done and the meeting concluded, nothing revives the hardworking executive like a glass of Scotch…and when it's time to seal the deal with valued clients, there is no more fitting toast nor better appreciated mark of esteem than to offer the noble spirit.
Outdoors Home of away, winter of summer, Scotch is the versatile drink enjoyed by young and old, active or relaxed.
Take it long or short, mixed or straight, Scotch is the perfect complement to any leisure activity, refreshing in summer, reviving in winter.
At home Scotch Whisky is a drink for all occasions…equally at home when there's a crowd or when there are only two of you.
Young or old, going out or staying home for the evening, a glass of Scotch sets the scene, complements the mood, ensures complete enjoyment…never intrusive, always compatible…
Scotch Whisky.
The versatile spirit
Malt Whisky
Served straight or with water.
Scotch on the Rocks
Served on ice.
Whisky Collins
2 oz of Scotch
1 oz Lemon juice
Dash of Gomme syrup (Sugar Syrup)
Soda
Shake the ingredients, except the soda.
Pour into a long glass and top with soda.
Decorate with a slice of lemon.
Scotch Fizz
1 oz of Scotch
½ oz Fraise
Chilled Champagne
Pour the spirits into a wide champagne glass and top with champagne.
Decorate with a strawberry.
Highland Fling
1 oz of Scotch
1 oz Blue Curaçao
½ oz Orange bitters
Soda
Serve the spirits in a large goblet, topped with soda.
Decorate with a slice of starfruit and kiwi.
Clansman's Coffee
1 oz of Scotch
¾ oz  Sambuca 
Black coffee
Whipped cream
Wipe the rim of a goblet with a piece of lemon and dip it in brown sugar.
Pour the spirits and coffee into the glass, add sugar to taste and float the whipped cream on top.
Decorate with grated chocolate.
Rob Roy
1 oz of Scotch
1 oz of Sweet Vermouth
Dash of Angostura bitters
Shake the ingredients, strain into a cocktail glass.
Decorate with a cherry on a stick.
Long Hot Summer
2 oz of Scotch
½ oz Campari
Dash of Angostura bitters
Fill a long glass with ice, a chunk of cucumber, pieces of orange and lemon and a sprig of mint.
Pour the ingredients into the glass and top with lemonade.
Whisky Sour
1 ½ oz of Scotch
1 oz Lemon juice
Dash of Gomme syrup (Sugar syrup)
Dash of egg white
Shake the ingredients and pour into a small goblet.
Decorate with a slice of orange and a cherry.
Green Mist
1 oz of Scotch
1 oz Creme de Menthe ½ oz Lemon juice
Shake the ingredients, strain into a cocktail glass.
Decorate with a slice of kiwi and a sprig of mint.
McToddy
1 ½ oz of Scotch
½ oz Madeira
1 oz Lemon juice
sugar to taste
a stick of cinnamon
2 cloves
Place the ingredients and a metal spoon in a heavy goblet.
Pour on boiling water and stir well.
Decorate with a slice of lemon.