

OVERTAXING OUR BRITISH SPIRIT
An illogical tax is harming the economy
What's the tax on a centilitre of alcohol?
Strangely, there's no simple answer.
Put that alcohol in a wine bottle, and the tax is 11.02p; put it in a beer bottle, and the tax is 11.63p.
But put it in a Scotch Whisky bottle, and the tax is 19.81p.
This illogical structure might seem to make Scotch Whisky a nice little earner for the Exchequer — but in fact the reverse is true.
In fact the results of this illogical tax are:
•In the year to March 1993, revenue from spirits duty fell by a massive £80 million in cash terms, down by nearly 7% in real terms.
•Sales of Scotch Whisky in the UK have been depressed — falling by almost 6% during 1992 and by 30% since 1979.
•Britain's case for fair tax treatment in other world markets — especially EC countries — is undermined.
•Scotch Whisky — a British product — is discriminated against in favour of imported wine and beer.
•It damages a strategic British manufacturing Industry that secures more than 71,000 jobs in Britain.
In the March 1993 Budget, by freezing excise duty on spirits while raising duty on wine and beer, the then Chancellor took a small step towards levelling the playing field.
But the discrimination against spirits is still so great that it would take a further 12 Budgets before spirits are taxed on the same basis as wine and beer.
There is a powerful case for moving in successive Budgets towards eliminating the irrational nature of Britain's alcohol taxes and to taxing all alcoholic drinks on the same basis, whatever the kind of bottle in which it comes.
Britain simply cannot afford anomalies that are so damaging to one of its strategic manufacturing industries, to its balance of payments, not to mention tax revenue.
Overtaxing the Exchequer
The present tax regime actually results in reduced Exchequer revenue.
While UK per capita alcohol consumption has hardly varied since the late 1970s, sales of spirits have been falling.
Over that period:
•The ratio of duty on spirits to duty on wine has worsened from 1:1.65 in 1979 to 1:1.80 today, and the amount of duty on a 70cl bottle of Scotch Whisky — today's standard size — has risen from £2.95 to £5.55.
•Whilst UK sales of Scotch Whisky have fallen 30%, sales of imported wine have risen by more than 60%.
Wine imports knocked a £1 billion hole in Britain's balance of payments in 1992.
•In real terms, Treasury revenue since 1979 from duty on Scotch Whisky has fallen by 45%, while revenue from all alcohol duty has fallen by some 10%.
Independent research by the Institute for Fiscal Studies,(The structure of alcohol taxes: a hangover from the past, 1990 ) and the Henley Centre for Forecasting (Competition between alcoholic drinks: and analysis, 1991 ) has shown that, for instance, it would be perfectly possible to sustain tax revenue by levelling down the duty on spirits and levelling up the duty on wine so that all alcohol is taxed at the same rate.
The Treasury's own calculations reach a similar conclusion.
Hitting the balance of payments
The relatively low duty on wine clearly encourages sales of imported wine at the expense of home-produced spirits.
Last year wine imports knocked a £1 billion hole in Britain's balance of payments.
Scotch Whisky, on the other hand, is an enormous contributor to the balance of payments.
In fact, our trade surplus in Scotch is three times greater than our trade surplus in oil.
Scotch Whisky is a major British export success.
What is more, with the decline of Britain's great capital industries, Scotch Whisky is nowadays one of this country's strategic manufacturing industries.
Since this Government came to power, while the nation's trade has slipped heavily into deficit, Scotch Whisky export earnings have risen from around £702 million in 1979 to £1,958 million in 1992.
With sales in 190 markets worldwide, Scotch Whisky is consistently one of the UK's top five manufactured export earners .
Exports per employee in the Scotch Whisky Industry are six times the average of UK manufacturing industry.
The European Threat
The largest — and fastest growing — market for Scotch Whisky is the European Community.
In 1992 the EC accounted for 40% of Scotch export sales, worth £784 million.
That £25 every second.
As a result of Scotch Whisky's success in Europe, the UK dominates the spirits trade between EC countries with a 51% market share.
This success has been achieved despite the discriminatory tax regimes which are plainly protectionist.
The wine-producing EC countries have sales taxes that favour wines.
The beer-producing countries have sales taxes that favour beer.
And the 1992 ECOFIN ‘harmonisation’ agreement on minimum duty rates institutionalised agreement on minimum duty rates institutionalised discrimination against spirits.
This must be against the interests of the UK economy, and of EC consumers.
Scotch Whisky faces unfair trade barriers within the ‘single market’, and will not realise its proper export potential while tax discrimination is allowed to persist.
A level playing field
1994 will present the British Government with a crucial negotiating opportunity to negotiate this discrimination.
Yet how can Britain argue for a level playing field in Europe when we don't even have one at home?
In 1992, the House of Commons Select Committee on Agriculture stated that over half Britain's £4 billion trade deficit in food and drink is accounted for by trade with other EC countries.
One quarter of this is wine imports.
More significantly in 1993 the Committee recommended that it would be sensible for all drinks in the UK to be taxed equally, according to their alcohol content.
A tax on jobs
In the UK, preferential tax treatment for imported wine has had a serious adverse effect on our domestic spirits industry.
Sales have fallen and distilleries have closed.
In the past decade, the number of jobs in Scotch Whisky companies has fallen by 40% from 26,000 to 15.
The impact of these job losses has been severe: Scotch Whisky distilleries are at the heart of small rural communities in areas where few other job opportunities exist.
There is a heavy price to pay, both in the impact on families and community life, and in the cost to the Treasury of social security benefits — of the order of £100 million per annum for the 11,000 jobs lost.
Made in Britain — most expensive in Britain
And the damage spreads far beyond the borders of Scotland.
Scotch Whisky companies support employment across many sectors of the economy by buying raw materials, manufactured goods, packaging and distribution services.
In turn, the employment income generated by Scotch Whisky companies and their suppliers feeds through into the economy, supporting further jobs.
Independent research by economic consultants Pieda estimates that 71,000 jobs in the UK are currently dependent upon a viable Scotch Whisky Industry.
In the coming years the size of the tax differential between spirits and wine will directly influence how that figure rises or falls.
What do health organisations say?
Economists and MPs aren't alone in supporting equal tax treatment for all alcoholic drinks.
Leading health groups do so as well:
Alcohol Concern
‘Our Charter for alcohol and health calls for a rational system of taxation with drinks taxed according to their alcoholic strength’
Scottish Council on Alcohol
‘There is no logical reason for taxing spirits higher than beer or wine.
All drinks should be taxed on alcohol content.’
Benefits of a new approach
The current system of taxation of alcoholic drinks is unnecessarily complicated to administer, illogical, unfair and bad for Britain.
A rapid move to a straightforward tax system based on alcohol content would:
•Increase tax revenue to the Exchequer
•Improve Britain's balance of payments
•Strengthen Britain's hand in arguing for fairer tax treatment in European and other export markets
•Support one of Britain's top five manufactured export earners in its home market
•Protect British jobs against unfair competition from imports
•Be in line with the recommendations of economists, leading health organisations, and the House of Commons Select Committee on Agriculture
•Remove market distortions that act against consumers' freedom of choice
The Chancellor, Kenneth Clarke, declared in his Mansion House speech that he ‘should like to be remembered as a Chancellor who helped British industry and British commerce through another difficult period and helped to make a difference to the wealth creating capacity of the nation .’
The Chancellor's treatment of Scotch Whisky will indicate whether or not these fine intentions are likely to become reality.
A single Scotch Whisky UK tax 23p.
A glass of imported Wine UK tax 13p