

It's a bloomin' mathematical marvel
MARGARET WINDSOR, a mathematical modeller in Harwell's Combustion Centre couldn't believe her eyes when she arrived for work.
Staring back at her from her office windowsill was a ‘dinosaurs head’!
The sudden apparition had been produced by her cactus plant in response to some tender loving care.
‘The plant has been neglected for a few years so I thought I'd give it some plant food and water and to my astonishment this was the result,’ said Margaret.
Mimic
Two days later, the most beautiful bloom burst forth which appeared to mimic a flow 3D diagram Margaret had been producing on her computer!
The flower, likened in horticultural circles to a ‘Queen of the Knight’, lasted a mere 18 hours before it wilted.
Creating a world class environmental consultancy
THE HEADQUARTERS of the new National Environmental Technology Centre being formed from the merger of Warren Spring Laboratory and AEA is to be at Culham.
A steering group chaired by Dr Stuart Nelson is examining the details and timing of the merger and the number of Warren Spring Laboratory scientists who will relocate to Culham and Harwell.
The move will create a world class source of environmental consultancy and technical services, dovetailing with and building on the collaborative work AEA already operates successfully with Warren Spring.
MEP on AEA fact finding visit
DR CAROLINE Jackson, MEP, visited Harwell last month and was met by Dr John Rae, Business Development Executive, Government.
An overview of recent changes in AEA Technology was explained by Dr Stuart Nelson, Managing Director Industrial Business Group and Mike Pilbeam, Director Estates, briefed Dr Jackson on plans for the Harwell site.
Relations between Warren Spring Laboratory and AEA Technology along with our environmental and biomedical work, were also discussed.
Dr Rae talks to Dr Caroline Jackson MEP, about our biochemistry work.
Faster pick-me-up needed
EVERY DAY around 2,500 of AEA's incoming telephone calls are being left unanswered.
Fact.
To avoid losing what could be over half a million lost business opportunities each year telephone training consultants, Teleconomy, were engaged to help us provide a more effective service.
Guidelines
They carried out a survey monitoring our telephone techniques and spent some time listening to how we answered our phones.
Of the 14,000 or so telephone calls received every day by AEA, 85% were answered in four rings by our telephonists at the switchboards, but only 71% were answered in four rings when direct dial extensions were included.
Both these figures are below national guidelines which recommend that 90% of all calls should be answered in that time.
What have we done about it?
Estates invited extension users at random to attend a 50 minute refresher presentation.
Most staff were not aware of the variety of facilities available on AEA's network or even on their own telephones.
Half-day training courses were also given to our telephone operators as part of the long term aim at increasing our effectiveness in the use of the telephone.
Improvement
Over the next six months calls through AEA will be monitored to see if a measurable improvement in call handling is evident and to compare our performance with that of other major UK organisations.
Joseph Russell (right) of Teleconomy demonstrates with Karen Gilmore of Estates (seated) how to divert your calls if you need them in another office and how to transfer calls across AEA.
Other Harwell staff noting the numbers are (from left), Catering Manager Brian Monnery, Susan Elsley of Estates Postal Service and Helen Astill of Corporate Training.
Bright future on the circuit for HIVOL
NEWLY DEVELOPED by InTec's materials department, HIVOL ‘Metal Matrix Composites’ were recently shown for the first time at an exhibition.
Made into hybrid integrated circuit packaging, this innovative material was displayed to delegates and fellow exhibitors alike at the  ninth European Hybrid Microelectronics Conference in Nice, France.
Offering substantial weight savings to makers of electronic packages, the material looks like having a bright future and Barry Moloney, Marketing and Sales Manager responsible for HIVOL, was kept very busy discussing possible applications and the advantages it promises.
PLASMAS ARE GOING PLACES
Part of Dr Brian Eyre, AEA Chief Executive's visit to Culham last month incorporated a look at current work in Fusion, in particular the START experiment, and at new areas being developed for plasma processing.
He is pictured here with InTec's Neil Griffiths, looking at the test bed for a newly developed plasma processing unit for sterilising hospital instruments — a pilot one of which is on trial at Oxford's John Radcliffe Hospital.
Wearing a ‘bear-faced’ smile
COULD YOU smile for eight weeks?
Staff at Harwell's Lloyds Bank were asked to nominate the customer who in their opinion had smiled and been the most cheerful during an eight week ‘smile’ campaign run at all Oxfordshire branches.
The unanimously selected winner was Julie McDonnel who calls at the branch regularly as part of her job at Harwell's Social Club.
Julie's award for being the happiest customer was a large teddy bear ‘Thoroughbred Ted’— the emblem adopted by Lloyds Banks to promote the campaign — and to help her celebrate, and keep smiling, a bottle of champagne!
Presenting Julie with ‘Thoroughbred Ted’ and her bottle of bubbly are, from left, Ian Day, Manager of the Harwell branch of Lloyds Bank and Julian Elger, Manager of the Didcot and Harwell branches.
Kill your speed
TO ENCOURAGE safe driving on Culham/Harwell site roads, a Radar Speed Gun has been purchased and is being commissioned by the Constabulary.
This will be used at random times and locations to measure vehicle speeds, naturally targeting faster moving traffic.
Drivers exceeding the speed limit will be reported to site management and may be barred from driving on the site and may be subject to disciplinary action.
Various measures have been taken over recent months to help to improve traffic safety on the sites.
Culham/Harwell Notice CHN 17, dated 15 February, drew attention to traffic safety regulations and new 30 mph speed signs have been installed.
Please kill your speed.
Helping a hobbyist to a career
WORK EXPERIENCE with Harwell photographer Graham Fletcher has encouraged Henley College student Matthew Best, to try for a career in media photography.
Matthew is one of 32 students at Harwell and 27 at Culham gaining work experience this summer.
Action, take-one.
Enlightening times as Graham, right, points out the light-meter reading prior to Matthew's shoot.
IN BRIEF 
A decade of hot shots
Ten years ago on 25 June the Joint European Torus (JET) experiment produced its first plasma.
The first shot at 16kA achieved currents up to 60,000 amps for one tenth of a second.
More than 27,000 pulses later the current has increased by 400 times and the pulse length by 600 times.
Origin of the galaxy at Culham
The 1993 Oxford Trust Schools/Industry Grant Exhibition and Summer Lecture entitled ‘Ripples in the sky — the origins of galaxies’ by Professor George Efsathiou of Oxford University, attracted 250 people to Culham last month.
Canines in the classroom
Two of Harwell's security police dogs and their handlers were among police officers spending a week with 10 and 11 year olds at Rush Common Primary School, Abingdon, as part of a Thames Valley Crime Busters project.
The children dressed up for mock scenarios which the police experience daily and learnt about legal phraseology.
Honorary Doctorate from Down Under
Dr Joan Freeman, who retired in 1983 after 32 years at Harwell, was presented with an Honorary Doctorate for her best seller ‘A Passion for Physics’.
Her book which was reviewed in CH News in May 1991 has already sold over 2000 copies.
Publication paved the way for an exciting tour of lectures, in the UK, New Zealand and her native Australia, culminating in the award at Sydney University — where she graduated with a double first in mathematics and physics in 1939.
Antimony sought
The Novel Absorbers Evaluation Club are desperately seeking some Antimony 124 or 125 (Sb124, Sb125) either in metallic form or as a liquid source.
Would anyone who could help please contact the Secretary of the Club, Grahame Murphy, R10, 353, Harwell.
OUT AND ABOUT
Strings in Church
24 July: 20,000 hours, Oxford Sinfonia concert in the University Church, Oxford.
Janacek Suite for Strings, Mozart Violin Concerto in D, Mendelssohn Italian Symphony.
Tickets £5, Concessions £3 from Blackwell's music shop, Oxford, or at the door .
Laughter at the Watermill
27 July — 4 September: Watermill Theatre & Restaurant, Bagnor, Nr Newbury.
Showing: ‘Say who you are’— a wickedly funny comedy.
Blooming flowers
1 August: 14.00 hours Grove Fuchsia & Pelargonium Society, Annual Show, The Old Mill Hall, Grove, Nr.
Wantage.
It's a Knockout
14 August: The Royal National Institute for the Blind's action packed fun day at Court Place Farm, Marsh Lane, Marston, Oxford.
Celebrity teams will be taking part in addition to many teams from local companies to raise funds for the blind and partially sighted in Oxfordshire.
Many attractions and stalls for all the family.
Insane Riders
14 or 15 August: Ride the full length of the Ridgway with some insane mountain bikers from AEA Technology, Harwell and raise some money for local charities.
Contact: David Spencer, H 5730 or Ian Pomeroy, H 5520 .
Holiday Club
16 — 20 August: 10.00 — 12.00 hours Grove Parish Church Hall, Grove, Nr Wantage are organising a fun week for 5–11 year olds.
The children will be divided into small groups called ‘cabins’.
Each cabin will have its own adult leader.
Details: June Dyer, or Nicky Gibbard,
Safety is the name of the game
SOME 700 children have followed an adventure route at Harwell learning how to keep safe.
The Junior Citizens Project held at Harwell's Ridgeway House was for 10 to 11 year-old children from Wantage and Didcot junior schools to take part in initiative tests on safety.
Over a two week period children spent half a day meeting unexpected situations from a road accident to an obstruction on a railway line, testing their ability to think quickly.
Every child was given a kit of information and  mementos from the local emergency services, fire, police and ambulance, public utilities and local councils who set the challenges.
An obstructed railway line — one of the problems for the children.
Not going for a song
A song thrush opted for a life on the road when it set up home on a pick-up truck at Harwell, see below.
The nest was built whilst the truck was in use, so the bird must have been patiently waiting for it to return after each journey so that it could carry on with nest building.
Generously, the staff of Decommission-ing and Radwaste have temporarily decommissioned their vehicle so that the thrushes have time to successfully raise their family.
Unofficial
Estates Services are not only providing accommodation for AEA staff, at Harwell they also have some unofficial tenants — a family of little owls.
These have set up home on top of a suspended ceiling.
Luckily the office below is not used as they have produced quite a smelly mess with droppings and remains of prey falling out from the ceiling!
It is thought that two young were raised.
In addition, at least one little owl has been raised on reactor site.
This is all good news as they are reported to be down in numbers in Oxfordshire this year.
Excursion
In June the Abingdon Naturalists' Society had an evening excursion to Culham Nature Reserve.
Eighteen members were shown around by AEA Technology's Peter Pool.
Several new plant species were recorded for the reserve but their most interesting find was of signs of a badger that had dug out a bees nest from the ground.
Also, very usefully, an offer was kindly made by a warden of a local nature reserve to help in the winter woodland management.
Thanks to all those who have informed me of sightings of wildlife; please keep up the good work and contact me in the Library & information Service,
There's no place like home on the road.
STOP PRESS
Unique service launched for users of radioactive products
AEA Technology and Amersham International plc have joined forces to set up a new international environmental management business.
Dr Philip Tasker, Chief Executive of the new Culham-based company, Safeguard International Ltd, said ‘This 50/50 joint venture will provide a unique service in the safe handling and distribution of radioactive products to users in medicine, industry and research worldwide.’
SAFETY FACTS
Rainfall in May and June ‘93
LAB LAUGH Computability applied to social sciences, law of.
If at first you don't succeed, transform your data set.
Is a suntan just politically incorrect?
DID YOU know that 30–50% of malignant melanomas are fatal?
The National Radiological Protection Board has published a new broadsheet, ‘Ultraviolet Radiation’ explaining the biological effects of ultra-violet radiation, especially those on skin.
Recommendations for protecting yourself are given including a summary of the early signs of malignant melanoma — prompt recognition and diagnosis provide the best chance of protection.
Facts and Fictions about suntans
Fiction : A sun tan is healthy.
Fact : A tan indicates that your skin has already been damaged.
Fiction : A tan will protect you from the sun.
Fact : A dark tan on a white person offers an SPF of about 4.
Fiction : You can't get burned on a cloudy day.
Fact : Up to 80% of the sun's rays can penetrate light clouds, mist and fog.
Fiction : You can't get burned if you're in the water.
Fact : Water offers minimal protection.
Reflections from water can intensify the sun's rays on you.
Fiction : With a sunscreen to protect me I can sunbathe for much longer.
Fact : Sunscreens are not intended to increase sun exposure time but to increase protection during unavoidable exposure.
Single copies of the broadsheet or small quantities are available free of charge from the Publications Office, NRPB, Chilton, Didcot, Oxon OX11 0RQ.
NEW LEAGUE RECORD FOR ROUNDERS
As flaming June warmed up, so did the rounders.
In group A the Paper Tigers with their amazing bouncing ball have lifted their rounders difference to great heights while Dr Blobby and the Blobettes have at last picked up some points from a game, which means that all teams this year have managed to win at least one point.
In group B Medical Misfits continue to play extremely well, topping the table.
The Fat Cats are also looking rather smug which leaves Charlie's Angels, The Waster and Pen's Plonkers to fight for the all important third and fourth positions.
The 149'ers, despite having four games scheduled in one week alone (Graham Dennie's usual organisation) are showing great improvement on last year.
Keep it up Pee Wee.
STOP PRESS Manky's Marauders have failed to umpire again for the 10th year running thereby creating a new league record.
LAMB IN ROSEMARY AND STOUT
In a little world of her own
‘MOST OF your articles seem to be about very physical hobbies, would you be interested in hearing about one that isn't?’ asked Rosemary Gardner who works in Harwell's Market Intelligence Service, part of Business Strategy Unit.
Of course!
Since having to give-up a dolls-house as a small child to help her mother make ends meet, Rosemary Gardner has always yearned to walk into a little world of her own, now, 40+ years later, she has done just that!
Re-kindled
From ribbon roses and tapestries to a triptych, Rosemary has always had craft projects of one sort or another on the go but her interest in the world in miniature was re-kindled when her brother, mindful of the dolls-house she had lost years earlier, bought her a  one-twelfth reproduction Georgian eight-roomed ‘des.
res’ as a Christmas present.
‘I needed a bowl of fruit for the dining table in the new dolls-house and set about finding one’, she said.
Passion, patience and pieces of a plasticine-like substance have, since Christmas, been warmed by Rosemary into a delightful art form.
The bowl of fruit idea blossomed to a full blown fruit and vegetable stall — albeit on a  one-twelfth scale.
Some of the items were more tricky to reproduce than others; corn-on-the-cob, cauliflowers, mushrooms, cucumber halves and even a half-peeled banana for instance!
Every item is individually crafted with meticulous attention to detail and colour, then oven-baked for 20 minutes until it ‘sets’.
Teaching
Rosemary will be teaching others her skills in creating a market stall complete with special effects in the form of ‘rosy’ apples and ‘muddy’parsnips at the Women's Institute's Denman College in Marcham before setting out for Staffordshire on a dolls-house holiday!
The aim of the holiday is to make a terrace of three  one-twelfth -scale houses complete with a shop — a cake shop in Rosemary's case.
Going with her will be her latest creation, a counter for the cake-shop including cake stands cleverly made from glass buttons and anorak toggles and everything sweet and gooey imaginable on the shelves, from slices of  battenberg to three-tiered wedding cakes — all looking good enough to eat!
In November she will be showing fellow members of Abingdon Miniaturists Group how to ‘bake’ some cakes for themselves.
This obviously absorbing hobby is a good stress reliever, ‘It's pure escapism and therapeutic — if I have had a frustrating day at work, the minute I get home I pick up a piece of modelling plastic and start modelling,’ said Rosemary.
‘As the saying goes — Miniaturists forever, housework whenever!’
P.S. If anyone has a ‘small’ secret Rosemary says she would be very happy to talk to them.
Every item is individually made — as our photographer found out to his cost when he moved the sack of potatoes sending us scrabbling to retrieve them!