

The magazine for all AEA employees at Risley, Culcheth & Springfields
Corporate Identity Roadshow
Kevin Murray, Director of Corporate Communication, in the first of a series of roadshows, unveiled the new corporate identity to Risley staff recently.
Before a questioning audience Mr Murray began by explaining the main features of the new corporate identity and outlined the way it would be introduced to its public.
One of the first questions asked concerned the cost of introducing the new identity.
Mr Murray said, ‘The total cost will be £350K spread over two financial years.’
Asked why image is important to us, Mr Murray explained, ‘The direct benefits of a strong corporate image are: high customer loyalty, easier cross-selling of other products in the range/new introductions and easier sales negotiations.
We employed an outside agency to carry out 200 face-to-face interviews with a cross section of external businesses to gain an indication of attitudes towards the AEA.
The survey revealed that the AEA is suffering from an identity crisis, i.e. no corporate goals, lacking coherence, weak marketing, minimal public awareness and no clear corporate identity.’
Mr Murray continued, ‘If the AEA is to be thought of as having a united corporate image then it has to behave as such: for example we have countless and diverse literature/publications produced (independently) by the Businesses, thereby leaving our customers confused.
Another member of the audience asked, ‘What would be different this time around as we went through a similar identity crisis 5 or so years ago.’
Mr Murray replied, ‘The Chairman and the Executive Board are backing this campaign and I have been given the ‘teeth to police’ the changeover and to deal with transgressors.’
Asked about TV advertising Mr Murray outlined the planned advertising campaign and concluded by saying, ‘Unfortunately there is a limited budget which will not stretch to TV advertising.
However there will be some corporate advertising in May.
Hopefully as we improve our business, we may indeed see TV advertising in future years and we hope that we will become as well known as IBM, 3M or ICI.’
Finally, Mr Murray said that he had received numerous letters about the selection of the typeface (Courier) for all our future correspondence and due to the strength of feeling on this and other layout issues it has been decided to set up a Keyboard Operators panel to discuss the way forward.
For more information about the new corporate identity please contact Mr Roy Newson, Corporate Affairs Manager, Harwell,
S&R on schedule
The Thomson House refurbishment exercise is nearing completion.
Extensive repairs to the exterior fabric of the building and the internal refurbishment of each floor has been co-ordinated by the Project Manager, Peter Standing of Business Environments and Dave Richards, S&R Relocation Project Manager.
The internal floors are in varying stages of readiness — the fifth floor is practically finished thereby allowing work-stations and storage units to be delivered.
Current completion forecast is for all work, including furniture installation, to be concluded by end April.
The physical relocation of S&R staff is scheduled for the last weekend in May.
RSSO's Get Bigger
The RSSO's are arriving.
What or who are they?
You may ask.
Remember the old SSO's; the A5 size Safety Standing Orders in the pale blue binder!
Well, the Risley Safety Standing Orders are a similar level of document.
However, they are full A4 size in a dark blue binder.
Where do they fit in?
We already have the Site Safety Instructions (SSI's) which implement corporate policy in identifying ‘WHO’ is responsible for what.
The RSSO's are the next level down.
They indicate ‘HOW’ the SSI's are implemented.
Who is controlling the RSSO's?
They are produced, distributed and controlled by Estates, as a result of co-operation between  businesses .
Senior managers, working groups, working parties and a host of peer reviews have all been involved.
To whom do they apply?
All businesses on site.
The RSSO's are at present in ‘base model’ form.
However, by incorporating comments from users feedback, they will be improved until they reach ‘GTI’ status.
The distribution was agreed by senior managers responsible for safety, however, by agreement, additional copies can be issued.
For more information on RSSO's contact the Risley Safety Department, or Estates QA,
RED ALERT
TO ALL STAFF AT AEA TECHNOLOGY GIVE BLOOD AT: Daten Sports & Social Club, Culcheth.
While you are reading this appeal, a patient will be receiving a transfusion to save his or her life.
Hospitals in England and Wales need 8,500 donations of blood every day of the year and as medical techniques become more sophisticated, the demand is rising steadily.
Blood is not only used for straightforward transfusions, products extracted from blood have a whole number of uses — from the treatment of burns to the prevention of infection.
By enrolling as a donor you will be making a vital gift of life to someone else.
You could also be making a vital investment in your own future — who knows when you or a member of your family will need a blood transfusion.
Who can become a blood donor?
Anyone between 18 and 60 who is fit and healthy.
All types of blood are needed — especially the most common because these are the ones that are most in demand.
How much time is involved?
It takes around 45 minutes to make a blood donation and  staff at AEA are invited to donate twice a year.
What happens?
You will be asked a few questions about your state of health and a drop of blood will be taken from your finger to make sure that you are not anaemic.
The actual donation takes about 10 minutes and then after 20 minutes rest and light refreshment you can go back to work.
Does it hurt?
Giving blood is a simple procedure and most donors feel only the slightest discomfort.
Is there any risk?
Donations are taken by trained staff supervised by doctors and nurses.
All the equipment used at each session is new and sterile and never re-used.
Erratum
To use the videoconferencing for an inter-site meeting contact Debbie Hancock,
The Village Shop
The Village Shop will close on Friday, 26th March 1993.
We thank all our customers for their support over the past year.
From Monday, 29th March all shop facilities previously provided by the Village Shop will be available from Chadwick House Shop 8am–4pm Monday to Friday and/or the Restaurant Kiosk 11.30am to 2.00pm, Monday to Friday.
The Ultimate Damned Good Do!
Join everyone for the party of the year in the Daten Sports and Social Club on Wednesday, 31st March.
Tickets are £6 and include disco, buffet and raffle, ‘Damned Good Value For Money!’
Contact   or  , or at lunchtime in Personnel, Building 5A3, Risley.
Keeping In Touch
Risley Transport Services (RTS) now offer a mobile phone for all self-drive hire car users.
Bob Atherton, RTS, explains this new service in detail.
Q Why have you introduced a mobile phone?
A To help alleviate the personal security fears of lone lady drivers, and allow drivers to make business calls whilst en route.
Q How is the mobile  phone powered?
A The mobile phone can be plugged into the cigar lighter socket of the hire car or, by means of a desk-top charger, be charged up via the mains.
This allows for the phone to be used totally independent of any fixed power source via fully charged batteries.
Q How much will it cost to hire the mobile phone?
A The cost will be £10 per 24 hour hire period, and will be charged to the Cost Centre you state on your Care Hire Application form unless you state otherwise.
The cost will cover the percentage use of the purchase cost of the hardware, connection fee, air time and itemised bill charge.
Call costs will also be included provided call charges are kept reasonable.
Q Can I make private calls?
A Yes, however, these should be kept to a minimum and be brief.
REMEMBER: Calls per unit are much more expensive than calls made from conventional phones.
Q How do I hire the mobile phone?
A Just make it clear on your Car Hire Application form.
It will be allocated on a ‘first come first served’ basis, irrespective of staff grade or journey length.
Q Is it difficult to use?
A The Responsible Officer for car hire will be pleased to give you a demonstration.
A Users Guide will also be available with the phone.
Q How do I obtain the mobile phone?
A The phone may only be collected from and delivered back to Risley Transport Services, Building 8E12.
The phone must be signed in and out by the user or their nominee.
Q What about security of the phone?
A It is highly recommended that the user keeps the hardware on their person at all times.
It must not be left in the hire care unattended.
Any theft must be reported to the local police and Risley Transport Services as soon as possible.
The cost centre will be responsible for all costs incurred resulting from theft.
Q What do I do if the phone develops a fault?
A All faults or damage must be reported to RTS, as soon as possible, so that immediate action can be taken.
Finally, may I ask all hire car users to write to me with their comments on the use of a mobile phone.
Pantomime Time!
Pantomime Time!
The Risley and Culcheth Sites' Social Club Committee took 70 kids aged from 9 to 50+ to see Aladdin at the Opera House!!
After the usual ten head counts (!) everybody is aboard and Manchester here we come.
Arrived with plenty of time to stock up with sweets, drinks and popcorn (and no-one was sick) and to climb umpteen stairs to our seats in the heavens.
Pantomime — what a good excuse to forget your age and join in with the booing, hissing, singing and hilarity.
Glad to say the AEA crowd did themselves proud joining in with lots of gusto.
Although it was Aladdin we were watching, Wishy Washy (Michael Barrymore) took over the show with his never-ending wisecracks.
The Dooby Doo show also proved to be very popular.
As the curtain came down for the fourth time the ‘helpers’ all gave a huge sigh and reverted back to responsible adults!
Roll on next year!!
‘I Don't Know How I Found Time For Work!’
Stan Shaw, formally from Purchasing, Risley, wins a meal for two in the Chatsworth Restaurant for his story of life in retirement.
I have now been retired for nearly five and a half years.
Once upon a time when I used to read, or hear, about all the exciting even exotic things that apparently all other retired people got up to I used to think ‘That's for me!
Just wait until I retire, I'll have a basinful of that!’
And then, not very long after retirement, I realised that I didn't rally want excitement any more — though perhaps a little bit of the exotic wouldn't go amiss now and then!
I realised that I get far more excitement than my heart and head can stand just from seeing my favourite sportsmen or women or teams fight their good fights and win magnificently, or lose unluckily (always unluckily) and my blood pressure would be much better off without even that vicarious sort of excitement.
No, I soon thought, not for me hang-gliding or white water canoeing or push-biking around the Himalayas or starring in parent/teacher bloody and painful, and of course exciting, rugby matches!
Give me my morning's gentle stroll down to the corner paper shop, my afternoon's lazy snooker match at the village club with a glass of you know what on the side-table, and my evening's friendly (is there any such thing?) solo or bridge games.
And then I looked through my diary!
Yes, I do still keep a diary, though it now shows my hospital, doctor's and dentist's appointments rather than my business meetings or my target dates and such.
And what did I find?
Firstly, that I seem to spend more time  out of the house than in it, and then more time away from home than at home, and finally but just as significantly, more time just watching the world go by then dashing around with it.
Oh yes!
Bett (my wife) and I do dash around now and again!
We dash abroad at least twice a year (we dashed over to California last November) and we dash down South to my daughter's in Hampshire umpteen times a year and we dash seemingly everywhere in the wake of our grandchildren when on school holidays or visiting but I (if not so much Bett) also spend a heck of a lot of time just watching (I prefer to call it scientifically observing) the world around me and contemplating.
For instance, at least once a week if possible I like to buy a Rail Ranger  or similar train or bus ticket and travel the countryside and towns just looking at everything.
I'm never bored even on the same old routes and there's always something or somebody new and different and interesting to ‘observe’.
At least once a week I also like to sit in a Magistrates or Crown Court observing different dramas of life — and sometimes death.
Ushers, magistrates, Clerks of the Court, solicitors, and even the odd judge or barrister now nod affably to me or wish me a good day and more than one defendant, during the break while evidence is being weighted, has asked my ‘professional’ opinion as to his chances.
At least one day a week I like (who said ‘Liar’) to devote to my chores around the house and garden.
We moved houses twelve months ago and I'm still shocked that there are far more things to do around and in a spanking brand new house than an old one.
Bett and I also like to ‘dine’ out as often as possible and we now know some very good and cheap pub lunches around South Lancs and North Cheshire (not to mention Greater Manchester and Merseyside).
Am I worried that I'm not doing more with my retirement?— Emphatically NO!
Am I enjoying retirement?
Emphatically YES!
And, when some other retired persons says in my presence ‘I don't know how I found time for work’, I no longer inwardly cringe with scorn at the well worn cliche as I used to do but instead I enthusiastically and of course sagely nod my head in hearty agreement.
New MoT Test — Will Your Car Pass?
In addition to the existing MoT test, from 1st January your vehicle will fail the MoT if:
damage to the windscreen exceeds certain limits;
registration plates are in poor condition or if the spacing of letters and numbers is obviously incorrect;
smoke from diesel engines exceeds certain limits;
or if any of the other new basic safety standards are not met.
To pay for the additional checks the new MoT test now costs £24.
The following information has been provided by the Department of Transport.
Field of vision/state of glass
The new MoT tests field of vision and condition of glass.
The critical area is zone ‘A’ shown above.
A vehicle will fail the test if damage to the windscreen exceeds 10 mm in zone ‘A’— the critical area in front of the driver — and 40 mm in the remainder of the area swept by the windscreen wipers.
Similarly, stickers or any other obstruction son the windscreen (except mirrors, sun visors, tax discs and smaller discs) will cause failure if they intrude to a similar extent.
However, vehicle owners will be given the opportunity to move or remove any such item beforehand.
Zone ‘A’ was developed by the British Standard Committee on windscreen repair.
It is an area 290 mm wide centred on a vertical line passing through the centre of the steering wheel, within the area swept by the windscreen wipers.
Registration plates
The test will check the presence, condition and any obscuration of the plates; that letters and figures are not obviously incorrectly spaced; and that characters are properly formed.
Mirrors
The test will check the presence and condition of mirrors required by law to be fitted.
Fuel tanks and pipes
The test will check the fuel tank and visible fuel system components to ensure they are not leaking and are secure.
Bodywork and body security
The test will check that there are no sharp edges or projections arising from damage or excessive corrosion likely to give rise to injury.
Seat security
The test will check that front seats are secure and that the back rests of all seats can be secured in an upright position.
Account will be taken of specialised modifications (e.g. to allow wheelchair access) and original design features.
Security of doors
The test will check that the driver's and front passenger door can be opened from inside and outside the vehicle and latched shut, and that other passenger doors can be latched shut.
Vehicle identification numbers
The test will check that post-1980 vehicles have a vehicle identification number.
If a vehicle fails the test because it does not have a vehicle identification number, MoT testers will advise motorists to get in touch with the local Vehicle Registration Office, which can allocate a new number.
Lighting items
Checks of these items — rear registration plate lamps, fog lamps and hazard warning devices — will be similar to the existing checks of lamps.
There is no question of a vehicle needing to be fitted with these lamps or indeed any other item — if the vehicle is of an age or type which does not require them.
Diesel smoke
Vehicles with diesel engines will be checked for smoke emission, using smoke meters.
The standard to be met will be the same as the one which applies to heavy goods vehicles and buses, ie:
3.2m -1; for non-turbocharged engines;
3.7m -1; for turbocharged engines
pre-1st August 1975 vehicles with non-turbocharged engines
The introduction of this check will mean that most vehicles, apart from motorcycles, will have a metered check of emissions at annual roadworthiness tests.
International News
UK
Britain's nuclear industry has welcomed the conclusions of the government's select committee report on trade and industry.
The Chairman of Nuclear Electric, Mr John Collier, said: ‘The committee's recommendations open the way for a secure future for coal and nuclear power in the UK.’
The report recognises the importance of completing and operating the company's Sizewell-B plant, saying there is ‘no economic case to suspend construction or mothball the station.’
Mr Collier also welcomed the recommendation that the British government review of nuclear power, scheduled for 1994, should be brought forward to this year.
Two nuclear power stations in Scotland broke their own record for 24 hours of electricity production last month — then matched the new total the following day.
The plants at Hunterston and Torness, operated by Scottish Nuclear, generated a combined total of 57.7 million kilowatt-hours, on 4th February and again on 5th February.
On both days, the plants achieved their best-ever power production figure for a 24-hour period.
FRANCE
1992 was ‘a year of progress’ for nuclear power plant safety in France, according to the nuclear safety chief of the national power utility, Electricité de France (EDF), Mr Pierre Yves Tanguy.
Mr Tanguy said that EDF was participating actively in international efforts to improve the safety of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe.
He added that concrete improvements had been made in that field, especially in Bulgaria.
BELGIUM
The national utility, Electrabel reports that the nuclear share in overall electricity production in 1992 rose to 60%, compared with 58.4% in 1991.
The Doel and Tihange power stations generated a total of 41.256 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity, equivalent to 61.2% of the global amount.
Electrabel describes last year's performance of the Belgian nuclear park as ‘excellent’ with the two plants achieving a high utilisation factor of 86%.
JAPAN
The development of Japan's nuclear power programme reached a milestone recently when the country's 43rd nuclear unit began commercial operation.
The latest addition to the Japanese nuclear park is unit 4 at the Ohi power station which has a 1127-megawatt pressurised water reactor.
The new unit at Ohi features a special room from with visiting members of the public can view various parts of the plant.
INDIA
The tenth nuclear power unit is to start operating in India in the next few months, with the country aiming for a nuclear part with a total of 16 units within the coming years.
SWEDEN
The Ringhals nuclear power plant in Sweden is producing more electricity than ever before and currently meets 19% of the nation's total demand.
The net electrical output from the plant's four units is 3498 megawatts — enough to supply 4.5 times the present power demand of Gothenburg, Sweden's second-largest city.
The previous best was 3408 megawatts.
Farewell To
Our best wishes go with all the above for a happy and healthy future  
Recipe of the Month
Hot Cross Buns (8)
10oz strong flour
1¼oz sugar
pinch of salt
1oz margarine
¾oz yeast
5oz milk
3oz mixed fruit
pinch of mixed spice
1.
Sieve flour, rub margarine into flour and make a bay in the middle of the mix.
2.
Mix sugar, yeast, salt into the milk which has been heated to blood temperature and add spice and fruit.
3.
Lightly mix together, now knead the dough until it is clear elastic free from humps and stickiness.
4.
Cover with a cloth and leave in a warm place until dough doubles in size.
5.
Divide dough in 2oz pieces and mould into rounds and place on a baking tray.
Prove until double the size.
6.
Mix a little flour with some water to make a smooth paste.
7.
Place mix in a piping with a plain nozzle and pipe crosses over the bun.
8.
Bake for ten to fifteen minutes at 450°F, 232°C or Gas Mark 8 until golden brown.
Cutting Down On Drink
By the end of January, most people will have left a trail of broken New Year Resolutions in their wake, resuming all of their bad habits within the space of a few weeks.
The problem is that at the beginning of each new year, we either ignore the tradition of making resolutions, or we try to do too much at once and fail dismally.
Unless you are enormously determined, it is far better to make small changes and build upon them, tackling one area at a time before you go on to the next rather than trying to lose weight, give up smoking, avoid alcohol and set yourself a punishing exercise regime all at once.
Cutting down on alcohol, for most people, is probably one of the easiest lifestyle changes to make.
Try cutting it out altogether for a while, or at least giving it up during the week and reducing your weekend consumption.
There is some evidence to suggest that a little alcohol, particularly a glass or two of red wine each day, may help to guard against heart disease.
However, too much alcohol slows reflexes and can cause aggression or sleepiness, leading to accidents.
Physically, it can cause hangovers, disturbed sleep, vitamin deficiencies and inflammation of the gastro intestinal tract and, more seriously, severe liver damage eventually resulting in death.
The safe upper weekly limits are currently considered to be 21 units for men and 14 units for women.
One unit is equivalent to half a pint of beer or cider, a glass of wine, or one standard pub measure of spirits.
Some people drink alcohol as much from habit as from desire.
Try out a range of alternatives including different blends of freshly ground coffee, exotic herbal teas, low alcohol drinks and unusual fruit and vegetable juices.
It also helps to drink as many Continentals do, sipping glasses of water — along with their wine — at the table.
If you find that you have difficulty in cutting down on your intake, consult your doctor — it may be that you have become alcohol-dependent and are in need of special help to stop the problem developing into full-blown alcoholism.
For further advice on alcohol and health, please consult any member of the Occupational Health Team, Risley, Ext. 2381.
VALENTINE  SURPRISE 
‘That's great’ said a delighted Derek Porter, from HFD, Culcheth, on being told that he had won the Gazette competition for January, a £50 perfume voucher courtesy of Hampson's Perfumerie, Leigh.
Jean Oultram, of Hampson's Perfumerie presented Derek with his voucher and offered her congratulations.
Derek added ‘I'll use the prize to buy my  fiancée , Ceri, some perfume for Valentine's Day.’
COMPETITION FEBRUARY ISSUE: A DAY AT ALTON TOWERS
The winner was , Personnel, Risley.
WIN A WEEKEND IN THE COUNTRY
Gazette, in association with the Statham Lodge Hotel, offers you the chance to win a Weekend in the Country.
Your two night break comprises dinner, bed and breakfast for two on the weekend of your choice.
Statham Lodge was built in 1742 in extensive wooded grounds as a country manor house, and remains as graceful and elegant now as when it was built.
The hotel is well located (within two miles of the M6/M56 motorways and 20 minutes from Manchester Airport), yet is set in peaceful surroundings with ample, secure car parking facilities.
Since 1962, Statham Lodge Hotel has been privately owned and therefore maintains unrivalled standards of personal service.
Whether for a family occasion, an overnight stay, social or business function, a reception large or small, or simply for a quiet drink and snack, Statham Lodge Hotel welcomes every visitor in the same friendly way.
All our 38 bedrooms are individually decorated, each with private bathroom, telephone, radio, colour and satellite TV, tea and coffee tray, hairdryer and trouser press.
An overnight stay includes a full English or Continental breakfast and a newspaper of our choice.
At Statham Lodge, we specialise in arranging the perfect business meeting or conference.
The Gainsborough Suite is a ground floor room, seating up to 150, with private bar, the Roulette Room and Hogarth Suite are perfect for smaller meetings, while the Keates Room and Rakes Bar, are ideal for interviews and informal gatherings.
A complete range of equipment is also available.
To enter the competition answer the questions and return the entry form to Statham Lodge Hotel Competition, Gazette, 5A3, AEA Technology, Risley, Warrington, before Monday, 29th March 1993.
The first correct entry drawn by a representative from Statham Lodge Hotel will win the prize.
Competition Rules and Conditions
1.
You must be either currently employed by, or retired from, AEA Technology.
2.
One entry per person only.
3.
The prize is a weekend for two people, which must include a Saturday night, on a bed, breakfast and evening meal basis.
All accommodation subject to availability.
All  alcoholic drinks and telephone calls will be charged as taken.
4.
The prize winner will be notified by phone.
5.
Gazette reserves the right to publish at our discretion a photograph of the prize winner.
6.
The Editor's decision is final.