

THE WAY AHEAD
We can no longer wait for recovery to bail us out…1993 looks no better than 1992, so we must restructure our cost base to fit the present size of our business 
CHIEF Executive Kneale Ashwell remains full of confidence for the future of the business in the wake of the decision to close Hanley Pottery and announce redundancies throughout the Group.
In a series of meetings with employees he explained: ‘A slimmed down, more agile Wedgwood Group will be much better placed to take advantage of worldwide recovery when it comes and to fight off our increasingly aggressive overseas competitors.
‘Wedgwood and Johnson Brothers are two immensely strong brand names around the world and Coalport and Mason's Ironstone are also very valuable assets.’
Prospects
Mr Ashwell and his fellow directors met staff employees throughout the Group to explain the reasons behind the planned closure of Hanley Pottery and the possible loss of around 400 jobs throughout the UK and overseas.
He outlined the Company's trading performance over the past three years and prospects for the coming year (as detailed below) before answering wide ranging questions from employees.
The worldwide recession has caused the value of sales to decline over the past three years, with a resultant drop in profits.
The recession has hit the Group in all major markets, even, in recent months, the Japanese market.
Mr Ashwell said: ‘The strategy was to wait out the recession, working short-time as necessary, in order to avoid major closures or redundancies.
‘However, the recovery in 1992 — expected by most economists and businesses — did not materialise and this year has turned out even more difficult than 1991.’
To stay competitive on a global basis, the Group needs to generate cash to invest in manufacturing, sales and marketing activities and in data processing and systems.
Mr Ashwell commented: ‘We can no longer wait for recovery to bail us out.
1993 looks no better than 1992, so we must restructure our cost base to fit the present size of our business.’
Measures necessary to achieve this restructuring and cost efficiency include the closure of Hanley Pottery with the loss of around 160 jobs.
Redeployed
Approximately 140 Hanley Pottery employees will be redeployed elsewhere in the Group.
Mr Ashwell said: ‘Johnson Brothers is still crucial to the Group's future and the range will continue to be made in Eagle and Imperial factories.’
Earlier this year a pay freeze was agreed by the factory employees and similar restraint will be asked of all other employees, at all levels, around the world.
‘Unavoidably, there will be further job losses — around 250 — in the UK and worldwide, at all levels,’ Mr Ashwell explained.
As regards the timing of the announcement, the Directors, in consultation with Unions and personnel professionals, decided that those affected would want to know immediately rather than wait until after the Christmas holiday to be told.
As far as possible, the job losses will be implemented through voluntary redundancy and early retirement.
The Directors will meet around 1,000 representatives from all areas of the factories at meetings on 18, 21 and 22 December.
Ho, ho, ho…
Father Christmas dropped in to bring a little festive cheer.
The cheery chappie with a quizzical eye behind the white beard and red cowl is a familiar face around the company.
See if you can guess who our mystery Saint Nicholas is before turning to page five for the answer.
New horizons
AFTER spending all his working life in the pottery industry, a familiar figure at Barlaston is setting his sights on a new ‘career’ which will enable him to explore scenic routes around the world.
Welfare services
GROUP welfare officer, Sheila Redmond, who is always on hand to help and advise employees with all types of personal problems, announces an on-site breast screening programme.
Seasonal verse
THE bard of the biscuit kilns at Alexandra, Gordon Knapper, has put pen to paper to compose a seasonal verse which has a cautionary message for naughty children at Christmas time!
Crossword, quizzes and Turkey teaser
KEEP the brain cells sharp over the festive holiday by tackling the puzzles on page four.
There is a giant Christmas crossword with more than 150 clues, a film quiz and a children's quiz compiled by Tim Brownsett of the Barlaston computer department, and the ‘Turkey teaser.’
Baker's dozen of plates for 12 great chefs
CORPORATE Wedgwood was commissioned to produce a baker's dozen of specially-inscribed commemorative plates for the ‘Twelve Great Chefs of Christmas’ contest held at Tatton Park, Cheshire.
The contest, organised by Town and County magazine, was aimed at raising the profile of the northern hotel and restaurant trade.
In the magnificent setting of the Park's mansion house, the region's top chefs prepared and presented an eight course banquet for 40 served on Wedgwood fine bone china tableware complemented by Waterford crystal stemware.
Corporate Wedgwood sales and marketing manager Barry Cox, who presented the awards, said: ‘Wedgwood tableware is seen in the finest hotels and restaurants, large and small, all over the world.
We were particularly delighted to support this prestigious regional event.’
Exclusive tableware for QE II
AMONG a host of prestigious contracts won by Corporate Wedgwood is an order for 18,000 pieces of tableware for a restaurant on-board the luxury liner QE II.
A sophisticated black and gold design, exclusively created for the world's finest floating restaurant, came into service in The Queen's Grill Room recently before the ship embarked on a voyage to the Caribbean.
In addition, an order has been received for 850, fine bone china tea sets in the Cavendish pattern with the famous QE II crest which will be presented to Cunard world cruise passengers next year.
The QE II is the only ship which operates a transatlantic service between New York and Europe.
Corporate Wedgwood has also received the first order for its new Caspian pattern for Amberley Castle, Arundel — the only 900-year-old castle in the world which is used as an hotel.
Another hotel, the new Coppid Beech at Bracknell, has commissioned the company to produce its entire complement of tableware in God Insignia, Terracotta and Abigail patterns.
Two new books of note
A comprehensive biography documenting the life and times of Josiah Wedgwood has been recently published by Macmillan.
Entitled Josiah Wedgwood, the book was written by Robin Reilly, a Wedgwood sales executive for 12 years from 1952.
He has since become an internationally acknowledged scholar and authority on all aspects of Wedgwood history, design and manufacturing.
The author makes extensive use of Wedgwood's letters and memoranda and the book is a must for collectors of Wedgwood ware.
A second book, by antiques expert Peter Williams, who specialises in ceramics, entitled A Collector's Guide to Wedgwood Wares, has been published by Apple Press and features extensive colour photography and a guide to present day values of items illustrated.
Green network
THE Wedgwood visitor centre at Barlaston hosted a breakfast meeting to launch the Staffordshire Business and Environment Network.
Twenty green-minded companies set up the network with the aim of raising awareness of environmental issues.
More than 70 companies were represented at the launch which was chaired by Wedgwood Group director of human resources George Stonier.
Work towards quality award helped to create greater teamwork
PRECISION Studios, the screen-printed ceramic transfers unit of the Wedgwood Group, has achieved the prestige BS5750 accreditation for quality.
The award relates specifically to manufacturing and supply and Precision had to satisfy 18 criteria from purchasing, process control and inspection, including training and customer service.
Every process used by Precision has been reviewed, improved where necessary, and documented, with an overall aim of guaranteeing good quality standards and systems across all departments.
All management and production staff were involved in the project, which was compiled and submitted by Precision quality assurance manager Irene Riley.
Challenge
The scheme presented a new challenge to Irene, who had worked for 16 years previously in financial administration.
She went back to college and studied a course on the BS5750 award before liaising with production director Graham Massey and Group research technologist Bruce Cox, to gain experience in production and calibration procedures.
Irene said: ‘Having the BS5750 standard further enhances the credibility of Precision Studios’ business and is an achievement which the whole workforce can be proud of.
‘Working towards the award has helped to create a greater teamwork spirit throughout the factory.’
Precision Studios were first registered for BS5750 in February 1991.
Assessment
In June 1992 the company had an informal pre-assessment and the final assessment took place in early October 1992.
Inspections were carried out by the Ceramic Industries Certification Scheme Ltd who are linked with the British Ceramic Research Association.
Precision managing director Howard Sims said: ‘I believe the award will have good marketing benefits which will open doors to more customers in the U.S.A., Europe and the U.K.
‘I feel we have a strong base for an ongoing quality improvement programme and with the commitment of all at Precision, positive results should be seen during the next 12 months.’
PRECISION Studios quality assurance manager Irene Riley shows the BS5750 certificate.
She is flanked by director of human resources George Stonier, left, assessor Geoff Willey, centre left, and production director Graham Massey, right.
Kath's 100 raffle tickets produce five winners in nationwide charity fundraising competition
KATH Goodwin, of the Barlaston sales department, sold 100 £1 tickets as part of a nationwide fundraising push…and five lucky winners came from Wedgwood.
The event was organised through one of the Group's retailers — Ashbourne House, Derbyshire — in aid of breast cancer research.
The Ashbourne House appeal raised more than £4,000 for the raffle and Wedgwood winners were .
Royal Tuscan Quality Circle facilitator Kerry Ratcliffe is appealing for donations for her adopted charity.
Kerry is to ask all departments throughout the Group for donations of food and biscuits to Bucknall Dogs Home.
Please contact your personnel department if you would like to help.
AWARD-WINNING NEW DESIGN — Marie, another successful Johnson Brothers' pattern in the casual tableware collection, scooped a national industrial design award this year.
TRADITIONAL BEST-SELLER — the established and well-known Fresh Fruit design continues to enjoy popularity and strong sales.
Answers to questions over future Group Strategy
Capacity to respond when recession hits
Wedgwood must compete successfully on quality, service, delivery and price
The directors are determined to avoid further reductions in the Group's skills base or permanent manufacturing capacity following the closure of Hanley Pottery.
In answer to one of the questions posed by employees in meetings throughout the Group, Chief Executive Kneale Ashwell explained: ‘If, as expected, 1993 remains on a par with 1992, we will have some over-capacity, so there may need to be some small pockets of short time working.
‘However, this strategy will enable us to respond efficiently when recovery comes, with our skilled staff and the necessary machinery in place to increase production to required levels, while maintaining the quality standards that are part of the Company's heritage.’
Other questions, which were answered by Mr Ashwell, concerned such topics as:
Where will jobs go — when and how many?
Because we want to take as many voluntary redundancies and early retirements as possible, and with employee turnover still at a relatively high six per cent per year, we cannot say at present just where and when the jobs will go.
The more people who volunteer, the more chance we have of avoiding compulsory job losses.
We hope to close Hanley Pottery completely by Easter 1993.
As far as possible, we will have finalised where job losses will occur worldwide by Christmas and hope to have advised all concerned by this time.
Inquiring about the terms of voluntary redundancy or early retirement will place no obligation on anyone if they then decide not to volunteer.
One rumour circulating recently was that the vast majority of the 250 job losses would be from Barlaston.
This is not true.
What is the future of other Group factories?
As already explained, subject to there being no further significant deterioration in trading conditions, once the Hanley factory is closed there will be no further reductions in our permanent manufacturing capacity.
Eagle and Imperial will continue to produce Johnson Brothers' patterns.
The integration of Johnson Brothers will not necessarily mean the closure of the offices at Hanley.
Any moves in this regard will be made only when the time is right, and without  interfering with the business.
The other major earthenware factory, Alexandra Pottery, will continue to produce fine earthenware for the Group.
Coalport Minerva and Mason's Ironstone are specialist units catering for very particular types of produce and both are important to the Group's strategy of developing its valuable brands.
Royal Tuscan will continue to produce a wide variety of fine bone china ware.
Hotelware will continue to be an important part of the Group's business, probably with greater emphasis on finer, domestic-type designs rather than the heavier weight catering product.
Precision Studios will continue to manufacture ceramic transfers for the Group.
What is the future of Hanley Pottery and the other factories which have been closed during the year?
Machinery will be transferred to other factories for use, and the building will be ‘moth-balled’— to save money on rates, if possible — and will be put up for sale, along with our other vacant properties.
The long-running recession has meant that interest in these properties is low, but if they can be sold the cash raised will be put back into further improving the remaining operations.
What about the competition?
We must realise that, as a global company, our competition is not only the UK manufacturers.
Japanese and European manufacturers continue to move aggressively into world markets.
The Japanese are number one in terms of imports in the US ceramics market, whereas a few years ago Wedgwood was clearly number one.
We don't want the same to happen to us in the UK — to go the same way as the British motor or electronics industries have — and to prevent this we must make ourselves as lean, fit and efficient as possible; able to compete with the Japanese on quality, service, delivery and price.
We must not, however, take short-term measures, such as heavy price discounting, in order to retain market share.
Such a strategy would ultimately devalue our famous brands and would be difficult to reverse when the recession ends.
Are we developing new products and new markets?
We have recently introduced some extremely successful new products such as Clio and Humming Birds and Johnson Brothers' casual range of tableware.
There are sectors in our business which are presently under exploited and the marketing and sales teams will be working to create new lines and marketing strategies to help us to become leaders in these new areas.
The Group General Export team led by John Chadwick and Vernon Wilson will attack new markets such as the Middle East, South America and Eastern Europe.
What is the situation at Waterford Crystal?
Management is negotiating with the workforce a strategy to bring the structure of the business down to a size that matches its present turnover.
Once the rationalisation programme is in place, Waterford will be well placed to become profitable once the worldwide recession ends.
Business analysts have recently reported favourably on both sides of the business because of the efficiency measures which are being taken.
Our present problems in the Wedgwood Group are certain NOT caused by the situation in Waterford Crystal.
Are the Banks still supporting us?
We have stayed within the requirements of our banking covenants for the past eight consecutive quarters.
The Banks are fully aware of and fully supportive of the measures which we have recently announced.
Christmas QUIZ Page
Brain Teaser
In the sum, each letter represents one of the numbers 0 to 9 and that letter always represents the same number.
Your task is to work out which letter represents which number.
To give you a start, K = 3.
Christmas FILM QUIZ
Get into the mood for the annual festive feature film bonanza courtesy of Newsline's Christmas movie quiz compiled by Barlaston computer department's Tim Brownsett.
1
Which film first featured the song White Christmas?
2
In the Wizard of Oz, what was the name of Dorothy's dog?
3
Who played Hilts, the cooler king, in The Great Escape?
4
What is the name of the young boy who befriended E.T.?
5
What was the first James Bond film?
6
What was the name of Robert Shaw's boat in Jaws?
7
Which actor won a best supporting actor Oscar for Spartacus?
8
How many Von Trapp children are there in The Sound of Music?
9
Who wrote the book on which the cartoon The Snowman was based?
10
Who played Chris in The Magnificent Seven?
Answers can be found on page 15
Children's Festive Quiz
Children can get into the Christmas spirit with our fun festive teasers from Tim Brownsett in the Barlaston computer department.
1
Which of Santa's  reindeers had a red nose?
2
Boxing Day is the feast of which saint?
3
Which country supplies the Christmas tree for Trafalgar Square?
4
In which pantomime does Widow Twanky appear?
5
Which angel announced the birth of Christ to the shepherds?
6
Santa Claus is thought to be derived from which saint?
7
In which town was Jesus born?
8
In the pantomime Cinderella, what did the fairy godmother use to make the coach?
9
Where did Joseph and Mary flee to after the birth of Jesus?
10
How many birds did my true love send to me on the twelfth day of Christmas?
STAFF at Royal Tuscan gave disabled ex-marine  Ketterick a cash boost with a £550 donation to North Staffordshire Hospital Centre's Bionic Workshop.
The money was raised at the Wedgwood Group Medieval Day and through raffles, competitions and collections at the factory.
was paralysed from the chest down in an abseiling accident 12 years ago and has championed fund raising for research into the treatment of orthopaedic patients.
is pictured receiving the cheque from Royal Tuscan's Works Committee.
Top artists project continues the best traditions of Josiah
WEDGWOOD has united art and industry by commissioning six of Britain's top painters and sculptors to design a limited edition series of 500 12 inch collectors plates.
The artists are Peter Blake, Patrick Caulfield, Patrick Heron, Bruce McLean, Eduardo Paolozzi and John Piper.
The idea of commissioning artists to decorate ceramics in their own individual styles was a tradition first established in the 1770s when Josiah Wedgwood employed the services of noted artists of the time.
For instance, John Flaxman, after whom a gallery is named at Staffordshire University, became famous for his portrait medallions and classical reliefs and George Stubbs was keen to work with Wedgwood in order to experiment with enamel colours on ceramic plaques.
Other well known artists who have designed for Wedgwood have included James Tassie, Joseph Wright and Elizabeth Templetown.
In the 19 and 20 Centuries, many more artists welcomed the opportunity to move outside their usual medium and work with Wedgwood craftspeople.
They included illustrator Walter Crane, woodcutter Claire Leighton, illustrator and mural painter Eric Ravilious, architect Keith Murray, graphic designer and water-colourist David Gentleman, and Eduardo Paolozzi who has worked with Wedgwood on several occasions since the 1970s.
Exciting
Wedgwood is delighted to support the National Art Collectors Modern Art Fund with this exciting new venture.
The Modern Art Fund, first founded in 1989, provides essential financial support for museums and galleries in the purchasing of  20th century contemporary art, as well as aiming to stimulate a greater interest in modern art in Britain.
Commemorating Building Blocks
Health Authority chairman Maurice Proctor, centre, receives the plates from manufacturing and technical director Chris Johnson and public relations executive Margaret Mitchell.
WEDGWOOD helped the North Staffordshire Health Authority say thank you to charity fundraisers who spearheaded the area's biggest ever public appeal.
One hundred fundraisers who took part in the Building Blocks Appeal to raise £750,000 for a new child assessment centre received a limited edition Wedgwood plate as a thank you for their hard work and generosity.
Plates were handed out at a commemorative dinner by Health Authority Chairman Maurice Proctor.
The plate, which has a special back stamp, features an illustration of the new centre at Hartshill, which was financed by appeal funds.
Also on a health care note, public relations executive Margaret Michell has been appointed as one of five non-executive directors of the new North Staffordshire Hospital Centre Trust.
She said she aims to use her experience of public relations and communications to help promote the hospital centre's services and monitor feedback from the people of North Staffordshire.
Success in Cannes
ONE of the biggest duty free exhibitions worldwide has taken place in Cannes.
As usual, a great deal of interest was shown in the Wedgwood stand with the new Clio and Humming Birds giftware ranges doing particularly well.
Significant orders were picked up from as far afield as Jordan, Panama, Turkey, Malta, Gibraltar and Barbados while new contacts were made in Russia, Bolivia, Poland, Rumania, Bulgaria and Uganda.
Children In Need adopted by Alexandra
EMPLOYEES at Alexandra Pottery have adopted Children In Need as their charity for 1993.
In 1991 they raised more than £3,000 for the national BBC appeal and, after taking a well-earned year off, organisers have set a target of £10,000.
A list of events for next year has already been set by organisers, planning manager Dave Sargeant, technical manager Dave Spruce and personnel officer Sue Petrulis.
In March an indoor games evening has been arranged at Mitchell's Social Club and a quiz night is being planned for April at the same venue.
In May, fund-raisers will be pounding the streets from Alexandra Pottery to the Barlaston Pavilion Club in a sponsored walk or run and during June and July organisers hope to take advantage of the Six Towns Celebration.
Treasure
September sees the launch of the appeal raffle and a treasure hunt at a venue to be fixed.
In October a limited edition mug, T-shirts and appeal merchandise will go on sale and a Children In Need cabaret extravaganza evening will round off the programme in November.
Event Organiser Dave Sargeant said: ‘Children In Need is a very worthwhile cause and we chose it again because we have a lot of fun while raising money with the various events.
‘A target of £10,000 is quite a challenge but we will all be going for it.’
Give someone a fighting chance
A special clinic is being organised to give employees the chance to take a big step towards being someone else's chance-in-a-million.
On 1 and 2 March Wedgwood is giving employees the chance to show they care by holding an Anthony Nolan bone marrow register clinic at Barlaston over the two days.
Group personnel departments have sent out booking forms to be filled in and anyone interested will be given a time to attend the clinic.
The only criteria are that applicants must be healthy, aged between 18 and 40, and weigh over eight stones.
Employees will be informed as soon as possible of the venue at Barlaston where a doctor will be on hand to answer, in confidence, any queries about transplants and the work of the Trust.
The Anthony Nolan Bone Marrow Trust was formed in 1974 when Shirley Nolan founded the Bone Marrow Register in a vain attempt to save the life of her young son Anthony.
Register
She failed to find a donor in time to save Anthony, who died, aged just seven, but since then the register has helped to save hundreds of lives and continues to provide a vital service.
Initially, all that is required of volunteers is for them to go along to a clinic where a small sample of blood is taken.
This is partially tissue-typed and the details are entered onto a central computer.
All personal details are treated as strictly confidential and remain on computer file.
Money so far raised is being used to increase the number of donors.
THERE'S a seasonal surprise…
Newsline's very own quiz king, Rim Brownsett of Barlaston's computer department, removes the Santa Claus beard to reveal his true identity.
Tim donned the Father Christmas outfit to join in the festive fun…and give everyone another teaser.
Total Quality
Leaders proud of school projects
HIGH school pupils have helped to improve processes in three production areas with a trio of Quality Circle projects.
Twenty seven youngsters from James Brindley High School, Stoke-on-Trent, worked closely with QC leaders at Alexandra Pottery.
The first group of nine youngsters designed a bench tidy to hold tools in the biscuit lithography department.
A second group re-designed the scouring machine in the biscuit warehouse to increase efficiency.
Fettling
The third set of pupils improved the blade and handle of the fettling knife in the sponging department making it easier to use and prolonging its usefulness.
QC team leaders involved in the scheme were Pauline Morrey of the biscuit lithography department, Margaret Robb, of the biscuit warehouse, and June Cartlidge of the sponging department.
The Alexandra QC leaders said: ‘We are very proud of the youngsters and we have had a very favourable feedback from the school on this, which is the first project of its kind.’
TNT
Training on impact of TNT practices
A specially-devised Group-wide TNT training course has been developed at Barlaston.
A series of sessions has since taken place which involved multi-functional, multi-site teams.
Bob Walker of the manufacturing support department, who developed the course with Paul Swiety of the work study department, said: ‘This is an important feature of the course as it helps people to understand that TNT has an impact across the whole structure of the Group at all levels.’
The first part of the one and a half day course deals with all the key elements of TNT on a formal lecture/discussion basis.
These include quality small batch production, set-up reductions, preventative maintenance, production control, supplier partnerships and employee development.
The remainder of the course involves a practical exercise which demonstrates the benefits of improving these key elements.
Our picture below shows Bob Walker explaining the use of Kanbans to John Nicholson from Alexandra Pottery's quality assurance department.
Looking on are Barlaston decorating department's Jackie Goodwin and Jim Curtis from Imperial Pottery's planning department.
GROUP Quality Circles members held their annual conferences during December and enjoyed workshops presented by guest speakers from various factories.
Our picture shows Mick Everson, left, and Mick Duncalf from Tuscan's casting department with the results of their communication exercise.
One member of each pair was asked to describe a drawing for their partner to draw — the casters' may not have been the most successful — but it certainly proved to be the funniest!
Clock gift marks school circle's timely success
WEDGWOOD chimed in with a gift to mark the timely success of a high school Quality Circle project.
Pupils at Sandon High School, Meir, working closely with staff from the Quality Circles department at Barlaston, tackled the problem of worn-out seating in their assembly hall.
When the scheme was successfully completed, Wedgwood donated a specially-made plate clock which the pupils helped to design, to add a finishing touch to the project.
The 53-year-old seating — installed when the school was built in 1938 had done a sterling job for the armed forces during the war and pupils alike over the year.
But the chairs were on their ‘last legs’ when school headmistress Barbara Hall was approached by five pupils — members of the ‘Assembly’Quality Circle.
They asked if funds could possibly be made available for refurbishment or replacement of the battered furniture.
The group was given the go-ahead and began looking at all options.
They even contacted local cinemas to ask about their used seating — looking at the possibility of donating surplus seats to the school.
The pupils found that new seating would be the most cost effective answer and Miss Hall was so impressed with their research that the old seating was replaced.
Joyce Edwards, Quality Circle facilitator at Wedgwood Barlaston, pictured at the presentation, said: ‘The most important aspect of the project was that the pupils themselves have taken over responsibility for the school and its property.’
Cup shop clean up
THE Automen have solved a messy problem in the Barlaston cup shop.
The four man circle, pictured above, identified that excess clay was falling not into the trucks beneath each machine but on to the floor.
This clay could not be reclaimed because of contamination and the waste and mess did not help in the integration of TNT principles.
The circle, comprising leader Neil Beresford, Mark Inskip, Alan Hower and David Foulkes, examined the amount of scrap clay accumulated over a 12 month period in terms of quantity and costs incurred.
They worked out that they could pay to modify existing trucks by the clay saved within 14 months.
Potting manager Mike Shufflebotham said: ‘The project was simple but very effective with an excellent presentation.’
Group out in force at national conference
REPRESENTATIVES from the Wedgwood Group attended the National Society of Quality Through Teamwork's annual national conference.
Thirty five Quality Circle leaders and facilitators from the Group visited the forum in Bristol along with pupils from Sandon High School who completed a successful QC project in conjunction with Wedgwood.
Wedgwood Quality Circles facilitator Joyce Edwards is the current chairman of the society and made the welcoming address.
Group chief quality circle facilitator Graham Finney was on the organising committee and facilitators Margaret Scott and Val Lowndes both presented successful workshops.
Bill Booth and Ann George also acted as moderators and Paul Bentley, leader of the Barlaston mill and sliphouse circle, was a member of the panel discussion team.
The conference is one of the highlights of the QC year and was attended by around 600 delegates from more than 100 companies from all over the UK.
Excellent response to Imperial questionnaire
IMPROVING communications is the aim of a new Quality Circle which has been introduced at Imperial Pottery.
The team prepared a questionnaire with the help of QC leaders which was issued to every department at the factory.
There was an excellent response with 304 of the 330 numbered questionnaires being returned (91 per cent) and prizes were awarded.
Wendy Allmark, of the banding department, received a first prize of a 30-piece dinner set.
Sliphouse
Second prize of a 21 piece tea-set went to Neil Powell from the sliphouse, and the third prize of an 18 piece tea seat went to the cup shop's Tracey Bowan.
Mark Shingler and Andrew Whiston, of the Barlaston computer department, are analysing data from the questionnaire and collating the results.
The team, which as yet has no name, comprises Ian Wright, Mike Lawton, Melvyn Dowsett, Kevin Hancock, Tom Brennan, Peter Gibson and Peter Bates.
Television coverage throughout the world raises Group profile
Making it big on the small screen
WEDGWOOD has made it big on the small screen with greatly increased television coverage.
ITN featured the Group in their new-look News at Ten on Royal commemoratives.
Unfortunately, extensive filming of craftspeople at work in the visitor centre was cut to only a few short extracts, plus an interview with Chairman and Chief Executive Kneale Ashwell, because of intensive coverage of the disastrous Windsor Castle fire.
In the same week, Sky TV filmed around the Barlaston factory and interviewed Stoke City and Port Vale fans at their workplaces as a scene-setter for the F.A.
Cup derby clash.
The film featured traditional craft skills and a selection of products.
Switching on of the Regent Street Christmas lights gave the company more TV exposure.
Networks
Silence of the Lambs star Anthony Hopkins performed the ceremony from the first floor of the Waterford Wedgwood shop in Regent Street, filmed by TV crews from the UK, Canada, Australia and the USA.
Meanwhile, viewers in Japan and Portugal will learn more about Wedgwood in the coming weeks from in-depth research and filming carried out by overseas television networks.
During 1992, more than 30 film crews have carried out features on the Group.
The value of such exposure is difficult to measure but, when three of the company's craft demonstrators recently returned from tours of Japan, they all reported that an amazing number of people approached them to say they had seen Wedgwood featured on the Did You Really Know It? programme during October.
It seems the whole of Japan saw the one-hour programme and became more aware of the Wedgwood Group and its products.
Wedgwood has also been a popular topic on the national airwaves.
BBC Radio One sent competition winners to Stoke-on-Trent who enjoyed a Visitor Centre tour and had a go at throwing their own pot.
BBC Radio Five recorded an infant science programme to encourage young children to learn about how products are made with the help of Barlaston First School pupils.
Sad
Finally, sad news of the impending closure of one of Johnson Brothers' three factories, Hanley Pottery, also attracted attention from regional and national TV networks.
In a busy day of communications meetings with employees, Kneale Ashwell was interviewed by BBC Midlands Today and Central Television.
Museum display for Wedgwood in Holland
ONE of the largest exhibitions of Wedgwood Museum objects to be staged outside the UK is currently being held in the Westfries Museum in Holland.
Museum curator, Ruud Spruit, first spoke to Wedgwood Benelux sales and marketing director Dolf Muller, about the possibility of such an exhibition early last year.
After meetings and discussions, the proposals were formulated for displays of 18, 19 and 20 century wares, set in the beautiful period room settings of the museum in Hoorn.
Lord Wedgwood and British Consul-General in Holland, Denis Doble, were guests of honour at the official opening ceremony.
The exhibition has received extensive coverage in the Dutch press and has been visited by groups organised by enthusiastic retailers in the Netherlands.
Museum information officer Lynn Miller will join Sotheby's experts on 19 December for a lecture day and identification session which it is hoped will achieve television coverage as well as major interest from newspapers and magazines.
Wedgwood Museum curator Gaye Blake Roberts said: ‘It is particularly exciting that this exhibition should take place in view of Wedgwood's long trading association with the Netherlands which is Wedgwood's oldest export market, dating back to 1763.
‘It was also very gratifying to be asked to work with such an enthusiastic curatorial staff and to place the Wedgwood exhibition in such a marvellous venue.
‘We are delighted to have created this prestigious exhibition which has been well received and enjoyed by so many visitors.’
Afternoon delight
AFTERNOON tea with Lord Wedgwood at a top London hotel was part of the first prize in an Australian TV network competition,
Rhonda Hubbers scooped the prize of a seven-day trip for two to London which included a VIP visit to Barlaston.
Miss Hubbers and her fiance, Lester Griebe, were escorted on a tour of the showroom before viewing a film in the visitor centre.
The couple were then given a guided tour of the Wedgwood Museum and the factory.
The competition followed Lord Wedgwood's recent visit Down Under which uncovered a secret Australian passion…tea drinking.
Rhonda and Lester are pictured, centre, at the workbench of ornamenter Paul Harper with visitor centre guide Maureen Wilkes.
Bridal contest winners
NEWLYWEDS Heleen, centre left, and Ko Roelofs, centre, celebrate winning the 1992 Wedgwood Bridal Competition at the Wim Pollmann BV store in Holland.
Sales and marketing director for the Benelux countries, Dolf Muller is pictured left, and right of the couple, are Margreet and Wim Pollmann — owners of the store which is one of Wedgwood's leading retailers in Holland.
Top Euro official tours factory
Wouter Wilton, deputy head of internal relations at the European Commission, was a VIP guest at Wedgwood Barlaston during European Community week.
Mr Wilton expressed a keen interest in the factory and visitor centre and enjoyed a tour of production processes before ornamenting a Jasper sweet dish himself.
He is pictured with director of human resources George Stonier, signing the visitor's book.
Riding the range for charity.
Charity fund-raising champion Dave Walton has raised more than £2,500 during 1992 for charities adopted by factories across the Wedgwood Group.
Dave, a general manager at Alexandra Pottery, is resident disc-jockey at Bidds Country Club, Longton.
On Saturday nights throughout the year he had organised country and western music evenings to raise money for a variety of worthwhile causes.
The money has gone towards buying mechanical walking aids for children, new equipment for local hospitals and even helping company employees and their families.
Dave said: ‘I have been raising money for charities at Bidds for quite a few years.
‘I think it is a great way to give something back to the donors because they can have a thoroughly enjoyable evening's entertainment while raising money for good causes.’
Three years' study rewarded
AFTER three years' study, analyst programmer Ray Marsh from the Barlaston computer department has achieved a Higher National Diploma qualification in computer studies.
Sponsored by Wedgwood, Ray attended Staffordshire University for around nine hours each week and studied at home for a further 12 hours a week.
The comprehensive course covered a variety of topics including a cut-down EPOS system — as used by the Company's retail division.
Ray is now working towards a BSc Honours degree in applied computing which will keep him busy for another three years.
He said: ‘I am very grateful to Wedgwood for sponsoring me and I have found the course work to be very valuable in relation to my job.
‘Although the studying is at times hard going, it is also very enjoyable and well worth all the effort and has helped me produce a higher standard of work for the Company.’
Brand new STEPHEN Brooks has been appointed brand manager for Johnson Brothers from 1 January.
After gaining a degree at King's College London he began his career in the gift industry before joining Mason's sales team in 1982.
He moved to Barlaston as sales support manager for Wedgwood early this year.
CELEBRATING SERVICE AND FOND FAREWELLS
BARRY Johnson, Barlaston Jasper department, receives his long service award for 25 years service from production director Roy Naylor.
BARBARA Gallagher, of the Barlaston potting department, is presented with a Coalport figurine to mark her 25 years service.
BARLASTON potting department's John Porter marks 25 years' service with a long service award from production director Roy Naylor.
Quarter century for Val
IT was all smiles as director of human resources George Stonier said thank you to his secretary Val Inskip for clocking up 25 years' service with the Wedgwood Group.
In the past she has been secretary to Fred Shaw (company secretary), Peter Williams (finance director and deputy chairman), James Moffat (company director and managing director), Paddy Byrne (chief executive) before becoming secretary to George Stonier 18 months ago.
Valerie, whose hobbies include tennis, squash, hiking and, more recently, golf, was presented with a Coalport plaque which she said has taken pride of place in her lounge.
Milestone for Hazel
COALPORT production director Mike Harley presents a long service award to Hazel Horne, production counter, after 25 years' service.
A friendly hug and gift vouchers were her reward at her happy long service presentation.
Vouchers
Hazel said she intended to spend her vouchers on items for her home and said: ‘I am very pleased to reach this milestone because I have always enjoyed my work and have made a lot of good friends over the years.’
Hazel originally joined Coalport Minerva as a flower maker and became production counter eight years ago.
Award takes the biscuit
HANDSHAKES of congratulations for Harold Clewlow, who celebrated 25 years' service as a biscuit placer at Coalport Minerva with a long service award from production director Mike Harley.
He is pictured on the right receiving gift vouchers which he spent on household items and also treated himself to a new pair of binoculars for his bird watching hobby.
Harold started on the biscuit drums and has been a biscuit placer for 16 years.
New ‘career’ of retirement after spending 40 years in the pottery industry
HAVING spent all his working life in the pottery industry, a Wedgwood executive is setting his sights on a new ‘career’ that will take him and his wife exploring the scenic routes, cities and towns of Britain, America, Canada and Europe.
At the end of the year, Roy Naylor, production director at Barlaston, will retire after 25 years with the Wedgwood Group and nearly 40 years in the industry.
Sojourn
He will forsake china production schedules for fine tuning the first of many travel itineraries planned for ‘my new career of retirement’, as he put it.
Canada in the Spring is already planned and Roy and his wife, Ann, are finalising the details of what promises to be an exciting six-week sojourn.
A keen caravanner for many years, Roy and his wife have travelled extensively throughout the British Isles and France.
‘We aim to do a lot of mobile meandering across the other countries of the Continent, further visits to the USA and of course to many other corners of this country,’ said Roy.
Off-the-road activities in mind are water colour painting and foreign language study —mainly in reserve for the dark nights of winter.
His working life started as a protege of the acclaimed art deco designer, Clarice Cliff, with whom he trained as an engraver in his first job at the old AJ Wilkinson factory.
‘Learning the skills of engraving and design composition was a marvellous initiation into an industry which was obviously poised to make great technical advances at that time in the early 1950's,’ recalled Roy.
‘Clarice Cliff was a hard taskmistress — I had to report to her every day — but she took great interest in the progress of young trainees and her husband, Colley Shorter, the chairman of her company, arranged for me to take day classes at Newcastle College of Art when I was doing National Service with the RAF stationed in Northumberland,’ he recounted.
After a few years of management experience gained in clay-making departments and a brief spell as a studio artist with Johnson Matthey, Roy felt the need for further managerial training.
‘I then joined Michelin and went through their management school for two years, which was invaluable,’ he said.
Romance
But it was the ‘romance and advance’ of the pottery industry that lured him back and in 1968 he got the job as works manager at Midwinter, shortly afterwards merged with J & G Meakin.
Those companies were acquired by the Wedgwood Group in 1972 and Roy was transferred to Johnson Brothers, firstly in quality control at the Hanley factory, later on yield improvement at Alexandra and then he moved to the Imperial factory.
Over the next 12 years or so, he fulfilled several senior production management appointments within the Group — as works manager at Mason's Ironstone, general manager of the Jasper department and later of the decorating department at Barlaston, production director at Coalport and later at the Eagle factory — before being appointed to his present role as Barlaston production director three years ago.
A long-serving member of the British Pottery Managers' Association, Roy was President in 1984 and served on the executive committee for eight years.
Changes in the industry during his career — from bottle ovens to tunnel kilns, from roller making to dust pressing — he would describe them as revolutionary.
‘And in my view there's still more to come both in mechanised manufacture and in decorating techniques,’ he added.
While he was enthusing about future advancements in the industry there was perhaps a hint of sadness in leaving it behind — but thoughts of the ‘challenges of my new career’ soon put back the sparkle in his eye.
Stoke fan Phil may need break
IN our picture on the right, Phil Pountain, of the computer department, Barlaston, receives gift vouchers from information systems executive Paul Campbell-Kelly to mark his 25th year with the Wedgwood Group.
He has worked in the computer department for around 20 years and plans to put his award of gift vouchers towards a holiday break.
Ardent
Phil is an ardent Stoke City supporter and season ticket holder and colleagues joked me may need to ‘get away from it all’ as he is still trying to shrug off his team's F.A.
Cup dismissal at the hands of derby rivals Port Vale.
On the left, new and special projects programming executive Brian George receives his award for 25 years' service from logistics director Mike Cozens.
OLIVE Booth says goodbye to friends and colleagues on her retirement as a lithographer after 15 years' service in the decorating department at Tuscan.
FAREWELL to friends and colleagues…
Roy Naylor says goodbye to the Company after 40 years' service in the industry.
SAYING it with flowers…
Barbara Ruane receives farewell wishes on her retirement as a lithographer from Eagle Pottery after 29 year' service.
And more fond farewells
ABOVE, warehouseman Gerald Plant, left.
receives a farewell gift from logistics director Mike Cozens on his retirement after 35 years' service at Barlaston.
To the right lithographer Enid Randles bids farewell to friends and colleagues at Eagle Pottery after 15 years' service.
Never a quiet life for retired employees' club
The annual Christmas party rounded off a hugely successful year for the Wedgwood Retired Employees Club which saw membership and events increase.
WRECS, which has been operating for almost a decade, now boasts a membership of more than 40 who attended the evening of festive fun at the Pavilion Club, Barlaston, complete with refreshments and cabaret.
Club chairwoman Connie Clewlow said: ‘It was a fine way to end a good year for the club.
The evening was made even more enjoyable by the popular guest choir who combined excellent music and comedy sketches.’
The year has seen a packed agenda for club members including excursions for pub lunches and trips throughout the UK.
WRECS have visited Stratford-upon-Avon, Bodelwyddan Castle near Prestatyn, a shoe factory and even watched a display of eagle flying.
Herbalism
The club has also heard talks from guest speakers on everything from herbalism and missionary work to theatre management.
Connie said: ‘It has been a marvellous year for outings and we have been very fortunate with the weather this summer.’
Meanwhile members recently organised a bring and buy to help raise funds for the club and Connie said every event was held in a warm and relaxed atmosphere.
Next year's calendar for the club includes another series of talks including guest speakers from the New Victoria Theatre and Sainsbury's as well as more pub lunches.
Connie said: ‘We need an audience of at least 40 for the Sainsbury's talk on May 12 and as usual anyone who is interested is welcome to come along — with members being given the opportunity of reduced prices.
‘Although 1992 was an excellent year and we would like to thank everyone for their support, we are always on the look out for new members.’
LEN Radford bids a fond farewell to production director Roy Naylor after 31 years' service as a placer in the biscuit kilns department at Barlaston.
DOREEN Barnett, seated, with one of her retirement gifts, says farewell to her colleagues in the potting department at Imperial Pottery after 27 years' service.
Stitch in his spare time
GRAHAM Finney does not mind that his hobby gives him the needle…for it helps him create textile masterpieces.
Together with his wife Lilian, the Group quality circle facilitator spends hours of his spare time counting cross-stitching.
The couple took up the hobby almost five years ago and since then have completed around 50 tapestries of various sizes, some of which decorate their home.
Graham said: ‘I am not the sort of person who can just sit around reading.
I need something different to occupy my time.
‘My wife bought me a small kit to try out using wool — which is rather like painting by numbers — and I have not looked back since.’
The couple have now moved on to the more complicated use of silks, and subjects have varied from masterpieces such as The Old Mill and The Haywain to a girl skating on a lake and a Victorian winter scene.
Graham said: ‘It is a fascinating pastime which we enjoy at night and on weekends and the brighter and more colourful the topic, the better.’
Graham and his wife Lilian are pictured at home working on their latest tapestry project.
Demonstrators show the best of British
A warm reception for craftspeople in Land of Rising Sun
MICHAEL Hughes displays his skills at one of the five stores in Sogo Group Chain.
DOROTHY Hayes explains ornamenting to one of the many Japanese visitors who watched her demonstrations at stores throughout the Osaka region.
MARK Mayson demonstrates throwing and decorating of Jasper ware at the Tenmaya Okayama store.
THREE Barlaston craft demonstrators took part in British Fairs at department stores throughout Japan.
Mark Mayson, Michael Hughes and Dorothy Hayes generated enormous interest among Japanese customers during the events which proved highly successful.
Mark, who also visited Japan in 1991, worked in the Josiah Studio which was specially-constructed at the Tenmaya Okayama department store in November.
He demonstrated throwing and decoration of Jasper ware and said: ‘It has been wonderful to return to Japan.’
Dorothy was invited to the British Fair held by the Sogo Group who opened a store in London during the summer.
She demonstrated at five group stores in the Osaka region throughout October.
Hospitality
Michael was also invited by the Sogo Group to display his skills in the five stores located in Tokyo.
He summed up the visit by saying
‘Japanese hospitality and interest are second to none.’
Sincere thanks from George
GEORGE and Eve Whalley would like to express their thanks to friends and colleagues at Imperial Pottery for the kindness and support following the death of their teenage daughter.
Eighteen-year-old Jennie Whalley was overcome by carbon monoxide fumes while sitting in a car parked in a garage.
In a letter to employees George thanked everyone for their understanding and sympathy which he said would help him and his family cope with the terrible tragedy.
With the help of Mick Neil from Imperial Pottery's engraving department, George has designed a poster warning of the dangers of carbon monoxide fumes which will be displayed in all departments throughout the factory.
Stall they never forget
EMPLOYEES at Tuscan organised a lunchtime white elephant stall which raised more than £100 for Children In Need.
Secretary Paula Degg, Valerie Rowley from the flat shop, Pat Bennett from the biscuit warehouse and Angela Heath from the planning department, arranged the event.
Bric-a-brac was donated and sold on the stall which was set up in the factory canteen.
Paula said: ‘We are very pleased with the amount of money raised which reflects the generosity of our colleagues.’
Tops for health and safety
THE Murray Curvex and enamelling department came top of the class in Imperial Pottery's inter-departmental annual health and safety competition.
Eight six-weekly inspections were carried out and the winning department came first on five occasions.
Health and safety committee members completed assessments on the same principles used in the Group health and safety competition.
The winning department was given two tea sets and the names of the employees were picked out of a hat to find the winners.
Euro souvenir
BRITAIN'S Presidency of the European Community during 1992 was commemorated by a specially-designed Wedgwood plate.
A limited edition of 1,000 white on pale blue Jasper 8-inch plates, featuring the Home Office seal, were produced.
Group chairman and chief executive Kneale Ashwell is pictured presenting one of the plates to the Home Secretary, Kenneth Clarke, in London.
Sally Army salute
SALVATION Army top brass were given a guided tour of the Wedgwood Barlaston Visitor Centre when Canadian Chief of Staff Commissioner Bramwell Tillsley and his wife Commissioner Maude Tillsley visited the Potteries.
They were accompanied on their tour by Hanley Salvation Army Captain Ian Payne and are pictured with ornamenter Paul Harper as they signed a Jasper sweet dish to commemorate their visit.
Working together for a healthier future…and a cleaner, greener Company
Heartwatch in third year of health education programme
Everyone waiting to be involved will be seen before summer
Cholesterol — the answers
‘Eating a sensible diet is the simple way to ensure your cholesterol level stays low and to keep yourself in good, all-round health.’
WEDGWOOD'S Heartwatch programme is entering its third year and is as popular as ever.
Heartwatch co-ordinator Andrew Smart puts the project's success down to a general increase in awareness of personal health issues.
Across all divisions, Heartwatch participants are getting younger and younger and it is hoped that everyone who is waiting to be involved in the programme will be given an appointment before summer 1993.
Heartwatch gives a specific assessment of the probability of developing heart disease or suffering a stroke in later life.
Questions also cover much broader aspects of general health and fitness.
The test result which always raises the most interest and the most questions is the cholesterol level.
Here, Andrew answers some of the commonest questions about blood cholesterol results:
Q. Why do experts disagree about the importance of cholesterol?
A. They don't.
Decades of research on a major scale points the finger at cholesterol as one of the key risk factors for heart disease.
Precisely how the disease process works is still a mystery, and a great deal remains to be learnt about it.
In the meantime, people should not be advise to seek guidance from the tabloid newspapers, which are more interested in a ‘good story’ than scientific accuracy.
Experts
Q. Why do some people do everything the food experts tell them and still have high cholesterol levels?
A. Because we are all different.
Our cholesterol levels are influenced by many things: age, sex, genetic make-up and so on, not just diet.
However, eating a sensible diet, low in fact and high in fibre, is the simple and natural way to ensure your cholesterol level stays as low as it can, and to keep yourself in good all-round health.
As a country, if we all ate a lower-fat, and less-processed diet, Britain would not have one of the world's highest rates of heart disease.
Q. Years ago, people seemed to eat plenty of dripping and bacon fat.
So why is cholesterol a modern problem?
A. Firstly, lifestyles have changed enormously.
People had to be much more physically active in those days.
Also, although people may have eaten more visible fat, today, most of us eat enormous amounts of invisible fat in cheese, other dairy products, processed foods, biscuits, cakes, chocolates, pies and pastries.
In fact, those foods were luxuries then, but we all take them for granted now.
Q. I have heard that cholesterol means several different types of fat, like LDL, HDL, VLDL, triglycerides, etc., some good and some bad.
So what is the point of having a total cholesterol test?
A. As a first stage, having a total cholesterol test will pick up those who have a problem which may be putting their health at risk.
If there is no change after following a low-fat diet, a more detailed test is usually the next step.
Q. How reliable is the Heartwatch cholesterol test anyway?
How would we know if something went wrong with the machine?
A. Every single working day, the machine undergoes at least one quality control test using a sample with a known quantity of cholesterol, and often a second sample at a different level.
Over two years of use, for more than 4,000 tests, it has never strayed beyond the permitted margin of error.
It has been proven in trials to be one of the most accurate machines of its kind, comparing well with laboratory standard equipment.
Q. To keep my cholesterol low, do I need to buy foods labelled low in cholesterol?
A. No.
Cholesterol in food makes very little difference, and such labelling is a marketing point.
You should maintain a low intake of fat, especially saturated fat, and eat plenty of fibre-rich foods, like fruit, vegetables, beans and grains.
There is plenty of evidence to suggest that such a diet also helps reduce your risk of certain cancers, and it will certainly help you to keep to a sensible body weight too.
(Obesity is another major problem in this country.)
Guidelines
Keeping a low blood cholesterol level is just one reason to follow these simple guidelines for a healthy diet:
Eat less fat, sugar and salt.
Check your food labels.
Eat more fibre and fibre-rich foods, particularly fruit, vegetables and beans.
Many canteens in the Wedgwood Group are taking steps to help employees change their diets for the better.
Anyone wanting more advice should write to Heartwatch co-ordinator Andrew Smart at Barlaston.
New policy on alcohol
EARLY in the New Year Wedgwood Group employees will receive a copy of the company's policy with regards to alcohol.
It lays out a set of objectives and procedures for employees who may have a drinking problem which is affecting their work.
China division personnel executive Mike Foster said: ‘The policy informs employees who feel they have a drink problem of the opportunity to attend special counselling sessions with an external agency.
‘If the employee should then agree to attend the sessions and counselling proves successful then all disciplinary proceedings would be waived.’
Objectives
The objectives of the policy are firstly to set out the attitude of the Wedgwood Group and, to elaborate on methods of dealing with alcohol problems in the workplace.
Secondly, the policy aims to reduce the amount of absenteeism and poor work performance caused by excess use of alcohol, and to help improve the quality of life for those concerned.
Thirdly, the document will provide employees with the opportunity to come forward for help in the knowledge that they will be positively supported with the advice and necessary assistance, in order to overcome their problem and maintain their job security.
Finally, the policy also aims to provide assistance to employees with other substance abuse problems.
Mike added: ‘This is not a clampdown, but a concerted attempt by the Company to help employees tackle any alcohol-related problems they may have which affect their performance at work.
‘We do not want to give the impression that employees who have a drinking problem will lose their job, but rather that the Company is now in a position to help them without losing job security.
‘Neither a person's drinking habits, nor refusal to help or co-operate in treatment, are disciplinary matters.
‘Only if work performance, attendance etc, continue to be unsatisfactory will normal procedures apply.’
Women urged to use tests
FORMS have been distributed promoting a new cervical smear programme for Group employees which will be introduced in 1993.
The scheme is available, free of charge, to employees under 65 who have not had a test in the last three years.
Special clinics, run in conjunction with the North Staffordshire Health Authority, will visit factories throughout the Group during the year.
Group welfare officer Sheila Redmond said: ‘It is important that all women employees treat smear testing very seriously and take advantage of this opportunity.
Sheila Redmond is also looking at the possibility of arranging talks on the menopause for female employees.
She said: ‘If enough interest is shown through people contacting me on Barlaston extension 2486, then I will arrange for a specialist consultant to give a talk.’
New policy on VDU use
FOR some time Wedgwood has had a policy on the correct installation and use of visual display units, broadly complying with the Health and Safety Executive (HSE) publications on the subject.
Much has been said and written on the potential adverse effects of screen flickers, unfiltered light, and the benefits of different working postures.
However, an EC directive now lays down formal health and safety requirements for work with display screen equipment.
Directive
From January 1993, all new workstations will have to meet the requirements of the directive, whilst existing workstations will have to comply by January 1997.
Wedgwood's policy is to comply with all legislative requirements and to make the workplace as comfortable as possible for VDU users.
All VDU users will be provided with a copy of the new Company policy early in the New Year.
During all workstation assessments, the VDU user will be consulted and is encouraged to participate so that the workstation can be adjusted to suit the needs of the individual.
Here are some guidelines which you should follow in order to improve your comfort during work with visual display units:
Ensure your feet are well supported — flat on the ground or on a foot rest.
Keep your shoulders relaxed and your wrists balanced.
Avoid being static for too long by moving your arms, legs, shoulders and neck frequently.
Plan your work to allow for mental and physical variation.
Make use of document holders and telephone headsets to minimise static, awkward or constrained positions.
Take short but regular breaks.
Plans unveiled for on-site screening
WEDGWOOD plans to continue the service for on-site breast screening, which is available to all women aged 35 and over.
Last year more than 800 female employees took part in the examinations and forms for 1993 will be issued in January.
Employee concern over an article in the Independent newspaper concerning mammograms was raised at a recent meeting of the health and safety committee.
Mammogram
The story claimed pressure exerted during mammogram testing could cause the spread of cancer cells.
In reply Dr Hugh, a consultant radiologist based at Basford House Clinic, addressed the meeting to allay employees' fears.
Group welfare officer Sheila Redmond, pictured left, said: ‘Dr High advised that there was little or no medical evidence contained in the article and that the uniform pressure exerted during examinations is necessary in order to take a clear x-ray which covers as much of the breast as possible.’
Ultrasound
Another concern of employees expressed at the meeting was that younger women were only offered ultrasound examinations while older women were receiving mammograms.
Dr Hugh explained that ultra-sound is adequate for testing on younger women as it is unlikely that breast cancer would have developed.
He also dispelled fears regarding radiation doses as the radiation amounts used in x-rays are very small.
Group welfare officer Sheila Redmond is on hand to help with any employees' problems — personal or medical.
You can contact her in confidence at 
Company announces support for UK 2000
WEDGWOOD has joined other leading companies throughout the country in supporting the UK 2000 environment project.
The Group has added its name to the programme, organised by six of the United Kingdom's leading voluntary organisations, which has developed well over 2,000 self-financing environmental schemes and green projects for small businesses since 1986.
Environmental help plea from green team
WEDGWOOD believes that safeguarding the environment for ourselves and our children should be a part of good business practice.
The Group is therefore committed to ensuring a high standard of environmental management both within the factories and also in relation to operation and existence within the local and wider community.
Environmental issues are an integral part of the total quality management programme.
Awareness
In his introduction to the environmental policy document which will be issued to employees in 1993, Chief Executive Kneale Ashwell explains: ‘For some time we have recognised the need for a policy to increase awareness, to deal with environmental issues and to implement systems which ensure the Company complies with all relevant legislation and manages the essential attitudinal and behavioural changes that are likely to affect business operations.
‘That is why we have developed a comprehensive environmental policy of which every employee will receive a copy in the New Year.
‘This policy sets out the Company's objectives to control the impact its activities have on the environment and shows its commitment to being an industry leader in its awareness of and approach to environmental issues.
‘I urge you to read this important document and let many member of the environmental policy team know if you have any comments or suggestions for a greener environment within the Wedgwood Group.’
The policy outlines those persons within the Wedgwood Group who have specific responsibility regarding environmental issues and states 13 major objectives that the Company is determined to achieve.
Group environmental manager Jon Lawrence said: ‘If Wedgwood is to achieve its objectives it will require the commitment and co-operation of every individual working for the Company and not just those who have specific responsibilities in this area.
‘Your help in achieving the environmental objectives and any future targets is vital in ensuring the greening of the whole Company.
If you can think of any way in which you can reduce the impact of your job on the environment, whether it is minimising or recycling waste, increasing energy efficiency or substituting materials with less hazardous alternatives, then let your manager know.
‘Remember!
Help yourself to help Wedgwood help the environment,’ he urged.
Projects
The current members of the team and the departments they represent are:.
Company secretary Wendy Jennings said: ‘The document follows hard on the heels of the Group health and safety policy which was contained in information packs last year.
The policy will outline the Group's commitment to protecting and enhancing the environment and inform employees of new projects and who has responsibility for them.’
If you can think of any way in which you can reduce the impact of your job on the environment…let your manager know.
Your help in achieving the environmental objectives is vital in ensuring the greening of the whole Company.
Why not adopt a Wedghog
WEDGWOOD company secretary Wendy Jennings and pupils from Barlaston First School's Class M with Wedghogs.
FOR employees looking for an environmentally-friendly Christmas present…why not adopt a Wedghog.
That is the name given to hedgehog-shaped pencil holders made by Barlaston First School pupils.
The scheme is the latest in a series of environmental projects Wedgwood has run in conjunction with the school.
Following a presentation given by Group environmental manager Jon Lawrence the children were set a questionnaire and asked to design a poster and come up with a project to help safeguard the  environment .
The children decided to raise money to fund new litter bins at the school and made the pencil holders which are to be sold in aid of school funds.
Anyone interested in purchasing a Wedghog for £1 should contact Sue Meaken on Barlaston extension 2572.
Vouchers for quiz winners
Terry Daniels of the polishing shop at Alexandra Pottery proved he is in the know on the green scene when he came top in the environmental competition in the last edition of Newsline.
He scored an impressive 14 out of 15 correct answers and scooped gift vouchers as first prize.
Group environmental manager Jon Lawrence said: ‘Although the response to the competition was not particularly encouraging, Terry did very well to score so highly.
‘It has been a tough year all round but we have managed to complete a number of objectives and it is important that all employees continue to appreciate the value of environmental and health and safety issues.’
Other winners following the environmental competitions detailed in October's Newsline were Mark Greaves of the Barlaston engraving department (logo quiz winner) and Leonard Price, of Mason's biscuit kilns (photo quiz winner).
Competition answers are printed on page 15.
Pat on the back for tea service
SALES and marketing staff at Barlaston received a pat on the back for a teapot triumph from a satisfied customer.
Pamela Bothwell, of Farnham in Surrey, was having pouring problems with defective china teapots until a friend suggested she contact Wedgwood direct.
The company promptly sent a replacement and Mrs Bothwell said: ‘I had a trial pouring and the teapot passed with flying colours.’
In a thank you letter to UK sales and marketing director David Marten, Mrs Bothwell praised the swift and courteous response of all those involved in her teatime trauma.
Excerpts from the letter read: ‘All too often these days customers have to put up with defective and unsatisfactory goods, and, at best, an indifferent attitude by retailers and manufacturers to their problems and complaints.
‘Therefore, I must say that Wedgwood's response was like a breath of fresh air.
‘Please thank everyone on my behalf, their efforts were very much appreciated, and my next dinner service will, of course, be Wedgwood.’
Pupils are no mugs
THREE high school pupils proved they were no mugs when they took part in a shared business project with Wedgwood staff.
Helen Booth, Andrea Brownsword and Rohela Mumir from James Brindley High School spent three weeks in the lithography department at Barlaston transferring their Easter egg designs on to mugs.
Mugs were then filled with chocolate eggs and money from sales was given to local charities.
The project was so successful that the youngsters were awarded the school's own annual Steelite Enterprise Trophy.
Headmaster John Wood said: ‘I am grateful that Wedgwood were able to supply the project material for the three youngsters who I feel are very worthy of the award.’
Education liaison officer Lindsey Walton said: ‘We were very pleased to help the pupils in their coursework.
‘This is just one of the many ways in which Wedgwood is strengthening links with local schools.’
Not a lot of people know he won
A famous name won the name game and brought a touch of celebrity class to a major careers convention.
Michael Cain — not the film star but the schoolboy from James Brindley High School, Stoke-on-Trent — correctly named a Coalport figure, and received it as a prize from director of human resources George Stonier.
He correctly identified Lorraine from a list of 22 names.
Convention
Group employees took part in a two-day-career convention for schools and colleges at Northwood Stadium.
Our picture, courtesy of the Evening Sentinel, shows trainee paintress Amanda Moore of Mason's Ironstone giving demonstrations to visitors to the Wedgwood stand.
She was joined by lithographer Lisa Rhodes from Barlaston.
Sending electronic mail to France
WEDGWOOD Barlaston has joined forces with a trio of local schools to help strengthen communication links with industry and education in continental Europe.
As part of a national scheme organised by British Telecom, the Company is working with staff and pupils from Moorside, Cheadle and Biddulph High Schools.
The aim of the project, which finishes in March, is to send and receive electronic messages via a special modem link to schools and companies in France.
Data
Stores controller in the purchasing department at Barlaston, Dave Lewis, is overseeing the data transfer which ties in with work he is undertaking as part of a three-year course at Staffordshire University.
Education liaison officer Lindsey Walton said: ‘We were approached and asked to participate in this prestigious scheme and are very pleased to be associated with the schools.’
Dave is pictured at his keyboard explaining the electronic mail system to pupils from Biddulph High School.
Clio range a hit in Holland
GROUP sales and marketing manager for the Benelux countries, Dolf Muller, is pictured, right, escorting the British Ambassador to the Netherlands, Sir Michael Jenkins, and his wife, around the Waterford Wedgwood stand during the International Dutch Autumn Trade Fair in Utrecht.
More than 28,500 people attended the show and Wedgwood scored a success with the new Clio table and giftware range which was launched earlier this year.
Craftsman Mark Mayson demonstrated the art of hand throwing on the potter's wheel.
The Wedgwood stand was decorated by Pam Griffith of the Barlaston display team to give it an authentic English look.
Festive warning to naughty kids
NAUGHTY children beware…
Gordon Knapper of the biscuit kilns department at Alexandra has put pen to paper and composed this cautionary ode on the yuletide tradition of giving presents.
When as a child one Christmas,
I'd been a naughty boy,
I woke up one Christmas morning,
To find I had no toys,
I know my dear old daddy
Said my naughtiness he'd cure,
When I looked inside my stocking,
It was full of horse manure,
When I went out into the street,
I saw my pals and mates,
Some were on new bicycles,
Some on roller skates,
When they saw I had no presents,
They began to laugh and scoff,
So I said: ‘My dad's bought me a horse,
But the bloomin' thing's  ran off!’
Thanks for cash help
The director of the Feed The Children appeal which sent truck loads of relief supplies into war-torn former Yugoslavia has expressed his thanks to Wedgwood employees.
Collections
The Group works council volunteered to make collections and their £1,280 was matched by the Company so that a total of £2,560 was donated to the appeal.
Sportsline
City old boy saves day
Late winner in tense final
A late penalty by 'keeper Des Wilson gave the Potting B team the glory in the tense final of Coalport's five-a-side competition.
Des, who used to be a goalkeeper on Stoke City's books, turned on the style with some continental soccer skills to entertain the crowds before netting from the spot.
Both potting department sides beat teams from the dipping house and glost warehouse in a league table to make it to the final.
Glory
The annual tournament, held at Staffordshire University, was organised by Coalport sports secretary Jim Cooper.
Jim said: ‘The Potting B side running out winners was a real surprise because they turned the form book on its head.
‘Potting A have a very strong team and the dipping house had stolen the glory in last year's competition.
‘It was a good natured competition on the day and Des’ Dutch turns gave everyone a good laugh.’
The contest was run on a league basis and each game lasted just six minutes per half.
THE winning team is pictured, proudly displaying the coveted trophy.
They are, back row left to right, Andrew Lloyd, spot-kick hero Des Wilson and goalkeeper Chris Broadhurst, and front row, left, Ian Jones and Steve Thomas.
THE runners up from the narrowly defeated Potting A team are, back row, left to right, Mike Walklate, John Orlowski and Steve Majers, and front row, left, Steve Nixon and goalkeeper Lee Mason.
Teeing off for an exciting season
DIRECTOR of human resources George Stonier, front left, presents the Coalport vase to Ian Curley from Royal Tuscan at the Wedgwood Golf Society's annual presentation.
Other winners are, left to right,.
Each year the society holds its presentation evening at the Hollybush, Stockton Brook, and spouses, girlfriends and guests are also invited.
Membership
The society holds its annual general meeting at the Barlaston Sports and Social Club on 19 January.
Secretary Peter Masheter said: ‘It has been a good year with membership increasing to 63 from around 40.
‘Now we are looking forward to the new season and despite the difficult climate we are hoping membership holds steady.
‘Both Ian Curley in his first year and John Nicholson, whose handicap has come on leaps and bounds, have done really well.
‘We have already booked the Hill Valley course in Shropshire for one of our fixtures and are now looking towards other reasonably-priced courses which will be able to accommodate us.’
Pedalling power
EAGLE Pottery workers pedal-powered their way to raising almost £200 for a national children's charity.
Robert Machin and Chris Castle, of the finished warehouse department, lithographer Tricia Woolridge and Jim Curtis, of the planning department at Imperial Pottery, raised the money for Barnardos.
The intrepid four took part in a gruelling sponsored 50-mile bicycle ride.
Jim said: ‘We would like to thank everyone who gave their money and encouragement.’
‘We were lucky enough to enjoy the fine weather and gentle hills while raising money for a good cause,’ he added.
Jewel in their crown
88th minute rocket makes sure of the spoils in Group final
HIT man Chris Hackney scored two gems to give the Jewellery Division victory over battling Wedgwood Barlaston and win the Group's soccer tournament.
With just two minutes to go, the striker unleashed an explosive drive from the edge of the penalty box to give his side the spoils in a tightly-fought final.
Both defences were well in control of the game as the midfields cancelled each other out with early tackles.
Penetrating
Jewellery defenders Devall, Cooper and Copeland worked hard to contain the penetrating runs of Grayson and Brooks.
The first chance fell to Barlaston's Brooks, who hesitated on the edge of the penalty area allowing Devall to deny him with a crucial tackle.
Jewellery replied quickly and Amison and Plant were forced to take on extra defensive duties while at the other end, captain Tony Elkin, brother Kevin and Paul Moran were well in control for Barlaston.
Steve Hancock then created a superb opportunity for Ray Caci with a brilliant through ball which beat the Barlaston defence, only for the forward to thunder his shot against the bar.
Barlaston had most of the pressure in the second half but the opposition always looked dangerous on the break with both sides making light of the heavy weather conditions and playing some attractive football.
A draw seemed the most likely result until five minutes from time when Caci's goal-bound shot was parried into the path of Hackney who lobbed home from close range.
Barlaston responded immediately with Alan Hope's left-wing cross finding the back of the net before Hackney claimed the glory.
It was the first time Jewellery had participated in the competition which involved two teams from Wedgwood and from Coalport, Precision Studios, Royal Tuscan, Alexandra Pottery, Johnson Brothers and Mason's Ironstone.
ABOVE, winners from the Jewellery Division celebrate the spoils of cup victory.
Meanwhile, left, battling Wedgwood Barlaston manage to smile in gracious defeat.
And it's trophy time for bowlers, golfers and domino players
Top of the spots scoops prize
JOHN Harding proved he was top of the spots when he came first in Alexandra Pottery's annual dominoes competition.
He beat  to take the coveted first prize in a hard-fought battle at the Sneyd Arms, Sneyd Green.
John, from the casting department, is pictured, above right, receiving the trophy from last year's champion Frank Cooke, of the dipping house.
Bowlers' trophy evening
CLIVE Smith scooped Wedgwood Bowling Club's President's Cup at the annual awards ceremony.
More than a dozen awards were presented to club members and guests of honour were group quality control executive Carl Moss, production director Roy Naylor, and estate manager Jim Lee.
The Bowling Club's ceremony took place at the Wedgwood Pavilion Club and entertainment included a comedian and singer.
Raffle prizes were donated by Roy and Carl and raised more than £130 for the club which just missed out on an historic victory — being runner up in the first division of the Industries League for a second year.
Carl Moss is pictured presenting the President's Cup winner Clive Smith with the club's doubles trophy.
Also pictured, left to right are trophy winners .
Close finish in golfing contest
QUALITY control manager John Nicholson won the Alexandra Pottery Stableford Shield by a nail-biting two point margin.
He beat caster Tony Brennan into second place in the contest, 39 points to 37, at Goldenhill municipal golf course.
Twenty golfers took part in the annual event and plans are being laid for a Fine Earthenware matchplay knockout competition next year.
John is pictured, right, receiving the trophy from planning manager Dave Sargeant.