

Rentokil ServiScene Issue number 13
Green for Danger
‘The Green stock par excellence’— an accolade given recently by a City analyst to the Rentokil Group plc.
This was in view of the company's established reputation in providing environmental services safely and responsibly in pest control, clinical waste disposal, property conservation, timber pre-treatment, air cleaning equipment, water and air conditioning servicing, and generally carrying out the types of work that other companies are reluctant to undertake.
Elsewhere, the enthusiasm for protecting everything ‘natural’ is too often misplaced and can lead to unnecessary confusion in the minds of a large population of consumers who actually owe their lives, their health and an enviable standard of nutrition to the responsible use of pesticides, medicines, preservatives and other ‘artificial’chemicals.
[See also ServiScene No. 12].
The risk from natural poisons in foods is a hundred times greater than the perils posed by man-made additives or pesticide residues, claims Dr Roger Fenwick of the Government's Food Research Institute.
Speaking at the British Nutrition Foundation conference, he pointed out that ‘natural’ is not necessarily synonymous with safety and he sounded a note of caution about the trend towards ‘health’foods.
We are not yet in the realm of ‘The March of The Killer Potato’, but perhaps research should be focused on the extent of glycoalkaloids, saponins, glucosinolates and other natural toxins produced by plants as their own pest repellent mechanisms.
This month sees the announcement of The Food Safety Directorate, a new government watchdog to reassure people about the standard of food and to explain the forthcoming Food Bill.
Agriculture Minister John Gummer has also stated he is against those who frighten the country about the safety of food with false alarms.
The food faddists, he warns, ‘would leave us on a diet of nuts and cabbage — and then find too much salt in the nuts’.
The British food industry responds to consumer demands for meals that can go from freezer to microwave to table within minutes.
To do so, many more processes have to be undertaken by food manufacturers, each stage adding value and also incurring extra risk of contamination.
The food distributor then has to ensure special storage conditions, fast delivery, rapid turnover, accurate temperature control and reliable refrigeration, all of which can be ruined by the consumer within hours.
Perhaps we should all start using words with a more accurate yet emotive appeal to describe what we are producing.
The consumer's choice is not between ‘natural’ and ‘artificial’food, but between ‘unprotected’and ‘protected’food.
the consumer's house is not ‘treated with chemicals’, it is preserved, with built-in protection — or if it is not, it is built of woodworm fodder.
It is ironic that the ‘E’ number classification which means that food preservatives have met stringent European safety standards, should be equated with Evil and to be avoided, whereas many natural foods contain powerful allergens and toxins in unknown amounts.
Without preservatives, fat goes rancid, bread goes mouldy and anything not ‘refrigerated after opening’ feeds food poisoning bacteria and microfungi that produce mycotoxins.
Where now is the consumer's demand for weekly one-stop shopping when bread has to be bought fresh daily?
Consumer demand is a powerful market force, so it is vital that the consumer is properly educated with accurate, scientifically responsible information.
Dry facts don't win hearts and minds compared with unsubstantiated or unbalanced claims about possible unspeakable [because unknown]dangers to our children's health.
Of course we all need to ‘protect the environment’, but let us be clear about who is protecting whom from what.
National food poisoning figures indicate a possible trend resulting from the impossible demands placed upon food manufacturers and caterers even with professional help from specialist hygiene and pest control contractors.
The rat is the unacceptable face of the environment; so is listeria and clostridium botulinum.
The Green Party's policy has been described as a manifesto for the 1890's rather than the 1980's.
We are now heading for The Green Nineties.
Let's hope they aren't spoiled by the Black Death.
Remember, your customers and staff must be given a choice between protected food or unprotected food, a healthy office or a sick building, a sterile hospital theatre or a source of dangerous infection.
The truest Friends of The Earth are those who fight the natural Foes of The Earth.
Rentokil offers a helping hand for those who make the right choice — it's even got green fingers on it.
Graham Foote Managing Director U.K. Environmental Services 
Contract Cleaning Goes to The Shops
Rentokil and Retail Cleaning is not a partnership that naturally springs to mind.
However, this sector of the Environment Services Division has expanded greatly in the ten years that it has been operating
Rentokil Retail Cleaning has become a significant force within the cleaning industry, with many national contracts being serviced on a daily basis.
Rentokil's unique branch network ensures multiple chain stores receive first class service throughout the country.
The reputation of this division has been built up by a dedicated management team, many of which have been involved in contractual cleaning operations as well as in-house posts.
Retailers, from department stores to supermarkets to newsagents, realise that ultimately it is their consumers who have the purchasing power and freedom of choice, and if they provide the right shopping conditions, with a bright and clean atmosphere, the customer will be enticed into the shop more regularly.
Rentokil have established themselves in this market through a unique management structure.
Every contract is serviced by a fully trained team of operatives who work under either a site manager or in smaller retail outlets, a working supervisor.
Over and above the on-site team are service and branch managers who will visit premises on a weekly basis to ensure that they are being cleaned in accordance with the client's needs, and they can be contacted twenty four hours a day, whether at home or work, by radio pagers.
As all store or premises managers know, there is no such thing as a nine to five retail business.
Such comprehensive supervision and reporting can actually reduce client costs, and relieve clients of the problems inherent in cleaning any premises.
One of the major chain stores has calculated that their own management time has been reduced by 80% as they are now only involved in inspecting the finished result of the cleaning operation.
Free surveys are available, and trained consultants are able to advise on any type of retail or office property.
THE ULTIMATE [PATENTED]BETTER MOUSE TRAP
The electronic mouse detector system introduced by Rentokil over a year ago has now received full patent protection [no 2,179481]and several companies have installed the system in order to protect their businesses with the best possible ‘early warning system’, yet without chemical rodenticides.
Each Mouse Alert system comprises a network of up to 360 strategically placed infra-red electronic sensor boxes.
These are linked up to a central control panel which monitors the entire system.
At the first sign of mouse activity the control panel indicates with both visual and audible alarm signals where the sensor has been activated, and a quick response by a Rentokil serviceman enables the intruder to be dealt with before harm is done.
The wide applications of Mouse Alert have already been seen by a variety of customers, whose needs range from protecting high technology equipment, ensuring that perishable foods leave premises uncontaminated, and knowing that pharmaceutical products remain sterile.
Just one mouse in any of these premises can, by a gnawed cable or a dropping, bring production to a standstill, and tests have shown Mouse Alert to be significantly faster and more reliable than visual inspections and conventional baiting.
This system, devised by Rentokil's Research and Development department, offers for the first time a non-chemical, twenty-four hour detection and protection system.
The company is now just waiting for the world to beat a well-worn path to its door.
THE RENTOKIL LIBRARY
The Rentokil Library provides an authoritative series of fully illustrated books and expert knowledge of specialist authors on many subjects of concern to those responsible for hygiene, pest control or property maintenance.
Many of the books, which range from ‘Hygiene in Buildings’ to ‘The Woodworm Problem’are used as recommended text books on university and college courses.
All are available from the Book Order Department, Rentokil, Felcourt, East Grinstead, West Sussex, RH19 2JY, cash with order.
MORE POISON ON YOUR PLATE
The food and catering industries are currently under great pressure to maintain satisfactory standards of hygiene as cases of food poisoning and restaurant prosecutions increase.
In the first quarter of last year there were 6,586 reported salmonella cases, up from 3,818 in 1987.
This figure represents only the tip of the iceberg, since as many as 90% of cases go unreported, according to Dr Richard Gilbert, the Director of the Food Hygiene Laboratory.
The Environmental Health Officers who are highly trained in all aspects of health and hygiene, are ‘in the business of changing people's behaviour — as hygiene does not come naturally to the majority of people’.
Restaurateurs obviously know that it's not in their best interests to poison people: however, seemingly inaccessible places can harbour dirt and discarded food scraps, which in turn encourage rodents, cockroaches and other pests.
Pest control and hygiene should not be seen as separate operations; rather, they should be combined as essential components of good hygiene practice.
Insufficient cleaning not only helps encourage pests, it also makes it much more difficult to control them.
Regular thorough cleaning is necessary to shift all cooking residues.
Equipment including such items as cooker hoods and trunking, which often get overlooked, needs to be dismantled and deep cleaned regularly.
The thick coatings of grease which can accumulate on such equipment constitute a fire risk as well as being unhygienic.
Effective cleaning not only reduces risks from pests and food borne diseases, it also improves the efficiency of cooking and extraction equipment.
Research carried out by Rentokil scientists has shown the insecticides used to control pests, such as cockroaches, are much less effective if sprayed onto greasy kitchen surfaces.
Insecticides used for control are designed to have a residual action which goes on killing cockroaches several months after the initial application.
Flying pests also constitute a health hazard.
These can be quickly and effectively dealt with using electronic fly killers, or inspect screens — thus preventing initial entry, backed up by the detection and elimination of their breeding sites.
It is non-productive however, to treat only a kitchen, or only a canteen, as pest infestations occur in all parts of buildings.
A complete planned maintenance programme is necessary to ensure that pests are controlled and hygiene standards are maintained.
As one top London restaurant chef said, ‘you have to stick rigidly to the basics of hygiene and constantly motivate your staff to the highest standard.
Only then will food poisoning and prosecutions become a thing of the past’.
STINKING FISH
Residents and shoppers in Girvan were recently confronted with a very smelly problem, as hundreds of fish were left to rot in freezers that had been switched off when a shop closed down and the previous owners omitted to tell the managing agent.
The stench filled the street, making shopping very unpleasant, and Environmental Health Officers received numerous complaints.
The local Rentokil pest control branch were contacted to see if they could help.
Although fish are not a usual ‘pest’, the team of servicemen set to work immediately and, wearing protective clothing and breathing apparatus, removed the decomposing fish and freezers from the premises.
The whole incident was triggered off when the local electricity board disconnected the power supply to the empty shop, without realising what was soon to be swimming in the melted ice!
‘The job was too major for the district council's own cleansing department’, said Colin Wallace, representing the Environmental Health department.
After Rentokil had cleared the premises they chemically disinfected the entire area and the property is now ready for sale, minus ‘the ones that got away!
A LEGAL SMOKESCREEN?
There has been a regrettable move recently whereby colleagues have been urged to sue each other.
This has transpired from the fact that employees are alleged to be endangering their workmates’ health by smoking.
Paul Jenkins, of the National Occupational Hygiene Service charity, has said that ‘Court cases over passive smoking are on the way.
there is a growing trend for people to tell their boss: ‘I'm fed up with working in a smoky office’.
Under Common Law everyone is bound by duty to care for others by ensuring that they are not endangering them in any way.
In Australia a bus driver developed a type of lung cancer which has been closely associated with smoking, and he successfully sued his employers.
This type of action could easily be adopted in the UK by disgruntled employers.
Consequently, many customers are banning smoking or restricting it to certain areas of the office or canteen, yet it is perfectly feasible to banish the smoke without banning smoking, by installing the latest electrostatic air filters.
Electrostatic air filters solve the problem of smoke in confined areas as they extract tobacco smoke particles as well as stale lingering smells, airborne dust, bacteria, pollen and other atmospheric pollutants.
As general manager David Lynch stated, ‘We are not just selling air purifiers, but ensuring a healthy indoor environment.
Clients pay for the service on a quarterly basis and they know that the air will be kept clean, without any additional expenditure on repairs or maintenance’.
The air is cleaned and then recirculated without the loss of expensively generated heat that occurs with extractor fans.
So when staff are literally fuming at each other, and wanting to sue, the simple solution is to install an electrostatic air filter.
A TAIL FROM THE RIVERBANK
The 25,000 bombs which fell on London's dockland during the Second World War dealt a devastating blow to a thriving industrial community from which it never fully recovered.
By 1970 the area was in major decline; unemployment was high, docks and warehouses either did not have enough business or were closed, derelict land abounded and little redevelopment took place.
The area had effectively been abandoned as a port in favour of new sites further down the Thames which used the then new technology of roll on/roll off container ships.
The large number of dockers who had handled cargo was suddenly and dramatically reduced.
Not until 1981 was the vitality of the docklands restored with the formation of the London Docklands Development Corporation.
Consequently, eight square miles of derelict docklands were regenerated with the hope that the area will ultimately become the business Utopia of the 21st century.
London's Docklands over the centuries has seen many ways of life come and go, but one has remained; that of pests.
Much of London's Docklands are built on re-claimed land, which was originally marshy.
As the port took shape and London became the trading centre of Europe, an elaborate system of canals was built, leading away from the Thames, ramifying throughout the UK and enabling goods to be transported inland.
To cope with the demands of the growing city population attracted by the new prosperity, sewers were built.
By the time the brown rat became established, around the mid eighteenth century, conditions were ripe for colonisation and spread was rapid.
London owes much of its rat problems to the poorly maintained sewer systems.
Today, on several of the new wharf developments there are huge rat and mice infestations.
They are tunnelling down into the sewers and up into the cavity walls and suspended ceilings.
Rats in particular are highly adaptable to change and their diet is wide ranging.
They can cause structural damage and many of the construction companies are employing the specialised services of Rentokil.
The old adage that prevention is better than cure certainly holds true; as some contractors have discovered to their cost.
The rates frequently gnaw food, insulation to electric cables and many other materials.
The biggest risk to humans however lies in the rats' ability to carry infectious diseases.
The Institution of environmental Health Officers report of August this year stated that the rat population in England and Wales had increased by 20% last year.
An alarming statistic, particularly considering that the brown rat also carries leptospirosis or Weil's disease, which infects half the rat population of Britain and kills about ten people every year.
The disease is caused by the species of bacterium called Leptospira icterohaemorrhagiae, present in the kidneys of the brown rat and voided in the urine.
It can be transmitted to humans by contact with contaminated water, through a cut or graze, contact with moist soil, or by direct contact with rats.
It can kill those susceptible.
Although there are particular occupational groups who have always been at risk, such as sewer workers, miners, farm workers and slaughterhouse workers, the working population and residents of the new London Dockland system could also be at risk.
Part of the development of the area includes provision for water sports ranging from canoeing to wet-biking [a combination of water skiing and motor biking without a rope].
Many canals still run into the Thames around the Dockland area and most canal and river water is polluted by the disease organism.
Local public health authorities and water sports authorities have issued warnings about the risk from Weil's Disease.
London Dockland is a very attractive residential and business area.
This reputation could be tarnished if adequate steps are not taken to control the rodent population.
In 1783 Thomas Swaynes, Ratcatcher to His Majesty's Navy, killed 2,475 rats aboard the Duke and 1,075 aboard the Prince of Wales , using a mixture of white arsenic, sugar and meal.
The ships have gone and so has the Black Rat, but the opportunist Brown Rat remains a threat ashore.
Thomas Swayne's successors are now employed to protect the new residents of dockland and ensure that the rats give then a wide berth.
FARMING OUTLOOK
Scotland and Northern Ireland combined forces to present the range of pest control services to all those who attended the Royal Highland Show.
The Show, which attracted crowds of over 50,000 during the four days, proved to be a good venue for the Pest Control surveyors to introduce all those in agriculture to the range and diversity of services available.
Visitors were intrigued by the live specimens, marionettes and innovations such as the Mouse Alert and the mini bubble.
Rentokil produce a whole range of pest control services specifically tailored to the farming industry; free surveys and recommendations are available on request.
PEST POSTER
Rentokil's Pest Control service have produced a new poster detailing types of pests and the necessary control measures available.
These colour posters are being displayed in customers' premises, local authorities, hospitals and schools.
They aid employees in the identification of the types of pests commonly found in and around buildings.
Free copies can be obtained by indicating on the reply paid card.
VENOMOUS SHARPS
Two refuse collectors were recently stabbed by hypodermic syringes which had been incorrectly disposed of by being placed in domestic waste.
One of the casualties punctured his skin with a syringe previously containing snake venom, which is often used in the treatment of arthritics.
Fortunately, after a visit to hospital he was found not to have picked up any poison.
Dangerous items such as these should never have found their way into household waste.
Under the 1974 Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act, ordinary waste from surgeries can be collected by the local council.
However, clinical waste or sharps — needles, syringes, scalpels, glass phials and ampoules, should be collected by a proper clinical waste disposal service, such as Rentokil's Medical Services, for incineration.
Furthermore, the 1988 Waste Collection and Disposal Regulations clearly state that all clinical waste has to be segregated and disposed of separately.
Each entire Rentokil water resistant, puncture-proof unit is completely incinerated, thus greatly reducing the risk of needlestick injuries and cross infection from HTVL III [Aids]and Hepatitis B as well as snake venom.
FOREIGN BODIES ON BOARD New Scientist recently highlighted the fact that there was an increasing inadvertent trade in insects of public health and agricultural importance by aircraft.
Apart from malarial mosquitoes, a surprising number of aircraft are being grounded because of the presence of rats and mice on board.
The introduction of new efficient and fast fumigation techniques which have been developed by Rentokil, combined with the use of insecticides compatible with airframe construction, have created an international aircraft pest-control service that is now far more effective than the previously available one-shot aerosol ‘disinsection’.
All too often this method fails to reach the stowaway pests, or if it does, it fails to kill them.
The problem of jet-set pests in aircraft is reflected in other forms of transport; container lorries are now carrying many of the same exotic infestations that previously used to arrive only by ship.
Banana cockroaches, scorpions and black widows seem to generate the highest media interest, but it is undoubtedly the ticks, beetles and flies which have more significance for health and agricultural concerns.
In addition to its contracts with airlines around the world, including a consultancy with Air India, Rentokil pest control services protect the channel tunnel construction sites on both sides of the channel, and Dover DC has entrusted the company with the whole of its pest control.
BUBBLING AROUND THE WORLD
Since the launch of Rentokil's patented, portable fumigation ‘bubble’, the number and type of applications continue to grow.
It can be used with methyl bromide, phosphine or carbon dioxide as the chosen fumigant, more efficiently and safely than traditional methods.
A world famous fashion house recently found that their entire production of a line of woollen garments were infested with the larvae of the clothes moth, just before they were due to be sent to the retail outlets.
The new technique came into its own by treating the infested garments for 72 hours in ten bubbles simultaneously.
The operation was completely successful, and the undamaged clothes were in the shops at the designated time.
Other recent applications have included the entire works held in a prestigious library which were infested with booklice.
The collection, which included rare artefacts and manuscripts, was encased in the bubbles whilst the bookcases were treated for woodworm.
There has been no subsequent infestation.
Not only in this fumigation method gaining wide recognition in the U.K. but throughout the world the bubble is being marketed under the Rentokil patent and is available in the U.S.A. through B & G Inc.
Free estimates are available on request and a videotape provides a demonstration of how the system works.
BRITISH PEST CONTROL ASSOCIATION
BOOK NOW FOR HARROGATE 1990!
Registration forms are now available for the 9th British Pest Control Conference to be held at The Old Swan Hotel, Harrogate, from 5th-8th April.
The conference theme ‘A Better Mousetrap’, ties in with the centenary of crime novelist Agatha Christie, who turned up at The Old Swan after her own mysterious disappearance, and the titles of some of the papers will reflect the investigation, detection and arrest of some villains that threaten our property, our health or our lives.
Professor Colin Berry, chairman of the Advisory Committee on Pesticides and professor of morbid anatomy at the London Hospital, will open the proceedings and there will be contributions on Foreign Bodies, forensic entomology [‘Dead Men Do Tell Tales’]and ‘The Expert Witness’, among the twenty papers by experts from public health, the industry, government and the academic world.
Other subjects include an update on legislation, including the impact of the COSHH Regulations, Weil's Disease, insect and rodent disease vectors, health surveillance, the changing incidence of pests, protective clothing, ‘1992 And All That’, and a session on the role of local authorities, ‘Prosecutor, Judge and Executioner?’
There will be the customary banquet and Ladies' programme and companies wishing to exhibit or to provide sponsorship may still do so.
Pest Control is after all, a matter of life and death, so if pests are your concern, book now.
Registration fees including VAT are £298.65 per delegate, £179.25 for an accompanying person, with reductions for BPCA members, and a special one day rate for the Friday.
Accommodation at The Old Swan is at a special conference rate of £35 per night per person sharing or £45 for a single room.
Reservation forms and details from The Conference Organiser, 9th British Pest Control Conference, 3 St. James Court, Friar Gate, Derby DE1 1ZU.
PROTECT YOUR CUSTOMERS
The government has recently published the White Paper on food safety.
Entitled ‘Food Safety: Protecting the Consumer’, it outlines proposals on how to ‘strengthen and streamline’ the numerous British laws on food safety and update the 1984 Food Act.
The Bill will probably be published early next year.
The paper suggests a variety of measures that will ensure that food is kept, distributed and sold in hygienic conditions.
Proposals include; increased powers which will allow environmental Health Officers to impound food which is deemed unfit for consumption, introduction of ‘use by’ rather than‘sell by’dates on perishable goods, registration of both food-selling premises and flocks of egg-laying hens, the pasteurisation of milk from sheep and goats, an increase in the control of temperatures at which food is stored, and the irradiation of some foods.
The existing requirement to exclude rodents and insects from food premises will be extended to bird pests such as sparrows and pigeons.
Obviously the effectiveness of these proposals depends on how the government chooses to enforce the regulations.
As Douglas Georgala, the director of the Institute of Food Research said, ‘We will have to wait and see the detailed legislation’, but the enforcing authority will presumably continue to be the Environmental Health Officer.
SYSTEM OFFICE PLANTING
Rentokil now has a thriving national plant rental business with over 5,000 clients, as well as an expanding landscaping team of experienced professionals.
Added to these two, the company also sells through Acorn Products, the wholesale side of the business, plants, planters, irrigation equipment and plant care accessories.
Increasingly, plants are seen as an integral part of any office complex and are not something to be considered only during a refurbishment or initial build.
The ‘greening of work environments’ is something that is being taken seriously both internally and externally.
All town and city planners aim to create a friendly environment by providing plants and trees.
A hostile environment is one devoid of landscaping and planting — more often than not, it is the psychological effect that plants provide that creates the satisfactory working and living environment.
When this is translated into indoor office accommodation, it is those complexes which have adopted a planned approach that are deemed most ‘user friendly’.
In many instances, if plants are not provided, staff will bring their own in to improve the atmosphere.
However, it is far preferable for companies to utilise the professional services of a company such as Rentokil Tropical Plants.
When a company considers installing plants, one of the Tropical Plant consultants will survey the area and make recommendations on colour, type of plant or replica material which is most suitable for the working environment.
The plants are then supplied with an incorporated maintenance programme.
Clients are realising the benefits of having a service which relieves them of any direct involvement and staff will derive both psychological and health benefits from plants.
A recent NASA research document details the positive effect that plants have in cleaning the air.
The range of plants available, which are taken from our own nurseries, ensures that most premises can have living plants.
However, when there is minimal or low light, replica material can be installed.
As with any living or replica plant material, there is an average lifespan for plants.
Obviously leaves fall and plants bend in the replica material, and live foliage may need replacing.
Therefore it makes sense both aesthetically and financially to adopt an installation and maintenance service.
There have been many examples, particularly in pub, club and leisure businesses where false economies have been made and wilting plant material is always noticed by a discerning, paying public.
Therefore intangible and psychological benefits that are derived from a Tropical Plant service are obvious.
The plant consultant will come into an establishment to select material, and is then followed by the plant technician.
The technician's cleaning, careful feeding and replacing are often translated by staff as the management's concern for their welfare.
All involved in the chain from installation to servicing, fully understand the design and function of plants and over the last decade an increasing awareness of the environment has concentrated concern for the situations in which people live, work and play.
Free surveys are available on request.
RENTOKIL PLANTS SPROUTS IN BRUSSELS
Continuing the Group's policy of worldwide growth of its Tropical Plants Service through acquisition, Rentokil has bought De Smedt et Monsieur PVBA, the leading indoor plant company in Belgium.
De Smedt et Monsieur supplies to a wide range of customers including shops, hotels, restaurants, offices and airports.
Tropical plant growth was also recently announced through the acquisition of Sinclair Hire Plants of New Zealand.
Clive Thompson, the Rentokil Group Chief Executive states that ‘Tropical plants rental is now established as a core Rentokil service in which we are the leaders in the U.K., the U.S.A., Australia, Holland and now Belgium.
We plan to sustain the geographical expansion wherever there is an appropriate market’.
PREMISES MANAGEMENT EXHIBITION
Office and Retail cleaning services recently took a stand at the Premises Management exhibition in the Old Trafford grounds in Manchester.
The attendees were mainly those responsible for the running of large office and retail complexes and several were surprised to discover that Rentokil were into this sector as well.
The stand was enhanced by a variety of plants supplied by the Tropical Plants division.
FOOD HYGIENE SYMPOSIUM
‘Consumer Care’ is the theme of the Society of Food Hygiene Technology's next symposium, on 20th February at the City Conference Centre in London [conference fee £75, members55].
Papers will include Crisis Management; Adulterated Food; Total Quality Management; Product Development for the Health Conscious Consumer; and there will be items on product liability and litigation.
The Society's latest leaflet in the ‘Hygiene In Focus’ series is on Low Temperature Pathogens, providing topical guidance on listeria and other food poisoning or food spoilage organisms that can survive and multiply in fridges and freezers.
Copies are available at 50p, as are the other 10 titles which range from ‘Preventive Pest Control’ to ‘AIDS in the Food Industry’and from ‘Regulations for Contractors’to ‘Hygiene in The Retail Trade’.
Three more are in preparation, and the Society's Refrigerator Thermometers are available at £1.99 each with discounts for quantities over ten.
Details of forthcoming Symposia, current publications and membership are available from The Secretary, The Society of Food Hygiene Technology, PO Box 37, Lymington, Hampshire S041 9WL.
THIS IS NO TIME FOR SEDIMENT!
Legionnaires' Disease can lurk in the bio-slime that accumulates in cold and hot water systems as well as in the cooling towers, tanks and sumps of poorly maintained air conditioning systems.
Following the recent prosecutions of the BBC and several other major companies for failing to prevent outbreaks of the disease, many premises managers have found that the threat of expensive law suits focuses the mind wonderfully on the need for Rentokil's Water and Ventilation Service.
One major pharmaceutical products company recently used our service to remove contaminated lint dust from the air conditioning ducting that served their production area.
A national beverage manufacturer was saved by our Water and Ventilation service from very serious consequences after salmonella was discovered in its ducting.
Fine dust that passes through normal filters and collects in ductwork, if not removed, will contaminate rooms to which air is circulated, just as slime and algae in pipes and tanks will contaminate plumbing and produce bacteria-laden aerosols from taps, showers and WCs.
Cooling Towers in Hot Water
Destroying Britain's water cooling towers to defeat Legionnaire's disease is neither sound science nor sensible economics.
They are but one source from which Legionella pneumophila can breed.
Only a third of last year's 17 deaths and 275 reported cases could be attributed to cooling towers.
Replacement of wet by dry cooling towers would cost £10 billion and take 10 years — and dry systems depend on refrigeration using ozone-damaging CFC's.
The Control of Substances Hazardous to Health Regulations [COSHH]which came into force at the beginning of October, not only relate to preventing risks from chemicals, but also to protection from biological hazards such as Legionella.
Already, a company or an individual within a company in breach of the Health and Safety At Work Etc.
Act 1974 is liable to unlimited fines and/or up to two years imprisonment after conviction by a Crown Court.
The BBC was fined only £3,600 and another company £4,000, plus costs, because they were dealt with by Magistrates' Courts, but claims for compensation for victims may cost millions.
John Rimington, Director General of the Health and Safety Executive, has warned operators of air conditioning plants: ‘There is absolutely no excuse for the recent outbreaks.
The causes of the disease are well understood and precautions that must be taken are simple.
I warn those responsible that where inspectors find evidence that our advice has not been followed, we shall prosecute’.
Legionnaires' Disease, Sick Building Syndrome, Humidifier Fever and problems from contaminated ductwork have given fresh emphasis to the need for regular inspections, monitoring and specialist cleaning of water and air conditioning systems.
The organisms causing these modern maladies develop in hot and cold water systems, humidifiers and ducts and are spread in aerosols generated by whirlpool baths, taps, showers, cooling towers and certain industrial processes.
They are the worst news for showers since ‘Psycho’.
Water in cooling towers can be contaminated with legionella bacteria: surveys found the organism in 40–70 percent of hotels and hospitals.
Between 1979 and 1986, 1,295 cases of  Legionnaires' Disease were reported in England and Wales, resulting in some 150 deaths, 28 in one outbreak.
To meet current recommendations of the Health and Safety Executive, the DHSS and the Chartered Institute of Building Services Engineers, Rentokil's service carries out thorough surveys, monitors and assesses the extent of contamination, cleans and disinfects all filters, header tanks, cooling tower sumps, packing and drift eliminators, spas and whirlpool baths; repaints tank linings, proofs roof spaces and pipe ends to keep out pests, and cleans overflows and plant rooms regularly to maintain hygienic conditions.
Ventilation ducts are cleaned to remove dust and debris, birds and insects.
Wet cooling towers and air conditioning systems are regularly inspected and conditions monitored so that cleaning is carried out only when necessary but is done by thoroughly trained staff.
As well as removing slime, algae, dirt and other contamination, the service enables water treatment programmes to operate efficiently, as well as reducing the risk of infections, prolonging the effective life of cooling towers, pipes and ductwork, and cutting the risk of fire in ducting caused by accumulated fluff.
For water systems, precautionary chlorination is carried out before cleaning, to prevent dispersal of bacteria into the environment.
Legionnaires' Disease was first recognised and named in 1976 following an outbreak of pneumonia amongst a group of American Legion delegates to a convention in Philadelphia.
The cause was eventually tracked down to a previously unknown bacterium, given the name Legionella pneumophila.
It occurs widely in nature.
It is found in rivers, lakes, mud and even rain water.
It is an organism that has taken advantage of a man-made ecological niche, created in buildings' water systems.
Table 1 shows how often Legionella is found in hot and cold water systems and cooling tower water.
This particular survey showed that the probability of finding the bacterium increased with the number of water samples taken.
To support multiplication of the organism, the water must be warm [20–45° C]and stagnant, together with a source of iron, such as rust, and nitrogen.
There is also evidence that algal growth helps promote its spread.
These conditions are frequently found in cooling towers, hot water systems and header tanks.
Hot water systems where the temperature falls below 50° C because of the long pipe runs or infrequent use may also act as Legionella multiplication sites.
In one survey of 300 cooling towers in London's West end, half of them contained water between 30° C and 35° C.
The good news is that the disease is quite difficult to catch.
It is only infectious in tiny airborne droplets of 5 microns or less, breathed into the lungs.
The inside of a cooling tower is ideal for this.
Sprays produced by taps and showers also produce fine aerosols and here the person at risk is one close to the source of aerosol production.
The same is true of whirlpool spas where aerosols are directly produced by splashing water.
The final stage in the chain of infection is a susceptible person.
Males over 50 years are particularly at risk, especially if they drink or smoke, and have an underlying illness or are immuno-suppressed through any medication.
The best way to break the chain is removing the conditions for Legionella to multiply by improving the hygiene in existing systems.
Cleaning of water tanks, cooling tower sumps, taps, showers, calorifiers and associated pipework is essential to remove the scale, rust and bio-slime deposits safely and cost effectively.
Only then will the necessary biocides and corrosion inhibitors be able to work effectively as part of a continuous water treatment programme, which is supplied and monitored by Rentokil's service.
From Mains to Drains
Rentokil's nationwide Water and Ventilation Hygiene Service was further enhanced in July by the acquisition of ABK Technical Services Ltd of Manchester, a firm with £2 million turnover and twelve years experience in the supply and application of water treatment chemicals, the deep cleaning of water systems, and associated engineering services that are vital to automatic chemical dosing and monitoring equipment.
Added to the existing washroom and drains maintenance service, the Water and Ventilation service means that Rentokil can look after water systems in buildings, ‘from mains to drains’.
WHAT PRICE PEST CONTROL?
Our pest control customers are now being provided with considerable detail about what they are getting for their money, which is quite right and proper.
Behind the bald figures on an invoice however, are other factors that contribute to the provision of value for money.
Experience is one intangible factor that is not easily priced, so what value do you put on 62 years of pest control operations, on the problems solved for 120,000 U.K. customers, on trouble-shooting in 40 countries from Iceland to New Zealand?
Training is not only highly desirable but is now a statutory requirement and last year 2,000 U.K. Rentokil staff and 145 managers attended courses and seminars in addition to their training at local branch level.
Technical resources from Rentokil's research and Development division include objective scientific assessment of new methods and materials so that the service staff are not solely dependent on the claims of manufacturers.
From the same source come innovations which keep the company in the lead within the industry and form the cutting edge of competition.
These have included significant developments in rodent control, bird control, fumigation and measures for the detection and monitoring of pest infestations.
Inevitably, some of these have been copied by competitors who lack facilities for research of their own.
Every Rentokil customer has access to the company's free identification service, is supplied with the relevant Materials Safety Data Sheets and can call on our specialist entomologists, zoologists and chemists for advice.
Such research and development within the industry is increasingly important since the run down of the research previously undertaken by the MAFF laboratories at Slough and Tolworth but no longer available ‘beyond the farm gate’.
Supervision is vital in maintaining the highest standards: every Rentokil branch has dedicated supervisors as well as drawing on field biologists and quality assurance inspectors whose salaries are not related to any trading performance incentive.
Staff quality is perhaps the most important factor of all in providing the standard of service that is expected by those who pay for it.
The hundred or so graduate biologists within the Rentokil pest control service represent an investment for future promotion.
Perhaps even more valuable are those servicemen and servicewomen who are sufficiently secure, motivated, well paid and content to remain in the same job for fifteen, twenty or thirty years, providing a continuity of local knowledge that is invaluable to those who come to rely upon them.
Nobody in this business is infallible, but if something does go wrong, the customer must know that the contractor has the technical resources and financial muscle to put it right; just as that contractor needs to have the resources and skilled manpower to tackle any infestation, and be neither too big to care nor too small to cope.
Rentokil
Rentokil is an international service group whose consistent aim is to provide for its shareholders a growth of at least 20% per annum in profits and earnings per share.
The Group employs some 12,000 people, and operates in over 40 countries worldwide.
Services are committed to improving the environment and protecting health and property.
The Group's success is derived from the motivation of its staff at all levels to provide to customers the ‘Rentokil’ quality of service.
This quality, over 60 years, has led to the name Rentokil becoming a major international brand.
Environmental Services
Pest Control
With operations in over 40 countries, Rentokil is the largest international pest control company in the world.
Emphasis is placed on environmental safety.
‘Green’ pest control techniques include the electronic detection of rodents and special services which reduce or completely eliminate the use of toxic materials.
These include a patented fumigation system, electronic fly killers and sonic systems which deter bird flocks from roosting on particular buildings.
Rentokil Pest Control is important in the hi-tech environment of the 90's.
Office and Retail Cleaning
Rentokil provides a comprehensive daily cleaning service to commerce and industry and is the U.K.'s leading cleaning service to the quality retail sector.
Through training, stringent supervision and the use of the most up-to-date equipment, Rentokil ensures that the highest standards of service are maintained.
Amongst the group's clients are many of the most prestigious high street retailers, financial institutions, food manufacturers and high-technology factories.
Rentokil Office and retail Cleaning maintains its quality through training and supervision.
Tropical Plants
Rentokil is the world's largest company specialising in the installation and maintenance of interior landscaping and tropical plants in shopping centres, leisure complexes, hotels, public buildings, office blocks and reception areas in the U.K., U.S.A., Australia, New Zealand, Belgium and the Netherlands.
The pleasant environment created by such displays helps to improve staff morale and encourages productivity, as well as adding prestige to business premises and public buildings.
Research, including work done by NASA at its National Space Technology laboratories in the U.S.A., has shown that many indoor plants are efficient in removing unhealthy air pollutants such as carbon dioxide, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde and benzene.
Rentokil Tropical Plants add prestige and enhance the work environment.
Ladies Hygiene
Sanitact Service is the leader in the hygienic collection and disposal of sanitary dressings.
Other ladies' hygiene services include soap dispensers, automatic air fresh units, hand dryers, sanitary towel and tampon dispensers, and a nappy disposal service.
These services are now offered in a wide variety of industrial and commercial premises including factories, offices, airports, shops, clubs, leisure centres and restaurants.
Rentokil Sanitact is dedicated to meeting ladies' hygiene needs by the hygienic disposal of used sanitary dressings.
Medical
Rentokil Medical Services provide for the safe collection and disposal of used hypodermic needles, scalpels and other surgical instruments and soft clinical waste such as bandages and other medical dressings.
Special medical air fresh units and ‘anti-bacterial’ soap dispensers are also installed and maintained.
These services are now used extensively by doctors, dentists, vets and hospitals and are set to continue to grow as public awareness of the risk of AIDS, hepatitis and other contagious diseases increases.
Rentokil Medical Services help to reduce the risks of used surgical items passing on infection and disease.
Hygiene
The need for improved standards of health and hygiene ensures a strong demand for Rentokil Hygiene Services.
Specialised ‘anti-bacterial’ cleaning services are provided in industrial and commercial premises, in particular in high risk areas, such as toilets and drains, and food production and preparation.
electrostatic air filters are installed in offices, restaurants, bars and clubs to remove air pollutants.
These filter systems are particularly effective in removing cigarette smoke.
Cigarette smoke is just one unhealthy air pollutant which is removed by Rentokil electrostatic air filters.
Water & Ventilation
The fast expanding Water & Ventilation Services provide specialist cleaning of air conditioning systems, water storage and supply systems including pipework and ducting and industrial cooling towers.
The services are aimed at reducing the risks of Legionnaires' Disease and Sick Building Syndrome and are supported by the Group's specialist knowledge of the ways in which regular maintenance can prevent contamination of water and ventilation systems.
Water cleansing is a major growth area for Rentokil.
Property Services
Property Care
Rentokil is the recognised leader in the preservation of buildings suffering from dampness, woodworm and wood rot, with continuing emphasis on the development of more environmentally acceptable treatment systems.
In addition to the treatment service, the specialist survey service is increasingly valued by professionals and the public.
Rentokil provides its own unique insurance against the cost of treating outbreaks of woodworm and wood rot and the failure of damp proof courses.
The growing Cavity Wall Tie Service provides a comprehensive system of inspection and replacement of corroded wall ties.
Timber Preserving
Timber Preserving provides specialist preservative products to the major wood producing countries of the world.
Production is sited around the world to provide a source for export to neighbouring countries.
Pressure impregnation plants are installed and the associated technical support is provided for the pre-treatment and long term protection of timber using Rentokil preservatives.
Expert knowledge is necessary if timber is to be preserved safely and effectively.
Rentokil Timber Preserving eliminates the need for cutting down 1 million trees every year.
Office Machine Maintenance
Office Machine Maintenance provides a service for leasing, rental, sales and maintenance of photocopiers and fax machines.
Rentokil brings its experience and reputation for high quality service to an industry sector in which service is vital.
Major brands are sold with service and maintenance provided under contract with the aim of reducing down time from breakdowns and maximising the reliability and performance of the equipment.
Fast, efficient service and maintenance of fax machines and photocopiers is essential.
Products
Rentokil specialises in industrial products in the fields of public health, safety, fire protection and energy conservation.
In addition to the Rentokil name these products are marketed under the brand names Tutor and Albi.
A wide range of consumer products are marketed.
These include rodenticides and products for insect control, woodworm and wood rot fluids, wood preservatives and other products for the home and garden.
Many of the products used by our services businesses are also available in retail packs.
Pride in people and technology
The Group's success around the world over many years is a direct result of the dedication and commitment by Rentokil staff to high standards of service.
Rentokil is committed to protecting health and the environment at home and at work.
In addition to pioneering ‘green’ techniques in areas such as pest control, a number of new businesses have been developed to meet the increasing concern for the environment.
The Water & Ventilation Services reduce the incidence of Legionnaires' Disease and Sick Building syndrome with a very extensive water cleansing and treatment service.
Medical Services counter the risks of the AIDS virus, hepatitis and other contagious diseases associated with used sharp medical instruments, such as hypodermic needles, with a service for their safe collection and disposal.
Hygiene Services have developed new cleaning equipment for use in food factories, which further reduces the risks of the spread of harmful bacteria in the production areas.
‘Anti-bacterial’ soap dispensers also reduce the transfer of bacteria, such as those which can cause listeria and salmonella.
Conferences for 50–1,000 Rentokil staff at all levels are held to inform and motivate.
An effective Tropical Plants service requires continual research and development.
Rentokil Tropical Plants make the work environment more pleasant and healthier through the use of attractive indoor plants, many of which have been found to be effective in absorbing air pollutants in the office environment.
Through research and development, Rentokil is constantly seeking new ways to provide more and better services to protect health and the environment.
The corporate identity has been updated to reflect Rentokil's wide diversity of business activities and to promote and endorse the ‘Rentokil’ brand around the world during the 1990s.
The Rentokil corporate identity has been updated for the 90's.
Computer generated slides are made in-house to support staff training and client presentations.
‘One of the longest running marketing successes in the history of British Industry…’
Management Today 1986 
‘Its ability to extract superior performance from its employees, add value to acquisitions, and expand dynamically overseas are almost benchmarks for the rest of the service industry.’
Financial Weekly 1990 
‘Green Stock par excellence.’
Dr. Charles Lambert Smith New Court Plc [Investment Analysts]1989 
‘The Group's ‘green rating’ would be difficult to match.’
Financial Weekly 1990 
Voted ‘Best performing service company.’
European Service Industries Forum 1990 
‘Highly rated for ability to attract, develop and retain top talent.’
‘The Economist’ Survey of Britain's most admired Companies 1989 
Voted ‘Best British service company in Europe.’
Management Today — Business in Europe Awards 1990 
‘One of Britain's fastest growing companies.
Well managed and financially sound, it is well placed to continue to outperform.’
Financial Weekly 1990 