

Dear F2 
RLS 100 CENTENARY
May I take this opportunity to introduce myself.
I have recently been appointed as the RLS centenary co-ordinator, based at the National Library of Scotland.
As co-ordinator my main aim is to define and document all current planning for RLS centenary events in order to produce a joint leaflet or brochure to publicise these events during 1994.
I wish to produce the brochure in time for its issue to have maximum circulation and impact to ensure a successful centenary.
I would therefore propose that September 1993 be set as a tentative deadline for the confirmation of events, dates and locations.
I would be most grateful for any information you may have pertaining to the RLS centenary be it an update of your present events or any contacts you may know of.
Please do not hesitate to contact me should you require further information or assistance.
Yours F3
Co-ordinator
Dear
I should be most grateful if you could include the Library's name on your mailing list to receive a copy of the first and subsequent numbers of the above periodical.
The National Library of Scotland, as you may know, is one of the ‘libraries of deposit’ entitled in terms of the Copyright Act, 1911, Section 15, to receive free of charge upon claim a copy of every printed work published in the United Kingdom.
As I am sure you will understand, we are particularly anxious to obtain for preservation any work either published in Scotland or of Scottish interest.
Yours
Head of Periodicals
Dear F2
I am returning herewith your invoice for a subscription to the above periodical.
I should point out that as one of the copyright libraries of the United Kingdom we are entitled under the terms of the Copyright Act to receive free-of-charge a copy of all United Kingdom publications.
I should be glad if you would ensure that we receive the current and all future issues of this publication.
Yours F3
Head of Periodicals
Dear F2
F3
I should be most grateful if you could send the Library a copy of the above work.
The National Library of Scotland, as you may know, is one of the ‘libraries of deposit’ entitled in terms of the Copyright Act, 1911, Section 15, to receive free of charge upon claim a copy of every printed work published in the United Kingdom.
As I am sure you will understand, we are particularly anxious to obtain for preservation any work either issued in Scotland or of Scottish interest.
If, however, you have already received and complied with a similar request from the Library's Agent in London, Mr A T Smail, 100 Euston Street, NW1 2HQ, there is no need or obligation to deliver another copy to this Library.
Could you also supply for the use of our Lending Services a second copy, together with an invoice.
This should be addressed to the Acquisitions Unit.
Yours F4
Research Assistant
Dear F2
F3
I understand that you have recently been allocated a new ISBN prefix by the Standard Book Numbering Agency Ltd and I am writing to ask if you could send the Library copies of your current and forthcoming publications.
The National Library of Scotland, as you may know, is one of the ‘libraries of deposit’ entitled in terms of the Copyright Act 1911, Section 15, to receive free of charge upon claim a copy of every printed work published in the United Kingdom.
As I am sure you will understand, we are particularly anxious to obtain for preservation any work either issued in Scotland or of Scottish interest.
If, however, you have already received and complied with any request from the Library's Agent in London, Mr A T Smail, 100 Euston Street, NW1 2HQ, there is no need to supply additional copies of your publications direct to this Library.
I enclose our leaflet on legal deposit which I hope will be of interest.
Yours F4
Research Assistant
Dear F2
F3
I understand that a report has recently been produced on the above topic.
If this report is available to the public, I should be most grateful if you could send a copy to the Library.
The National Library, as you may know, is one of the ‘libraries of deposit’ entitled in terms of the Copyright Act, 1911, Section 15, to receive free of charge upon claim a copy of every printed work published in the United Kingdom.
As I am sure you will understand, we are particularly anxious to obtain for preservation any work either issued in Scotland or of Scottish interest.
Yours F4
Research Assistant
FIXED TERM APPOINTMENTS
SCHEDULE
1.
The following terms and conditions also apply to your appointment in the Civil Service.
It should be understood, however, that in consequence of the constitutional position of the Crown, the Crown has the right to change its employees' conditions of service at any time, and that they hold their appointments at the pleasure of the Crown.
2.
MOBILITY
Mobility, ie liability to transfer to anywhere in the United Kingdom or abroad, is a condition of most Civil Service appointments at roughly Executive Officer level and above, and in certain other grades where the nature of the work requires staff to be moved from one location to another.
As a fixed term appointee you will be non-mobile and not normally be expected to transfer to a post outside reasonable daily travelling distance of your home.
3.
SICK LEAVE
Sick leave will be granted under the terms laid down in the Civil Service Pay and Conditions of Service Code.
4.
SUPERANNUATION BENEFITS
a.
Superannuation benefits are provided under the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme (PCSPS).
The following is a very brief description of the Scheme's rules as they apply to fixed term appointees and in no way overrides the authoritative rules, a copy of which may be obtained from Personnel Services Division when you take up appointment.
b.
All benefits under the Scheme, save those for widows/widowers and certain other family benefits are non-contributory.
Fixed term appointees may not purchase additional years of reckonable service under the Scheme.
They may, however, bring with them a transfer value from their former pension scheme which will be converted into qualifying and reckonable service under the PCSPS.
c.
A death benefit of at least two years' pensionable pay is payable to the personal representative of a civil servant who dies in service.
If a valid nomination is in force, this may be paid direct to the widow (or widower) without waiting for probate.
This death benefit and the 91-day pension (see.
e) are the only benefits payable under the Scheme in the case of an officer who leaves the Service with less than 2 years' reckonable service.
d.
Those who leave the Service with 2 or more years qualifying service will receive a pension of l/80th of pensionable pay for each year of reckonable service and a lump sum of 3 times the pension, both payable at the minimum retirement age (60).
A deduction is usually made from the pension with effect from age 65 for men and age 60 for women on account of National Insurance pensions.
e.
Save in exceptional circumstances, all civil servants must pay contributions of 1 ½%; of salary for widows'/widowers' benefits.
These contributions are refundable in whole or in part if the officer is unmarried when he/she leaves the Service.
A pension at the rate of the officer's pensionable pay is payable for note less than 91 days to the spouse of an officer who dies in service with less than 2 years qualifying service, his widow will receive an annual pension of up to one-half of what his/her pension would have been if he/she had been retired on ill health grounds on the date of his/her death.
The annual pension is increased for not less than the first 91 days of widowhood to the rate of the officer's pensionable pay.
f.
Pensionable pay is basic salary/wages and pensionable emoluments in whichever of the last 3 years of reckonable service gives the highest figure.
5.
STAFF ASSOCIATION/TRADE UNION MEMBERSHIP
The trade union representing your grade is the…which is one of the unions recognised for collective bargaining purposes.
If you decide to join the union you are encouraged to play an active part and to ensure your views are represented.
6.
GRIEVANCES
If you have any grievance relating to your employment the Head of your Section is the person to approach.
The initial approach should be made informally; thereafter you may submit a written statement of your grievance.
Should you still feel dissatisfied you may personally bring your grievance to the notice of Personnel Management Division or you are free to raise it with your staff association or trade union who may take action on your behalf.
Details of the steps to be taken should you consider that the cause for complaint has not been dealt with satisfactorily, in spite of the approaches to the above officers, are given in the Staff Handbook.
7.
DISCIPLINE
The disciplinary procedures which apply to your employment are set out in paragraphs 10010–10052 as supplemented by the procedures set out in the Scottish Office Handbook.
Dear
1.
I am writing to you to offer you an appointment in the grade of Curator Grade G on a casual (ie temporary and non-pensionable) basis to work in the , a department of the National Library of Scotland.
2.
Your appointment on a casual basis will start on  1993 and will not in any circumstances extend beyond  1993.
Employees will be required to give the Library one week's notice of resignation.
In the event of dismissal, 2 weeks' notice of dismissal will be given by the Library.
3.
You will be paid monthly in arrears at the rate of  per annum.
4.
You will normally work a 5 day week of 42 hours including meal breaks.
5.
Staff employed on a casual basis are entitled to annual leave with pay at the rate of 22 days per annum.
For the period from  your allowance will be  days.
Staff are not allowed to anticipate paid leave beyond what has accrued to them at the rate shown on the annual leave slip at the time of going on leave.
6.
Staff employed on a casual basis are entitled to not more than one week's sick leave on full pay for every completed 4 weeks of effective service.
Each period of casual employment will be treated separately and a previous period may not be aggregated with a current period for determining sick leave allowable.
7.
Casual appointments are not pensionable under the terms of the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme.
This appointment is therefore not pensionable.
8.
If you are willing to accept employment on the basis of the terms contained or referred to in this letter, will you please sign one copy and return it to me as soon as possible.
You should retain the other copy for your own information.
Yours sincerely
Secretary of the Library
STAFF — IN CONFIDENCE
Dear
1.
I am writing to offer you formally an appointment as an established in the Department of  beginning .
You will be on probation for a period of year and confirmation of your appointment is dependent upon the satisfactory completion of this probationary period.
If your work and attendance during the probationary period (which may under certain circumstances be extended) are not satisfactory, your appointment will normally be terminated.
Your appointment may be terminated at any time during the probationary period in the case of misconduct or if your service is unsatisfactory and it is clear that you will not be able to reach the required standard before the end of the probationary period.
2.
The following paragraphs and the schedule attached to this letter summarize your main conditions of service as they apply at present.
Any significant changes will be notified by means of Staff Circulars.
Details of conditions of service applicable to civil servants are to be found in Civil Service Pay and Conditions of Service Code, a copy of which may be consulted in the Department of Administration.
3.
PAY
4.
HOURS
You will normally work a 5 day week of 42 hours including meal breaks.
5.
LEAVE
In addition to public holidays and privilege holidays which total 10½ days and are detailed in the Staff Handbook your annual leave allowance will be  weeks  days with pay, rising to  weeks  days with pay, rising to  weeks  days with pay, after  years' service.
As your leave year is from 1 April to 31 March your leave allowance for the current year will be 
6.
PENSION SCHEMES
Established appointments are pensionable from the outset under the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme, details of which are included in the Schedule to this letter.
7.
ACCEPTANCE
If you are willing to accept employment on the basis of the terms contained or referred to in this letter and the attached schedule, will you please sign one copy and return it to me as quickly as possible and in any case within 4 weeks.
You should retain the other copy for your own information.
Yours sincerely
Secretary of the Library
STAFF — IN CONFIDENCE
Dear 
FIXED-TERM APPOINTMENT
I am writing to offer you formally on behalf of the Board of Trustees of the National Library of Scotland, an appointment as a  with the Department of  of the Library.
The period of the fixed-term appointment will be for three years dating from  until 
Fixed-term appointments are offered by the Board only where the job is expected to be of limited duration or there are exceptional  management reasons for appointing someone for only a limited period to an ongoing job.
You should not therefore expect your appointment to extend beyond the period referred to above.
As a condition of this appointment you are required to accept that if the appointment is not renewed or extended at the end of the period referred to you will not be entitled to claim any rights to complain of unfair dismissal under the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978, as amended, which authorizes the exclusion by agreement of any such claim in the case of an appointment for a period of one year or more.
You are further required as a condition of this appointment to accept that if the appointment is not renewed at the end of the period referred to then you would not be entitled to claim any redundancy payment under the Employment Protection (Consolidation) Act 1978 or under any analogous provisions, should your appointment not be renewed at the end of the period referred to.
It is a condition of this appointment that you complete the attached waiver agreeing to the exclusion of any claim to statutory rights in respect of unfair dismissal or redundancy payment on the expiry of your appointment without its being renewed or extended, and acknowledging that you will not be entitled to redundancy payments on such expiry.
The following paragraphs and the schedule attached to this letter summarize your main conditions of service as they will apply in relation to this appointment.
Any significant changes will be notified by means of Staff Circulars.
Details of conditions of service applicable to staff of the National Library Or Scotland are to be found in the Civil Service Pay and Conditions of Service Code, a copy of which may be consulted in the Department of Administration.
PAY.
You will be paid monthly in arrears.
Your salary will be  pa and your incremental date will be 
PROBATION.
You will be on probation for a period of one year and confirmation of your appointment is dependent upon the satisfactory completion of this probationary period.
If your work and attendance during the probationary period (which may under certain circumstance be extended) are not satisfactory, your appointment will normally be terminated.
Your appointment may be terminated at any time during the probationary period in the case of misconduct or if your service is unsatisfactory and it is clear that you will not be able to reach the required standard before the end of the probationary period.
HOURS.
You will normally work a 5 day week of 42 hours including meal breaks.
ANNUAL LEAVE.
Your annual leave allowance will be 22 days with pay.
The annual leave year runs from 1 April to 31 March and your leave allowance for the current leave year will be days plus 1 (PH).
PUBLIC AND PRIVILEGE HOLIDAYS.
The Board affords 10.5 days per annum leave to staff in respect of public holidays and privilege holidays.
These holidays as with annual leave may be taken with the approval of the Board.
PENSION.
You will be eligible for membership of the Principal Civil Service Pension Scheme.
Details of the Scheme are outlined in the explanatory leaflet which you will receive in due course.
You will not be entitled to redundancy compensation under Section 10 of the Scheme in the event that your appointment were to terminate at the expiry of the fixed term without being renewed or extended.
The rules of the Scheme and guidance on its application may be found in the Civil Service Pay and Conditions of Service Code.
Membership of the PCSPS is no longer a condition of service.
Staff are able to contribute instead to the State Earnings Related Pension Scheme or contribute to a personal pension scheme.
As an alternative to preservation accrued PCSPS benefits may be transferred to any approved pension scheme.
You will not be eligible to purchase additional years of reckonable service.
APPRAISAL.
You will be subject to a system of periodical appraisal of your performance of your duties since appraisal will include the preparation of your Annual Report.
Appraisal will ordinarily be carried out on an annual basis.
SICK ABSENCE
You will be entitled to sick pay in respect of any absence from work through sickness.
You will be subject to such conditions that the Board determines for its employees in that regard.
GRIEVANCES AND DISCIPLINE.
In the event that you have at any time during the currency of your appointment any grievance concerning your appointment with the Board then you should raise that with your line manager.
The ordinary disciplinary rules and procedures which the Board applies in relation to its employees will apply in relation to you.
TRAVEL AND SUBSISTENCE.
During the currency of your appointment you will be entitled to be reimbursed for travel and subsistence expenses on the terms which the Board would apply in relation to a .
TERMINATION.
This appointment may be terminated prior to by you or by the Board and in any such case you will be entitled to receive and required to give notice in writing as described in the schedule.
In any case of gross misconduct no notice or pay would be due.
In the event of the Board terminating your appointment other than in circumstances of gross misconduct on your part or wilful neglect by you of your duties then the Board may in its discretion determine to pay you compensation in respect of that termination.
The amount of any such compensation would be entirely at the discretion Or the Board.
SUSPENSION.
The Board is entitled to require you not to attend at any place of work and they may otherwise suspend you from the performance of your duties under this appointment where that course is a necessary precaution in the public interest or otherwise in the interests of the Board pending the outcome of criminal, disciplinary or other investigations or proceedings and where no alternative course is reasonably appropriate.
VARIATION OF CONDITIONS OF SERVICE.
The Board will be entitled during the currency of this appointment and after proper  consultation with you to vary your conditions of service.
Where the Board issues any general conditions of service governing employment of its staff then such conditions shall, unless otherwise provided for in this appointment, apply to regulate your appointment.
APPLICATION OF BOARD'S GENERAL CONDITIONS OF SERVICE.
Unless otherwise stated the Board's general conditions of service applicable to a  will apply to you.
In the case of any conflict between such terms and the terms set out in this letter the terms in this letter shall prevail.
ENFORCEABILITY
In the event of any clause or conditions set out in this appointment being declared invalid or unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction then all other clauses or terms remain in full force and effect and shall not be affected thereby.
GENERAL WAIVER.
No waiver of any terms or conditions of this appointment shall be effective unless made in writing and signed by the party against whom enforcement of the waiver is sought.
A Waiver of any breach of any terms or conditions of this appointment shall not be construed as a waiver of any subsequent breach of conditions whether of the same or a different nature.
GOVERNMENT LAW.
This appointment is to be interpreted and receive effect in accordance with the law of Scotland.
ACCEPTANCE.
If you are prepared to accept appointment on the basis of the terms contained or referred to in this letter or the attached schedule, I shall be glad if you will sign one copy of the letter and return it to me.
The other copy may be retained by you.
Yours sincerely
Secretary of the Library
Dear Mr Gregory 
INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITIONS
I am replying belatedly to your letter concerning international exhibitions in Scotland.
Unfortunately, I do not think that I can help you with this particular line of enquiry.
We ourselves, like the other national institutions and many private galleries, mount many exhibitions with some international components, but I am not sure that this type of exhibition (primarily arts/humanities orientated) is what you are interested in.
If it is, you would have to write individually to each institution (gaining the addresses from relevant directories) asking about their past programmes.
As for large exhibitions like the 1938 Empire Exhibition, I have no specific information about these, although if you were to visit the Library I am sure that use of our collections would enable you to document the history of such exhibitions.
Today, the nearest we come to such exhibitions are to be found in the trade exhibitions mounted at venues such as the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre (SECC) at Glasgow.
I am sorry that I cannot be more helpful.
Yours sincerely
At the beginning of this year, my colleague Dr Gibson wrote to you regarding possible touring exhibitions for your venue.
He mentioned then a touring display on the poet Hugh MacDiarmid, and I am writing to you now with some more information on the display.
It consists of 12 information panels (heavily illustrated with contemporary photographs) mounted on to large wooden boards measuring 8ft high and 4ft wide.
These can be clamped together in groups of various sizes, depending on the layout of the venue.
The display can be further extended by incorporating 2 large photo panels: again this depends on the size of the venue.
I enclose a photograph of the display as it appeared at the National Library of Scotland; obviously the cases are not part of the touring display.
As Dr Gibson mentioned, the only costs incurred would be transport of the display to Skye.
It would certainly be nice to have the display on show in Skye; MacDiarmid had links with the island through his friendship with the poet Sorley Maclean, and the importance of the Gaelic language and culture was a recurrent theme in his writings.
The display will be available from spring 1993.
Please let me know if this is of any interest to you; and if you need any more information, I will be glad to provide it.
Yours sincerely
REQUEST FOR EXHIBITION LOAN
I wonder if, even at this late stage, it might be possible to arrange for the loan of an item from your collections for our forthcoming exhibition on John Slezer, of which you may already be aware.
The exhibition is entitled ‘Scotland First Portrayed’, and is scheduled to run in our Exhibition Hall from 1 June to 30 October.
The item in question is John Slezer's marriage contract (RD14/Box 40/792).
Should you agree to lend this item, it will be displayed in a locked exhibition case in our Exhibition Hall, with which you are familiar.
It is my understanding that as this would be a loan between two national bodies it would not be appropriate to issue an indemnity, although we should have to agree a value with you.
If you feel able to lend this item, therefore, perhaps you could also let me know the value that you would place on it.
I shall be on leave in the week before Easter, but if you have any queries about this request Barbara Hegarty will do her best to help.
(Jacqueline Cromarty is, incidentally, on maternity leave at the moment, having produced a daughter in January!)
Yours sincerely
FRAMING FOR SLEZER EXHIBITION
Further to my telephone conversation with your wife on Tuesday, I am pleased to confirm that we are happy to accept your quotation of 28 January 1993 for framing work in connexion with our forthcoming exhibition on Slezer.
As I indicated to your wife.
I am anxious that you should start work on this project as soon as possible, so that there are no last-minute delays, I should therefore be grateful if you could start on the first batch of frames, of which I give details below:
Quantity: 57
Size: 445mm (high) x 590mm (wide).
Note that this is the inside measurement; that is, the frames must accommodate a mount cut to the above size.
Note, too, that this size is marginally smaller than that for which you were asked to quote.
Moulding: Ashworth & Thompson code 342/462/000
Glass: standard
Backing board: 2mm MDF board.
Note: please ensure that the moulding specified will accommodate the depth of material required: ie 2mm glass, plus double mount of 4mm, plus 2mm backing board.
If there is any doubt about this, please contact me to discuss alternative arrangements.
Fixings: Please supply 3 mirror plates and associated screws for each frame.
Delivery: By 10 May 1993, please.
Further to Mrs Armstrong's letter of 8 September 1992, in which she indicated that your Library would be willing to lend its Slezer drawings to our Slezer exhibition this summer, I am now writing to finalise arrangements.
1.
I append a list of the 15 drawings that we should like to borrow, and should be grateful if you would assign individual values to them so that I may arrange for them to be covered by government indemnity while in our care.
2.
Can you also please let me know if the drawings are at present mounted, and, if so, what their outside dimensions are.
If they are not mounted, we can perhaps discuss procedures for having them mounted, probably using the services of our own Preservation Division.
3.
We shall also need to discuss delivery dates.
At the moment my preferred delivery date is Monday 24 May, and I wonder if we could collect the items from you — or have them delivered to us — at around 9.15 that morning.
On an associated matter, I have only just written to Mrs Sharp formally requesting permission to borrow the large Slezer view of Edinburgh from the North currently hanging in the Edinburgh Room.
I have suggested that, in the event of it being loaned to us, we would be happy to arrange a photographic replacement for the duration of the exhibition.
Dear Mrs Sharp 
JOHN SLEZER EXHIBITION
Further to my letter of 3 September 1992, I am most grateful to you for your permission to borrow for our forthcoming exhibition on John Slezer the Slezer drawings of Edinburgh held by Edinburgh City Libraries, and shall be in touch with Miss McDougall about practical arrangements in due course.
I wonder if I might trouble you with two additional queries, however.
First, we shall be publishing with HMSO a book on Slezer to accompany the exhibition, and should like your permission to reproduce your drawings in this book.
If you are agreeable to this, can you please let me know the form which the credit should take, and give me details of any reproduction fees which are applicable.
Second, may we also have permission to borrow, for display in our exhibition, the large Slezer print from your Cowan bequest ‘The Prospect of Edinburgh from Ye North’, which is on display in the Edinburgh Room.
As I am aware that to remove it from its present location would leave an unwelcome gap in your own display, may I suggest that, if you are willing to lend it, we supply you with a full-size mounted or framed photograph of the original to take its place for the duration of our exhibition?
Yours sincerely
Dear Mr Johnston 
RETURN OF LOANS FROM ROBERT ADAM EXHIBITION
I am writing to let you know about the arrangements for returning to you those items from the SRO which were kindly lent to our Robert Adam exhibition, ‘Monumental Reputation’.
The items in question come from (a) the Blair Adam Collection and (b) the Collection of Sir John Clerk of Penicuik.
The exhibition is currently at Kenwood, London, where it will close on 28 February.
The loan items will be transported to Edinburgh on Thursday 4 March, using the Library's own vehicle, which is purpose-made to conform to the National Security Advisor's guidelines.
I shall personally accompany the consignment.
On arrival in Edinburgh, the loans will be stored overnight in the Library's Strong Room.
It is my intention then to deliver them to you the following day, Friday 5 March, probably sometime before midday.
Unless I hear to the contrary, I shall assume that you are happy with these arrangements.
I cannot at present be more specific about when I shall be able to deliver the items to you, but if it is important for you to have a specific time, could I ask you, please, to get in touch in a day or so.
Once again, many thanks for your assistance in this matter.
Yours sincerely
Dear Mrs Love
Thank you for your letter concerning the possibility of arranging visits to our exhibitions.
We are always delighted to arrange private views for societies such as yours, and will do our best to accommodate your requirements.
Our current exhibition, ‘European Treasures’, closes on 30 April 1993.
It is followed by our major summer exhibition, ‘Scotland First Portrayed: Slezer's views of Scotland in 1693’, which runs from 1 June to 30 October.
Plans for the winter season, 1993–94, remain to be finalised, but a number of later summer exhibitions are already fixed; ‘Robert Louis Stevenson’ in 1994 (a centenary event, which will complement a display in the City Art Centre); an exhibition to mark the tercentenary of the Bank of Scotland in 1995; and a major Burns exhibition to mark the poet's bicentenary in 1996 (this latter being a joint exhibition with the National Museums of Scotland and the National Galleries of Scotland, and housed in the RMS in Chambers Street).
I enclose some information about our current exhibition, as well as preliminary information about ‘Scotland First Portrayed’, which I think is likely to be of considerable interest to your members.
Once you have digested this, perhaps you could get in touch to discuss arrangements for a private view, at which time I can outline to you the various options open to you in terms of guiding, catering etc.
I look forward to hearing from you.
Yours sincerely
THE HOLOCAUST — AND AFTER?
Thank you for drawing my attention to your proposed exhibition, I did indeed receive your telephone message, but other pressures prevented me from responding to it before you had also handed in your portfolio.
Unfortunately, although this is clearly an important and interesting exhibition it is not one that we would wish to accommodate here, essentially because — practicalities aside — we are not a general art exhibition venue, and as a matter of policy only mount displays which relate to our collections or, more broadly, to the world of books.
(The ‘Contemporary Illustration’ exhibition in which your daughter's work featured, for example, fitted in with our policy because of the relevance of illustration to books.)
I am sorry to have to decline your offer, but hope that you will understand the reasons for this.
I hope, too, that other, perhaps more suitable, venues can be found.
Yours sincerely
I was delighted to hear that your Luxembourg concerts were a success.
I did in fact attempt to return your telephone call, but when I rang you were out, and our current panic (we're in the throes of mounting our summer exhibition) prevented me from getting back to you before your letter reached me.
It was good to learn that you had managed to sell the dozen copies of the book which you took with you.
Thank you for your cheque for £107.40.
In fact, however, we now owe you money, since you were effectively acting as a salesman!
So what I have done is arrange for our normal trade discount (33.3%) to be applied, and for a cheque for £35.80 to be sent to you.
I hope that your future concerts go as well, and shall be happy to provide any additional copies of the book on a ‘sale or return’ basis.
Kind regards to you and your wife.
Dear Mr Gray
You will remember that, some time ago, we expressed the hope that we would be able to mount a small display of your work in the Library either this autumn or next year.
Unfortunately, difficulties with the environmental conditions of the area which we had intended to use mean that we will now have to modify our plans.
There are two options open to us: we can either mount a much more restricted display in the Library than originally hoped (restricting ourselves to the two display cases in the Barrel Vault leading to the foot of the main staircase), or we can examine the possibility of creating a panel-mounted display which would go on show both in the Library and in other venues.
We can say with certainty that we would be able to mount the first kind of display; but at the moment we cannot be so certain about the travelling display which, although the more attractive proposition, has much more significant resource implications.
I am writing, therefore, to let you know the position.
Unless you take a different view, our own preference would be to pursue the question of a travelling display as actively as we can, recognising, however, that if it does not prove feasible for reasons of finance and other resources to mount such a display in the foreseeable future we may have to fall back on the reduced-size Barrel Vault display.
Yours sincerely
ANNUAL CLOSED WEEK
4 — 9 OCTOBER 1993
The Library's closed week this year will be from Monday 4 to Saturday 9 October.
During this period all the Library's services in both the George IV Bridge and Causewayside Buildings will be suspended.
The only exceptions are the Exhibition Hall and the Library Shop, which will operate as normal.
The annual closed week is the first week in October each year, and allows the Library to carry out inventory control of its collections.
This is in line with the practice of many large research libraries, including the British Library and the National Library of Wales.
Any inconvenience to readers is regretted.
Queries relating to this matter should be addressed to the Librarian.
Librarian