

Institute of Actuaries
This booklet is produced by the Institute of Actuaries.
In the United Kingdom there are two professional bodies of actuaries, the Institute of Actuaries in London and the Faculty of Actuaries in Edinburgh.
To become an actuary in the UK it is necessary to qualify as a fellow of one or other of these associations.
BECOMING AN ACTUARY
‘I don't really know what an actuary is or does’ is a fairly typical reaction by many young people, if asked whether they have considered the actuarial profession as a future career.
Indeed they often have a lot of misconceptions about the profession…amounting to an overall impression that actuaries are dull, uncreative, myopic number-crunchers buried in mortality tables in the back-rooms of insurance companies.
The facts about the actuarial profession are very different.
Here are a few of them:
Actuaries are creative problem solvers concerned with the future rather than the past.
The profession is highly regarded and exclusive.
It's difficult to become an actuary and this is well-known and appreciated outside the profession.
You acquire a wide range of skills as an actuary and continue to learn throughout your professional life.
Actuaries are highly paid.
This is because there are relatively few of them and their services are in increasing demand.
Most actuaries thoroughly enjoy what they do.
The last point is most important — they do.
The aim of this booklet is to explain to you, if you are at school or in higher education, how becoming an actuary can be the path to a satisfying as well as a financially rewarding career.
WHAT AN ACTUARY DOES
It is easier to describe what actuaries do rather than what they are.
Even the name ‘actuary’ does not help in this respect.
It was obscure even when it was first introduced.
Fundamentally an actuary is a problem-solver and this is a thread which runs from the second half of the 18th Century to the present day.
It began in 1756 when a fellow of the Royal Society called James Dodson had a problem.
He was turned  down for an insurance policy on the grounds that he was too old.
His solution was to come up with the first table of annual premiums based on life expectancy.
From these beginnings the actuarial profession has provided the answers to a succession of problems, laying the foundations of the modern life assurance and pension industries and spreading into a variety of other areas — the basic link being the theory of probability.
During the Second World War, for example, one achievement by actuaries was to forecast the likely incidence of flying bombs.
Nowadays, actuaries are spearheading the revolution which is taking place in the pensions field.
Making forecasts in this and other areas is the actuary's stock-in-trade for the profession is essentially concerned with what may happen in the future rather than balancing the books of the past.
As one might expect, there are heavy responsibilities involved in making decisions about the future and it is not easy to become an actuary.
However this also accounts for the small size of the profession — there are at least 2000 qualified actuaries in the United Kingdom — and it's relatively high status.
‘The label of an actuary is usually enough to have people take note of what you are talking about’ was one young actuary's recent verdict on the reputation of the profession.
Another attractive feature of an actuary's work is that you never stop learning — both on your own account and from your colleagues.
Indeed the size of the profession means that actuaries have a strong sense of fellowship which it is difficult to achieve in other professions with memberships numbering many tens of thousands.
‘The theory of probability is possibly the chief weapon in an actuary's armoury’
SOLVING THE PROBLEMS
We have emphasised that the essential work of an actuary is that of a problem solver and that this involves a high degree of practical creativity.
It's not the sort of creativity involved in painting a picture or designing a house.
It is the sort which, at a time when the financial services industries are expanding rapidly, involves playing a large part in shaping the future.
For example:
In the life assurance industry, it means playing an important role in the development of new products.
In non-life insurance — such as fire, accident and motor — it means being involved in statistical research underlying the assessment of increasingly complicated risks.
The radical changes which are taking place in the pensions industry mean that actuaries have a growing responsibility to ensure that desirable objectives — such as easily transferable pensions — are achievable in practice.
At Government level, both in the UK and in English speaking countries throughout the world, there is a strong awareness that actuaries are vital to the task of assessing the effects of decisions taken now which may influence the course of events for many years to come.
These are just some examples.
There are many more including risk management, the handling of special projects, the development of modern portfolio theory, devising corporate planning models — the list is endless.
But the common factor is that they all require the judgement and the practical imagination which the actuary is trained to apply.
‘As a profession we are apt to be accurate, cautious, consistent, and reticent, and in thee lies our strength; but if they do not leave enough room for impulse and imagination, they can be a weakness.
The actuary who is only an actuary is not an actuary.’
DEVELOPING NEW SKILLS
It is a common fallacy that actuaries develop a narrow range of skills which are only relevant to the statistical departments of insurance companies.
The reality is that, from specialist beginnings, the range of skills required by actuaries is expanding continually — the reason being that the actuarial profession lives in a commercial environment and has to adapt continuously to changing circumstances.
Of course there is a core range of skills which all actuaries must possess in order to qualify.
And these are very extensive as a glance at the examination syllabuses will reveal — including mathematical, statistical and financial techniques, economics and accounts, probability and statistics, institutional investment theory and the mathematics of finance.
But beyond these, actuaries have developed skills in all kinds of other areas such as:—
Long range corporate planning
Pensions consultancy
Employee benefits
Market research
Investment management
Communication
The modern actuary is far more likely to be a well-rounded individual, meeting people and advising on vital aspects of corporate development, than buried in a statistical department.
Indeed, the range of skills which actuaries develop nowadays are ideally suited to fitting them for corporate management in general.
‘Actuarial work does not just mean being involved in a mass of figures’
A BROAD RANGE OF OPPORTUNITY
Far from being a narrow specialisation, an actuarial qualification opens up a wide range of employment possibilities from academic research to the whole spectrum of commerce.
This is partly due to the rapid growth of the financial services industry which has increased the demand for actuaries, but it also has to do with expansion of the skills which actuaries have to offer.
The discipline involved in applying actuarial techniques of probability means that actuaries frequently develop a flair for analysing and solving business problems.
The result is that many achieve success as managers and, in this context, the actuarial profession is an attractive route to top management — and therefore a profession for dynamic and ambitious people.
INSURANCE
Insurance, both life and non-life, has been rapidly expanding in recent years and this is a continuing trend as people and companies become more risk-conscious and because of the growth in the pensions industry.
The actuarial profession has its historical roots in the insurance industry and insurance companies still employ nearly 60% of the Institute's Fellows.
Within insurance companies, actuaries have a much wider responsibility than just keeping the statistical score.
For example, they are concerned with product development, underwriting, legal and tax matters, formulation of policy and investment.
Indeed investment management is an area where many actuaries play a very active role in insurance companies.
It is also a fact that many of the Chief Executives of Insurance Companies have risen to the top by the actuarial route.
CONSULTANCY
A large number of companies employ firms of actuaries to advise on pension and employee benefit matters.
Some firms also provide advice to insurance companies.
The size and the number of actuarial firms is expanding rapidly in response to the demand for their services.
This has opened up new areas of employment for actuaries, frequently involving communication skills as well as technical expertise.
THE STOCK EXCHANGE
A number of actuaries are members of the Stock Exchange in London or are employed by Stock Exchange firms.
Their work includes giving advice to clients, particularly institutional investors, investment research, and the application of computer techniques and forecasts.
De-regulation of the Stock Exchange, the so-called ‘Big-Bang’, has led to a greatly increased demand for qualified professionals and actuaries are well-placed in this respect.
GOVERNMENT SERVICE
About 30 actuaries are employed in the Government Actuary's Department which advises the D.S.S. on retirement and sickness benefits, acts as a watchdog over life assurance companies and also advises on the various public service pension schemes and many other matters.
‘Once qualified the horizons for an actuary are almost unlimited’
INDUSTRY AND COMMERCE
The size and importance of many company pension funds has led to a demand for inhouse actuarial skills.
A number of actuaries are responsible for individual company pension schemes with funds amounting to hundreds of millions of pounds.
Others are employed in merchant banks advising pension funds.
OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
Besides the more obvious areas for employment, actuaries are to be found applying their skills in the academic world, in computer development, operational research and as business consultants.
TO CHANCE TO GO ABROAD
Becoming an actuary does not mean that you will be chained to a desk in the U.K. About 750 members of the Institute of Actuaries are employed overseas by U.K. and other employers.
With the increasing internationalisation of finance and commerce, many U.K. jobs will involve some overseas travel and there are growing opportunities to spend limited periods on secondment overseas.
‘I never have that Monday morning feeling’
HIGH REWARDS
As well as being satisfying and challenging, the actuarial profession is financially rewarding — if you measure up.
It is logical that this should be so for actuarial skills are in limited supply, are in increasing demand, and frequently carry a great deal of responsibility.
Being responsible for literally billions of pounds, as some actuaries are, is not a task to be taken lightly and salaries reflect this.
Certainly they compare favourably with those of other professions.
For example, on completing the examinations, a new Fellow can expect upwards of £25,000 a year in Central London which could rapidly increase to £40,000 a year or more.
From then on, as they say, the sky is the limit.
One further point: the actuarial profession is firmly egalitarian and for many years there have been equal opportunities for women.
Many more women are entering and progressing through the profession.
‘Satisfaction of being regarded as an expert’
WHAT IT TAKES TO BE AN ACTUARY
As already mentioned, it is not easy to become an actuary.
You will need to have staying power to complete the examinations successfully — it normally takes at least 3 years.
You will also need to have an aptitude for mathematics.
This does not necessarily mean a mathematics degree, as many people imagine.
Degrees in subjects such as natural sciences, economics or statistics are just as welcome and there are some actuaries with degrees in arts subjects.
However, if you have not reached a good ‘A’ level standard in mathematics, then it is very unlikely that you will be able to cope with the actuarial examinations.
Entry to the profession may be either from school or sixth form college or from universities or polytechnics.
If you have an ‘A’ level grade B in a mathematical subject plus at least a grade C in another subject together with a range of ‘O’levels (including English) then you are qualified to enter the profession.
In fact over 90% of U.K. entrants have degrees, and so you are well advised to study for a degree if you have the opportunity to do so.
Training is partly by at least 3 years' approved practical experience of actuarial work and partly by tuition for the examinations.
But the first step for prospective actuaries is to find an employer who is usually an insurance company or a firm of actuaries, but other suitable opportunities are also available.
University or polytechnic students should apply to their Careers Service for a list of possible employers while school leavers may be advised by the school or college careers adviser or the local authority careers adviser.
Full details on the training and examinations are contained in the inserts in the sleeve of this booklet, but basically you will have to take two groups of examinations.
0
‘The amount of studying for the exams comes as quite a shock’
SUBJECTS 1–6
The 6 subjects in this group cover mathematical, statistical and financial techniques.
Some exemptions may be granted (see the insert).
It is also possible to study for these examinations by taking a one-year full time course at The City or Heriot Watt Universities.
However, many students study  for the examinations by correspondence courses provided by the Institute's Education Service.
SUBJECTS 7–10
The application of the material covered in the first six subjects to professional problems is tested in the last four subjects.
Study for these is normally by correspondence which can be supplemented in London and certain other major centres by lectures and discussion classes.
However although many employers grant day release facilities, most of your preparation for the examinations will take place outside office hours.
You will be awarded the Associateship (A.I.A.) once you have passed the examinations and the Fellowship (F.I.A.) once you have the required experience (see the insert).
To become an Associate you must be at least 23.
ROUTES TO QUALIFICATION
FURTHER INFORMATION
The Institute of Actuaries and the Faculty of Actuaries have made a videotape called ‘Actuaries’ which is available for viewing from university and polytechnic career services.
If you would like further information, contact the nearest Local Education Representative or your Higher Education Liaison Officer whose names and addresses are given on the insert.
Alternatively, write to: John Waugh 