

From the Presidents
This first annual review from the Institute and Faculty of Actuaries comes at a time of ever-increasing activity, change and challenge within the work of the UK actuary.
Actuaries have long been associated with life assurance business and pensions.
In both areas our principal concern is in ensuring that the interests and expectations of life assurance policyholders and members of pension funds are best protected.
We play a significant role in the supervision of insurance companies and pension funds, providing a link between the supervisors and the companies and funds.
This link, which has been developed in the UK and Ireland, is unique within the European Community and has enabled insurance companies and pension funds to operate with greater freedom which in turn has resulted in greater value for the consumer.
Much of our present activity is directed towards building upon these solid foundations — the ultimate aim always being to strive for the best interests of the general public concerned.
Increasingly the profession is extending its activities in the wider financial services sector and also within the European Community.
It is particularly appropriate that this first annual review from the Institute and Faculty comes at the end of a year which has seen so much co-operation between our two organisations.
The two Councils met together in York in March and agreed a mission statement for the profession —
‘to develop the role and enhance the reputation of the actuarial profession in providing expert and relevant solutions to financial and business problems, especially those involving uncertain future events’.
This statement together with a series of strategic aims (set out on page 2) and more specific objectives will guide the Councils in establishing specific action plans for the next three years.
The success of these plans will be determined largely by the extent to which members take a pro-active role in the areas identified.
The need for effective communications, both with our members and others, has never been so great as in these times of significant change and development.
The production of this review is largely driven by our desire to achieve this.
The two Councils were also pleased to support the launch of a monthly magazine, ‘The Actuary’, last summer.
In partnership with the Staple Inn Actuarial Society, we look forward to building on the success of the first year's issues and to the increasing use of the magazine as a means of effective two-way communications.
Developments in Europe continue apace as many of the directives and associated legislation from the European Community affect areas of work for our profession.
We are keen that the benefits to the ultimate consumer of our systems of supervision and actuarial control be fully understood by EC legislators.
We are very pleased to see that the draft directives are allowing the partnership between the profession and the supervisory authorities to continue.
Also, in the field of educating future actuaries, we are sharing our long experience of running an education service with many colleagues in both Western and Eastern Europe.
We are determined that our training and examination procedures keep pace with current developments generally in the field of education.
To this end a comprehensive review of the training and examination syllabus has been undertaken and we are now embarking on a period of consultation with a view to implementing a more up-to-date system in two years' time.
Though we maintain a relatively small profession in the UK, our numbers have increased by 28% over the last five years and the number of actuarial students is up by 45%.
We have a degree of influence in the UK which is quite out of proportion to our relatively small number.
The Councils of the Institute and Faculty are determined that we should strive to achieve even more influence within our areas of expertise and this will call for ever greater involvement of our current and future members in these areas both in the UK and overseas, particularly Europe.
STRATEGIC AIMS OF THE PROFESSION
Standards
To achieve the highest professional standards of integrity, expertise and relevance in the giving of actuarial advice.
Education
To maintain the high educational standards necessary for the exercise of the profession and to promote research and extension of relevant knowledge.
Professional Development
To encourage and promote professional and related personal development of members.
Standing
To raise awareness, understanding and esteem of the profession and to promote a positive image.
Influence
To promote the influence of the profession in all areas where actuarial opinions would be of value.
Life Assurance
UK insurance legislation places great importance on the role of the Appointed Actuary to a long-term insurance company.
This role is unique within the European Community countries.
We are naturally anxious to retain this position and to ensure that EC legislation encourages a similar approach.
The Department of Trade and Industry has produced a Consultation Paper, ‘Strengthening the Appointed Actuary System’, which recommends the introduction of a practising certificate for Appointed Actuaries.
We have welcomed the DTI's proposals and are now preparing the criteria on which the issue of such certificates will be based.
We take every opportunity to explain the crucial role played by the Appointed Actuary in the management of the company and to this end have recently published a booklet for non-actuarial directors and other senior managers of life assurance companies summarising the responsibilities and duties.
The principal objective of the system of supervision with the Appointed Actuary is to give emphasis to the importance of providing fair value for consumers of life assurance products and ensuring their security, rather than to provide protection for the insurance company.
Actuaries continue to play an active part in consultations on the disclosure of information during the sale of life assurance products.
The present volume of disclosure is detailed and excessive, and still does not address some of the critical issues which prospective policyholders need in making informed choices and decisions.
In recent years, there have been a number of contested take-overs and mergers of insurance companies in the UK.
We have often played significant roles in such events, with actuarial advisers acting for both sides of many of the transactions.
The publicity surrounding such cases and the call for greater disclosure in life assurance company accounts have led to some proposals for introducing new accounting practices for proprietary life companies which seek to re-spread shareholder profits more relevantly over the term of the individual policies.
These proposals need to be considered in the context of both new European directives and also of the UK life market.
Actuaries are helping to facilitate these discussions.
Pensions
A growing proportion of the profession in the UK is engaged in consulting practice, as the chart on the back of this review indicates.
Many consultants work exclusively in the pensions field.
Furthermore, an increasing number of actuaries employed by insurance companies work on pensions issues.
The statutory framework for pension schemes in the UK is such that the actuary's role is largely governed by the operation of Guidance Notes issued by the Institute and Faculty rather than by legislation and regulation.
We work closely with the Department of Social Security in developing such guidance and are keen to preserve this relationship as we believe it provides more flexibility and enables actuaries to apply their professional judgement ultimately for the benefit of the pension scheme member.
During the year under review, new Guidance Notes were issued on the subject of transfers and the new accounting rules, SSAP 24, in relation to the accounting for pension costs.
We expect further guidance will be necessary in relation to the treatment of surpluses in pension funds, though recently considerable uncertainties have arisen in this area about the cost of pension provision as a result of the European Court judgment, often referred to as the ‘Barber Case’.
Developments in Europe, particularly the Barber Case and other statements in relation to the equalisation of retirement ages, have created considerable uncertainty in the pension industry.
In view of the relationship between occupational pension schemes, particularly contracted-out final salary schemes, and the State scheme, we feel that this uncertainty is likely to continue since the Government has made no indication that State pension ages will be equalised.
We have publicly stated that we believe the Government should address this issue sooner rather than later and have suggested that a flexible approach to State pension age could be achieved with little additional cost to the State.
The problems raised by the Barber Case and the associated questions of equal retirement ages will continue to tax actuaries working in the pensions field.
A further important issue concerning the relationship between the State scheme, contracted-out final salary schemes and, increasingly, personal pensions, is the terms for contracting-out over the period 1993 to 1998.
The Government, on the advice of the Government Actuary, must announce the terms for contracting-out next April.
We expect to be actively involved in the discussion process and shall work closely with the various Departments who will ultimately make their recommendations to Government.
The methods commonly adopted in the UK for the pre-funding of pensions liabilities are not commonly found in other European Community countries.
Furthermore, the relationship in the UK between pensions legislation, Finance Arts, Social Security Acts, the Financial Services Act and Trust Law is also unique  within Europe.
A pensions directive is currently being prepared by the European Commission and it will require extremely careful consideration if it is to achieve the desired effect of not restricting labour mobility with the European Community.
We are keen to promote the UK system of funding which we believe provides the necessary protection for pensions scheme members.
This system, together with actuarial certification, guidance and disclosure, should provide the optimum protection for all pension scheme members without the need to impose rigid minimum funding standards and other legislative requirements.
We shall continue to press strongly for this approach to pension provision in the next round of discussions on the proposed pensions directive.
General Insurance
The pace of actuarial involvement in general insurance continues to increase as shown by the demand for a growing number of actuaries to specialise in this area.
In a number of overseas countries the role of actuaries has been enhanced by requiring them to fulfil a statutory role.
Recent announcements made in the USA, Canada and Norway have increased the statutory responsibilities for actuaries.
As a result of the international involvement of UK companies and the Lloyds market, especially in London, the profession is responding to requests to advise increasingly in assessing the financial soundness of UK companies whether in a statutory or non-statutory role.
Already, in the past year, Lloyds has introduced regulations requiring actuarial certification in certain specific circumstances.
We are responding to this increasing demand by continuing to promote a strong research and educational programme through the General Insurance Study Group.
As in so many other areas, developments in the European general insurance field are providing the profession with much more work in monitoring and reviewing draft directives and associated legislation from the regulatory authorities.
Actuaries have been increasingly involved in merger and acquisition activity in the general insurance field.
A number of issues are arising in relation to the way actuaries are involved and the way advice and assumptions are given.
We are currently considering these issues and expect to offer advice and guidance to actuaries who find themselves in these circumstances which can often prove difficult for a professional advisor.
Europe
A recurring issue throughout this review concerns developments within Europe.
In virtually all the fields of activity of the profession, proposed directives and legislation have the potential to significantly impact on the work of the actuary.
We have established a European joint committee to act as a focal point for EC issues affecting the profession and the areas in which we work and to ensure that all such issues are kept under review.
We have made submissions to the Commission with our views on proposed life assurance and pensions directives and we have had successful meetings with representatives of the Commission on the issued raised in both these areas.
This is an important time in the development of financial institutions across the community and we are determined that the actuarial professional should play its part in laying the proper foundations, to ensure the most effective protection for the rights and security of the ultimate consumer
The Groupe Consultatif des Associations d'Actuaires des Pays des  Communautés Européennes is an Association established by the National Associations of Actuaries in the EC.
It not only represents the profession towards the Institutions of the EC where it has made significant contributions, but is also the focal point for the discussion of matters of common interest to the profession throughout Europe.
Naturally, we are well represented in this body, with the Institute providing vital secretarial support.
A further important European issue concerns the adoption by the European Council of a Directive on a general system for the recognition of higher education diplomas awarded on completion of at least three years' professional education and training.
An agreement between the National Actuarial Associations in the EC is being implemented which provides for the mutual recognition by each Association of the members of other EC Associations who wish to pursue the profession in other member countries.
Mortality
The Actuarial profession has its foundations in the practice of life assurance in the early to mid-19th century.
The impact of mortality rates on the early development of the life assurance industry had much greater significance that it does today.
and actuaries developed a specialist skill in the analysis and production of mortality rates.
Ever since these early beginnings the Institute and Faculty, through the Continuous Mortality Investigation Bureau, have jointly carried out mortality and sickness investigations for the long-term insurance industry.
In the last year new standard tables of mortality have been published by the Bureau.
Computers programmes have been developed and are available for calculating a wide range of actuarial functions.
The Bureau carries out regular reviews of each contributing office's mortality and sickness experience against the general experience for all offices.
Currently a major analysis of permanent health insurance statistics is being undertaken.
After many years of gradual improvement in mortality rates generally, the emergence of AIDS has brought a dramatic reversal in certain specific groups.
We are closely monitoring the development of the virus, its current and likely future impact on mortality rates and have produced a number of bulletins summarising the results of our work.
The profession has played a significant part in the development of products for long-term insurance companies and this has been helped considerably by the work carried out by the CMI Bureau, something which is unique in Europe.
This will continue to provide a major role for the profession in the conduct of life assurance and pensions business.
Investment
The work of actuaries in investment has been rapidly expanding over recent years in the following areas: financial measurement and control; capital management and corporate risk; strategic and tactical asset allocation; systematic stock selection; stochastic investment models and performance measurement.
We believe the methods and systems we have developed in the management of organisations in our more traditional areas of insurance and pensions can be applied, in principle, to many other business areas.
Through FIMAG, the joint Institute and Faculty Group formed to research these areas, we hope to exploit interesting new opportunities.
One of the more prominent activities with which the profession is associated concerns the production of the FT-Actuaries Indices.
The daily change in the FT-Actuaries All Share Index is frequently used to illustrate the general movement in Stock Market prices on a daily basis.
Members of the profession working together with other professionals from the investment community, regularly review the classification of companies in the various indices and recommend changes and the creation of new indices as appropriate.
With the increasing internationalisation of investment markets this area of our work is likely to expand and acquire even greater prominence.
FT-Actuaries World Indices are now produced and we are currently reviewing the operation of these indices and expect to produce revised rules and methods during the current year.