

EDITOR'S DESK
Searching for a role.
In these unnervingly fast-moving times, even the most established on institutions has to keep recreating itself to capitalise on its attributes — or to avoid extinction.
If it wasn't there already, the impact of recession has spurred awareness in the corporate law sector that you can't just sit and wait for clients to come to your door with their next little legal exercise.
On the plus side, wouldn't it be nice if the clients were helped to look ahead and didn't go on lurching from legal hitch to last-minute legal hitch?
Time for a little client-oriented proactivity.
Trouble is, as our Law Survey shows, that's not the way business wants to work.
Telephone interviews with over 400 Scottish businesses, typifying the community, picked up impressively high rates of satisfaction.
Yet what they seem satisfied with is that they initiate contact with the lawyer, and not the other way round, as and when they think he or she is needed.
Sign the document, pay the fee and that's that until the next time.
There isn't a lot of potential to add value to a relationship like that.
Of course the bigger clients are getting the message and do keep in touch but with the rest it's proving hard work teasing out the issues and reassuring there's value in it for them.
Some initiatives have already fallen on stony ground, but, as we see in subsequent features, others keep coming.
There are even moves to make commercial litigation more client-friendly, to hold on to the business that's dribbling away southwards if not to attract more in.
The fact remains that it will be a long time before the legal profession properly shakes off the constraints of client expectation that force it to underplay its modern role.
Among those clearly and actively wishing their institutions would stick to their old role are many of the with-profits policyholders of the mutual life companies.
Unfortunately, as Ian Harper reveals in Personal Finance, that too places unconscionable constraints on those companies that wish to grow and more may be forced to follow Scottish Equitable's example of doing a deal with a big external investor, if not go for wholesale demutualisation.
Happier are those that can switch between roles as and when conditions dictate.
The surveyors until recently seemed to have permanently taken on the boom-led guise of deal-makers, Ken Houston writes in Property.
Yet now it is so much harder to move assets they are re-asserting their traditional role, not least through the marketing of property audits, in helping businesses to manage them more effectively instead.
For all this many professions and other service providers still cast their eyes enviously at accountants and the apparent ease with which they can offer additional services to clients, thanks to the automatic access granted by audit.
Yet even those outside the profession will know it has not been an easy road recently.
Briefing reports on further developments (including the new-style auditors' report) which, present new and no less demanding challenges.
More and more these days the demands are made on all the individuals within an organisation as resources shrink and the drive for quality mounts.
Yet, Margaret Ramsay reports in Management, the resulting stress can negate the productivity gains.
Her article reveals that among the more easily preventable or curable types of stress are the work-related ones.
Stress management in this respect is a matter of good management: not least, of managers giving themselves and their staff a clear, forward-looking idea of their role and how well they are fulfilling it.
Without that, these are unnerving times indeed.
MADE IN SCOTLAND
Troubled wake for a quiet operator
Even his own kind in the Scottish health service found Don Cruickshank hard to handle.
Neil Fitzgerald profiles the Virgin man turned health boss and now head of Oftel.
Whether from the industries themselves, inquisitorial environmental lobby groups, the pressure and criticism directed at the regulators of the former nationalised industries have been unrelenting.
Few, however, will have been as well-prepared for this as Don Cruickshank, the; new director-general of the telecommunications regulator, Oftel, who has come to the post after three years as the first-ever chief executive of the National Health Service in Scotland where public controversy, as he put it, ‘is part of the job’.
Indeed, the internal acrimony levelled against him at times has been such that, when his departure was announced, the best that some figures within the health network could say was ‘we'll be very happy to wish him goodbye’.
This may seem the predictable conclusion to a scenario involving, as unions and Opposition politicians indeed presented it at the start, the injection of a ‘private sector hatchet man’ at the top of a highly sensitive public sector organisation.
However, as is the way of such things, the reality is a good deal more complicated.
Scots-born (in Elgin), educated at Aberdeen University, qualifying as a CA, then joining Alcan Aluminium, he realised his experience and qualifications were ‘quite narrow’ and so headed off to Manchester Business School and an MBA which then took him into international consultancy with McKinsey.
The continuity was then broken when in 1977 he was approached by a head-hunter and asked if he was interested in working in the communications industry, or Fleet Street —‘a contradiction in terms’, he said — and found himself working under Duke Hussey as commercial director at Times Newspapers, becoming general manager of the Sunday Times.
Finding the work ‘quite fun’, from then on his commercial career was set to remain in the media industry, moving in 1980 to be director of Pearson's information and entertainment division then, in 1984, becoming managing director of Virgin group where, operationally, he was responsible for the record, video, entertainment and retail businesses (including the group's Megastores).
Meanwhile, however, another career strand had become woven in back at McKinseys where, he said, he had done a number of health service assignments with John Banham (the future first head of the English Audit Commission before he became director of the Confederation of British Industry).
‘I'd spent quite a bit of time then visiting district nurses and accident and emergency departments which gave me a real insight into the health service and an understanding of the commitment there was around,’ Cruickshank said.
So when he was approached in the early '80s to be part-time chairman of Wandsworth Health Authority in London ‘I knew what I was taking on’.
The appointment enabled him to engage in a process of comparing and contrasting between his main job and the health one.
‘It was a refreshing change of challenges and issues, seeing if you could deliver new ideas through old skills,’ he said.
‘Yes, it's harder to be entrepreneurial in the public sector than in the private one and there are more rules, but they are good rules and in fact there are more similarities between the two sectors than differences.’
Then, in 1988, Virgin's buccaneering founder Richard Branson mounted a buyout of the group's shares from the stock market.
‘And once that was decided there was no room for both of us,’ Cruickshank said.
At Virgin, over and above establishing more centralised management functions ‘my role was to ensure we were informal but not casual, to the extent that Richard had a limited number of objectives we were committed to spending money on, based on a view of; the company and the things we had to do well’, he said.
When he started at the NHS in Scotland in 1989 he took the same approach.
(Perhaps this was where the first shock to people in the field arose 0 as one said, ‘we were expecting an all-singing Branson man and what we got was, although he could be very charming, a quiet, distinctly unvibrant and very determined person’.)
‘The  difference was that at Virgin, in answering the question ‘what do we do well?’ people immediately thought in terms of the customer whereas in the health service you have to tease it out.
‘There was a lack of a shared view about what the health service's purpose was, and yet without that how can you know if you've done a good or a bad job?
So I spent my first year developing that, translating it into a job description for me an my colleagues, structuring plans for the health boards and therefore job descriptions for general managers — it was a cascade — to help people in their everyday jobs, involving examining what proportions of the organisation were crucial, not just to the people within them, but to those using them.’
In his view, what makes the task different in the public sector is that many of the objectives are ‘unquantified and multi-faceted.
Between the two the unquantified aspect is easier, you just have to push and push and eventually get to a kind of measurement.
‘What's harder is the multi-faceted aspect which at times is even conflicting.
The way round it is to avoid making everything a priority, which is the great temptation in the health service, and establish what's wanted by both ministers and users participating in a debate about what matters so that you limit the number of priorities, then get them refined so that they are easily understandable and structured.’
In this way he even controverts the view that he lived up to the feared role of private sector financial disciplinarian when he brought qualified accountants for the first time into the head office.
‘For a start, I've never done a purely financial job.
Secondly, financial controls in the NHS in Scotland have always been generally very good — apart from one or two isolated exceptions,’ he said.
‘What we brought into the head office was financial expertise as I'd recognise it and it did deliver a huge benefit including giving professionally-based leadership at the centre for all the financial staff already working out there in the field.
‘As for value for money, it wasn't per se my main concern but reorienting it from an activity-based approach of what the cost of something was to VFM in terms of delivery to the patient — evaluating what we were doing well in the sense you or I as doctor-patient would expect, the outcomes of value to the patient, establishing how much it costs to deliver (something we couldn't do but are better at now) and then asking if it is reasonable value for money or, more interestingly, why it is cheaper in one place than another, benchmarking it.’
Cruickshank believes that over the three years the results have been that ‘so much of what we do is now being delineated by what the users want — the Patients’ Charter is just one example of that — and health boards are taking much more time to get views, getting people like general practitioners contributing in strategy-setting and so on, so they are less likely to make mistakes.
‘More quantifiably, there's been a significant improvement in productivity and activity out of a budget which is increasing in real terms but not by much.
And we know that it's easier to get through a hospital now, appointment times are met, there's less anonymity and more explanation to the patient of what's happening next — the fact that we do know this because of surveys and face-to-face interviews itself comes from a culture of establishing objectives that matter.’
All through this Cruickshank has carefully sought not to be the outsider caught between what could have been the conflicting demands of minister-in-government and workers and patients in the field, ‘by brining in the ministers and whoever and getting that shared view.
‘Notwithstanding the fact the minister and I, as chief financial officer, are accountable to Parliament — and there's no comparison between appearing before the parliamentary accounts committee and shareholders at an AGM — the benefits are delivered in tiny pockets all over the country which makes it impossible to control directly from the centre.
‘You've got to establish the trust that staff are delivering what matters and what the public wants.
Rather than having ministerial diktats which we then have to deliver, you establish a broad, agreed policy.’
For all that, however, friction has been generated, not least within the service where criticism has personally been directed at Cruickshank — and not from health workers and professionals but the very business people brought into the service whom one would have expected to sympathise more with his modus operandi.
How much this resulted from Cruickshank's own approach   to maintaining contact and diplomacy with individual people and concerns — he's more generally credited with being a man for the ‘big picture’— or from the excessive demands put on anyone trying to run and change such a vast and politically sensitive organisation, is open to debate.
Certainly, there is a feeling that while he has been highly successful in forging a strong team at head office out of civil servants, health service professionals and other outsiders (and in convincing ministers at the same time), generating stout loyalty there in the process, away from St Andrew's House there are many complaints of being side-lined, overruled and ignored.
‘He was very determined to ensure all the power remained in the centre, one observer said.
There are complaints that, while one day Cruickshank will address you by your first name, the next day ‘he'll walk past as if he'd never met you’.
He is accused of direct interference in senior board and managerial appointments and other local decisions, and of holding back money in reserve to then push it out on waiting list initiatives.
Cruickshank countered that getting out an developing stronger internal communication has been one of his priorities.
With ‘good head office staff, I've been able to spend upwards of two days a week out in the service and if you keep that up it's amazing how many places you will have been over the years and we now have a much more open relationship’.
Appointments are a ministerial decision ‘although I do make recommendations’.
As for handling people, ‘i think you have more problems dealing with the chief executive of a book-publishing division than with chairmen of health boards.
‘Of course there's been a lot of public controversy over the proposals for hospital trusts and fund-holding general practices, that's part of the job.
But in terms of service and common purposes between ourselves I don't think there has been particular resistance to doing what we've been doing.
‘Then again, perhaps that's my particularly thick skin.’
Arguably in his new role at Oftel, Cruickshank will receive comparatively less of a rough ride.
The range of objectives to be met, and potential opponents, are narrower and this time the ground has already been well and truly broken by a predecessor.
While he spent the first month of his new appointment easing himself in and still nipping up to Edinburgh to round off one or two NHS tasks from London (where he kept his home and from which he was commuting during his health job), many of the key decisions affecting the telecommunications industry over the next year or so have already been taken, so the learning curve will not have to be so dramatics last time.
He will, however, have to start defending them and other decisions still in the pipeline.
In which case he will have use for that thick skin very soon.
PERSONAL FINANCE
Mutual decisions
The deal between Scottish Equitable and Aegon prompts questions from policy holders about the future of the company, but Ian Harper suggests that it may be the only way.
On 20 April Scottish Equitable announced that it was to form a ‘partnership’ with a giant Dutch insurance company, Aegon.
Unlike the previous deals involving the Scottish life industry, this one will not involve a straightforward demutualisation and takeover — although in practice it may well amount to a ‘creeping takeover’.
Under the terms of the deal, Scottish Equitable will transfer its existing business operations and staff into a new proprietary company — Scottish Equitable plc — which will be managed by the same people who manage the existing mutual.
Aegon will pay £200m — about half of which is good-will — which will be injected into the with-profits fund for the benefit of the current and future policyholders invested into that fund.
In return, Aegon will take a 40 per cent stake in the infrastructure profits (that is management charges less expenses) generated on unit-linked and non with-profits business.
Aegon will also inject £40m into the new plc as share capital to fund new business growth.
Although it may appear like a demutualisation, it is not.
This is because the mutual structure of the with-profits fund will remain and the investment returns on this fund will be for the sole benefit of the policyholders with a stake in this fund.
With FS Assurance (now Britannia Life) and Scottish Mutual (now a subsidiary of the Abbey National) an amount equal to ten per cent of the bonuses distributed to the with-profits policyholders in any one year are paid to the owning company.
The reason why Scottish Equitable is proposing such a deal is simple.
In common with many small and medium-sized mutual life assurers investing in growing their business, because it cannot raise money from outside as a proprietary company can, it is forced to make a choice.
Either to close the new business altogether and run off its assets for the benefit of existing policyholders, or to seek new capital in a deal with another company.
What does it mean for the people who own the company — the policyholders?
Under the terms of the deal, there are essentially two types of policyholder.
Firstly, ‘participating policyholders’ who have all or part of their policies invested in the with-profits (the ‘participating’) fund.
These are mainly holders of pension policies but here are a few endowments.
Secondly, those who have policies such as annuities (an income providing policy) or term assurance (a pure life assurance as opposed to investment policy).
The participating policyholders also break into two groups.
The smaller comprises 100,000 holders of ‘traditional’ with-profits policies which are invested totally in the participating fund (none of which have been sold for about six years) will be totally ring fenced, and both the investment profits and the ‘infrastructure’profits — that is, the profits on the policy management — will remain the property of these policyholders.
They will also receive the benefit of 60 per cent of the infrastructure  profits on all the other business.
The second group of participating policyholders are those who have unitised with-profits (UWP) policies.
These are policies which are invested part in the with-profits fund and part in a range of unit-linked funds (which resemble unit trusts).
These people will still be entitled to all the investment returns on the with-profits element of their investment — which accounts on average for about half of all investment into UWP contracts — but they will only be entitled to 60 per cent of the infrastructure profits on both the with-profits and the unit-linked business.
All policyholders with a stake in the participating with-profits fund will receive a special bonus if they vote for the Aegon deal.
This will amount to about a fifth of the £20m Aegon is to pay for the 40 per cent cut in the business.
The bonus each policyholder will actually get will depend on the reversionary (or annual) bonuses they have received to date on the with-profits element of their policies and will probably be paid out as part of the 1993 bonus distribution in February or March 1994.
But why, policyholders may well ask, should they give up a 40 per cent stake in the business?
The reason Scottish Equitable is proposing this deal is because it is short of the necessary capital needed to carry on growing its business.
All business growth to date has been funded by the with-profits policyholders.
Unfortunately, the surplus, or free assets in the with-profits fund have dwindled.
This not only leaves little for continued growth into the future, but also means that the society's solvency margins have been reduced, so inhibiting its investment freedom and with it, investment performance.
Consequently, by selling a stake in the business for £200m the first effect is to raise the solvency margin on the with-profits business.
This in turn will permit greater investment in equities as compared to gilts and fixed interest securities and so enhance investment performance.
Currently, the with-profits fund is invested only about 50 per cent in equities, compared with 65 or 70 per cent of the stronger life offices.
As to the loss of 40 per cent of the infrastructure profits of new and existing unitised with-profits, unit linked and non with-profits business, the theory is that a 60 per cent stake in an expanding cake is better than a 100 per cent slice of a stagnant one.
The key issue facing policyholders, however, is — is a partnership with a big company like Aegon the best option available or are there other options?
One option would be to continue as an independent mutual.
In practice, the would mean severely restricting new business growth, so cutting the growth of infrastructure profits to zero except by squeezing existing policyholders.
But more significantly, it would mean a reduction in investment performance as more funds were switched into gilts and fixed interest stocks so as to meet the statutory solvency requirements.
The second option is to close the fund to new business, lay off the staff and pay a third party to carry out the investment management and administration on behalf of the policyholders.
In other words, run off the business for the benefits of existing policyholders.
This option will be tackled in the transfer document to policyholders, but according to, Scottish equitable marketing director, closing the fund is not the best way forward.
‘We basically believe that the deal with Aegon will be more profitable to existing policyholders.’
But it is a view which is questioned by the leading independent adviser and actuary,.
He said: ‘There is no doubt that they have to consider the possibility of closing the fund, but his is not what they want to do.
But we have to ask — how many insurance companies do we need in the UK and how cost effective is it to keep these companies running when it might be better to wind them up?’
He added: ‘What the policyholders have to ask is for whose benefit is it being done — the management's or the policyholders’?
Is it being done for the management, who have to justify it in terms of the policyholder?
Why not sell all the unit-linked business for £500,000 or so and plough all of that into the with -profits policyholders?’
Of particular interest to policy holders when considering the option recommended by the Scottish Equitable board will be past investment performance and the business strategy which has been pursued.
‘Last summer, before the markets looked up, there were some companies whose solvency margins looked very thin and Scottish Equitable were towards the bottom of these.
But since last summer, the market has turned up nicely.
But if they changed their portfolio balance, they would have lost out on this upturn,’ said.
One question policyholders should ask is — if the company did underperform last year, has this limited its options?
The most influential voice of support for the Scottish Equitable board's proposal will come form the independent actuary.
The role is being carried out by , a former group chief actuary at Legal & general who is now retired.
This situation — where one man, eminent as he is, nevertheless has to carry out a huge amount of work effectively on his own, mirrors the two previous demutualisations — is a situation many believe should not have been repeated.
As such, policyholders might ask — why is there not an independent actuarial committee given that Scottish Equitable is a far larger company than both FS Assurance and Scottish Mutual put together?
For the deal to go ahead, it must first be approved by 75 per cent of those eligible policyholders who cast a vote — either at this month's special general meeting in Edinburgh, or by proxy.
It will then go to the Court of Session.
But on the basis of past experience, this will be a formality if the policyholders vote in favour.
All 600,000 policyholders — including those ‘non-participating’ policyholders who have no interest in the with-profits business, such as the term assurance and annuity policyholders — will have a vote.
but assuming the deal goes ahead, how will it affect the rights of the policyholders, who at present own the company?
Currently, it is the policyholders who elect the board and who therefore technically determine what the company's investment and bonus strategy will be.
If the takeover goes ahead, a voting trust will be established which will be elected annually by the participating policyholders.
This trust will maintain control over the investment and bonus strategy of the with-profits business.
In addition, it will technically be able to veto any changes Aegon proposes to the business plan of the new Scottish Equitable plc, including Aegon increasing its stake to above 50.1 per cent after 1999.
After 1999, Aegon will be able to inject any amount of new capital and should this be approved by the voting trust — which must be likely should it wish to generate more profits through business growth for the with-profits policyholders — then the with-profits fund must match Aegon's injections (which must be considered unlikely given the huge resources Aegon has access to) or see its stake in the company diluted.
The policyholders' rights enshrined in the voting trust will remain intact until Aegon increases its take in the plc to the 80 per cent mark.
At that point the voting trust would lose the power to veto changes proposed by Aegon in the plc's business plan.
In addition, should Aegon increase its stake to 80 per cent , the possibility of closing the with-profits fund altogether becomes a serious one.
Despite the structure of the proposal — where the with-profits fund retains a mutual structure, analysts say the deal is effectively a demutualisation because it opens the door to eventual takeover.
, insurance analyst with James Capel in Amsterdam, said: ‘Is this a demutualisation?
Absolutely.
One could say — and Aegon are not denying it — that is an acquisition by Aegon of this company spread over time.
Initially they get a 40 per cent stake in the non with-profits business but this is the fastest growing and represents 90 per cent of new business.
As it is fast growing, additional capital has to be injected into the company to finance the rapid rate of growth.
Initially, Aegon will find the additional in a way that will give them a 50 per cent stake in the non-with-profits business.
But in future, although the capital can come from both sides, you can expect that Aegon's stake will move up to 100 per cent.’
Nevertheless, he said: ‘It is a good deal for the with-profits fund.’
As for Aegon, believes that: ‘From a strategic point of view, for Aegon it is a good deal, though in the short term, the shareholders of Aegon are paying price.’
Meanwhile, the proposal — which owes much to the structure of Aegon (itself the product of a proprietary company, ENNEA, merging with a mutual one, AGO, more than a decade ago)— is being closely studied by the many other mutual UK life assurers who find themselves short of free capital.
In the absence of few if any other UK acquirers with their own distribution outlets in the Abbey National-style, the only hope, apart from closure, for these companies may be to seek out other Aegon-type deals.
MANAGEMENT
HANDLE WITH CARE
Margaret Ramsay explores the problems stress can bring to the workplace and suggests what a company needs to be checking out.
Companies trying to succeed and survive in the '90s are under growing pressure to give a quality service, often with reduced resources.
Yet the resulting stress levels, unless properly handled by both the company and the individual, can prove overwhelming, leading to distress for the employee and problems for the company with rising absenteeism, high levels of staff turnover and staff dissatisfaction, and ultimately to poor quality products and customer service.
As , lecturer in organisational psychology at Heriot-Watt University, explained: ‘On average a company with 1,000 employees loses £200,000 a year through stress-related factors including lost production, replacement costs, and absenteeism.’
Many factors can affect someone's ability to do their job effectively: personal problems, such as financial worries, divorce, drug or alcohol dependency, as well as pressure involved in the job itself and problems in the organisational set-up.
‘If a company is serious about stress then it has to address the issues raised,’ commented , a chartered clinical psychologist working as a consultant with KPMG Peat Marwick, especially if it emerges that certain internal working practices and management are the major factors in staff stress levels.
The strategy for both a company and an individual is, said , ‘to first identify the sources of stress, differentiate between those you can control and those you can't, and then decide on an action plan’.
As , managing director of business psychologists, John Nicholson Associates, explained: ‘A crude analogy is if you are a fleet manager and one of you cars is not working properly, then you check out the problem and see if it can be fixed in-house or go to external specialists to get it back on the road in peak condition as soon as possible.’
One method for a company to identify the sources of stress is by having a ‘stress audit’, which is a yearly check on ten to 20 per cent of the workforce, using questionnaires together with group and on-to-one interviews, on how they are doing and what problems they have had.
‘You can use outside professionals to do this or in-house trained and qualified personnel managers can run it,’ explaining .
‘Staff are often happier working with outside consultants,’ added , professor of organisation psychology at the University of Manchester Institute of Science and Technology, ‘as many of the issues raised will be confidential.’
Factors at work that cause stress include the physical demands of some jobs, such as poor working conditions, dangerous elements to the work, shift work and travel demands, as well as work overload, both in terms of having too much work to do, resulting in long hours, and of having work that is too difficult for the individual, causing anxiety.
However, as  explained, such problems are often symptoms of deeper organisational and management problems: ‘It is often assumed that stress is caused by too much work or tasks that are too difficult, but it is more likely to be because staff don't have a context for what they are doing.’
agreed: ‘Problems arise when roles are not properly defined, when people are ‘shifting the goalposts’ and objectives are not clear.’
Such problems can be aggravated in promotion, as  explained: ‘Many people have problems coping with a new job when responsibilities, priorities and goals are not being clearly defined.’
Indeed, an organisation's communications structure and climate have a massive impact on workers, particularly in times of change.
‘A lot of companies are going through a process of change and old certainties are going, which leads to insecurity, a lack of certainty and worry over jobs,’ said .
‘A company should give people as much information as possible about why change is happening, what impact the changes will have on the individual and what is expected of them.’
Similarly, a company is only making problems for itself by creating a norm of people working extra hours, putting staff under stress which impacts on their home lives and which probably does not achieve greater productivity since it is commonly believed that working beyond 40 to 50 hours a weeks results in time spent which is increasingly unproductive.
Add to this the fact that ‘65 per cent of workers in the UK are now part of a working couple’, according to, and the tensions between the time demands of home and work can lead to even greater stress problems.
One of the greatest sources of stress at work is relationships with other people — with superiors, with subordinates, with colleagues.
‘It's not just at executive level, or even at just management level, it’ also the way staff work with colleagues,’said .
‘It comes down to people problems.’
And such problems can make difficulties at the management level.
‘the majority of UK managers are very bad at managing people,’ continued .
‘They're happy with facts and figures, but less happy about managing the people resource.’
added: ‘There seems to be a skills gap, a lack of basic management training for managers.
Organisations are neglecting this because of the emphasis on technical expertise.’
This appears to be particularly prevalent amongst the professions.
Managers can also be what  referred to as ‘stress carriers’, causing stress for those around them, for example by being  ‘the lovable incompetent boss who sets objectives, then changes his mind, or the flip-side of that, the dictator boss who rules with fear’.
agreed: ‘Managers ruling by punishment not reward are very stressful to work for.’
It seems to be that good management means effective stress management, as  commented: ‘Ideal managers don't have problems.’
explained: ‘In general it is down to having good management — knowing how to push people and giving them a clear context to work within.
You can't isolate stress from the general management context.’
Indeed good managers not only keep work stress levels down for their staff but can also be the first check point for employee stress.
explained: ‘Managers should keep an eye on staff, on any absences, illness, reduction in production levels, or reduction in quality levels.’
added: ‘A company should develop the counselling skills of its managers so they can be the first step in the process of diagnosis.
An outside problem can sometimes be helped by, say, more flexible working hours and so be resolved at management level.
Part of the management job is to create an atmosphere in which it is possible to talk about problems.
‘But managers can't be counsellors.
They have to decide what problems they can deal with and which need to  be referred to outside specialists.’
For specialist advice and counselling on a wide range of stress-related problems, from legal worries through to substance abuse, a company can employ an in-house stress counsellor or use outside stress counselling services, such as employee assistance programmes.
Such programmes can also provide crisis counselling for post-traumatic stress, which can result from involvement in such events as rail crashes, explosions, witnessing a fatal car accident, or being mugged.
According to, ‘this provides early support for those that need it and is cost-effective for the company, because an employee is back to productivity sooner and there is no extended sick leave’.
Individuals can also take steps to reduce their stress levels.
For example, according to , ‘anxiety attacks can be eased by learning mental relaxation techniques.
Time management is also a vital part.
High level staff often don't take their holidays and this can be dangerous.
Rank Xerox estimates the cost of replacing an executive exceeds £300,000 whereas a place on a typical stress management course is between £200 and £3,000 for an executive.’
agreed: ‘It is not a sign of weakness to attend a stress-management course.’
‘Sometimes it is important for the individual to step back from the fray,’ said , ‘and describe to themselves what the work problems are and build up an action programme for themselves.
Of ten problems, say, three need extra training, two need clarification, two are not part of the job, two are due to organisational difficulties, and one is due to not having enough time.
It may call for assertive behaviour in dealing with others to get the matters cleared up.’
For an individual, then, stress management is a matter of well-being, for a company, a matter of the recognition of the benefits of good management.
‘An organisation is operating in a self-interested way if it is dealing with stress,’ said .
‘What will give companies the competitive edge is the quality of the way their people treat customers and that is linked to the way they are treated by managers.
So stress management is directly linked to commercial and survival interest.’
A word of warning though.
It is not enough to bring in an employee assistance programme if the company fails to face up to its own part in stress mismanagement.
As  pointed out: ‘If you start asking staff about their problems, they will expect you to do something about them.’
…
‘EAP is just part of being a good corporate citizen’
‘The company's main concern is providing quality customer service.
If our staff are worried about problems at home or work they cannot achieve that,’ said , staff relations manager with Standard Life in Edinburgh, explaining the company's decision to provide an Employee Assistance Programme (EAP).
The programme offers external counselling and advice to staff and their households on a whole range of issues, from financial and legal worries to marital problems, relationship difficulties, career problems and substance abuse, as well as health concerns.
Counsellors are reached by telephone and face-to-face meetings can be quickly arranged if wanted.
Standard started looking at the possibilities of EAP back in 1990 when the financial industry was going through a period of great change.
‘Staff numbers had doubled over the previous five to six years and a programme of change had been thrust upon us by the market,’ explained .
The company recognised that this would put extra pressures on staff.
‘Also, we had introduced performance management and appraisal and have a policy here of developing staff to their full potential,’ he said, ‘yet we were finding that outside stress factors were preventing people from reaching that.’
Phased in from July to November last year, the EAP, named Axis, is provided by Personal Performance Consultants Limited with tailor-made training for all divisional managers covering Standard Life's 6,200 employees in its offices throughout the UK and Ireland.
An important part of the service is the confidentiality.
As  explained: ‘It is vital that the staff know the programme is totally confidential.
The company is not told who uses the service, only how much it is being used.’
In fact the staff response has been just below average with legal and financial worries being main areas of concern.
Axis is only one part of the company's planned staff assistance measures, which include fitness assessments and health education.
‘EAP is just part of being a good corporate citizen,’ said .
‘The company is taking the wider view, being proactive over staff well-being.’
With good feedback so far, such programmes appear to be the way forward for a company concerned not only with its staff but also with its customers.
MONEY TALKS
Merging from the shadows
Peter Woodifield talks to Bell Lawrie White's Derek McIntosh following the merger with Brewin Dolphin.
Not many people in the financial world, apart, oddly enough, from chartered accountants, can say they have worked for five different companies and yet remained where they started off.
Derek McIntosh, the chief executive of Bell Lawrie White but still known to all and sundry as plain Bell Lawrie, is one such person.
He joined Bell Cowan in 1964, which was the driving force behind the merger in 1975 that eventually produced Bell Lawrie, a firm which can trace its roots back to 1815.
His move into   stockbroking at the age of 21 followed two years' training to be a chartered accountant which by his own admission he didn't enjoy.
It only took him six years to become a partner after spells in London and New York.
McIntosh worked in the discretionary fund management operation of the firm and also looked after the dealing and institutional sales side.
When the firm became Bell Lawrie in 1986 he became managing director and the firm changed simultaneously from being a partnership to a limited company.
‘We decided when Big Bang came along it was right to become a limited company.
We had got to a size where we needed an injection of institutional money and there were people who wanted to retire.
We took the view that we had a plan in place, a five year plan, and we did not want to be acquired.’
Unlike many of its southern competitors Bell Lawrie, which is very much an Edinburgh stockbroker, albeit with clients all over the country, ensured that the institutional money only represented 25 per cent of its equity — the money coming from the Bank of Scotland, Ivory & sime and Edinburgh Investment Trust.
Despite a desire not to be acquired, it was four years later that the firm was bought by Robert White.
‘We had received a number of approaches.
The logic of the approach by Robert White was very sound and, to be frank, it was a very attractive offer and one had to look after the institutional shareholders.
We had given them the prospect of an out in the five years and they did very well out of their investment.’
Robert White was part of Hill Samuel, itself part of TSB, at that stage on an acquisition spree it has since reversed.
At the time it changed its name to Bell Lawrie White and McIntosh remained managing director.
The following year he became chief executive when the then chairman and chief executive,, left to pursue his political ambitions.
‘As I became chief executive there was a change of policy.
I realised at the beginning of 1992 that we were not core and that we were to be disposed of — we had a very difficult year.’
McIntosh is too much the diplomat to say what he really thinks about the firm's three year spell inside the TSB empire, except to say two things — firstly that he doubts whether it either made or lost much money on its investment, and secondly that Hill Samuel was very supportive once the decision to sell had been taken in principle.
The nearest McIntosh comes to direct criticism is when he says: ‘What we are trying to do is to provide clients with the services that they want and I think that will be the difference.
I think we found it quite difficult to provide the range of services at fully competitive prices and the one thing that this merger will do is to make us much more competitive.’
It was made clear that a management buy-out was not on the agenda.
In turn he made it clear that the directors wanted an opportunity to participate in whatever business they ended up in and that there was a realistic profits incentive.
The merger with Brewin Dolphin, already one of the largest private client stockbrokers in the UK and from an early stage the preferred suitor, ensures both with Bell Lawrie and shareholders owning 25 per cent of the enlarged group.
‘It was as near to an  MBO as we could get.’
It was, of course, not just the uncertainty which made 1992 such a difficult year for McIntosh and his colleagues.
The other problem was the insider dealing charge against , the firm's highly regarded Scottish companies analyst whom even his rivals regarded as being as honest as the day is long.
Nevertheless he was convicted and fined £25,000 in the High Court earlier this year, a matter which has gone to the appeal and which therefore constrains McIntosh in what he can say.
Notwithstanding, the firm has backed  all the way, and  has continued to work for Bell Lawrie, even if he cannot give advice to clients.
Companies seem happy to talk to him and he can still give advice internally.
It is not the  affair that has prompted Bell Lawrie to withdraw from institutional sector research, notably pharmaceuticals and electricity (but not Scottish Power and Scottish Hydro-Electric which will continue to be covered by its regional research).
‘We intend to develop our regional research which is based on our corporate activity and develop our corporate finance capability.’
‘What we have to do is develop the investment research capability designed for the private client.
What we were doing was total duplication.
You need to be a major international player with a market-making capability to be competitive,’ McIntosh argued.
The money saved there will be transferred to develop the private client business and research which is corporate based.
From McIntosh's point of view it was not an easy decision to pull out of institutional sector research as he was involved in setting it up in the mid '70s.
The combined new firm has discretionary funds of more than £4 billion under management, to which Bell Lawrie contributes about half.
Bell Lawrie has 14,000 portfolio clients against Brewin Dolphin's 18,000 and together they are one of the largest private client brokers in the UK which gives them a certain amount of clout.
One of the reasons for Bell Lawrie feeling that Brewin Dolphin was the right answer to its future was that their approaches are similar and therefore such integration as there needs to be is largely confined to systems.
The decision to scrap Taurus has upset the apple cart, but McIntosh is convinced a rolling settlement will come.
‘We have got to be there with a service that is compatible with out clients’ needs.’
He sees considerable scope for the firm widening its client base in the '90s as people inherit houses from their parents and money is available for investment.
‘If you are in quality stocks with strong balance sheets in less cyclical areas of the market you will do well in equities over the next few years.’
Over the years Bell Lawrie has worked closely with lawyers and accountants as a source of referrals for people with money to invest and that will continue.
‘It is a very important market for us.’
As for the future, McIntosh says the  next few years will be easier.
‘What we have to do is get the cost base competitive.
There will be some rationalisation but it will be based on systems.’
But whatever the future holds it is unlikely to match what has happened in the recent past.
‘It has been an interesting three years,’ he said with a delightful degree of understatement.
‘One has gained a certain amount of experience that one didn't have before and I think we will have come out of it stronger.
We have to remember in terms of timing that we started with the Gulf War and then moved into perhaps what will be seen as the worst recession since the '30s.
I am very pleased we have come out in the shape we have.
‘In terms of my 30 years in stockbroking I think the past three years have been the most interesting, if interesting is the right word.
I am glad it is behind me.’
The CA Magazine Corporate Law Survey
LAW SURVEY
It's down to client wishes
The problem for Scotland's lawyers seems to be that they are now exceeding their clients' expectations of the legal services, Neil Fitzgerald explains.
If anything encapsulates the problems or opportunities — depending on the viewpoint — facing lawyers in serving their business clients it must be the following quotation.
‘We don't have a great need for lawyers but they are a necessary requirement.
You need them when you are forming a company or acquiring premises and the law lays down that you must follow procedures.
‘You do that, you pay a bill and you get a piece of paper in a language you don't understand but it must be right because the lawyers have produced it and you have signed it.’
The words come from one of the in-depth interviews carried out by George Street Research, as part of our extensive survey of 418 businesses corresponding to the overall profile of Scotland's industrial and commercial community, and are considered representative of its attitudes to and uses of solicitors' services.
However, anyone taking that quotation as evidence to confirm that Scottish business is dissatisfied with the service it receives from its legal advisers couldn't be more wrong.
Rather, it simply exemplifies the paradoxes of the client-lawyer relationship which the profession's firms are having to address and, indeed, many of which are succeeding in doing so.
Because, perhaps surprisingly to its critics, the survey reveals lawyers are achieving an impressively high level of client satisfaction.
Respondents were asked to rate their satisfaction with various aspects of lawyers' services and facilities on a scale of one to five, where ‘one’ equates to ‘not at all satisfied’and ‘five’to ‘very satisfied’.
As table 1 shows, almost one in three businesses gave the highest possible rating, and almost three-quarters the two highest, while only one in 20 gave the two lowest combined.
While we're in the process of overturning stereotypes and preconceptions, it's worth focusing on arguably the, traditionally, most-cited criticism of lawyers — price and value for money.
Although in that same table value for money stands out as the biggest area of dissatisfaction, only a minority of 16 per cent rated it negatively.
Even among those who stated their overall dissatisfaction, when asked to indicate their reasons, less than a quarter cited high charges as the reason (service or errors made racked up a  much higher 38 per cent).
And among the many more who were overall satisfied and gave a specific comment, only eight per cent mentioned charges being too high (see table 2).
According to, managing partner with W&J Burness, ‘solicitors in the last year or two have become more flexible.
To build up a more stable relationship, rather than simply seeing how much time the work took and charging by the hour, we have all had to come to terms with pricing in a market, giving a clear idea what the budget will be and taking much more care to explain what we're charging for.
‘Nevertheless, it remains a big challenge.’
, head of Thorntons' commercial department, agreed: ‘It's not a matter of giving a ball-park figure and then saying nothing until the work is done before you reveal there were extra costs involved.
You've got to be open and keep communicating all the way through.’
‘The problem,’ said , senior partner with Dorman Jeffrey, ‘is that estimating is an art, not a science, and you can still come up against obstacles from the other side and other unforeseen circumstances outwith your control.
Experience may help you take some of these into account but if you went for a fixed fee you may have to pitch it at such a level to allow for these that it's perhaps twice what it might be and you could lose the client.
‘It's not an easy thing to do, making assumptions to estimate costs and then keeping people informed of any changes as they arise, but it's not easy for others such as building contractors to do it either and they do.’
On the more nebulous issue of value for money  of George Street Research said there was clear evidence, of which the opening quotation forms only a part, that clients do not know what goes into a piece of legal work to justify the fee, other than the fact that the job is done.
In this respect, lawyers have a greater disadvantage compared with, say, auditors whose clients can at least see the teams of accountants around their offices.
‘Normally clients won't get the feeling they have had value for money unless they have had a disaster and the lawyer has got them out of it,’ said , one of the senior partners in Biggart Baillie Gifford's company    and commercial department.
According to, there are ways to get clients to feel they are receiving value for money in terms of how the service is delivered: ‘People are impressed by well-produced documentation and plain English in presentation.
But there's no ‘wow’ factor in just getting it right and so much of the work is a distress purchase.’
It throws a much colder light on those satisfaction ratings if, unlike in their relationships with their accountants, clients are basing them on just the service delivered during a one-off transaction.
While it may be straightforward to assess whether a lease is renewed properly or a contract accurately drafted — it will soon be clear if they have been or not — these transactions don't carry much potential for building long-term relationships or adding value through additional services.
As table 3 shows, the key legal services used by businesses tend to be the sort that are need-driven — litigation, commercial property and employee legislation — rather than reflecting a broader and continuous relationship.
(In addition, of those who sought advice in mergers and acquisitions, a third used solicitors.)
Frequency of contact underlines this trend of tactical use.
While 28 per cent of the total sample said they are in contact with their solicitors at least once a quarter, it is weighted towards the larger business (see table 4).
One in two of those with turnover over £5m claimed to be in touch so regularly, compare with only one in eight with less than £500,000 turnover.
And a fifth of businesses with turnover of up to £1m said they had no firm of lawyers with whom they deal with on a regular basis at all.
The danger is that many businesses are   waiting until there is a problem, or even a crisis, to be sorted out before they ask for advice from a solicitor — as  said: ‘Regrettably, lawyers are seen as a cure, not a preventative’— and it is the smaller, more vulnerable business that falls into it most.
Meanwhile, not only are legal firms unable to maximise the amount of extra business they can sell through cross-fertilisation of other specialised services, they are losing it to other providers of information and advice.
Less than one in five of businesses seeking advice on professional liability (most went to insurance brokers), less than a third seeking advice on employee legislation, and less than ten per cent concerned about environmental legislation went to solicitors.
One obstacle, believes, is that ‘as a profession we are still trying to decide what our firms individually are good at.
It would be unreasonable of any firm to claim that it is the best at everything.’
On the other hand, even where they have decided, many agree with , partner in the commercial property department of Morton Fraser Milligan, that ‘solicitors are still backward in pushing ourselves forward’.
On the face of it, the omens are good.
Table 5 shows the percentage of respondents that agreed with particular statements about solicitors.
Less than a third agreed they came by their fees easily, while half felt they made a positive effort to support and understand clients and 59 per cent that they respond very positively to requests for help and advice (although these two groups of responses should be seen in the light of that ‘distress purchase’ attitude, where lawyers are unlikely to be negative when a client suddenly calls up offering business).
More significantly, only a fifth believe lawyers should not involve themselves in the general running of other people's businesses and just three per cent that they are currently too aggressive in selling their services.
While clients therefore would like to see their lawyers being more proactive, helping them to foresee ways round particular hazards before they arise, the difficulty seems to be in how to do it.
In one of the supporting in-depth interviews, one respondent said: ‘We have one lawyer whom we contact once a month on average for disputes or land deals and so on and another one who specialises in debt collecting who may be chasing about 20 customers at any one time.
‘As far as giving advice is concerned, the debt lawyer is extremely useful in his field but I don't really feel our other lawyer is in a position to help.
He is not a businessman and would have little to contribute.’
This tendency not to see beyond the individual and his or her legal specialism that has been used before, to the other service available in the firm, is an old-established one —‘although,’ said, ‘I had hoped we were starting to get past that’.
too disputed the view that all clients see lawyers as compartmentalised individuals, ‘although I do know people who use specific lawyers for specific areas and our own recent market research has confirmed my own view that a number of our clients don't know the full depth of service we have on offer’.
But, ethical issues aside, simply parading specialisms before existing, if not new, clients is believed to be a non-starter.
‘In such a fragmented market, there are hundreds of firms satisfying clients without having specialist units and there is tremendous loyalty, so as a means to getting them to change they don't work,’ said .
As for existing  clients, the view is that amid the mountain of junk mail specialised newsletters would be lost, if not be a deterrent.
‘Brochures can only act as a taster, that may also turn you off,’ said .
In  's view, what is needed is a more fundamental shift in approach.
‘I think lawyers have been too much looking from the law outwards rather than as a client looking at the law from the outside.
They should be seeing what they can offer in the modern world rather than what the law does and how it links to the client.’
As , chairman of Dundas & wilson who claims to have had little problem in providing other specialist services to clients, small and large, the exercise becomes on of ‘not cross-selling but cross-advising’.
The solution would be a corollary to  what lawyers see as the accountants' distinct advantage of a more continuous and broader based role through the company audit.
‘There are areas in which we can act as a sounding board in general business issues and where the accountant can't’ said .
Some believe that, to some degree at least, such a contact point already exists: cites the regular company secretarial work that everyone but the small unincorporated business has to undertake with a solicitor's help.
deals with the due diligence work on contingent contracts and claims in corporate fund-raising and audit.
It was to broaden the opportunities to take on this role, particularly for the new and smaller client, that the Law Society of Scotland introduced the  Commercial Health Check scheme in April 1992 as part of Scottish Business Services.
Since then 172 firms have come on the register from which businesses without a solicitor can be referred.
For free the solicitor then discusses with the client the legal aspects of the business and its plans, how it operates, ‘key contractual and legal rights and obligations’ and recommendations for any action, all followed up by a written summary.
However, the feeling among certain firms on the scheme is that it has not done much if anything to generate business from new clients.
‘The idea behind it and the way it was packaged were excellent,’ said one.
‘But I don't think people in business are that open to contacting a firm they don't know for a health check.’
‘It hasn't cracked the shell,’ said another, ‘probably because people see the long list of issues covered and think, ‘oh yes, and if they find a load of things that they say need addressing how much is it going to cost?’
Once again, the fees issue rears its head.
‘The cynics are bound to say that the solicitor would have to recover the time spent on an apparently free comprehensive audit by undertaking some recommendations,’ said .
Yet some firms have gone ahead with their own health check service, aimed at existing clients.
‘We've soft-sold it on a limited basis,’ said  at Thorntons, ‘focusing on particular clients and their circumstances.’
They are offering a similar service at Morton Fraser Milligan.
‘What we're not doing is offering the client an audit on a regular basis,’ said , ‘although whether it will form the catalyst for more regular contact is another matter.’
Most agree that its greatest value is in raising the client's awareness.
‘It subtly reminds the client that they should be thinking about legal issues on a regular basis,’ said .
The key seems to be shaping it to the particular client.
‘You have to understand the client,’ said  which is why the firm also encourages quarterly meetings where future plans are discussed and the partner assigned to a new client takes along details of other services available which fit perceived needs.
Of course there is the ever-present possibility of resistance because of client fears that you are out to chase up more fees ‘but you have to be open about it and say, yes, there may be fees further down the line but it's still up to the client whether they want the work done or not,’ he said.
In the end, said , ‘it's all about getting to know the client's business and having a partner assigned to that client whose job it is to know it and what it does or does not want’.
It means, according to, ‘meeting the client, not just during a transaction but regularly to show an interest in the business and make the client comfortable, that while a lawyer is there primarily to earn a living he or she will act in the best interests of the business rather than in the best interests of the till.’
It is hard work, said, ‘but the current recession has shown we have to go out and go through it.’
There seems a lot more law firms can do in this respect.
When asked who initiates contact, almost nine in ten businesses said contact is always initiated by them and there is no evidence that this varies with the size of the business concerned (see table 6).
Still, old stereotypes and perceptions die hard on the other side of the desk.
As one respondent in an in-depth interview said: ‘I'd be a bit taken aback if my solicitor contacted me.
I wouldn't be looking for him to approach me.’
Some tactical points for keeping up front We detail two cases where initiatives have been taken to stay ahead and stand out amongst other law firms.
It hasn't been an easy time, even for the professions, and while law firms have had to cut back on staffing, they face having to get more out of the personnel they have left in terms of client service.
‘Professionalism isn't just about legal skills, it's also about all the other aspects such as handling clients, selling, and dealing with people,’ said Neill Mulvie, chief executive of Bird Semple Fyfe Ireland.
With his background in the personnel field, it is perhaps not surprising that the firm became actively engaged in identifying, on a structured basis, and developing the necessary skills or competences required: financial, marketing, staff and project management and so on.
In the absence of a ready-made framework in Scotland, the firm looked elsewhere to the English Law Society's Continuing Professional Development scheme, launched last year and aimed at not only keeping solicitors up to date with the law but to develop management and other professional skills and to enhance career development.
The elements it contained ‘helped us but in the end our approach is driven by our own particular view focused by the firm's strategic plan’, said Mulvie.
‘This establishes what out of all the training we were doing contributes to any of the five critical success factors we've identified as key and without which we would fail.’
One part of a whole range of training needs that were identified was time management.
‘The law, like accountancy, is very much a time-based profession.
It's important to look at how you manage you time and schedule your work to make yourself more productive and better able to handle clients,’ he said.
In all, nearly 40 professional staff went on time management courses run by international training company TMI.
‘The idea may be considered pretty basic elsewhere but it was quite novel in the legal profession,’ he said.
More wider-ranging in terms of staff involvement was training in total quality management, Mulvie said.
Indeed, all the staff have been away on courses on this.
‘But the thrust of our approach is to start at home, focusing on one thing at a time rather than confusing ourselves by trying to do everything at once— which is a major reason why 85 per cent of organisations trying to do something in this area fail to get it right.
So our emphasis has been on cost reduction and internal quality issues.
‘Cost savings have been achieved,’ he claimed, ‘just by focusing on questions such as‘is this right?’or ‘is that the sensible way to it?’.
You have to enfranchise people to question these things and to take actions, telling them everything's up for grabs and they have the right to make changes.’
As always, it's the little bits, generated by staff at all levels, that add up.
The same goes for the whole training initiative.
Already the firm is moving onto the next, more outward-looking stage.
‘In the end it's all about the way you organise all your output and you have to relate it to satisfying the client,’ Mulvie said.
‘We are making progress but that isn't something that happens overnight, it happens very slowly and almost imperceptibly.’
And, in spite of his position and background, ‘human resource development is something that has to be driven by all managers, not just a personnel director.’
When Shepherd & wedderburn 's Paul Hally and Graham Barnet first suggested setting up Connections, a ‘corporate finance marketing forum’ in the form of a quarterly newsletter, ‘we were very cautious and circumspect, simply going round saying ‘we've got this idea, we think it might work’,’said Hally.
Yet the response from other corporate finance advisers looking for a vehicle in which to advertise, on a confidential basis, acquisition and disposal opportunities they are involved in was ‘so strong that we then only had to say it was happening, do you want to be part of it?— and most of the intermediaries did’.
The first edition, produced last March, contained 11 opportunities generating 15 enquiries —‘which may not seem a lot but in the context of the Scottish market, and the quality criteria we imposed, is impressive’— and with second going out to intermediaries —‘apart from not being allowed under the Financial Services Act to sent it out to the business community generally, we want to maintain the quality of submissions received’— in the last fortnight, Hally sees no reason for second thoughts.
‘We do regard it as a profile raiser,’ he said.
‘We've been doing M&A for years but don't have the same profile as others because we do it for private clients who just want to sell a company or buy one.’
In many ways it's that role that has supported the success of Connections.
‘A corporate finance house couldn't do it because of competition with other corporate finance houses whereas we have no involvement in that respect.’
For such reasons as workforce morale or diplomacy towards the existing management owners may be unable to put a ‘for sale’ sign on the company.
Yet, in what can be a highly specialised market, its adviser may also be unable to market it openly without its being immediately identified.
‘But Connections creates a completely safe channel to put opportunities in front of people that matter.’
What he found additionally gratifying was the way some intermediaries and fund providers approached opportunities on a lateral basis, proposing supporting roles and other disposal routes.
In the same way, ‘of course we may pick up business if, say, the existing solicitor on one side or the other has no M&A expertise, and that will be a bonus.
But what we've already found is that our involvement with Connections has led to our speaking to people who ask what we do and this has thrown up other opportunities.’
Judging the need for speed
Neil Fitzgerald looks at the case for finding a fast-track route for commercial actions.
When businesses just want to get on with doing business, ‘to be told you can take out a summons but then must allow three to four months for the other side to put forward defences, then allow more time for adjustments of claims and defences, and then, subject to the availability of a judge, you'll get a hearing on it in 18 months’ time, is less than satisfactory’, said , senior partner with Dorman Jeffrey.
Last autumn , lord president of the Court of Session, suddenly announced he was forming a working party under  to examine how to improve the handling of commercial cases and to make their hearing speedier and more convenient to litigants.
It seemed to hold out hopes of relief for Scottish businesses — and lawyers themselves.
It may seem strange that lawyers might have a vested interest in making the law move faster.
Yet, like any good joke, there is an element of genuine pain behind one solicitor's comment that ‘one way to speed up litigation is don't go to court’.
As commercial disputants look to other means of settling disputes — tribunal, arbitration, alternative dispute resolution — it is hard enough that law firms are having to set themselves up in competition with non-lawyers to provide these services.
Worse, however, is the fear that what court litigation business remains is being driven South of the Border where courts are believed to move faster.
It is said that this was one principal factor behind the setting up of a number of Court of Session rules setting out expedited procedures back in 1988.
These were not enough, it's believed, even though they have twice been amended since.
Hence, as another lawyer put it, ‘what's behind the  working party is an attempt to keep commercial litigation in Scotland and to attract more’.
That may seem to trivialise the intentions of the working party which is now sifting through the comments that have already been submitted to it (and, although the deadline passed on 30 April, it is still interested in receiving any others sent in as soon as possible).
In fact, rather than jumping to simple solutions it is starting from first principles.
According to, depute clerk of session and secretary to the working party, ‘there are perceptions that the process is slow but senior law officers have received no particular complaints so it will set out first to test these perceptions by asking if this is in fact the case.’
That doesn't satisfy the sceptics, among whom one said: ‘I suspect there'll be a fair bit of tweaking when something far more fundamental is needed.’
For others, if there have been no actual complaints, the problems nevertheless seem pretty apparent.
According to, partner in commercial litigation with Biggart Baillie Gifford, there are several.
The first is a lack of judicial time particularly when judges in Court of Session must also give priority to criminal cases.
The workload is considered such that not even the appointment of a number of additional limited case judges has made much of a dent in it.
Along with that, although solicitors have been given limited rights of audience in the courts, seriously complex cases still require specialised counsel and these are in short supply: ‘You only need one Piper Alpha inquiry and they'll be tied up for months’, he said.
Then, ‘some clients aren't always as good as they might be: they don't like being distracted from other parts of their businesses and, when solicitors need information and documents, there are delays in locating them’.
Finding documents is only the start of  the problem.
Whereas in England, the use of affidavits is commonplace, the tendency North of the Border is still to require witnesses to speak to documents in person, complicating even further the coordination of judges' and advocates' business diaries with those of expert witnesses.
A number of lawyers also expressed admiration for the English system's much stricter overall timetable for disclosing claims, defences and witnesses to the other side.
There was also criticism of the Scottish system's period of ‘adjustments’ by both sides after claims and defences have been lodged, which was described by another as ‘a lot of footering about altering original positions — which could all be done a lot faster’.
Many feel that judges could be given greater leeway than even under present rules, perhaps through case conferences, to cut away the deadwood of the case and focus on the principal points of dispute.
In fact, a ‘fast track’ procedure, in which the court would seek to deal quickly with preliminary issues in an endeavour to reach the stage of proof within a short time’, is one of the proposals already before the  working party which would like to hear of experiences of that kind in other jurisdictions.
‘It would have to be understood, however, that such a procedure would place constraints on litigants,’ a paper from the working party warns, ‘by obliging them to proceed more quickly than they might wish and forego the examination of some or all of the issues in a case by oral evidence.’
Some agree that, delaying tactics by one party of litigants or another aside, there can be genuine reasons why there is a limit to how much more quickly some cases could go.
‘In some complex cases, not necessarily large in terms of the money at stake, all the facts and merits do have to be examined,’ one observer explained.
Still, speedy resolution of some cases could free up those vital human resources for more complicated ones.
Meanwhile, some argue that that pool of resources could be expanded further by allowing solicitors to plead in more types of case.
‘There are those who would say it isn't in the public interest and would lead to a diminution in standards of pleading.
But it hasn't in other jurisdictions such as in the US, and parts of the Commonwealth or Europe,’ said .
Even among lawyers, the belief is that all that's needed to change the situations is the will.
Ironically, in the midst of this debate last month Edinburgh hosted a conference aimed at promoting Scotland as a highly effective venue for international arbitration, via the International Chamber of Commerce.
One lawyer cited one of the first such cases to be heard in Scotland: ‘At one point the tribunal took the case by the scruff of the neck and told the claimants to put in their claim within 14 days and gave the other side the same amount of time for their defences.
All this in a foreign country, for them a long way from home to go back and consult.
Of course everyone threw up their hands and said it was impossible.
‘But they all managed it.’
PRACTICE MANAGEMENT
Managing to keep it simple
Linsay Harrow looks at how a good IT system can increase management efficiency within the professional firm and give the practice an informed edge.
Back in the good old days, you could manage your practice with nothing more complicated or technologically advanced than a pen, paper and adding machine, with a manual typewriter thrown in for the real forward thinkers.
Times have changed however.
Firms are bigger and spread across many locations, information on profitability and time spent on different transactions or matters is demanded, time management is the order of the day and speed of information retrieval is of the essence.
Technology has come on the scene to help firms with all of these practice management needs and, most recently, integrated practice management systems have evolved to provide the solution to all the information problems of the busy practice.
The key is fast access to all information and integration: the ability to provide almost limitless permutations of information combinations — fees by fee-earner by job, profitability by industry sector, the number of clients who like two spoonfuls of sugar in their morning coffee — the possibilities are endless.
Most importantly, partners who do not want to know how technology works or to learn how to use computers must be able to call up all the necessary client and administrative information they require.
The issue which faces many firms is defining what management information it needs, then producing the information in a format which is understandable and useful.
There is a  great temptation to capture all sorts of information for the sake of it and to keep the same information in several different locations.
More and more professional firms are bound by slower cash flow and increasing debt and there is a need to tighten control and increase efficiency.
Computers are one of the aids to achieving effective control of costs and time.
The problem which many firms face is overcoming ‘techno-fear’ and taking the plunge into a new computer system.
Common concerns are the expense of a system and ignorance of how computers work.
Alasdair MacCormick, who runs Law Practice Management, a consultancy which advises on the selection of computer systems, feels that knowing how computers work is not important.
Analysing how the firm works and breaking that down into work which demands your professional training and expertise and work which does not is more important, since it allows the firm to work out the computer applications it needs.
Computing power has never been cheaper, he added, but the cost of your computer system will be too high if you don't make full use of it.
‘Many firms use only ten to 25 per cent of their computer's capability,’ he said.
It is also important not to remain tied to the investment made in an old system.
‘The three year cost of a new system that can handle the load effectively is often cheaper, pound for pound, than the three year cost of supporting an old, slow, ineffective machine,’ MacCormick said.
It is helpful to talk to other users about their system's performance and support and you must expect to devote time and money to training and to spend time and money planning for change.
Do not be afraid to ask ‘silly’ questions and don't buy computer power until you need it.
A lot of firms need to buy computer power when their administrative work takes up too much time.
Systems which streamline administrative work and can be linked into other areas of the practice are being used more and more.
Stronachs, an Aberdeen-based legal firm, operates a general chamber practice alongside court work, commercial law and estate agency in five offices, creating a large volume of administration.
Traditionally, the firm's accounts were based on ledger cards running on a mechanical accounting machine which worked flat out from morning until night The sheer volume of work restricted the capacity to process data efficiently.
The firm introduced Signet, a tailor-made computer system which has made financial accounting very much faster and also handles word processing requirements.
Stronachs plans to introduce time management and other functions as well.
The Signet Portfolio has been developed by CB Business Systems, regarded as the market leader in legal practice management software in Scotland, with over 200 firms using their products.
The basic products within the portfolio, which handles accounts, client details, word processing and time management, were created with the help of a team of practising solicitors.
The range of software products includes conveyancing and fee-earner support systems, investment management, debt recovery and a client and contact database, all of which are integrated to a powerful report generator.
Electronic mail and the facility to send a fax from any terminal are available options.
‘Fast information retrieval is the key requirement of professional firms,’ commented , managing director of CB Business Systems, ‘combined with flexibility and the ability to add applications.’
, a partner with Pagan Osborne Grace and Calders, which has offices in St Andrews, Dundee and Cupar, agreed that the flexibility of the system is a great asset.
His firm took advice form consultants at the University of Strathclyde before buying their computer system, to ensure minimal redundancy and the potential for infinite future expansion.
He believes that Signet has given his firm a competitive advantage —‘a major part of our practice is providing advice to all types of businesses and the sophistication of our system helps us to service our clients’ needs more efficiently’.
Ross Harper and Murphy, with 20 offices employing 20 partners and 80 fee-earners, wanted an integrated system linking word processing and accounts.
The speed of the system was an important consideration as was the   fact that Signet could be adapted to the firm's precise needs.
‘CB Business Systems understand the Scottish legal system and what solicitors actually want,’ said , the firm's managing partner.
Moore Stephens Business Technology Group is another company which has spotted the potential and introduced a practice management system to streamline the administrative work in professional practices.
The system provides instant information on clients and contacts, current and past jobs, profitability and costs and also offers automatic invoice generation facilities.
It has been designed to be used by the professionals themselves who do not, said Moore Stephens, have the time or inclination to learn about computers but appreciate the efficiency benefits which technology brings to administration.
Moore Stephens has developed a ‘niche’ concept which minimises the effort needed for data entry and maintenance.
A niche, for the purposes of practice management software, is any combination of a client and a location.
Data for each client and location is stored only once and each niche is independently associated with a partner and with individual jobs.
The system can readily identify relationships, record details of referred work, select individuals or places for specific mailings.
The system will also enable time and expenses to be recorded against each client job and produce bills for one or more jobs at any time.
Profitability and exposure analysis reports can be produced for groups of related clients as can analysis of time spent on non-client work.
Moore Stephens is using the system itself, although none of the Scottish offices have implemented it as yet.
There are plans to market the system to other professional firms in the future.
the major benefit of the system is that it allows partners and managers to tap into the system directly.
It is also built around a client and contact database, so it has a marketing benefit.
‘Many traditional systems have the database tacked on,’ said  of Moore Stephens' business technology group.
‘This system has been developed with the marketing capability as a fundamental principle.’
The range of information now available for capture and the possibilities for manipulating that information are staggering, but how much of it is really necessary?
The potential to produce ever more sophisticated reports and analyse and measure against every type of performance indicator does not necessarily mean that the firm will take action to correct profitability problems or reduce work in progress or collect debts more quickly.
Before you are carried away by the possibilities of information manipulation for its own sake it is worth taking a step back and examining how much more than the pen, paper and adding machine you really need.
TECHNOLOGY
The connecting point for successful development
‘The world does not need just another computer exhibition…’
Neil Fitzgerald reports.
Gordon Howell is unequivocal on this point: ‘Above all other industries, information technology cannot be self-serving.
What is important is how IT serves the critical success factors of business across all sectors.’
As Charlie Woods, director of Scottish and international operations at Scottish Enterprise, said, the whole reason why the Forum for Open Systems (of which Howell is director) was set up by SE's Software Group was ‘to bring together the users and suppliers of technology to establish how products should be developed and used’.
The gap between the two sides is all-too-well known and, it has to be said, not confined to domestic users and suppliers of Silicon Glen.
A recent survey in the US found a huge disparity between the interest of users and those of the supposedly user-friendly computer industry there: for instance, while security loomed in the minds of buyers as their number one concern, among the vendors it ranked just seventeenth.
And yet in any industry, ‘if you've got a sophisticated customer base in you own country it will force the industry to be a top-notch world class player’, Woods said.
‘As such it is a powerful mechanism providing a double benefit — to business generally and to the industry itself.’
The forum's initiative to achieve this culminates this year in the 1993 IT Summit, billed as the biggest such gathering ever put together in Scotland with the participation of almost 100 organisations and 65 speakers from across the world, which takes place in Glasgow on 22–24 June.
Again, Howell is unequivocal about what the event — which is also organised by Glasgow Development Agency, Scottish Software Federation, itacs at Strathclyde University and the computing science department of Glasgow University — should achieve.
‘The world does not need just another computer exhibition, PC show, networking conference, Windows show or other niche event,’ he said.
‘What is needed is an event that takes an overview of all the dynamics of the IT industry and focuses each aspect back to the key issue of how this provides business benefit.’
He also believes this should not be the sort of event senior executives will simply want to delegate, along with the ticket, to their organisation's IT specialist.
‘A major misconception is to treat IT as a department but you can't hive it off, it has to pervade an organisation and be built into marketing, sales, finance, production and so on.’
He points to some of the planned sessions which together constitute a ‘business stream’, beginning with an opening session which, he says, ‘starts on the basis of, forget IT, what are the critical success factors of your business?’, and is then followed on the next day by looking at how to manage for change by establishing an IT corporate policy.
The final day of this particular stream then looks at entrepreneurship in IT.
‘This takes the different tack of how to make money in IT,’ Howell said.
‘I see a lot of software produced by end-users who have no idea they are in the software market, yet if you are a company that's produced its own system, say a financial system, that really helps you to work better then why not market it?’
If this seems to blur the boundaries between user and supplier then it is perhaps deliberate.
Of course, other sessions running in parallel on the days are aimed at the specialists in the industry and the ability of such people to gather is another important aspect of the event.
‘A major problem in the Scottish software industry is that its people never meet, whereas they should to learn about possible joint ventures and other ways of cooperating,’ said Gerry Docherty, the summit's chairman and managing director of Real Time Engineering which recently won the 1993 TickIT National Quality Award.
Yet the aim is for individuals on both sides to come together and explore, ex tempore, mutual areas of interest in the conference venue, the Glasgow Hilton,(’ I expect a lot of the business to be done in the corridors’, said Howell) or at the Computer Solutions Show which runs simultaneously at the Scottish Exhibition and Conference Centre.
Here again the format is given a new twist, displaying practical options rather than disconnected elements — whether in the Research Village, a showcase of current IT activity in Scottish academia, the Industrial Garden, which brings together the many of the development agencies under one roof to discuss business opportunities, or the Model Factory, a scaled-down version of an actual open-system-based manufacturing installation, from design function to milling machine, created by the National Engineering Laboratory.
As Docherty said: ‘The problem caused by the tendency in user organisations to hive off IT to specialist managers is that the real users and decision-makers within them are isolated.
I don't believe they really know the things technology can do nowadays for their organisations.’
This, above all, is what the summit sets out to resolve, according to Woods.
‘It will provide a showcase to business people of all the attributes the industry has in Scotland and how they can be used, while getting a real exchange going as to how it should develop in the future.’
PROPERTY
Constructive criticism
Reflecting the property market changes, surveyors are moving back to helping property managers make the best use of their assets.
Ken Houston reports on the rise of the property audit.
A stranger attending a reception to mark the opening of new or refurbished office accommodation recently might have found it difficult differentiating between the property professionals and the PR men.
For not only would the developers — who always did have a reputation as sharp dressers — be examples of sartorial elegance but the traditionally staid chartered surveyors would also have swapped their green-check jackets and corduroy trousers for double-breasted suits, red braces and ties that were more of a ‘statement’ than a fashion accessory.
But this may have been more than just a sartorial sign of the changing times.
With, until recently, so many ‘deals’ being done, agency work had become the high-profile end of surveying practice.
But with far fewer deals being done than was the case, say, five years ago, what now for the red-braces man?
While he does expect recovery to come, he assumes life will be much gentler in the '90s than it was during the '80s.
Property professionals will not live by agency work alone.
In fact, rather than that vast army of fairly young but experienced, skilled and dedicated men and women, battle-hardened by the '80s boom, quitting to study law, drive taxis or run pubs, they are already in step with the shifting sands.
Property is not, after all, just about securing a first class covenant for 100,000 sq ft of new office space or selling a multi-million pound shopping centre to the retail trade.
The recent dearth of deals has made people realise that there is a vast portfolio out there worth, even after the recession, billions upon billions of pounds.
So property professionals are now turning their sights towards the existing occupied stocks.
The ‘property audit’ is not a new term but with the slowdown on both lettings and investment changes it is becoming a more prominent feature of the industry.
Yet it is not a case of chartered surveyors and suchlike touting for audit and similar instructions to fill a gap while the market is slow.
This additional work is, in part, a reaction to a new demand from landlords who have often ignored the asset values, or liabilities, of the buildings they own.
Even tenants, with no heritable interest in the buildings they occupy, want professional advice on how best to maximise space which they might (even in Scotland) be paying as much as £26 for on every sq ft, every year.
The main forms of property audit
Space audit — the assessment of a client's existing premises to define their long-term space requirements.
It can involve a simple space plan of the existing building to provide a more flexible and efficient layout or alternatively, it can be used as the basis to calculate the required floor area for a new building.
Building and services audit — a detailed building structure/fabric layout and services appraisal which can be undertaken for purchasers, owner occupiers and tenants.
It involves a detailed survey of a building and the specification/drawings, and so on.
This type of audit is more commonly referred to as a ‘structural survey report’ or ‘building inspection report’.
Environmental audit
General property audit — collates information on a building or property portfolio in order to establish a long-term strategic plan.
It goes significantly further than others in detailing long-term expenditure, projected land/building values, future developments, running costs, occupation costs, depreciation, performance assessments, information technology systems, and so on.
So how does a company in this position go about obtaining a property audit?
In Scotland, Co-ordinated Land & estates (CLE) is usually associated with developments such as Clydebank Business Park but in fact property audits have been a metier of this company for the past decade.
CLE said it will prepare a report for a client who is then free to decide whether or not to act on it.
CLE does not charge a set fee, operating on the basis of sharing in the expected savings derived from the recommendations in the audit.
Chief executive  has, at various times, made what he sees is the case for the property audit to be carried out by a development company rather than a surveying or accountancy practice, claiming that the former can provide the ‘multidisciplinary package’.
This, perhaps, might not go down too well in Scotland where he will find firms of chartered surveyors more than ready to rise to the challenge.
For instance, Bell-Ingram has been appointed by Clackmannan District Council to undertake a review of its property portfolio, which is believed to be the first of its kind in Scotland.
The company has also been commissioned to undertake the first quadrennial inspection of HM Customs and Excise's portfolio of historic buildings both in Scotland and the north of England.
‘The Clackmannan review is to ensure that the council's property investments are performing adequately and it will also provide a baseline to enable decisions to be taken regarding the portfolio and its future management,’ said , senior partner with Bell-Ingram.
‘This is something all local authorities are expected to undertake but I believe Clackmannan are ahead of the field in this respect.’
And obviously not one to hide the light of his firm — or the cause of the chartered surveyor — under a bushel with regard to the property audit, he said: ‘We see this as further endorsement of the quality and range of services which we are equipped to offer both the private and public sectors.’
said there had probably never been a better time than now for a private company or public body to carry out a property audit.
‘There was a time when all companies assumed that the value of property they held would rise inexorably.
Now some may even find themselves with property liabilities and if this is so they need professional advice   on how to remedy the situation.
‘Even where a client's property portfolio is basically sound we are now trying to broaden the scope of the advice we can give.
It is not enough in today's market to simply tell the client to ‘buy’ or ‘sell’.’
said this change of emphasis was good for the profession as a whole.
In a buoyant market, with deals being done left, right and centre, chartered surveyors were too often seen as ‘brokers’.
‘Now once again we are being given the opportunity to demonstrate our professionalism in all its fields,’ he said.
In addition to the audit of a single building or a whole portfolio of buildings there has also been an increase in demand for the ‘space audit’, usually from office tenants.
‘This is something our relevant surveyors in both Edinburgh and Glasgow offices are receiving more and more requests for,’ said , a partner with Jones Lang Wootton.
‘A company which has grown in the past two or three years may have been unable to move to larger premises, partly because it has been unable to pass on its present lease.
As a result an occupier will tend to look closely at existing accommodation and see how it can be maximised.’
A space audit need not be restricted to simply shuffling people around a building and could take in aspects such as energy, said .
For example, it has been shown that failure to clean fluorescent lighting over a five-year added 20 per cent to the running costs of the apparatus.
claimed that firms such as hi, with a team of relevant specialists, was able to respond quickly to requests of this kind, especially now that they were equipped with a computer-aided design system (CAS).
But he felt this was a minority reaction and warned: ‘Given the increasing emphasis on the property and space audit I don't think the profession as a whole is as geared up as it should be.’
LAWPOINT
Plans to avoid picking up the pieces
Our legal correspondent looks at the aftermath of the London bombs.
Last spring I sat in the Windows on the World restaurant on the 45th floor of the World Trade Center, whose twin towers are a New York landmark.
The top of the building — one third of a mile high — was hidden in the clouds and away below me I watched as snow squalls hit the streets of Manhattan.
I casually wondered how I would get out if a bomb went off down at ground level.
Almost exactly a year later, a bomb did go off in the basement car park during the evening rush hour, causing many minor casualties, and about £350m in damage, about ten per cent of which was ultimately reinsured in the London market.
This terrorist activity brought home to Americans what the United Kingdom and, more recently, the city of London has had to tolerate for years.
In April 1992 the IRA bomb in St Mary Axe which destroyed the Baltic Exchange and caused about £300m damage led to the preparation of contingency plans as a result of which the consequences of this April's bomb in Bishopsgate were to some extent mitigated.
But there are substantial legal problems as major financial institutions literally pick up the pieces and look to their future.
After the Baltic Exchange explosion, the Government agreed to move in as it had done before in Northern Ireland, to act as ‘insurer of last resort’, and the necessary legislation is in the Reinsurance (Acts of Terrorism) Bill published on 5 May this year.
Insurers withdrew terrorism cover from standard commercial policies last year.
In the meantime, the insurance industry has set up Pool Re, which began collecting premium income in January.
This will be insufficient to meet the cost of the Bishopsgate bomb, and although the industry itself will meet ten per cent of the excess reinsurance costs, the balance left for the government could be as much as £200m.
A number of legal problems still have to be sorted out.
Physical damage to buildings and office equipment and data is very much part of the cost.
But will the scheme also cover business interruption loss, which in last year's explosion amounted to £100m?
There may be difficulties in demarcating what exactly are terrorist induced losses, as against other more remote claims.
Many office blocks are rented on multiple leases.
Who pays for general structure repairs if not every tenant is insured?
Should insurance cover be overall, or just limited to high risk sensitive areas like the City?
If so, what cover and premium rates should apply to provincial centres which, as recent events showed, are similarly now liable to attack?
One way to avoid selective cover only would be for the government to insist on a compulsory levy on all commercial insurance policies, and this has been suggested by the Association of Insurers and Risk Manager in Industry and Commerce (AIRMIC) which represents about 300 UK insurance buyers.
AIRMIC fears that selective premium rates for vulnerable areas could mean that even fewer companies would buy cover from Pool Re.
Would the separate private off-shore cover arranged by some major international groups be able to buy into Pool Re?
While the Government would like to aim at an insurance pool of around £500m a year, the industry thinks this would be optimistic.
In the fortunate event of no major occurrence in any particular year, would the premiums be waived for the following year, or if there was profit distribution who would benefit?
Another problem is the operation of EC anti-competition law.
If Pool Re was the only viable cover offered on the market, this could be regarded as an anti-competitive agreement under article 85, unless special exemption was obtained form the European Commission.
contingency planning, or to use the vogue phrase, disaster recovery arrangements, has now become more important in the calculation of premiums.
Obviously a business which has good security and suitable contingency plans can expect a reduction in premium because business interruption claims would be limited.
If a company can limit its interruption claim to a period of three months rather than three years, it could expect a premium reduction of between 25 and 50 per cent.
For security reasons, most City organisations are reluctant to discuss their own contingency plans.
The main clearing banks all have disaster recovery plans and, as members of the Association of Payment Clearing Services (APACS), are required to test contingency facilities each year.
The fact that the City was able to resume normal business so quickly is a tribute to the adequacy of the contingency planning.
It has been estimated that about 20,000 office workers were displaced as a result of the recent bomb.
Many could be relocated  within the company's own premises, surplus space having become available because of the recession.
but it has not always been easy.
’ It's been a matter of judicious use of a shoe horn,’ said one insurance broker.
So what can the law do to help the protection of the City of London and those who work there?
The Government and senior police officers have so far resisted calls for a ‘ring of steel’, Belfast-style protection, with closed circuit television, control zones, and very restricted access.
When the security forces mounted check points at every key road into Belfast, commuters soon became angry at the lengthy delays, and the cost was enormous.
If this were done in the City, the IRA could simply switch their targets to prestigious offices in the provinces.
The police would like operate more random stop and search vehicle checks, but are working under the limits of legislation in the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984.
At present, road blocks can only be set if the police have reasonable grounds for believing a serious offence is about to be committed, or if they are searching for someone who intends to commit an offence.
Permanent road blocks and checks would require further legislation, and would be bound to meet opposition from civil liberties groups who would claim harassment of the loyal Irish community within the UK.
Still, more street could be pedestrianised and private car circulation restricted.
Meanwhile, after the Baltic Exchange bomb last year, the Corporation of London increased the number of police officers by 40 at a cost £1.5m, the extra cost being mainly borne by the large financial institutions.
Fears that London's reputation as the world's leading financial centre has been permanently damaged are considered to be exaggerated.
In Frankfurt, for example, the Bundesbank is protected by barriers with armed police, there have been a number of terrorist kidnappings of leading business figures and many top bankers and others are protected by personal bodyguards.
Some executive work in offices without windows.
The general consensus, however, is that time is not on our side, and the law must move quickly to offer such enhanced protection as it can.
CITY DIARY
Cautious trend in takeovers
Remember the takeover bid?
That colourful and noisy species which bestrode the '80s City landscape has appeared to be approaching extinction this year.
It is unlikely to reach extinction.
But is may not be an accident that two out of the last three large, completed bids have ended up as tender offers, not full-scale takeovers.
The two were Hong Kong Land's bid for up to 29.9 per cent of Trafalgar House late last year, and Thomas Cook's for 12.5 per cent of Owners Abroad.
The Cook offer successfully saw off a full bid from Airtours.
Laporte's trumping of Wassall on 8 January with a £135m bid for glue maker Evode has been the nearest thing to a typical bid salvo, although there have been some minnow-sized transactions.
So why the slow-down in bid activity?
Not, apparently, because companies have ceased considering takeovers — everyone talks of City corporate finance departments working on full throttle.
That cannot just be because they have a lot of flotations and rights issues to work on.
The implication must be that a lot of bids are being planned but never see the light of day.
The high level of the stock market in the last six months may have made certain bids, for underperforming companies, uneconomic.
And predators may be hesitating longer than i the past, over due diligence studies.
Commercial property values are depressed and only some companies may have adequately written them down in their accounts.
And a firm's environmental history has emerged as another potential poison pill no-one wants to swallow.
The danger of swallowing can be minimised if companies take the tender offer route — buying minority stakes which still enable them to exercise some control, and still share costs in areas such as research or marketing.
Some of Britain's most prolific bidders may have lost some of their confidence after recent setbacks.
Hanson lost out to Tomkins in its last big bid, for Ranks Hovis MacDougall, and anyway now has a lowly share rating with a yield well above the market average at about six per cent.
So issuing more of its own paper is not so attractive.
Institutional investors have shown themselves, as in the Airtours-Owners battle to be less welcoming and more sceptical of bids than they were in the '80s.
Institutions have learnt that bids are not the only way to force the replacement of under-performing — witness the success of a Gartmore-led group of investors in pushing through a boardroom putsch at Alexon, the troubled clothing firm.
Underwriting may be another problem.
The drain on institutional cash flow from the Government's £50 billion gilts programme this year will make cash and part-cash takeover bids hard to underwrite.
Fashion may also have changed.
Recently , chairman of ICI and Zeneca, said Zeneca was unlikely to go onto the takeover trail: ‘The number of '80s-style expansionary acquisitions has to some extent levelled off, or declined.
people are now looking at other ways of enhancing their product portfolios.’
He pointed to product collaborations as a better route.
Other companies may prefer ‘bolt-on-on’ acquisitions to takeovers — buying a division of another group may be possible at a lower multiple than buying a company outright.
If so, dilution of earnings may be avoided more easily.
But I also suspect that the shortage of bids may be not unconnected with the revolution in British accounting.
In April the Accounting Standards Board proposed that provisions for future losses and reorganisation costs after an acquisition will no longer be allowed to be taken straight out of the balance sheet of the purchaser's accounts, without passing through its profit and loss account.
Instead ‘acquisition provisions’ will have to be treated as above-the-line exceptional items, hitting pre-tax profits and earnings per share.
If implemented, this will be a serious blow to takeover specialists.
Until now, acquisition provisions have appeared often to slope the playing field in favour of takeovers and against non-merging companies.
So if takeovers are on the retreat, what next?
They may be less glamorous but cross-border collaborations and intra-industry consortia could be the fashions of the '90s.
TAX
TAX MATTERS
ICAS says harmonisation begins at home
The European Commission's report by the Ruding Committee on tax distortions in the internal market was questioned by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland for the ‘piecemeal approach’ it put forward to harmonise by directives on individual items.
ICAS welcomed the review but also said it was a timely reminder of archaic and unnecessary burdens in the UK tax system and urged an independent examination by a working party of all interested bodies to tackle problems close to home.
It went on to warn against any general attack on fiscal incentives (or, as ICAS says the report negatively and unhelpfully refers to them, ‘fiscal degradation’): there is no level playing field in the EC and so less successful economies have to offer incentives to compete, ICAS said, and any attempt to eliminate them would only lead to governments using non-tax ones which will be harder for others to identify.
Rather than addressing individual anomalies by directives, ICAS called for a conceptual framework and a single model tax treaty, to be signed by all EC members, which would in itself result in harmonised treatment of cross-border transactions.
It also endorsed the Ruding proposal for the difference between commercial and tax accounts to be reduced.
This is one of the issues it felt should be tackled in the UK whose system also, according to, convener of ICAS's international tax committee, ‘disadvantages British business operating internationally and taxes foreign companies trading in Britain less heavily than British ones.
A review of such a distortive system is long overdue.’
NIC compliance costs attacked
Initial findings of a survey on what were deemed unnecessary compliance costs in the direct tax system found that the collection of National Insurance Contributions was a major concern, the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales said.
The survey of tax practitioners who are members of the institute, part of a research project at Bristol University, found that NIC compliance costs were unnecessarily high and considerable savings could be made without a fundamental change in Government policy.
Harsh criticism was also levelled at Contributions Agency staff, especially when compared with the Inland Revenue.
on the other hand, while the CA has been operating as a separate agency for two years, 24 per cent of the NIC specialists who completed the survey were unaware of its existence.
, one of the researchers, said the survey clearly demonstrates the benefits to be gained by putting administration of NICs and the agency under the Inland Revenue.
Buyers to account and pay for VAT on gold
From 1 April a new statutory payment and accounting system for gold came into force under which the responsibility for paying VAT on gold transactions was transferred from the seller to the buyer.
The change, which affects sellers and buyers where they are both VAT registered or are liable to be registered as a result of a transaction and the buyer is making the purchase in connection with his or her business, was made in an effort to combat the growing number of serious VAT frauds involving smuggled gold.
It will not apply to manufactured goods purchased for sale as such or part-manufactured goods sold for further processing into finished manufactured goods or jewellery.
Work on goods to businesses in other EC countries
VAT must now be charged on repairs, reconditioning or any other work on a customer's goods subsequently removed to another European Community country that does not bring about any fundamental change in the nature of those goods.
The customer may be entitled to reclaim the VAT from Customs & excise or the UK supplier can claim the refund on the customer's behalf subject to holding a power of attorney or letter of authority.
It still puts such services at a disadvantage compared with the supply of goods to a customer elsewhere in the EC which is zero-rated if VAT numbers are known.
However, an alternative treatment is possible, according to Customs.
The supplier and EC customer may arrange for work to be supplied in the form of goods rather than services, by making two separate supplies.
For example, for a repair the owner of the goods would supply them to the UK repairer who, using its VAT number, would account for acquisition tax in the normal way.
Having carried out the work, the repairer then supplies the goods to the original owner who, using its VAT number, acquires them in its own country so avoiding the need for cross-border refunds.
Supplies will be deemed to have taken place even if the contract under which title passes also obliges the repairer to sell the goods back in their altered state to the original owner, Customs said.
The original owner's invoice should show either the current cost of the goods if supplied to the repairer for nothing, or if a charge is made the amount to be paid.
The value of the altered goods supplied back by the repairer would be the price agreed taking account of work performed and any charge by the original owner for them.
Amendments on forex gains and losses
Amendments to the Finance Bill which the Government claimed meet representations from business on draft clauses published for consultation in February were tabled.
Among others, these prevent double counting of non-trade exchange differences which could otherwise be included under deductions for cases III, IV or V Schedule D, of exchange  differences on currency acquired under a forward contract and indefinite deferral of unrealised gains; ensure carry-forward of losses are not prevented by a drafting technicality; enable regulations to apply arm's-length test exclusions to debts that vary in amount; and extend the rules on translating forward currency contracts to those not reflected in accounts prepared under normal accounting practice.
Euro-list on authorise warehouse keepers and taxed warehouses
The EC now requires each member state to maintain a list of all its registered traders, authorised warehouse keepers and taxed warehouses.
Customs & excise intends to update a computer disk monthly and exchange details of tax traders with other EC member states.
A number of traders already use lists in the warehousing, tobacco and oil sectors in their own computerised validation procedures.
Customers intends to make its disk available to these and any other trader expecting to have significant EC aid in excise duty-suspended goods.
The list would be in ASCII format, Data Ease 4.5 and in a compressed form.
Any trader interested in receiving the disk should write to  .
No break on snacks
Those fearing a re-run of the Great Jaffa Cake VAT saga, only this time on ‘savoury snacks’, can relax — perhaps.
After a review both the trade and Customs accept that the current legal framework continues to provide a broadly satisfactory distinction between categories that are and aren't excluded from zero-rating for food, Customs said — even though originally there was concern over confusion about the correct interpretation of food products ‘obtained by the swelling of cereals’.
Not surprised, so were we.
That doesn't rule out a debacle later on.
‘Future problems over borderline products should be resolved through ad hoc bilateral discussions.’
With new products being innovated endlessly, it can only be a matter of time….
Grant News
Since the last Grant News was published changes and developments have affected several of the incentive schemes available for businesses from both national and EC sources.
In particular, it has been confirmed that changes announced in the Budget to the Loan Guarantee Scheme will come into effect on 1 July 1993.
These include an increase to £250,000 in the maximum loan for established businesses, an increase in the Government's guarantee to cover 85 per cent of the loan, and a reduction in the premium payable by borrowers for fixed rate loans.
British Coal Enterprise Ltd has recently set up a Fast Track Loans Scheme to provide almost ‘instant loans’ for small businesses in a bid to speed up job creation in pit closure areas.
Under the scheme, loans will be available up to £15,000 at a fixed rate of interest of nine per cent without security.
The scheme is due to be introduced in Scotland in late May/early June and will complement BCE's existing financial assistance package which is designed to assist business start-ups and facilitate company expansion and relocation into mining areas.
In the field of research and development, a new programme has been launched under the LINK initiative to support collaborative research into the biological treatment of soil and water.
The aim is to help the competitive position of the water processing and soil bioremediation industries.
This is the 31st LINK programme; LINK provides assistance to help ‘bridge the gap’ between the research base and industry by stimulating collaborative projects in key areas of science and technology.
Remaining with the research theme, the Government has commissioned a review of the DTI's five research centres (including the National Engineering Laboratory in East Kilbride) to look at options such as privatisation or franchising.
The centres are all currently Executive Agencies which between them generate business worth more than £100m a year.
Also on the topic of research, the European Commission has published several calls for proposals for participation in Research & technological Development (RTD) programmes.
These cover nuclear energies, the European System and Software Initiative (ESSI), and TEDIS (Trade Electronic Data Interchange Systems).
A call is also anticipated under the Environment Programme.
Participation in EC RTD programmes is generally via the ‘calls for proposals’ process whereby applications are submitted in response to an invitation published in the Official Journal of the European Communities.
Each call sets a deadline for the submission of proposals — usually ten to 12 weeks from the date of publication.
Applications are selected on a competitive basis, with programmes often being oversubscribed.
Projects are judged on the perceived importance of the proposed work and the extent to which the project meets the programme's objectives.
Participation usually requires transnational collaboration.
Also, the research should also be innovative and pre-competitive, that is, somewhere between basic fundamental research and commercial application.
Staying with EC programmes, a call for applications has also been published under FORCE — an action programme supporting the development of continuing vocational training in the community.
Assistance is available for: exchanges, training courses, preparatory work designing transnational cooperation and the exchange of experience.
BRIEFING
BUSINESS
‘Burdens’ review of safety regulations
A review involving cost-benefit analysis of around 400 sets of health and safety regulations to ensure they do not impose unreasonable burdens on business was announced.
The Health and Safety Commission also called for help from business, particularly small firms, ‘for whom Government regulation — if there is no proper advice and assistance — can sometimes seem to be a particularly heavy burden’, said its chairman,.
It is forming seven industrial task groups —
food, drink and agriculture;
communications/transport;
engineering;
chemicals and pharmaceuticals;
financial services;
other services
— and asking representatives from small firms to join them.
‘We already apply cost-benefit analysis to each new precaution.
The review continues that work but we shall go back over the ground to make sure that the newer regulations we have introduced include as little red tape as possible,’ said.
HSE's director-general,, said: ‘Law that is fussy or demands unnecessary detail is ineffective and also gives too many opportunities to consultants and others to exaggerate what it requires so as to get themselves business — quite a problem at present.’
Scottish output shows early recovery
Scottish manufacturing and construction companies showed a 2.3 per cent increase in the fourth quarter over the previous three months, according to provisional Government output figures excluding oil and gas.
That compared with a continuing slight downward trend in the rest of the UK and, coupled with the year-on-year trend of minus one per cent and minus 1.6 per cent for the whole of the UK, suggested a resurgence North of the Border ahead of the rest.
The detailed figures showed some fairly lumpy rises in specific sectors.
Investment goods output jumped 17 per cent in the fourth quarter, with engineering up 15 per cent and within that electrical and instrument engineering ahead 30 per cent over the previous quarter.
Meanwhile construction suffered a 6.6 per cent reverse in the period but, according to the figures, was still higher by 2.2 per cent in 1992 against 1991.
And the overall engineering figures seemed to have been held back by a ten per cent drop in the fourth quarter, pulling it down to the overall UK trend for the year of minus five per cent.
Guidelines on Serbian sanctions
A second supplement to the notice, United Nations Act 1946: Serbia and Montenegro of 8 June 1992, giving details of revised arrangements following the tightening of sanctions, was issued by the Bank of England.
In particular, permission will not be given for payments by Serbian/Montenegrin-owned companies, whether incorporated in the UK or elsewhere, for third-country trade — goods purchased in one country for sale in another, neither being Serbia or the UK.
Questions may be referred to the Bank's Sanctions Emergency Unit:
Business grants system under fire
Many businesses with high potential for growth and job creation are not getting the help they need because most grants available are determined by geographic location, it was claimed.
‘A firm's ability to use the money effectively should be more important than whether the company is in a designated area for special assistance,’ said , partner with Moores Rowland, as the firm issued guidelines to the main business grant schemes.
Urging a review of the UK system, compared it with France where, although special support went to deprived regions, there was a wide range of financial incentives specially tailored to industrial programmes so a higher proportion went to businesses most likely to produce the best results.
Property values suffer yet another reverse
After a period of restabilisation in March, office rentals fell sharply back again in April, according to the Richard Ellis Scottish Monthly Index.
Meanwhile capital values fell by 2.5 per cent so that annual capital and rental growth is now around minus 7.5 per cent, with total return barely positive.
Annual industrial capital values growth also turned negative again after a fall of 1.1 per cent in April, pushing the total return to below ten per cent.
Only retail showed continued rises with rental values up slightly and capital values 0.6 per cent higher, pushing the annual total return up from 10.2 per cent to 10.7 per cent.
Overall, property results continue to worsen with annual returns now running at 6.2 per cent.
Investor protection moves
Waverley Fund Management, operating from  in Edinburgh and , London, was declared in default by the Investors Compensation Scheme on 22 April.
Its membership of the Financial Intermediaries Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association was suspended on 16 April 1992/
ICS will contact all known investors with the firm, which acted as an adviser on investments, life assurance and unit trusts, and any others not hearing from it should contact the ICS, although declaration of default does not necessarily mean all investors will be eligible for compensation.
In entirely unrelated incidents, the Securities and Investments Board obtained injunctions to protect UK investors in LW Investment Corporation (LWI), which has a registered office in Kent, Delaware, and a client service centre in Cyprus.
Injunctions were also obtained against , its principal director who appears to have offices in South Africa.
The action was taken on grounds of conducting unauthorised business and making unsolicited calls and misleading statements, SIB said, and prevents LWI and  from continuing to do this and from disposing or dealing with any assets.
SIB would like any investors who have dealt with LWI directly or through  to contact its Public Information Office .
FINANCIAL SERVICES
New money laundering rules and training to be addressed
A joint money laundering steering group was convened to revise UK money laundering guidance notes for the financial sector and examine how a new statutory requirement for employers to train relevant staff in recognising and reporting suspect transactions will be met.
Changes to guidance notes are needed to accommodate the Money Laundering Directive currently being implemented through the Criminal Justice Bill and supplementary European Community regulations.
The bill is expected to received royal assent in July, the regulations to come into force early 1994.
For now, existing law and guidance prevails.
The new regulations will leave some areas for the guidance notes to clarify, such as references to ‘normal market practice’.
The notes will also give a practical interpretation of the regulations and codify best practice, as well as be more prescriptive to clarify what have already proved in practice to be grey areas.
The steering group, under the chairmanship of  of the Bank of England, is considering how the regulations' statutory requirement on employers to train relevant staff will be met and will oversee production of centralised training packages.
A conference to launch the notes and the training material is expected in the early autumn.
Cancellation rights extended
From 20 May, cancellation rights for holders of most new term life assurance policies were extended.
The cooling-off period, during which new policyholders may cancel without penalty, on many of these ‘non-investment’ products, including some hitherto exempt from any such right, has been extended from ten days to 14 days, bringing them into line with‘investment’products covered by the Financial Services Act.
The move implements cancellation provisions contained in the second and third life assurance directive.
The mandatory rights would also be granted to policyholders purchasing from insurers based in other EC countries.
Article 15 of the second directive gives cancellation rights to all individual contracts except those of six months or less and is amended to exempt where the policyholder has had, for example, the opportunity to reflect on the policy terms before contacting the insurer.
Equalisation of pension rights between sexes becomes clearer
It now looks likely that pension schemes will only have to backdate any equalisation of benefits between men and women to those in service on or after 17 May 1990.
But this will have to involve levelling up to the more advantaged rather than levelling down to the lesser, although future benefits can be reduced so long as diminution is applied equally to both sexes.
These were two of the points made in the opinion delivered at the end of April by the Advocate General to the European Court of Justice in relation to four test cases to clarify an earlier ECJ watershed case on equal pension rights, Barber v Guardian Royal Exchange, which found on 17 May 1990 that Article 119 of the Treaty of Rome on equal pay applied to pension benefits.
The most wide-ranging in implications of the four concerns Coloroll Group and questions of retrospection, trustees' liability and sex discrimination in determining members' benefits.
It is still open to the ECJ judges to differ from the Advocate General's opinion and, according to consultants and actuaries Noble Lowndes, even when judgment is given it is unlikely to cover all the details so requiring national legislation or court action.
However, it does give employers and trustees a large amount to prepare on.
Among other points in the opinion, sex discriminatory actuarial factors within the scheme are not allowed — benefits for women and men must be calculated in the same way, although unisex pricing of annuities on the market do not seem required.
The opinion comes down on widowers having the same rights as widows, although this would only apply to service from the date of the forthcoming judgment.
It believes that all national legislation, administrative provisions, contracts and trust deeds are overridden by article 119 (so the Government contracting-out provisions and Inland Revenue practice notes could also be affected).
Trustees are obliged under Article 119 to do everything in their power to ensure benefits comply with equal treatment and that cases can be brought against them as well as the employer, it says, although it recognises there may be limits imposed by the size of the fund and the trust terms.
Similarly, where there are insufficient funds in the scheme to meet the cost of equalisation, the national courts must decide the scheme's and employer's respective liability, but national law must not stand in the way of Article 199.
Finally, the Advocate-General's view is that the Barber judgment applies to schemes whether or not they are contracted out and it is irrelevant whether a scheme is funded exclusively by the employer or also by compulsory or voluntary employees' contributions.
Additional voluntary contributions seem caught too, therefore.
OPB approach to eliminating pension surpluses
The Occupational Pensions Board gave examples of circumstances in which applications for orders for pension fund surpluses to be reduced or eliminated had been turned down, as part of new guidance on how to make applications.
Those that have caused concern include the balance of the distribution of the surplus between employer and members, unexplained anomalies in allocation between different member categories, lack of independent advice to trustees or consultation with members, inaccurate or misleading information given to members, and the apparent failure of trustees to consider all options available to use the surplus.
New points in the revised announcement 47 from the OPB include additional stress on the need for trustees to have considered all the options and the application should demonstrate that this has been done; that they had sought independent legal advice ‘from lawyers who do not advise the company on such matters’(the OPB does not regard another partner in the same firm as ‘independent’) and the OPB would find it ‘helpful’ to see copies of correspondence between them; and specific details of the information sent to members which should be contained in the application.
ACCOUNTING
ASB proposals on substance and valuing hit flak
The Accounting Standards Board continued to receive criticism from the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales on what the institute still feels is a potential conflict between FRED3 on capital instruments, which it says ‘concentrates on legal form’, and FRED4 on off balance sheet finance which ‘emphasises the substance of transactions’.
But it welcomed FRED4, saying because it contains more detailed proposals its provisions should be used to override FRED3 and, indeed, there should be a requirement for all transactions to be interpreted in the light of the draft off balance sheet standard.
Meanwhile, in a bulletin accompanying the latest update to Current Accounting Law and Practice, its editor,, questioned the ASB's proposals in its Role of Valuation in Financial Reporting paper which moves towards current values.
While that seemed intellectually right, he said, it depended too much on the integrity of management and advisers in subjective assessments and far safer would be to accept the limitations of balance sheets and adhere more rigidly to historical values.
Accountancy section formed to help in development of EDI
Members from all areas in accounting and audit are being sought to join a group to help influence the development of electronic data interchange in a way that takes into account the profession's requirements in the UK and Europe.
The accountancy interest section was started recently by the EDI Association which seeks to improve UK business efficiency through the use of EDI.
It already has a number of other special interest sections including the financial interest section and legal advisory and security groups to support members.
Among other services to members is a helpline, professional support staff and information and education resources.
Membership, from £200 a year based on company turnover, gives access to all these.
AUDIT
Tougher guidelines on auditor's reports
The end of the bland three-line statement and of the understated ‘subject to’ comment comes into effect for companies' annual accounts with year-ends on or after 30 September with the introduction of the Auditing Practices Board's first statement of auditing standards.
In what , the chairman of the working party responsible for it and president of the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland, described as ‘the most fundamental change in audit reporting probably for more than a generation’, the SAS seeks to close the so-called expectations gap and bring practice into line with recommendations of the report of the Cadbury committee on corporate governance, of which  was also a member.
The auditor's report will itself be longer than before, with information on the respective responsibilities of directors and auditors and a description of the basis for the auditors' opinion.
The latter will include the fact that the report complies with auditing standards and, where it departs from these, the reasons; the steps taken in the audit process; and that it was planned and performed ‘so as to obtain reasonable assurance that the financial statements are free from material misstatement, whether caused by fraud or other irregularity or error’.
Instead of opinions expressed ‘subject to’ the effects of uncertainties, auditors will be required to express an opinion taking into account whether estimates an disclosures are sufficient for the accounts to give a true and fair view.
The APB believes readers will then be able to see that auditors have evaluated the treatment of uncertainties and whether or not they are satisfied.
Auditors will also be able to give an opinion without resolution of all uncertain matters so removing an argument for delay.
Meanwhile, any fundamental uncertainty will be covered in a separate paragraph including details of potential risks and costs.
One of the changes introduced since the consultation period on the SAS's exposure draft, published in May 1992, is a distinction between an inherent uncertainty which may be expected to be resolved at a future date and one which exists because evidence does or did exist but is not available to the auditors and so arises because of a limitation in the auditors' work.
The circumstances in which an inherent uncertainty is regarded as fundamental in the auditors' opinion must be identified but auditors should use words that clearly indicate their opinion on the financial statements is not qualified in respect of the paragraph's contents.
However, where the scope of the work has been limited, auditors will give a qualified opinion.
Disclaimers of opinion and presentation of an adverse opinion are also still available as options.
Low level set for audit abolition
Small companies wishing to dispense with the burden of audit would have to have turnover of no more than the VAT registration threshold, under new proposals from the Government.
Although the Department of Trade and Industry estimates that between 250,000 and 300,000 companies' turnover falls below the VAT registration threshold, the exemption limit is considerably lower than that proposed by, among others, the accountancy profession in the last consultation period.
The DTI sets out two options: abolition without replacement, and replacement by a ‘compilation report’ by an independent and suitably qualified accountant (stating compliance with legislation and that the company is eligible for exemption) with a directors' declaration which, under two options, could simply state their obligations or also attest they have kept proper records and prepared accounts to give a true and fair view — and so, as the DTI warns, expose them to civil liability and weaken their statutory defences.
Issues raised on Cadbury controls
Auditors will be able to comply with the Cadbury recommendation that they report on directors' statements with regard to companies' internal controls but only if there is clear guidance for both sides on a number of scope, technical and reporting issues, an analysis by the Institute of Chartered Accountants in England and Wales concluded.
The institute's auditing committee said there are limitations on the auditors' ability to know the systems as well as the directors, or to challenge directors' judgments on activities and risks and the solutions they have adopted.
It may be better for auditors to limit the scope of their work and describe it in their report, it concluded.
It went on to discuss what form the opinion should take, including where a reservation of opinion would be required.
Any breakdown or weakness would initially be reported by the directors, and care will be needed to decide what constitutes a ‘significant’ one.
It presented an illustrative example of a report which emphasises that the auditors' conclusions related to the date of the financial statements, but ‘because of inherent limitations in any system of control, errors, breaches of law, inefficiencies or irregularities may occur and not be detected and such a system is subject to the risk that procedures may become inadequate’.
Meanwhile in a speech to the Chartered Association of Certified Accountants Sir Adrian Cadbury said the view among some critics that his committee's proposals on non-executive directors were divisive for boards stemmed from a misunderstanding of its terms of reference which were limited to financial aspects and did not touch on the wider responsibility of all directors for general governance.
And he warned that if companies failed to address corporate accountability the market regulation it proposed could be replaced by Government regulation.
INSTITUTE
Adviser change rule
New draft guidance on the procedures for the outgoing and successor firm when a client decides to change advisers, issued by the Chartered Accountants' Joint Ethics Committee, puts greater emphasis on the fact that any change in a continuing appointment, such as tax or accounting work, should be treated in the same way as a change of auditors.
The guidance will bring together for the first time all the relevant existing guidance into one statement and has already been the subject of previous consultation in a green paper.
Apart from, as CAJEC chairman  said, ‘clearing up any misunderstanding that this enquiry procedure is just restricted to audits — it applies to all assignments’, other significant changes include requiring firms to provide minimum accounting information to a successor even where fees remain outstanding and stronger procedures to be followed by firms to inform the existing adviser that they have been invited to take on additional work.
Directors disqualifications show sudden rise
The company Directors Disqualification Act was seen to be starting to bit when figures produced in Impecunias, the magazine jointly run by the Institute of Chartered Accountants of Scotland and the Law Society of Scotland for insolvency specialists, showed a sudden surge in disqualifications in Scotland form just 49 by the end of April 1992 to 102 by the end of March this year.
The change was put down to the fact that, since the act was only brought in in 1986, it had taken time for its effects to come through.
In addition to the time lag while the act was being understood, it can take up to four years for an insolvency practitioner to lodge a report and then for a disqualification order to be made.
Another trend starting to make its presence felt was the putting out to tender of insolvency appointments, initiated by the Royal Bank of Scotland.
Some practitioners complained that it was to difficult to estimate in advance and could lead to aggressive underpricing which may affect the quality of the work.
Another Royal Bank policy, to prevent reporting accountants from then undertaking the receivership and so prevent potential conflicts of interest, was also said to be too restrictive.
But a Royal Bank spokesman said: ‘We would only expect tenders to be based on the cost per hour, not the total cost.
As for quality, it's just for simple cases and in truly complex insolvencies or where we wanted someone to trade the company through, the need to get the person or firm with the right expertise would tend to override any cost concerns.’
He stressed: ‘These policies aren't for our benefit — usually the bank is paid up-front as a preferred creditor.
They are to protect other unsecured creditors who might otherwise see what's left swallowed up by large fees.’