

PRESIDENT'S MESSAGE
In every sense of the word, 1992 was a tough year for the profession.
The recession deepened, fee competition intensified and the Warne Review was announced with its obvious threat to statutory registration.
We consulted widely with the Membership before submitting our evidence to John Warne.
Overwhelmingly, our members want to retain statutory registration to protect the public from impostors and the unqualified.
I am convinced this is right and that the Institute must unify the profession and provide leadership for the threats and opportunities that lie ahead.
The Institute itself has, of course, suffered financially from the impact of the recession and has had to make painful economies and cut out some activities.
Nevertheless, as this report proves, a whole panoply of activity has been taking place on behalf of the membership and it is to the credit of our staff that we ended such a difficult year with a small surplus when other professional institutes regrettably hard large deficits.
I am pleased to report that in 1992 I was able to substantially achieve one of the objects of my Presidency, the refurbishment of the main exhibition galleries at Portland Place, making it more welcoming to members and the public and better able to put the case for architecture.
As a consequence, the exhibition programme has expanded considerably and 9000 visitors — about 20 per cent of them members of the public — visited the Santiago Calatrava exhibition in the Autumn.
We have, I believe the most active Architecture Centre in Europe where it is not only a must but an honour for the world's leading architects to lecture or exhibit.
We have developed a most successful Urban Design Initiative where students from schools of architecture have participated with practitioners in developing imaginative approaches to exploring the potential of vacant urban sites.
The Initiative began at the ‘Drawing on London’ weekend at the RIBA and workshops have now taken place in eighteen cities nationwide.
By working with others we can demonstrate the real contribution that chartered architects can make in reviving our urban environment.
I have continued to build up alliances with organisations prepared to pursue quality in architecture.
In November we had a most successful joint colloquium with English Heritage on new Buildings in historic contexts and with our allies, we continued our campaign against Compulsory Competitive Tendering.
We published Agenda for the 90's, a statement of RIBA policies ranging from Housing to the Environment and used it as a tool with which to lobby parliamentary candidates for the General Election.
Times are hard for chartered architects who sometimes ask ‘What does the Institute do for me?’
The way to find out is to read this report but, more importantly, become involved with your branch.
Our strong regional and branch structure is a tremendous asset and I pay tribute to the many members centrally and regionally who give a great deal of voluntary time to the profession and their Institute.
A high degree of involvement by members is essential for a healthy institute.
I believe we have such an Institute.
Notice of the RIBA annual general meeting
The report of the Council of the Royal Institute for consideration at the Annual General Meeting to be held at 6.15pm on Wednesday 14 July at 66 Portland Place London W1N 4AD.
The AGM will be followed by a Special General Meeting to discuss Byelaw changes in relation to SGM and AGM procedures.
DIRECTOR-GENERAL'S REPORT
Lobbying and communicating
The dominant theme throughout the year was the worsening recession and its consequences for members and for the Institute.
It was estimated that as many as a third of all members were either put out of work or seriously under employed, and students found great difficulty in obtaining placements in architects' offices.
These severe economic conditions were reflected in a small fall in membership and a trebling of the numbers seeking to pay a minimum hardship subscription.
They also created adverse trading conditions for the Institute's wholly-owned companies.
The overall result was that the demand's on the Institute were greater than ever before without a matching increase in resources.
Much of the time of the Director-General and senior staff was spent in budgeting and cost control and, in order to achieve further savings, eight redundancies were declared at the end of the year.
Decisions were also made to eliminate losses on the RIBA Journal by new arrangements for publications and to introduce Library charges.
In response to the Inquiry into the Architects Registration Act asked for by ARCUK and undertaken by Mr John Warne, the Institute submitted evidence after extensive consultation with members.
Whatever decision Parliament makes in the light of Government decisions, the abolition of ARCUK will have wide-ranging consequences for the Institute and Chartered Architects.
The Institute continued to express its opposition to Compulsory Competitive Tendering for architectural services as provided for in the Local Government Act 1992.
In response to strong representations from the President, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Mr Michael Howard, agreed to further considerations before any date was fixed for its introduction.
Mr Howard and the new Secretary of State for National Heritage, Mr Peter Brooke, were among Ministers entertained at 66 Portland Place.
Every opportunity was taken to inform Ministers of the grave economic state of the profession.
A reception was held at 66 Portland Place for new MPs, and MPs were lobbied both before and after the General Election about the consequences of the recession.
The Institute worked closely with other professional and representative bodies on such matters.
The Director-General served on a working party on economic policy chaired by Mr Ian Dixon, Chairman of the Construction Industry Council, and attended meetings convened by Sir Brian Hill, President of the Building Employers Confederation.
The publication of the first part of the Strategic Study of the Profession was followed by widespread consultation with regions and branches.
Council approved a five-year Corporate Plan for the Institute, and this was circulated to members.
It will inform all future policy and budgetary decisions.
The President and Director-General became members of the new Architecture Round Table launched by the Chairman of the Arts Council, Lord Palumbo.
Other founding bodies were the Royal Fine Art Commission, English Heritage, the Royal Academy and the Architectural Foundation.
The Institute and a number of regions and branches were successful in obtaining grants from the Arts Council in the first tranche approved by its Architecture Unit.
Council agreed that, after an interval of six years, it would again be prepared to consider applications for recognition from schools of architecture in South Africa.
Council Courier continued to be circulated to regions and branches to inform them without delay of the decisions of Council.
The Director-General's Newsletter was published from time to time as a further means of membership communication.
The Director-General made a number of visits to regions, branches, practices and local government offices, and spoke at meetings, conferences and dinners to members, clients and representatives of the construction industry and the public.
He referred to the economic problems faced by architects and wider matters affecting the professions in speeches in the House of Lords.
Council's candidate for Senior Vice President, Dr Francis Duffy, was accepted without an electoral contest.
Dr Duffy will become the Institute's next President on 1 July 1993.
PRACTICE
Policy developed in housing and the environment
Revised terms of reference for the Practice Committee were agreed by the Council at the beginning of the year.
To the traditional tasks of improving the climate in which members practice and provide them with support was added to the development of policies in fields such as housing, planning, energy and the environment and community architecture.
These wider terms were evidenced in the range of publications with which committees and the Department have been associated including the Standard Form of Agreement for the Appointment of an Architect (SFA/92), revised JCT Prime Cost Contract, a revised Quality Management Manual, new and revised forms of collateral warranty, and two major policy documents, Our Homes: a call for action and Supply and demand in a greenhouse economy.
Budgetary constraints have caused the Practice Committee to review its priorities, given focus during the year by the Council's Corporate Plan and the interim report of the Strategic Study of the Profession.
Practice has helped to prepare members for 1993 with regular contributions on Europe and on Continuing professional development (CPD), as well as providing updates on contracts, fees, statutory controls, competition and insurance, and features on financial difficulties, procurement of commissions, clerks of works, Radon and SFA/92.
The Practice Committee has agreed that the Yorkshire Region Information Technology Group, Chairman Jaki Howes, should fill a gap by assuming responsibility for national work in this field.
Approval from the Bar Council has been received to guidance notes prepared for those members wishing direct access to barristers.
Much of the Committee and Department's work has been done through joint bodies such as the JCT and the NJCC, CIC and BPIC, and the Architect's Council of Europe, and this collaborative activity is expected to grown.
Fees
In June the new Standard Form of Agreement for the Appointment of an Architect (SFA/92), the successor to the Architect's Appointment, was published.
Alternative and supplementary schedules were published for conservation work and for community architecture services.
In December two variants for Design and Build were published, for use with an Employer Client and with a Contractor Client.
This concluded three years of work by a joint RIBA/RIAS/RSUA/ACA Review Group chaired by Ian Thornton.
Guides to the new documents were edited and published by RIBA Publications, and their use was promoted in seminars.
A draft code of Procedure for Fee Tendering with a Design was prepared by a group in the South East Region.
Contributions were made to related work on fee tendering and on co-ordinated conditions of engagement by the Construction Industry Council.
Contracts
The work of the Architects as Project Managers Working Group, established to advise on policy in connection with Project Management, resulted in a report to Council being made and its recommendations adopted to encourage architects in this growing role and to provide for their training.
A Practice Note on the Role of the Clerk of Works, prepared with the RIAS and the JCW, was published in Practice.
A new edition of the JCT Prime Cost Contract was published and the Tribunal continued to keep under review the Standard Forms of Contract and Sub-Contract together with their ancillary documents, issuing amendments, variants and re-editions.
The NJCC for Building published a Guidance Note on Collateral Warranties and a Procedure Note on Tendering for Building Works without Bills of Quantities.
Liability and Indemnity Insurance
The Liability Committee was reconstituted to strengthen links with the RIBA Insurance Agency and to include those insured through other brokers.
The Committee participated in the publication by the BPF of a new Form of Collateral warranty for purchasers and tenants and in the third edition of the form for funders.
It commented favourably on a model form issued by the NFHA for use in connection with design and build.
The Committee developed proposals for a scheme making it obligatory for members in practice to be insured, considered with insurers the implications of low fees and contributed to developments towards harmonisation in the EC.
Code Policy Committee
Issues considered by the Committee are: the Institute's disciplinary procedures with particular reference to whether or not non-members should become involved; a draft Practice Note ‘Business and other names connected with a Chartered Architect's Practice’, which it approved and which has been considered by the Practice Committee; and details of the text of the Code, in respect of which changes are suggested.
Research
Work towards the implementation of the policy of collaborative architectural research aimed at strengthening designer/user links and encouraging the profession to work from a well-researched base continued despite restricted resources.
A small core committee developed links with CIC, SERC, CIRIA and the Research Forum.
Forty-six applications for Research Trust awards were considered and twelve awards were made.
Construction Standards
The Committee is keen to encourage greater member participation in this important but time-consuming work on the development and maintenance of British, European and International standards, appropriate for quality building and construction, and in accreditation and listing regimes.
Advice has been given on the EC Construction Products Directive and its implementation.
Building Control
The Committee has commented to the Health and Safety Commission, directly and through CIC, on draft regulations and an approved code of practice intended to implement the EC Temporary and Mobile Construction Sites Directive, stressing the need for clarity in defining the roles of all the parties with a responsibility for site safety.
It has repeated its calls for law reform in response to the Department of the Environment (DoE) on approved inspectors, and has welcomed the National Core Curriculum in Fire Safety Studies.
Planning
Guidance on Architects Advisory panels for panel members and panel users was prepared together with model terms of reference.
Collaboration with the RTPI led to an agreed statement on design control which was published by the DoE as an annex to revised Planning Policy Guidance Note 1.
A meeting with the Planning Inspectorate considered increasing the number of architect inspectors.
Support was given to the President's Urban Design Initiative, and comments were made on more than twenty-five consultation papers from the DoE and others.
Environment and Energy Policy
The policy statement, Supply and demand in a greenhouse economy, published in May, stressed the gravity of the situation regarding global warming and its climatic consequences, and recommended action including raising insulation standards and the introduction of a carbon tax.
Work continued with the Energy Efficiency Office and BRECSU towards the publication of best practice guides.
Members of the Committee made significant contributions to low energy design in their own work.
Sound Practice
The Committee's manual, Quality Management: Guidance for an office manual, was revised and a special edition was prepared for the New Zealand Institute of Architects.
The Committee has promoted and encouraged the use of sound practice procedures.
The continuing work of the Building Project Information Committee on conventions for co-ordinated project information is acknowledged as an aid to sound practice.
Housing
Our Homes: a call for action was published in March.
Stating the RIBA housing policy for 1992, it called on the Government to accept responsibility for setting the national housing policy based on need, ability to pay and choice of tenure, drawing on the combined resources of the public and private sectors.
Issued as a contribution to the election debate, it was complemented by a comparison between the housing policies of four political parties.
An exhibition, ‘Housing for young people’, marked National Housing Week and was widely shown.
Work progressed on guidelines for house purchasers and on methods of procurement for housing association dwellings.
Community Architecture
A reappraisal of resources led to the closing of the Southern Region centre and concentration at Portland Place.
Three Members of Parliament, Sir George Young, Minister of State at the DoE, Clive Soley and Simon Hughes, contributed to a conference in January, Shaping our Towns and Cities — strategies for partnership and participation.
The Group is represented on a DoE steering committee overseeing research on Community Involvement in Planning and Development Processes.
The Education Sub-Group has forged links with schools of architecture and practitioners.
The Community Projects Fund goes from strength to strength.
The DoE has discontinued support after nine helpful years.
British Telecom, a major contributor, staged a reception in support of the Fund in the Telecom Tower in September, attended by the President and Director-General, BT Directors, and community group representatives.
Public Sector
The Local Government Act 1992 gave the Secretary of State powers to introduce Compulsory Competitive Tendering (CCT) for local government white collar services.
In a strong response to a consultation paper, the RIBA challenged the Government's underlying assumption that CCT for architectural services is needed to provide better value to the citizen.
It recognised the significant contribution to the quality of the environment made by members in the public sector.
Representations against CCT and in support of the public sector have continued, alone and with others, throughout the year.
The Group's programme for visiting schools of architecture to promote public sector architecture continued.
Submissions were made to the Government, the Audit Commission and others on completion, the client role and trading accounts.
A Think Tank session on ‘What is meant by enabling’ was held in December and a paper will be published.
Conservation
Education and training for members have been identified as the first priority.
The Committee made a submission to the Burton Committee recommending conservation practice as part of the curriculum for both undergraduate and post-graduate courses.
Members of the Committee have liaised with regional CPD convenors.
Responses have been made to English Heritage on the management of England's heritage and on changes to its role in Greater London.
Work with the RIAS is aimed at changes in VAT legislation in relation to conservation work.
PERSPECTIVE
1993 will see further sharpening of priorities in the light of the Corporate Plan and the Strategic Study of the Profession.
New and tougher codes of procedure for selecting and appointing architects, covering fee tendering with and without design input, will emphasise value for money and the importance of careful assessment, giving due weighting to quality as well as price.
It will become obligatory for members in practice to hold adequate professional indemnity insurance.
EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
RIBA endorses 5 years funding for architectural education
On 30 June 1992 the RIBA Steering Group on education, chaired by Richard Burton, delivered its response to the Secretary of State for Education.
As well as calling on the Government to continue to fund the five academic years of architectural education, the report made wide-ranging recommendations for future developments.
The RIBA celebrated the tenth anniversary of the International Student Competition in September and A Decade of RIBA Student Competitions was published to coincide with this event.
Student Prizes
1992 was the seventh year of the Altro Floors Sponsored President's Medals for Architecture in Education.
Judges were .
The Silver Medal was won by  (Royal College of Art), and the Bronze Medal by  (Mackintosh School of Architecture).
Stephen also won the Serjeant Award for his category, and  won the Silver category Serjeant Award.
The President's Dissertation Certificates, accompanied by a £500 bursary from Butterworth-Heinemann, were awarded to .
The Tenth International Student Competition, ‘Hybrid and Superimposition’, was judged by .
The exhibition was held at the Royal Academy with winning schemes from , and a group of 12 Russian students from Bashkirsky Dom, Ufa, Russia Prize money and travelling expenses for these winners was donated by Chartham Papers.
Continuing Professional Development
The RIBA continued to develop its CPD service for members in the regions.
Regional CPD convenors met at the third CPD Forum in Windsor in October, which was this year sponsored by the Architects' Journal.
At a national level the CPD Sub-Committee produced a Guide to CPD and a Personal Development Plan to be sent directly to every member in 1993.
The Bye Law making participation in CPD a duty of membership was passed by council and an SGM and awaited Privy Council approval as the year ended.
Open Learning
The Steering Group continued to commission new titles and identify new topic areas in 1992.
Three packages dealing with uses of steel in architecture, sponsored by British Steel, are to be published at the beginning of 1993.
Packages in the existing topic areas (practice management, project management, contract procedures, building law, and legal and insurance issues) continued to sell and were used for both personal and practice CPD.
Visiting Board Panel
Quinquennial visits were made to the university schools of Bath, North London, Leeds Metropolitan, Humberside and Portsmouth and to the Architectural Association School of Architecture.
Review visits were made to the University of Greenwich and the Mackintosh School, the Glasgow School of Art/Glasgow University.
The Urban Design Visiting Board Panel made a (delayed) triennial visit to the Urban Design Course at Oxford Brookes University.
The RIBA/ARCUK Joint Visiting Panel took over the task of visiting UK schools of architecture in October at the beginning of the 1992–3 academic session and made its first visit to the University of East London.
Representatives of the RIBA Visiting Board made visits to schools of architecture in Chile, Colombia and Russia, and other representatives went to China and Saudi Arabia.
RIBA Examinations
The Examinations Sub-Committee continued its review of the syllabus for the RIBA Examination of Architecture.
The Examination results were (Part 1) 7 passes from 14 entries;(Part 2) 28 passes from 45 entries;(Professional Practice) 34 passes from 38 entries.
The Examination Enrolment and Membership Eligibility Panel interviewed and assessed the work of 24 office-based students either already enrolled in the Examination in Architecture or seeking entry thereto.
The Panel also interviewed 39 students from unrecognised courses in 22 countries seeking assessment of their qualifications.
Professional Studies and Training
Students continued to experience severe difficulties in finding practical training opportunities in the UK and increasingly looked abroad for openings.
The minimum period of experience in an architect's office acceptable for the purpose of the practical training scheme was reduced from five to three months.
The Sub-Committee continued its review of the professional practice examination system.
The annual forum for Practical Training Advisors was held in York in March.
General Education
The Architecture Centre's Schools Workshop continued with Bridge Building for 8–13 year olds in the Santiago Calatrava Exhibition, followed by ‘Modelling in Light’ at the Jubilee Line Exhibition.
RIBA Schools' Exhibition in June included work from all the participating schools from the RIBA Workshop programme.
London University of Education assigned 60 PGCE Art and Design Students to work with 15 Architects from the Camden Branch, on a multidisciplinary Workshop day in June.
PERSPECTIVE
A response to the Burton Report is expected from the Secretary of State for Education.
It is anticipated that RIBA Visiting Board representatives will go to Chile, China, Hong Kong, Russia and Sri Lanka.
1993 will see the introduction of obligatory CPD.
BRITISH ARCHITECTURAL LIBRARY
Twenty years' celebration for exhibitions at the Heinz Gallery
Information services were maintained and increased demand from the UK and overseas met in a difficult year.
With the help of donations and grants we have restored some of the lost opening hours, continued to purchase books and carried out urgent conservation work; and we celebrated twenty years of exhibitions at the Heinz Gallery.
Library Services
The year began with reduced opening hours as a result of cuts.
However, in response to public demand, and thanks to the personal generosity of Council members, Saturday morning opening was reinstated from the beginning of February.
The Library continues to be heavily used not only by personal visitors but also by post, telephone, fax and through our conventional and electronic publications.
The number of letters received showed a sharp increase to just over 6,000 in 1992, 30% more than in 1991, while the number of telephone calls received increased by 2,500 to nearly 42,000.
The answerphone, which was installed in March to provide recorded information when the Library is closed, dealt with 1,500 calls.
Demands for bibliographies doubled in the course of the year.
Two staff posts were lost.
The photocopying services were much used; more than 160,000 copies were made in total, over 6,000 of these being supplied by post or fax.
A colour photocopier was installed, in addition to the two black and white copiers.
The photography services supplied nearly 3,000 images for use in publications and television programmes, and hired out more than 500 slides.
Collection Development and Management
Acquisitions and preservation budgets for all collections were cut back significantly.
However, with the help of grants and donations we have continued to build the collections.
James Gillespie Graham's The Chapel of St Anthony the Eremite at Murthly, Perthshire, the seat of Sir William Drummond Stewart (Edinburgh, 19850) was purchased with a grant from the Friends of the National Libraries and donations from Scottish members.
John Cragg's Remarks upon the Gothic Style of Building (Liverpool, c.1814), and The Chimney-Piece Maker's Daily Assistant by Thomas Milton, John Crunden and Placido Columbani (1766) were also acquired.
B.T. Basford and Butterworths donated all their new architectural publications.
Accessions to the Drawings Collection included a large archive of designs by Septimus Warwick; drawings by Sir Guy Dawber, a former President of the RIBA and Royal Gold Medallist not hitherto represented in the Collection; Sir Basil Spence's design for the British Pavilion at Expo ‘67 in Montreal; and a set of prints, with pencil annotations, of a design by Adolf Loos for a house in Czechoslovakia.
As part of an arrangement with the CICA, winning and other selected entries from the 1992 CICA CAD Drawing Award were presented to the Collection.
Participants in the exhibition ‘10 Californian Architects’ also donated examples of their work.
The outstanding acquisition for the Photographs Collection was the archive of 44,000 negatives of Henk Snock, perhaps the most accomplished post-war architectural photographer working in Great Britain.
The accession includes extensive recording of subjects such as Coventry Cathedral, Heathrow Airport, Liverpool Cathedral and Span housing.
Other acquisitions include slides of some of Skidmore Owings & Merrill's work in Docklands, and a large collection of photographs of the work of Oswald Milne (an accession that also included drawings and manuscripts).
The number of images in the Collection now totals over 400,000.
Members of the National Association of Decorative and Fine Arts Societies (NADFAS) began sorting and organising the Michael Hodges' collection of 25,000 slides on a voluntary basis.
The Manuscripts and Archives Collection acquired a small but interesting group of 18th and 19th century manuscripts, including letters written by John Nash, A.C. Pugin, Decimus Burton and C.R. Cockerell, which nicely complements material already in the Collection.
In accordance with his wishes, the Library has also received the papers of Sir John Summerson, following his death in November.
Temporary additional shelving was installed in the periodicals gallery to provide some much needed space for growth.
Exhibitions and Loans
To celebrate twenty years of the RIBA Heinz Gallery, an exhibition (the 94th) was held in May of a selection of recent acquisitions.
The year's programme began with the National Monuments Record of Scotland Jubilee Exhibition and continued with ‘The Architect and the Carpenter’.
This exhibition, organised by David Yeomans and accompanied by a short book of the same title, explored the relationship between architectural design and carpentry from the mediaeval period to the present day.
‘10 Californian Architects’ featured a total of 28 projects in drawings and photographs.
In September, ‘In the Line of Development: F.R.S.
Yorke, E. Rosenberg and C.S. Mardall to YRM, 1930–1992’ was curated by Alan Powers with an accompanying publication; and finally Treve Rosoman, of English Heritage, curated ‘An Exhibition of London Wallpapers, their Manufacture and Use 1690–1840’.
David Yeomans and Alan Powers gave lectures in conjunction with their exhibitions.
Loans were made to Edinburgh, as part of the Adam celebrations; to the ‘London: World City 1800–1840’ exhibition in Essen; to Brussels, for an exhibition on Sir Edwin Lutyens and Nigel Coates; and to a total of 11 UK and six overseas venues.
The presidential portrait of Sir George Gilbert Scott adorned the Foreign Office for the duration of the UK's presidency of the EC.
Publications
The 1993 RIBA Calendar featured drawings of 20th century architecture from the collection.
Slide packs of the year's Heinz Gallery exhibitions were also produced by World Microfilms.
The 19th volume of the Architectural Periodicals Index (API) covering periodicals and books for the period Jan–Dec 1991 was published by RIBA Publications, as well as three quarterly issues for 1992.
The cumulative volume also included amendments and additions to Architectural Keywords, the subject headings used in the index.
Grants, Awards and Special Projects
Drawings by William Burges are being conserved with a generous grant from the British Library, on behalf of the Wolfson Foundation and the Wolfson Family Charitable Trust.
A further grant was received from the National Manuscripts Conservation Trust for the conservation of important 18th, 19th and 20th century papers in the Manuscripts and Archives Collection.
Work continues on preparation of the published catalogue of the Library's collection of pre-1841 books.
Preparation of the second series of the catalogue of the Drawings Collection was helped by a grant from the Marc Fitch Fund.
The database ‘British Architectural Bibliography 1834–1900’ is also being prepared for publication in 1993 as The Directory of British Architects.
Grants for the purchase of drawings were made by the MGC/V&A Purchase Grant Fund and for books by the Friends of the National Libraries.
Architectural Documentation  Co-operation
The Library continued to participate in the work of such bodies as the , and was represented on the Visual Arts Library and Information Plan steering committee.
The participation of the Director and staff at international meetings and conferences concerned with architectural documentation, including Europa 93: in Venice and the inaugural meeting of Spanish architectural librarians held in Malaga, was made possible by the British Council and the host organisations.
Professional Literature Committee
On the recommendation of the Committee, the 1991 Sir Banister Fletcher Award of the Authors' Club was awarded to James Stevens Curl for The Art and Architecture of Freemasonry: an Introductory Study (Batsford, 1991).
The Committee (Chairman, Professor Martin Symes) continues to consider and evaluate new books for the annual RIBA list of recommended books.
British Architectural Library Trust
The Trust met under the chairmanship of Maxwell Hutchinson (Past President RIBA).
The other Trustees are .
PERSPECTIVE
1993 presents us with a new challenge in the form of charges for admission to non-members and some other services.
While regrettable, this will enable us to maintain the collections and improve the level of service that we currently offer.
MEMBERSHIP AND OVERSEAS AFFAIRS
Membership consulted on review of statutory registration
After the significant expansion of the regional structure in 1991, 1992 was a year of consolidation made more difficult because of unavoidable budget reductions.
In addition to coping with reduced grants, many regions suffered further loss of income through difficulty in attracting advertising revenue for their regional directories and year books.
Despite these difficulties, regional activities remained at a high level.
New regional offices for Southern Region were opened by the President in May.
The Regional Chairman's Committee continued to meet regularly and considered those aspects of RIBA policy which were of particular interest to the regions.
In particular, the chairmen were concerned to review the operation of the Clients' Advisory Service and to stress the regional nature of the service.
The Committee continued to monitor the development of CPD and sought more resources to enable the regions to offer a service to members.
The Membership Committee continues to oversee all aspects of the work of the department.
The response to the DoE Review of the Architects Registration Acts was preceded by a substantial exercise in membership consultation and the issue was discussed in regions and branches throughout the country.
The Committee, with the support of the Resource Planning & Finance Committee, initiated a twelve-month pilot scheme whereby upon payment of a lump sum by the student society, all students at the School of Architecture, De Montfort University automatically became student members of the RIBA.
If the experiment is a success it is hoped to extend the scheme to other schools.
The range of membership services was extended with the introduction of a health care scheme for RIBA members.
Ian Shaw MBE and Patricia Mosseveld retired as regional directors of Yorkshire and Northern regions respectively.
The Institute is grateful to them for their loyal service which in Ian Shaw's case totalled nearly twenty five years.
Woman Architects Group
The exhibition of women's work continued to tour the country and a research project into the working patterns of women architects is being conducted by the York Institute on the group's behalf.
Results will be available in March 1993.
Doric Club
The Doric Club met for its ninth annual lunch on Tuesday, 8 September.
The function was chaired by Fred Pooley and ninety two members attended.
The Guest of Honour was Richard MacCormac, President of the RIBA.
Membership Interest Group
The Group met three times during the year to try and ensure a balanced representation on the sixty or so committees.
The setting up of regional Membership Interest Groups was endorsed and efforts were made to enhance their powers to recommend names to Portland Place in order to effectively tap regional talents.
ARCUK Liaison Committee
Because of the Government's announcement of a review of the working of the Architects Registration Acts, 1931–1969, the Committee met on several occasions to discuss this important issue.
It helped to formulate the Institute's response to the Review.
Forty four members were nominated to service on ARCUK Council and the Institute maintained its representation on all ARCUK committees.
Salaried Architects Group
The Group hosted several well attended lunch-time seminars which included topics such as local authority housing, the future of the South Bank complex and the provision and design of nursery schools.
There was a regional visit to Liverpool and North Wales, and the annual SAG Tour to Lisbon and Portio was very successful.
Student Affairs
The last year has seen a number of developments which we hope will provide the basis for greater student participation in the Institute.
Among these has been the establishment of the Student Advisory Committee comprised of more than a dozen students from different schools and intended to provide the basis of a national forum for addressing of student concerns and promoting their interests.
Additionally, it is hoped that the block student membership scheme, being piloted at De Montfort University will be expanded to other interested schools in the near future.
During the coming year the Student Members of Council and the Student Liaison Officer will be working to promote involvement with and membership of the Institute by a number of methods including visiting schools of architecture throughout the country and maintaining contact with student representatives.
New student recruitment literature is now available and has been distributed as part  of an on-going campaign to encourage closer links between students and their Institute.
Current areas of interest and concern include student employment and practical training, improving links with other European students through their Institutes and making more information accessible on the employment and student alternatives available to students.
International Affairs
In approving a wide-ranging report covering all of the international activities of the Institute, Council recognised the need for a more systematic co-ordination of the international affairs of the RIBA.
The remit and composition of the Overseas Affairs Committee was revised, the Committee itself renamed ‘International Affairs’ and invested with a Vice-President, Rod Hackney.
It has been possible to continue with the South African bursaries programme.
The RIBA is still supporting the schooling of six black South African students, three of whom are new while the others are carrying on from last year.
In May, the RIBA Council agreed that in view of the changing social and political climate in South Africa it would welcome the opportunity to consider recognition of the courses at the South African schools which were de-recognised in 1986.
Unfortunately, there has been no money for the activities of the East Europe sub-group, which was to have built on the Presidential visits of the previous year.
However, with British Council assistance it has been possible to arrange for a Romanian student to successfully complete a  conservations course at Cambridge.
EC Affairs Committee
One of the main tasks of this Committee is to liaise with the Architects' Council of Europe (ACE).
1992 was ACE's first full year with a properly functioning Brussels office and staff.
ACE has established a number of work groups to monitor developments affecting construction legislation, and in particular liability.
The RIBA and ACE have been very active — along with the other construction professions — in lobbying for the exclusion of the construction industry from the scope of the general (horizontal) liability directive proposed by the Consumer Services Directorate of the European Commission.
However, it has not yet been possible to obtain agreement on the need for specific regulation for construction liability and so the principle of subsidiarity continues to apply for the time being.
The RIBA acts as convenor of ACE's Practising Architect group (under the Chairmanship of J Wright) which has produced opinions on draft directives (eg. Unfair Terms of Contract and Health and Safety on Temporary or Mobile Construction Sites).
It is also working on the production of guidelines to architectural practice in the EC, Quality Assurance, CPD and is close to finalising a draft contract for collaboration between two or more architects.
In the autumn, ACE held its first major conference in Seville in order to take stock of the work achieved to date and assess the state of the profession (by way of national reports) on the eve of the opening of the Single European Market.
EC Research Sub-Committee
Because of financial constraints, it was not possible during 1992 to produce further volumes in the Architectural Practice in Europe series.
However, existing publications on France, Spain, Portugal, Germany and Italy continued to sell modestly but steadily and it may be possible to commission further studies in due course.
UIA…
International Union of Architects
During 1992, the UIA Co-ordinating Group began preparing the RIBA's response to ‘Vision 2000’, the theme originally chosen for the UIA Congress in June 1993.
Following the UNCED Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, the AIA modified the theme to reflect the post-Rio interest in ‘sustainability’.
As a precursor to the UIA Congress, a major conference on Ecological Architecture took place in Stockholm and Helsinki.
No less than three UIA work groups met in the UK last year — the Public Health group met in London at the time of the International Hospital Federation conference; the Region 1 Habitat group met in Birmingham; and the Architecture in Primary Schools group 2 as associated with the successful BET event in Cambridge.
The RIBA acts as convenor for the UIA Sports, Leisure and Tourism work group.
CAA…
Commonwealth Association of Architects
The CAA continued with its very successful programme of practice seminars in various countries.
Reports were received of well attended events held in India, Sri Lanka, Ghana and Papua New Guinea.
From an RIBA point of view these seminars were a useful vehicle for reaching our members in other parts of the world.
Advisory visits were made to schools in Tanzania, Pakistan, India and Jamaica.
As Vice-President for the European Region of CAA, Tony Godwin of the RIBA is planning a seminar on European practice.
This should probably take place in the late spring of 1993 in Malta.
REGIONAL REPORTS
Eastern
The gallery at the regional Architecture Centre has been the focus for much of the region's activity with an attractive and well supported series of exhibitions.
Activity levels in the branches have been high and regional CPD events have been well attended.
East Midlands
The Notts & Derbyshire branch has taken responsibility for publishing the region's CPD Newsletter.
A CPD launch event in December was heavily oversubscribed.
London
1992 saw growing CPD service with free surgeries, a database and, with the Bartlett School of Architecture, a successful bid to the European Social Fund for money to train unemployed architects in architectural project management skills.
Northern
George Oldham became the first chairman of any region to serve a second term of office.
Cumbria branch celebrated World Day of Architecture and held a LEGO competition for children.
North West
The main activity of the North West region in 1992 was the attempt to convince the Manchester Olympic Bid Committee of the necessity for good design in the infrastructure to be built for the games.
The CPD programme was consolidated and two residential courses for Part III students were held.
Southern
A good level of activity is reported by all branches.
The Winchester lecture series was particularly successful and a lay audience heard the President give the annual Isle of Wight Discourse.
SouthEast
British Gas sponsorship was obtained for a comprehensive survey of client needs and perceptions of architects.
The Marketing Committee is making good use of the information obtained and held a successful ‘Survival Workshop’.
A regional award scheme ‘The Downland Design Awards’ was launched and attracted 84 entries.
SouthWest
The momentum following the creation of this region continues and a high level of activity has been maintained.
The conference ‘Talking Heads on Building Procurement’ was particularly successful, attracting one hundred delegates.
Wessex
During 1992, Wessex Region concentrated on building local services to members.
A new monthly magazine Wessex Architect was launched and used to promote a wide range of events.
In July, the regional office moved to the School of Architecture in Bath where it is united with the regional CPD unit.
West Midlands
A workload survey of practices in the region was made in February and more than 60% of practices responded.
A marketing survey was carried out in August and the information received will be fed into marketing courses.
CPD forums were held in each branch to discuss members' CPD obligations.
Yorkshire
A regional bookshop was opened at the regional office and has made an encouraging start.
Bookshop roadshows were organised to improve contact with schools of architecture in the region.
Following a successful Urban Design Workshop held in York, a workshop programme has been devised including a touring exhibition, a publication and a video.
Wales
RIBA Council, on the recommendation of the regional council, approved the setting up of a fifth branch in the region to serve the members in Central Wales.
CPD in Wales is flourishing with all branches arranging full programmes of events.
Royal Incorporation of Architects in Scotland
Research surveys investigating unemployment and office practice were undertaken.
Despite the recession, the RIAS workload increased and we remained solvent.
The Edinburgh Festival exhibition (Robert Adam) attracted thousands of visitors and ecstatic reviews.
The first year of the dedicated Competitions Unit was successful.
EDAS was launched nationally as a result of the Scottish achievements.
The second year of QMI held up extremely well.
A positive contribution was made to SFA ‘92.
The Quality Campaign continued.
Royal Society of Ulster Architects
The past year has been a time of consolidation for various initiatives recently commenced in the RSUA.
The Practice Subscription Scheme, the RIBA Bookshop, the RSUA Insurance Services Scheme and the recently set up magazine, Perspective continue to provide well utilised services to the members and produce a healthy profit for the Society.
MARKETING DEPARTMENT
Publication of Strategic Study first phase and strong growth in events
The first phase of the Strategic Study of the Profession was published in May.
This Strategic Overview has identified key issues to be addressed in future phases.
The President's plans for an Architecture Centre at Portland Place came to fruition with an exciting and expanding programme of events.
Press Office
The continuing recession in the construction industry was the biggest story of 1992.
The Institute has continued to highlight the effects of this recession on the construction industry — to the point of the Prime Minister being confronted with the RIBA Workload figures during the election campaign.
The Institute's opposition to Compulsory Competitive Tendering continued to receive wide coverage during 1992.
In this, as in the Institute's opposition to uneconomic fee scales, the battle has been fraught over the protection of architectural quality.
The expanding exhibition programme at Portland Place has received improved coverage.
The Calatrava exhibition in October received exceptional coverage which was reflected in the numbers attending the exhibition.
Market Research Unit
Phase 1 of the RIBA's Strategic Study was publicised to much acclaim in May.
The practical and hard-hitting report was summarised as a special supplement in Building magazine.
A seven-month programme of regional seminars followed, to discuss the findings with architects and their colleagues in the construction industry.
The Strategic Study is a three-year research initiative to lay the foundations of a new Institute strategy to help architects practice more effectively in a rapidly changing world.
The Unit produced  its annual report on ‘Architects Employment and Earnings’ and its quarterly reports ‘RIBA Leads’on architects' workloads.
It also contributed to the Government's work on improving the quality, relevance and availability of construction industry tactics.
Events
The Tuesday evening lectures throughout 1992 attracted a total of 8,200 students, members and non-members.
Speakers came from all over the world thanks to new and generous sponsorship from British Airways.
Among the speakers brought to London by British Airways were .
In June the 1992 Royal Gold Medal for Architecture was presented to Peter Rice.
As part of Richard MacCormac's drive to develop the building as an architecture centre, the exhibition programme at 66 Portland Place expanded considerably.
The Gallery, a new permanent exhibition space on the first floor, opened in May with ‘Model Architecture’, followed by a new series of exhibitions which included ‘The World of Peter Rice, Engineer, 1992 Royal Gold Medallist’, to coincide with the presentation ceremony, and the work of Stanton Williams.
The exhibition ‘Santiago Calatrava’ in both the Gallery and the newly refurbished Florence Hall attracted huge crowds during the Autumn and received a great deal of publicity.
Both Felix Candela and Santiago Calatrava gave lectures to capacity audiences during the exhibition.
Gallery 2 opened a new series of exhibitions with ‘Under £50K’, works by London practices with a contract value of under £50,000, followed by ‘Substance’, work by students and lecturers at Manchester University School of Architecture.
In March, Richard MacCormac led ‘Drawing on London’, a weekend workshop in which Part II students from UK schools of architecture participated in developing imaginative approaches to exploring the potential of vacant urban sites.
Awards
1992 yielded the highest number of entries for the RIBA Architecture Awards since the inception of the scheme in its present form in 1966. 29 buildings received Regional Awards from which four were ultimately honoured with National Awards.
The 1992 Building of the Year, the personal choice of the President of the RIBA, was the Jill and Arthur M Sackler Galleries at the Royal Academy of Arts by Sir Norman Foster and Partners.
In a return to the established tradition, the 1992 annual RIBA Awards Presentation was held at Portland Place and this year coincided with the opening of the RIBA National Awards Exhibition in the RIBA Gallery.
The fourth annual Housing Project Design Awards for schemes in progress on site attracted 168 entries from which a total of 13 housing developments received Awards, including seven private developments and six for housing associations.
Ten per cent of the entries were local authority schemes with the remainder divided equally between housing associations and private developers.
It is rare for the most prestigious award for architecture in the world to be given to a non architect but the decision to award the 1992 Royal Gold Medal to the structural engineer, Peter  Rice , was widely acclaimed.
Five Honorary Fellowships were awarded, to .
Jane Priestman accepted the President's invitation to chair the Board of Delegates of the RIBA Awards Trust, in succession to the late Courtenay Blackmore.
Efforts to encourage prospective patrons for the Trust continue.
The 1992 RIBA Trustees Medal, endowed by Marley plc for the best architecture of its time, normally up to 25 years of age, anywhere in the world by a living British designer, was presented to Sir Denys Lasdun for the Royal College of Physicians, London.
PERSPECTIVE
In 1993 Phase 2 of the Strategic Study will look at successful practices and clients and publish recommendations.
A new emphasis on regional marketing will result from organisational changes.
CLIENTS' ADVISORY SERVICE
Client enquiries continued to decline during 1992.
Compared with 1991, they were running overall at about 25 per cent down in the regions and 29 per cent down at CAS HQ, with smaller jobs showing the greatest fall in London.
No one type of project dominated the lists, although commercial, retail and office interiors were more frequent, with a fair sprinkling of housing and some leisure.
Many practices realised that their marketing had been deficient or that they needed to know more about trends and opportunities.
The CAS Director saw more than 130 practices during the year, either at the RIBA or in their own offices, to offer help and advice.
In addition, the Director participated in Worksearch seminars and CPD marketing seminars in .
CAS also had displays at three exhibitions: ‘Property Week’ at Olympia; the Daily Telegraph ‘Individual Homes’at the NEC; and ‘Building a Better Britain’at the Business Design Centre, London.
Preliminary action was initiated in conjunction with the Strategic Study to discover more about the changing perceptions and requirements of clients.
This will continue in 1993.
Competitions
1992 was busy again with promoters appointing the Office as Competition Administrators.
Documentation was supplied to 1,887 architects and students of architecture, and the Office processed 697 actual submissions.
The selection of projects offered during 1992 was particularly varied, ranging from a new business park in Snowdonia, to an extensive urban planning exercise near the River Tyne, and finally the design of a mausoleum.
The most popular competition was launched in June by the East Midlands Arts Board for the design of their new HQ in Loughborough; 234 submissions were made.
The multi-site Kent Design Initiative launched in April attracted 375 registrations and 140 submissions while 276 architects applied for details of the Listed Church project in Bradford.
Two prestigious exhibitions were held at RIBA HQ.
In February the short-listed schemes for the new Inland Revenue HQ in Nottingham were on display in the Florence Hall.
In July the schemes for the invited Bovis Competition to design a technology park in the Czech city of Brno were shown in Gallery 2.
The year concluded with the DoE agreeing to fund Great Britain's associate membership of the European organisation.
Europan 3 will be launched in January 1993 and will be open to architects under the age of 40.
UK architects will be able to participate in this competition which officers 54 sites in ten European countries.
The young practice, Birds Portsmouth & Russum, first prize winners in the RIBA Chichester Car Park Competition 1989, were awarded a Civic Trust Award for their Avenue de Chartres Car Park scheme which demonstrated ‘excellence in environmental design’.
The scheme also won an RIBA Regional Award in 1992.
Ian Shaw MBE, the Competitions Officer for eight years, retired in December after 24 years with the Institute.
RIBA/Building Industry Trust
The RIBA/BIT had a successful year, despite the hard times felt by us all in the building industry.
Twelve lectures were held with one lecture per RIBA region per academic year.
The lectures were well attended by both students and practising architects.
The Trust also hosted a popular lecture as part of the RIBA Summer Events Programme given by Rick Mather.
A lecture at the Belfast Winterschool was also given by the Trust.
The library project is on hold until further funds are available but we are investigating the possibility of a BIT Trolley to be kept at schools with working samples from manufacturing companies.
A pilot study is being carried out with Manchester University.
We are delighted that Ibstock joined us this year.
More industry members are needed to undertaken further activities.
It is with regret that we had to accept the resignation of three industry members due to difficult trading conditions.
We are grateful for the continued support of .
It is their commitment which has enabled the Trust to provide its unique contribution to the industry.
The Times/RIBA/Business in the community/community enterprise scheme
At Edinburgh Castle of 15 September, HRH The Prince of Wales presented Community Enterprise Scheme Awards to community groups.
The winner of the Charles Douglas-Home Award for the most outstanding entry was the Cornerstone Garthdee Project in Aberdeen.
There were sixteen award winners and eighteen commendations.
The category award winners ranged from a housing co-operative in Dundee to a children's play area in an Essex village.
CENTRAL SERVICES
Administration
The project to replace the Institute's main computer system has been a major task throughout the year.
Selection of the supplier was achieved in April and development of the detailed software specification was completed by the end of the year.
In the autumn a number of payroll systems were evaluated and one of these was selected to replace the current external bureau system processing staff salaries.
Installation of the new system will save time and a modest amount of money.
Internal printing and postal services were reviewed during the year and a reduction from four to three staff was made.
Human Resources
Employee-led programmes, whereby the Institute reimburses tuition and professional membership costs, emerged as the principal tool of training and development.
Staff salary scales were not changed during the year.
House
Repair of the southern part of the main roof at sixth floor level was the main maintenance activity carried out during the year.
Thermal efficiency was improved by laying the area with insulating tiles.
Close circuit television coverage has been extended to the main exhibition areas and cameras have been installed to cover exit doors from the Florence Terrace and on the Weymouth Street frontage.
The air conditioning units associated with the Library rolling stack shelving on the third floor have been replaced.
DISCIPLINARY, CONDUCT AND PERFORMANCE COMMITTEES
Disciplinary Committee
The Committee held four meetings, and after hearing charges which had been formulated by the Professional Conduct Committee under Byelaw 5, reprimanded two members who were found to have misconducted themselves and expelled two others from membership.
One case remained part-heard at the end of the year.
Professional Conduct Committee
The Professional Conduct Committee held eight meetings.
Altogether complaints from various sources concerning 126 practices or other businesses for which members are responsible were given consideration by the Committee which resolved upon the terms of charges in respect of ten members.
The Committee pronounced four members expelled for failure to provide information in the course of investigations.
Performance Committee
The Performance Committee met once in 1992, commencing consideration and investigation of allegations involving breaches by members of the Institute's Standard of Professional Performance.
APPOINTMENT OF ARBITRATORS
More than 170 written enquiries concerning the appointment of arbitrators were attended to in 1992, and more than 90 appointments were made by the President (or a Vice President), including one for an adjudicator and three for third surveyors under the London Building Acts.
Most of the 87 appointments of arbitrators in respect of building contracts and sub-contracts were under JCT conditions, namely:.
Further progress was made in developing a conciliation scheme as a means of alternative dispute resolution between members and clients, with particular attention being given to training for members willing to act as conciliators.
COMPANIES CHAIRMAN'S STATEMENT
It is with sadness that I begin my statement this year by referring to the loss of an inspirational founder member of RIBA Companies Ltd.
Fred Lloyd Roche, who had been our friend and colleague, passed away last November and will be greatly missed.
A further loss in 1992 was the resignation in October, because of too many other commitments, of Gordon Graham, a Past President of the Institute, another of the small team responsible for establishing RIBA Companies Ltd.
RIBA MAGAZINES LTD
The most serious single aspect of 1992 was the effect of the recession on the results of RIBA Magazines Ltd.
In 1991, the Company had been able to take action to contain the situation, which enabled a break-even for the year to be returned.
As I mentioned a year ago, however, the then current sales of advertising space and forward orders for 1992 were seriously down, a position which persisted throughout the year.
The consequences of this lack of business was a loss of more than £200,000 for the year which understandably had a serious effect on the results of our Group.
In the light of this loss and the prospect of a significantly larger one in 1993, we could see no possibility, on commercial grounds alone, of the company continuing.
It was therefore timely that the RIBA should have been approached by a number of parties interested in publishing the Journal and eventually a deal with The Builder Group was struck by the Institute.
This will relieve both our Group and the RIBA of a major financial burden, although there will of course be residual closure costs to be borne in 1993.
We are confident that the RIBA has made the best decision available to protect the future well being of the Journal.
A most unfortunate consequence of the deal with The Builder Group has been the redundancy of all the staff.
We had to say farewell to an outstanding sales force, under Tony Ferrary, at the end of November.
This was particularly regrettable since they had always performed well and the situation was not of their making.
Richard Wilcock indicated that he did not wish to be considered for the new Editor position but continued to perform admirably and responsibly until another Editor had been installed.
The departure of Richard Wilcock and his staff was equally regrettable.
I wish to pay tribute to the performance of the Journal's team.
Until Gerald Beale was brought in as Managing Director, RIBA Magazines Ltd. had suffered continual losses, culminating in £160,000 for 1987.
He and the Chairman, Clive Labovitch, were able to stem the losses.
Indeed, in the four years to 1991, the company supplied The Journal every month at no cost to the RIBA membership, other than that of the distribution to overseas members.
They received excellent support from the non-executive directors, Frank Woods and Godfrey Golzen.
We thank them, Richard Wilcock, Tony Ferrary and all the staff and wish everyone success in the future.
THE YEAR 1992
Although the recession has had a serious effect on certain sections of our Group, the result for 1992 was one of considerable merit.
In 1991 we achieved a combined profit of £540,500 (although down significantly from that of £1 million in 1990) and this was made possible without any contribution by RIBA Magazines Ltd. which broke-even.
In 1992, despite the deepening recession, the same companies i.e. before allowing for the Magazines loss, earned a profit of £733,500 or £193,000 more than in 1991.
I do not intend to comment in detail on the 1992 results of the individual companies except to mention that the principal contributors to this improvement were NBS Services Ltd, and Library Planning Consultants Ltd, RIBA Publications Ltd. held their position, and recorded their usual satisfactory return on sales.
RIBA Services Ltd, whose 1991 result had been poor, managed to produce a small profit in 1992.
Summing up, we are concerned that the recession continued to prevent us from contributing to the funds of the RIBA at the same levels as in 1989 and 1990 and are far from complacent about this situation.
1993 AND BEYOND
During 1992 your Board debated at length the manner in which the Group has been structured since its inception.
The separate companies were originally owned directly by the Institute.
RIBA Companies Ltd, was then set up to oversee the management of these companies, the shares in which were transferred over by the RIBA.
For some time, and particularly since NBS Services Ltd. was acquired, we have been conscious of the fact that there are certain activities which are similar in nature in more than one of our companies.
This offered the opportunity to rationalise product development, production and marketing.
The Board's discussions led to a conclusion that in order to improve profitability and obtain the benefits of economy of scale, it is desirable to merge the subsidiaries into the parent company, thereby creating a single company.
This will be structured into separate operating divisions each managed by a team of executives under a Divisional Managing Director.
The one exception would be RIBA Indemnity Research Ltd, the nature of whose business is unlike any of the other members of the Group, which will remain a subsidiary of RIBA Companies Ltd.
The object is that management of each of these divisions will be the responsibility of its Divisional Managing Director who will have a seat on the Board.
In addition, Advisory Panels are being established with members of the Institute as Chairmen and they also will be non-executive Directors of RIBA Companies Ltd.
Your Board is confident that the plan for restructuring the Group will result in a more streamlined, flexible and dynamic organisation and it is intended that it be carried through as fast as possible.
CONCLUSION
Once again I wish to thank the management and staff for their efforts in 1992.
The new operational structure is extremely important for the on-going success of your company and the full co-operation of all personnel is essential if its early implementation is to be achieved.
We have always had this co-operation in the past.
I am sure we will have it again now and in the future.
One of the consequences of the new structure is that, as and when the management of a subsidiary company becomes the responsibility of an operating division, its Board of Directors will thereafter only need to hold meetings to deal with any formal requirements prior to their company becoming dormant.
Consequently, it was felt appropriate, as a preparatory step, to reduce the numbers of non-executive Directors while retaining a sufficient number for proper non-executive representation.
Accordingly, the following have resigned from the subsidiaries which they have assisted, many for a considerable period:.
I am taking this opportunity to pay tribute to them for their dedication, time and support over the years.
,
along with Terry Snow, have kindly agreed to serve as Chairmen of the Advisory Panels to which I have referred and are currently agreeing the terms of reference and membership of the Panels.
Jim Ackland of course remains on the Board of RIBA Companies Ltd, as Vice-President Companies.
Finally I wish to report that Terry Snow, Peter Jacob and Clive Labovitch will be continuing as Chairmen of their respective subsidiary companies for so long as the executive directors remain responsible for their companies.
With regret however, I must record that, only as a result of the pending changes, Peter Jacob and Clive Labovitch have felt it appropriate to resign from the Board of RIBA Companies Ltd.
They have both made very substantial contributions to the progress of the Group and we will miss their sound advice.
FINANCIAL SUMMARY
1992 has been another year in which we have had to work hard to live within our means.
Fortunately, as is demonstrated by our modest surplus, this has been achieved.
As early as May it had become clear to the RIBA's commercial companies that the effect of the recession would be drastically to reduce their profits.
In addition, by July, the receipt of members' subscriptions was tending to lag behind the predicted pattern.
These factors resulted in the decision that we needed to trim budgeted expenditure by about £114,000 and Council agreed to the measures proposed at their meeting in July.
This is, of course, not the first year in which budgetary cuts have had to be made.
Unfortunately, however, as each successive cut is applied, it becomes harder to bear.
On this occasion the most difficult decision was to pass on a share of the savings target to the English and Welsh Regions.
In addition to these cuts, a moratorium was placed on the spending of certain funds, in the Administration, Finance and House budgets, the expenditure of which could be delayed until the income situation had clarified.
In the event it proved possible to release some of these funds as the proportional receipt of subscriptions improved later in the year.
Fluctuations in our income, and particularly in the profitability of our subsidiary companies in recent years, have served to necessitate that our finger be kept continuously on our financial pulse.
The course we have pursued has been a wise one — not cutting ahead of need but firmly doing so when required.
It had been my cherished wish, if our circumstances had allowed, to create a ‘Balancing Fund’ so that in future years the Institute would not be wholly dependent on forecasting expenditure on the basis of income it had yet to receive.
That it has not proved possible to squeeze our resources further in order to accomplish this is cause for regret, but it is an aim which I am confident that all of my successors will seek to achieve.
The Corporate Plan, recently approved by Council, will greatly assist in the focusing of future budgets.
It is a lamentable fact, however, that the extend of our resources is unlikely to allow us to do justice to many of the highly desirable objectives that the membership would wish the Institute to pursue.
The recession is not yet over.
And we must remember that our income in 1994 will be determined, at least in part, by the current level of our members' earnings.
In light of this, we must also bear in mind that until our income reflects any upturn in the economy, the Institute's budget will have to remain in low gear.