

Truancy and Attendance in Scottish Secondary Schools
Pamela Munn and Margaret Johnstone
The research reported here was carried out at the request of the Scottish Office Education Department in June and in November 1991.
A sample of 50 Scottish secondary schools was asked to complete a questionnaire on attendance and unauthorised absence.
A sub-sample of six schools also provided more detailed information.
IN JUNE 1991 the Scottish Office Education Department (SOED) carried out a wide ranging consultancy exercise on attendance in secondary schools.
As part of this exercise, SCRE was asked to undertake a survey of pupil attendance in a representative sample of schools.
A sample of 50 schools was drawn up the Statistics Division of SOED (one in eight of all Scottish secondaries) giving broad representation of Scottish secondaries in general, in terms of size, geographic location, denominational status and percentages of pupils entitled to free school meals.
The survey was repeated in November 1991 so that comparison could be made between summer and autumn attendance.
The response rate to a long and detailed questionnaire was good: 47 schools replied in the June survey and 41 in the November survey.
However, we would suggest caution in making generalisations from the results given the eventual shortfall of nine schools from a small and carefully constructed sample.
It should also be noted that the June survey involved S1–S4 pupils only, while the November survey covered S1–S6.
As a follow-up to the surveys, staff and pupils in six schools took part in semi-structured interviews to explore reasons for non-attendance and ways of combating it.
These schools' systems for monitoring attendance were discussed and observed.
In addition, a study of documents, which included registers, brochures and forms of communication to parents, was undertaken and a small number of special classes for truants observed.
A list of the key message from these schools is given at the end.
MEASURING ATTENDANCE
Schools are legally required to record pupil attendance and a good attendance rate is seen by many people as a characteristic of a good school.
The Parents' Charter (1991), for example, identifies attendance rates as an important performance indicator for schools.
In our view, it is right and proper that schools should pay attention to their attendance rates and indeed most do so.
Schools' concerns in examining their attendance rates tend to be with levels of non-attendance and in particular with truancy.
Although it is a parent's or guardian's statutory responsibility to ensure children's regular attendance at school, schools generally see it as their responsibility to monitor attendance, to seek explanation from parents for pupils' non-attendance and to ensure that once pupils come to school they attend their classes.
Keeping track of attendance is no easy matter for schools.
One way of keeping track, calculating attendance rates, as the Pack Report (1977) noted, is only part of the story.
Attendance rates are calculated by dividing the number of openings in the school register by the number of pupils present.
This can be done on a daily, weekly, monthly or annual basis.
For example, a school with 100 pupils which registered them twice daily would have 200 possible attendances per day in the register.
Over the week this would add up to 1000 attendances.
An attendance rate of 90% for a week means that out of the 1000 possible attendances over the week, 900 were recorded.
However, the missing 100 attendances could mean various things.
It might mean that the same ten pupils were absent for the whole week; or it might mean that overall, five pupils were absent for a whole week, plus two pupils absent for two days, plus 21 pupils absent for one day.
There are many other possible explanations for the missing 100 attendances.
In sum, therefore, an attendance rate of 90% does not mean that 10% of pupils are absent; the  missing 10% could come from a small number of pupils with lengthy absences or from a higher percentage of pupils with brief absences.
Each of these possible explanations for the missing 10% might demand a different strategy from the school, if the attendance rate is to be improved.
Attendance rates by themselves do not say enough.
It is also important to investigate the numbers of pupils absent.
It is only then that schools can explore whether there are any patterns to pupils' absence.
‘Are the same pupils regularly absent?’ is the first obvious question that cannot be answered by examining attendance rates.
Other questions might be, for instance: are absent pupils predominantly from the same year group?
Are some pupils absent only on particular days of the week?
Questions such as these are a starting point for exploring potential causes of non-attendance and perhaps ultimately for remedying it.
THE PROBLEM OF CONDONED TRUANCY
Pupils' non-attendance can be authorised or not.
There are many legitimate reasons for pupils not to be in school, the most obvious being ill-health, medical or dental appointments.
Other reasons for pupils' absence can provide challenges to the school.
For example, family responsibilities such as helping an elderly relative with shopping, or parents and children being unconvinced about the quality and relevance of what the school has to offer make regular attendance seem less important.
In these circumstances it is often easier for parents to support their children's non-attendance by providing bogus explanations for it.
Schools typically require parents to provide a note of explanation for their child's absence or ask parents to make contact with the school in some other way.
Parents whose children were absent for reasons regarded as illegitimate by the school, can seek to avoid confrontation by providing explanations which the school would approve of (‘Amy was absent because she had a stomach upset’, for instance) rather than provide the real reason.
Headteachers in our survey reported that condoned truancy was a problem and that parents condoning their children's absence included those from disadvantaged areas and those from ‘leafy suburbs’.
June was a particularly problematic month.
Children could convince their parents that ‘nothing much was happening’ at school and persuade them to support their non-attendance.
How does this relate to measuring attendance and truancy?
If truancy is defined as absence from school unauthorised by parents, then concentrating only on unauthorised absence could lull a school into a false sense of security.
As we shall see below, truants defined in this way made up very small proportions of absentees.
If the school's general attendance rate is poor, then school management may well suspect a high level of condoned truancy, even if the majority of non-attenders appear to have an explanation for their absence.
Furthermore, highlighting parental responsibility for ensuring regular attendance may deflect schools from examining their own practice, and asking why some pupils find schools unattractive places to be.
Our six case-study schools whose procedures for combating truancy we report at the end, regularly monitored attendance and absentee pupils rates and were alert to ways of keeping disaffected pupils in school.
Some of the schools also provided special classes for truants and had a member of staff ‘keeping an eye’ on them.
Clearly, time, energy and commitment is needed to tackle condoned and other kinds of truancy.
This goes beyond monitoring attendance to exploring reasons for absence.
We repeat, a study of absentee pupils is required, not just of attendance rates, if reasons for non-attendance are to be uncovered and combated.
ATTENDANCE RATES AND NUMBERS OF PUPILS ABSENT
For the reasons specified above, the 50 schools sampled were asked to provide us both with their overall attendance rate and the numbers of pupils absent for a specific week in June and again for a specific week in November.
The figures are shown in Table 1.
Our figures indicate that, over a week, about one in three pupils was absent at least once.
This figure is broadly consistent with figures quoted in the Pack Report (1977) which reported an unattributed spot check in Glasgow schools as showing an attendance rate of 90% with 25% of pupils absent.
The figures reported in Table 1 are averages and conceal quite large differences among the schools.
For example in June, the percentage of pupils absent in individual schools ranged from 0% to 44% of the school roll.
WHO WERE THE ABSENTEES?
We now look more closely at the absentees in relation to two factors; gender and school stage.
In June, more boys than girls were absent in each of the year groups S1–S4.
In November, the pattern was slightly different.
For S1–S3, more boys than girls were absent, but for S4–S6 marginally more girls than boys were absent.
As far as age was concerned, absentees were more likely to be senior pupils, S4 and above.
In June, the survey was confined to school records for S1–S4 pupils only.
Sharing out the absentee pupils amongst these years, S4 pupils took the largest share; just over a third of all the June absentees were S4 pupils.
The S4 pupils were also those most likely to be unauthorised absentees; 27% of all S4 pupils were absent without authorisation at least once during the week, in contrast to 5% of all S1 pupils.
As mentioned above, several headteachers said that during June even the more academic pupils are tempted to take time off and this is sometimes condoned by parents.
Schools have attempted to provide positive uses of this time by moving all classes onto the next year's timetable, or by offering a suspension of timetables for an activities week, for example.
How well this works in reducing absence is an open question.
In November, attendance in all six years was surveyed.
Sharing out the absentee pupils amongst these years, S5 pupils took the largest share (21%), followed by S4 (20%).
If the figures are recalculated to leave out S5 and S6, to give a better comparability with the June survey, then the S4 share of all absentee pupils is 28%.
This remains lower than the S4 share for June, when S4 pupils made up about a third (35%) of all absentees.
The November survey gave a better picture of absence, in that all school years were surveyed.
The absentees were likely to be senior pupils; 2 out of 10 pupils in S1 were absent at least once in the survey week, but 4 out of 10 pupils in S5.
Winter leavers may have contributed to the pattern of absenteeism, but overall, substantial numbers of senior pupils seemed to be irregular attenders.
There are implications here for senior pupils' class work.
Can teachers plan ahead when class membership varies from day to day or week to week?
How much time is spent in backtracking and catching up with work?
AUTHORISED ABSENCE
In both June and November, about two-thirds of the absentee pupils were absent with some form of parental consent or authorisation.
This could be worrying from the school viewpoint.
Although the survey forms took a closer look at unauthorised absence and aimed to collect data on pupils seen unequivocally as truants, it was plain that condoned absence was a major problem for headteachers.
From the November replies, for example, it appeared that for the peak year for absenteeism, S5, 27% of the pupils were authorised absentees at least once during the week, while 15% were unauthorised absentees.
In comparison, 20% of the S1 pupils were authorised absentees while 2% were unauthorised absentees.
With the older pupils, unauthorised absence increased — but so did their authorised absence.
In either case, the percentage of pupils whose absence was authorised could conceal pupils whose absence was truancy condoned by parents.
Not all authorised absence is condoned truancy, of course, especially in November when illness may be passed around the school.
Nevertheless, headteachers did express worries about condoned absence.
These pupils were not necessarily involving their parents in a conspiracy to allow them to avoid school for its own sake; they were more likely to agree with their parents in putting home values before school values as the following quotations from two headteachers illustrate:
Much of our ‘truancy’ is condoned by parents, where family needs take priority over the school.
Our biggest problem is non-attendance authorised by parents for what might be considered unacceptable reasons.
This clash between school values and home values made it very difficult for some schools to tackle problems of pupil absence.
Parents, could, and did, play the system, changing excuses and even changing schools in response to attempts by the school to improve attendance.
We had examples of other parents won over into trusting school staff and giving truthful instead of cosmetic reasons for the child's absence — but keeping the child off, nonetheless, for reasons peripheral to the child (such as‘going with granny to collect her pension’).
Thus headteachers were often concerned about authorised absence as about unauthorised absence.
In contrast, it is noteworthy that pupils skipping a lesson here and there, having registered as present, was not seen as a problem by headteachers.
Under half of the schools reported ‘truancy’ from lessons but 14 schools kept no period by period record.
These were typically smaller schools where period attendance was seen as easy to monitor informally.
UNAUTHORISED ABSENTEES
The two surveys indicated that 33% (June) and 30% (November) of pupils had been absent from school at least once in the survey.
Those pupils whose absence was, at the time of completion of the survey returns, still unauthorised made up 11% (June) and 7% (November) of the total of pupils surveyed.
As with most averages, these percentages conceal a degree of   variation between individual schools.
Some schools had no unauthorised absentees in either June or November, while a few schools recorded almost a third of the pupil roll as unauthorised absentees in June.
Table 2 shows the differences among the schools and in addition the seasonal variation.
The sample of schools was made up in such a way that the 50 schools, as a whole group, where representative of Scottish secondary schools.
It was therefore inadvisable to conduct statistical tests when missing data from some schools distorted the representativeness of the sample.
However, in June, the majority of schools had 6% or more of their pupils as unauthorised absentees.
In November, the majority had 5% or under as unauthorised absentees.
Those schools having no pupils absent were all either small and/or rural schools.
Those schools with the highest percentages of unauthorised absence were all inner city schools.
Unauthorised absentees were a focus of guidance staff efforts and a concern of senior management.
We asked headteachers to consider those pupils in their school who fell into the category of unauthorised absentees, and with the help of guidance staff allot these pupils into descriptive groupings.
Pupils classified as unauthorised absentees made up 11% (June) and 7% (November) of the total surveyed.
About half in each case were categorised by their headteachers as casual or persistent truants.
That is, 5% (June) and 4% (November) of all pupils surveyed were deemed by experienced and knowledgeable staff to be ‘real’ truants.
The other unauthorised absentees were a mixture of small numbers of ‘ghost’ pupils wrongly on the register, of pupils in trouble and temporarily avoiding school and larger numbers of pupils for whom authorisation was expected.
This authorisation could, of course, be spurious and be disguising condoned truancy.
However, setting this aside and taking parent-authorisation at face value, the high percentage of absent pupils came down to a small percentage perceived to be casual or persistent truants.
COMBATING TRUANCY
This whittling down of the 33% (June) or 30% (November) of pupils absent to a very small percentage seen as truants has implications for dealing with the problem of truancy.
The pupils falling into the category of persistent truants were described by experienced staff in the case-study schools as exhibiting one symptom of deep-rooted social, emotional or economic problems.
The schools could do little to alleviate this but did their best, working alongside social workers and educational psychologists, for example, to try to help these children.
This view was also given by headteachers outside the case-study group.
However, headteachers saw little hope of success especially if persistent truancy was accepted and even encouraged by parents.
Effort spent on this minority of pupils was costly in terms of staff time.
Headteachers were much more optimistic about tackling casual truancy, skipping days here and there, than they were about tackling persistent truancy, sustained absence from school over weeks and months.
A push to improve the overall attendance rate involved several different strategies.
While this was also costly in staff time it was seen as a worthwhile investment.
Giving a consistently high profile to the importance of regular attendance for all pupils was seen as having a spin–off effect on condoned truancy.
The following messages emerged from interviews with staff and pupils in the six case-study schools about how to combat casual truancy and promote good attendance.
Convey to pupils and to all staff that good attendance is expected through:
clear systems for following up non-attendance
having a senior member of staff in charge of monitoring attendance
rapid contact with parents of absent pupils
good liaison between form tutors, guidance, senior staff and the education welfare officer.
Staff involved in publicising the importance of attendance stressed that good liaison encouraged a united effort and avoided contradictory messages about the importance of attendance.
Have in place easily operated and maintained record systems to enable:
information on absentees and what was being done about them to be regularly fed back to appropriate staff
a senior staff member to examine statistics regularly so that the situation is not taken for granted.
Most staff with responsibility for monitoring attendance knew likely persistent truants from past contact with families.
However, they emphasised the value of analysing statistics to explore patterns of absence, both authorised and unauthorised.
Schools  had different approaches to data collection.
Manual systems, being more flexible, were sometimes seen as more informative than computer-based systems.
Enlist the help of parents and get them on the side of the school by:
listening to parents of persistent or casual truants.
sending a positive letter to pupils and parents for all children who have attended well
encouraging all parents to see the dangers of condoned truancy by describing pupil time off school in easily understood and immediate terms, for example in terms of work missed (eg 20 English lessons and 20 maths lessons) rather than as a poor attendance rate (eg 60%).
Senior staff who listened to parents were sometimes able to negotiate improvements, but sometimes they uncovered a family history of truancy to be overcome.
Work at setting up good information sources and networks.
Inter-agency and primary school contacts are vital.
No school thought it had the perfect answer and all stressed the need for constant awareness of the problem.
It was noteworthy that for the overall group of schools involved in the survey, few reported any involvement by school boards in problems of attendance or in improving attendance.
KEY FINDINGS
From the 50 schools, surveyed at two different weeks in the school year, a general picture of attendance emerged:
Attendance rates:November 1991 = 89% (all pupils, S1–S6); June 1991 = 87% (S1–S4).
Percentage of pupils absent at some time during the week in November was 30%.
In June it was 33%.
Unauthorised absentees were largely from the senior years S5 and S6, in November: 15% of S5 were absent without authorisation and 12% of S6.
In June, 27% of S4 were unauthorised absentees.
Persistent and casual truants — so categorised by headteachers — made up 4% of the school roll in November and 5% in June.
Truancy within the school day (by pupils skipping individual lessons) was not seen as a problem by headteachers; 14 schools reported that they did not keep period attendance records.
More was added to this general picture by the six case-study schools and by some headteachers in the larger survey in response to open questions:
Truancy condoned by parents who ‘authorise’ the child's absence was seen as a real problem.
It was seen as particularly acute in June for S4 pupils.
Persistent truants , those truanting for weeks at a time, were seen as posing intractable problems for schools.
They saw such truancy, often regarded as a symptom of deep-rooted social, emotional or economic problems, as something which, despite their best efforts, they could do little to alleviate especially where it was accepted by parents.
Schools tackle casual truancy by having good monitoring systems, a member of senior staff in charge of attendance, regular, timetabled liaison withe the education welfare officer and special classes or groups.
These measures were seen as indirectly reducing condoned truancy.
Acknowledgement
We acknowledge the ready cooperation and forbearance of the headteachers who completed two long and detailed surveys.
Without their goodwill, and that of their staff who assisted in compiling figures, the research would not have been possible.
We are grateful to staff and pupils in the six schools who spared time to be interviewed.
HM Inspectorate helped in various ways and Statistics Division of the Scottish Office Education Department drew up the sample of schools at short notice.
Responsibility for the content of this article, nevertheless, rests with the authors.
COPYRIGHT
SCRE Spotlights may be photocopied, for use within your own institution.
Copyright 1992 The Scottish Council for Research in Education.
The views expressed in these papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of SCRE.
Printed and published by the Scottish Council for Research in Education, 15 St John Street, Edinburgh, EH8 8JR, November 1992.