

Encouraging Healthy Living: Health Education in Scottish Schools
Marion Devine, SCRE
This report is based on a survey which was carried out in Scottish schools towards the end of 1992.
The aim was to provide a description of the provision of health education in Scottish schools and to review the support available to schools.
This paper summarises the findings and poses some questions which may enable schools and local authorities to consider their own situation.
In 1992 SCRE was asked to undertake a survey of the pattern of provision of health education in Scottish schools and of the support available to schools.
The evidence was mainly collected by a postal survey from a representative sample of schools across Scotland.
This method allowed us to generalise the result to all Scottish schools but limited the extent to which we could explore potentially interesting responses.
The importance of local authority policies
At the time of the survey 7 out of the 12 local authorities had a health education policy which they were prepared to share with us.
A further 2 were finalising preparations for publishing their policies.
The importance of the local authority in taking the lead in the development of a health education policy is paramount.
Secondary schools in particular were much more likely to have a health education policy if one existed at Regional level.
Only 30% of secondary schools in areas where there was no regional policy had developed their own policy.
This compared with 80% of schools where there was a regional policy.
No similar difference was noted in primary schools where two thirds of all schools had a health policy whether or not one existed at regional level.
In addition, the Regional document was the resource on which most schools depended in preparing their own health education policies.
Do local authorities appreciate the extent to which the existence and content of school health education policies depend on the existence and content of local authority documents?
Health education as a priority
Schools differ in the extent to which health education is a priority:
We have a comprehensive health education policy developed as a staff through consultation with relevant agencies.
Professional Association of Teachers sessions and teacher workshops.
The final document is used throughout nursery to P7 stages.
We are at present monitoring the policy as it has been in operation for approximately 18 months.
This particular primary school was clearly proud of its health education provision.
In some schools health education is included in the school development plans as a future topic for priority.
Occasionally health education is only a priority in special circumstances.
It would appear we have too many priorities in education and although health education is included in the curriculum it is not seen as a priority unless something goes wrong!
How can ‘good practice’ in negotiating, writing and monitoring a school policy be shared with other schools?
Health education co-ordinators in schools
The cross-curricular and cross-stage nature of health education make it necessary for someone within the school to take responsibility for co-ordinating the programme.
At the secondary level, unless health education is catered for solely within Personal and Social Education (PSE), the main problem is liaising with the various departments to ensure that each individual pupils is exposed to an agreed core of health education.
At the primary level the problem relates more to progression.
Since health education is an area which is of concern both inside and outside school, the co-ordinator has to be a person with sufficient status to be at ease with parents, health agencies, other sectors of education, and to take decisions which cut across stages and subjects.
Most schools have appointed someone at the middle management level or above (see Figure 1).
Regional guidance generally advised that the co-ordinator should be appointed fro the senior management team.
A few schools mentioned the expanding remit of senior staff as ‘a worrying situation’ and implications for staff development of the co-ordinator were also raised:
I was ‘thrown’ into this area with no training whatsoever.
How many others are in the same position?(secondary)
The appointment of senior teachers and the setting up of health education committees were mentioned by several schools as helping in the management of health education.
Are all health education co-ordinators in positions which give them sufficient ‘clout’ to take decisions forward?
What can be done to ensure that the staff development needs of health education co-ordinators are met?
How best can their work load be shared?
Delivery of health education
The different structures of primary and secondary schools were reflected in how health education was delivered.
Almost all primary school used environmental studies as a medium for health education but many also made use of situations as they arose.
We feel we do a great deal of work in this area but the majority of it is incorporated in thematic work or incidental.
The introduction of the 5–14 programme for Environmental Studies should ensure a core of health education for all primary and lower secondary pupils.
For the first time there will be a nationally agreed curriculum which gives clear guidance on what should be included in a health education programme and indicates a progression across the stages.
Problems which could be inherent in a more opportunistic approach to health education should be avoided.
At the secondary level there seemed to be widespread acceptance that Personal and Social Education (PSE) was an ideal medium for developing health education.
However, health education forms only one part of PSE and is also included in the curriculum of a number of subject departments.
Considerable discussions are needed among subject teachers, guidance staff and the health education co-ordinator to ensure that each knows which aspects of health education are being delivered and by whom.
The policy is delivered via the guidance system and lessons delivered by subject teachers mainly PE, HE, Science and Religious Education.
The whole school's health education policy is discussed by the subject teachers and each knows what part is delivered by their departments and what by others.
Several schools mentioned that they were presently involved in carrying out an audit of health education to monitor provision and delivery.
Keeping track of the individual pupil's exposure to health education is an even more difficult task, but one which is important if the purpose of health education is to promote and encourage future healthy living habits.
What support will be needed for teachers implementing the healthy living section of Environmental Studies 5–14?
How can the health education co-ordinator keep track of both school provision and individual opportunity?
Meeting the needs of pupils
Most schools seemed to be satisfied that they were meeting the needs of pupils, at least to some extent (see figure 2).
Those schools which were not satisfied were asked to give examples of the constraints which limited provision and, apart from time, those most commonly mentioned in the primary sector related to the low priority given to health education when compared with other developments, and to the lack of a specific school policy.
In the secondary sector, time-tabling health education in an already overcrowded curriculum was the most common constraint.
Senior pupils were considered to be less well served than any other group and almost one half of all secondary schools were not satisfied that the needs of these pupils were being met.
Pupils at S5/S6 spent less time on health education than any other group of pupils.
Since the questionnaire was directed to the member of staff responsible for health education, we have no evidence to indicate if pupils are also satisfied that their needs are being met.
A small number of schools mentioned that as part of their monitoring procedures, pupils were asked to evaluate social education programmes and one secondary school referred to a survey of pupils' attitudes to health education.
No-one appeared to carry out an analysis of pupils' needs.
What support might be offered to schools to help them analyse the needs of pupils and develop programmes to meet those needs?
The health-promoting school
The concept of a health-promoting school is being increasingly encouraged in guidelines from local authorities and the health board.
Schools' responses to some options which might promote healthy practices are shown in Figure 3.
About one quarter of primary and secondary schools indicated that they had prepared an explicit statement of the health education aims of the school for both staff and pupils.
Many more primary than secondary schools referred to a focus on healthy eating although this was clearly not without its difficulties:
Great problems with school meals…and tuckshop provision (secondary)
About half of both sectors operated a whole school no smoking policy.
One primary school interpreted this rather loosely.
Smoking is allowed only in the staffroom and nowhere else
Several schools commented on the importance of involving the whole school in living up to the agreed health policy.
Health weeks, health fairs and specific campaigns such as‘Be better hearted’, ‘Be fit’, ‘Be all you can be’, ‘Happy Heart’ and ‘Smokebusters’were mentioned by schools in both sectors as ways in which they promoted healthy practices.
Some schools looked forward eagerly to whole-school involvement in health:
With the emphasis on whole school health, all staff/school workers will have to be made more aware of healthy living.
It is an exciting prospect considering development in this area.
A school which is trying to establish an ethos of healthy living has to take care that the message it gives to pupils are reflected in the school generally.
The school mentioned earlier which only allowed smoking in the staffroom was sending inconsistent signals to its pupils.
How can ‘good practice’ be documented and shared with others?
Do schools pay sufficient attention to the match between the taught health education curriculum and the hidden curriculum of the school ethos?
Topics in health education
While recognising that recent trends in health education are encouraging a move away from a purely topics-based programme, pupils need to have access to reliable information on a wide range of aspects of health to help them make informed judgements about healthy practices.
Table 1 highlights those topics which were omitted at every stage by primary or secondary schools.
What the questionnaire responses cannot tell is how many individual pupils miss out on information relating to these topics throughout the whole of their school career.
Certain health education topics such as bereavement, child abuse and education for parenthood were omitted by large numbers of schools.
Almost one-quarter of primary schools did not include smoking as a health education topic with children at P6/P7.
This is despite recent research in Scotland which shows a substantial increase in smokers between the ages of 11 to 15.
Many health educators and local authorities might find it surprising and worrying that any schools could omit such basic concerns as diet and personal health or such high profile topical issues as drug education and HIV/AIDS.
Sensitive areas were avoided by many schools for pupils at all stages.
It may be that pupils' needs are greatest in these areas but they are where teachers feel least capable.
Staff need to be given support…especially in the more sensitive areas.
How are health education priorities determined in schools?
To what extent are national and regional patterns of health taken into consideration?
How can teachers be supported to help them deal with sensitive issues?
Liaison between primary and secondary schools
Cross-sector links between primary and secondary schools did not seem to be well developed.
They were either non-existent or perfunctory —‘none’, ‘not been addressed recently’, ‘school nurse is link for health ed’(secondaries).
Less than 25% of schools were involved in such possible links as ‘discussions about joint policies’, ‘discussions on curricular progression’ or ‘cross sector activities’.
This might be an area where the dissemination of good practice, which does exist, could be helpful for others:
Regular steering group meetings [with representatives from secondary schools and associated primaries]
How can cross-curricular links in relation to health education be improved?
Home/school links
Large numbers of schools have limited or no links with parents on health education.
A number of options were suggested to respondents and the one which was most used by both primary and secondary schools was ‘discussion with the school board’.
However, even as blunt an instrument as our questionnaire proved  to be a catalyst in providing ideas:
I like the idea of joint activities [from a list of possible home/school links]
Most of the comments on links with parents came from the primary sector
A parents' evening on four health topics is being held in school.
These are (i) schools meals — healthy eating,(ii) Dental care,(iii) A healthy diet,(iv) school health education policy.
A few schools in both sectors referred to PTA presentations and open evenings on health education One secondary school added this comment on links with the home:—
Parents are invited to donate blood (every February)
To what extent can parents and schools complement each other in their approach to health education?
Contacts with other agencies
More than half of all schools contacted health professionals (health board staff and/or school medical staff) and the police for guidance or support.
Drug agencies and family planning specialists were much more likely to be contacted by secondary than primary schools.
Schools were asked to indicate the kind of support they requested from the various agencies.
The police were mostly invited to provide a presentation in the classroom.
Health professionals were perceived mainly as providers of resources, consultants and (in the primary sector) for visits to the classroom.
The limitations of a questionnaire make it impossible to determine the extent to which visits to the classroom were part of a planned health education programme and whether they were reactive or proactive visits.
Less than 20% of primary schools identified a staff development role for any of the agencies contacted.
The figures were slightly higher for secondary schools: 42% of schools contacted drug agencies for staff development and 30% contacted health board staff.
Do schools make the best use of external agencies?
Could they liaise more with external agencies to develop a co-ordinated programme which makes the best use of their respective strengths?
Staff development needs
To gather information on the future needs of teachers with respect to health education, respondents were asked to rank five areas of support in order of importance.
Figure 4 shows that there were no great differences between the two sectors in the ares ranked first or second.
The demand for more classroom resources, particularly in the primary sector, is contradicted to some extent by information in Regional documents and comments from health board personnel which suggest that there are plenty of resources for health education.
Perhaps what is needed is more knowledge about what exists already and some sort of in-school organisation that facilitates access.
Some local authorities already include resource information in their policy documents.
Personal development programmes and consultations with experts ranked highly in only one quarter of schools.
Additional comments indicated particular needs in the primary sector —
Staff need to be given support in developing strategies for teaching…more sensitive areas.
Many staff feel uneasy with subjects such as sex education.
Staff need more training in dealing with this at parental level and pupil level.
Staff development is an area in which there is some discrepancy between the views of school staff and health board staff.
The role of health board staff is explored further in the next section.
To what extent are teachers aware of the range of existing resource material for health education?
Support for health education in schools
Although a number of different agencies were contacted by schools for support and guidance in the area of health education, the Health Education Board for Scotland (HEBS) and the various area health boards seem to have a particularly relevant role to play.
HEBS and the area health boards promote three main strands of involvement in health education in schools —
the concept of the health promoting school
curriculum development
teacher education
Health board staff believe that they can make a significant contribution to health education in schools.
They see themselves as having both reactive and proactive roles.
They react to requests for help with specific topics and resources but they are proactive in terms of the health promoting school and in teacher education.
To some extent there is a mismatch between teachers and health board staff in the perceived role of the health board.
Large numbers of teachers are looking for resources in the secondary school and classroom visits in the primary school.
Health board staff agreed with the need to help teachers with resources which will make life easier in the classroom but resource production is not a priority:
There's been curriculum development in the past and not a lot has happened with it…shelves are full of it.
The small number of area health board staff working on the schools' programmes makes it impossible for them to cater for individual classroom visits.
The only area health board which provided a written policy statement on health education in schools made it clear that direct pupil contact was not part of its role.
Few schools perceived health board staff as having a role in staff development and yet, according to health board staff, that is one of their three main functions.
When teachers were asked to suggest what their own staff development needs were, personal development programmes ranked low for most teachers, but high in the estimation of health board staff.
Given that HEBS has only recently moved from a topics-based approach, it is not surprising that schools still see the role of the health board in terms of help with specific topics and current health problems.
The introduction and expansion of a devolved staff development budget means that schools will be widening their range of staff development contacts.
The advent of personal professional development and increasing concern about stress management could lead to an increase in the demand for staff development in areas in which the health board is currently interested.
Could better use be made of health board professionals for meeting school staff development needs?
Key points for consideration
The recent Scottish Office document on Scotland's health (Scotland's Health: A Challenge to us all , 1992) the re-organisation in 1991 of the national agency for health education in Scotland, and an upsurge of media coverage have all helped towards an increased interest in many aspects of health.
The high response rate to our questionnaire (over 80%) is a reflection of this interest.
Local authority health policies
Those few authorities which do not at present have a policy on health education might care to consider the influence which this has on the development of school policy.
Schools depend largely on local authority documents for the existence and content of their own policies.
Health campaigns in school
Heavy demands are placed on schools to find time in the curriculum for a wide range of individually worthwhile activities and difficult decisions have to be made about priorities.
The notion of the health-promoting school which permeates all aspects of school life seemed to be gaining favour with many schools and may be one way of tackling the situation.
A health week or some form of health campaign provides a focus for the whole-school community with all grades of school staff and pupils being equally involved.
Links with parents and with associated schools — which were reported to be few and far between — could have been developed in this situation.
Pupils' needs
The systematic analysis of teachers' needs in relation to professional personal development is becoming widespread as staff appraisal and career review become more structured.
A similar technique might usefully be applied to pupils in relation to health education.
Such an exercise would help to ensure that the perceived needs of pupils are met at their different stages of development.
Decisions about priorities could take account of pupils' needs and national or Regional health concerns.
For many pupils, schools offers the only opportunity to discuss health issues openly with knowledgeable professionals.
Helping pupils to make informed choices about healthy living will influence not only their own future lives but those of their families.
Notes
1.
This paper and the full report Health Education in Scottish Schools are the outcomes of a project undertaken in the autumn of 1992 by the Scottish Council for Research in Education (SCRE) as part of its contractual arrangements with the Scottish Office Education Department (SOED).
The full report is available from SCRE at a cost of £6.00
2.
SCOTTISH OFFICE HOME AND HEALTH DEPARTMENT (1992)Scotland's Health: A Challenge to us all .
HMSO: Edinburgh.
COPYRIGHT
SCRE Spotlights may be photocopied, for use within your own institution.
Copyright 1993 The Scottish Council for Research in Education
The views expressed in these papers are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of SCRE or the organisation(s) which commissioned the research.