

The Network
It is nearly a year since the meeting which led to the setting-up of the Network and six months since the first registration forms went out.
Those of you who have registered as members of the network will have received with this second issue of the Bulletin a list of other who have also registered.
This should enable individual members to get in touch with each other, perhaps to set up teacher-researcher groups where none exist.
A selection of views from member's forms appears on pages 7 and 8, in particular about the ways in which the Network could support teacher research.
The registration form is repeated at the end of this issue.
Am I doing research?
Teacher-researchers sometimes feel the need to apologise for the studies they undertake, as not being ‘real research’.
Often this is quite unnecessary, since what they are doing is as genuine research as any.
But that isn't to say that doing research is like breathing — or speak prose — you do it all the time without realising.
Research, although it takes many forms, has recognisable characteristics.
My purpose here is to try to identify these, hopefully without too much over-simplification or bias.
Responses are welcome as a contribution to what may be an on-going debate in the columns of Observations .
My favourite quotations on the subject of ‘what is educational research?’ come from Lawrence Stenhouse.
His answers were: ‘Systematic activity that is directed towards providing knowledge, or adding to the understanding of existing knowledge, which is of relevance for improving the effectiveness of education’, which he later expressed more succinctly as ‘systematic activity made public’.
Between them, these statements identify three characteristics which are at the heart of educational research.
First, that it is systematic .
This doesn't mean that it has to be quantitative, but rather that there is a clear relationship between the understanding being sought and the information collected, or selected for review, so that there is no inbuilt bias which would prejudge the outcome.
Second, that it is purposeful , directed towards improving the effectiveness of education.
The purpose is generally expressed in terms of the research questions, which have a key role in planning research (see Lewis and Munn, 1987).
Third, it is made public, that is,shared with others who may be able to use the findings or build upon them.
Sharing can be through meetings and conferences, but a written report is obviously more easily accessible to others.
Both oral presentation and writing, however, have an additional function in helping the researchers to sort out and understand their findings in order to be able to communicate them to others.
A reason for teacher-researchers feeling apologetic about their wok can arise from a myth about the differences between ‘teachers’ research’and ‘researchers’research’.
It goes along the lines that ‘researchers’ research’is all about ‘controlled experimentation within a psycho-statistical paradigm’— to coin a jargon or two — and expressed in just this kind of language.
That might well have been true in the early 1960s but not in the 1990s, so let us not revive a distinction which has thankfully been eliminated.
All kinds of research in education have gone far beyond this narrow form.
A more important aspect of this distinction lingers, however, and this is the relationship of research to theory.
The word ‘theory’ is too often contrasted with ‘practice’and thus interpreted as being remote from real classroom and schools.
Hence the misconceived view that researchers' research is theory-based whilst teachers' is not.
Theory is essential to any enquiry.
Without a theory (meaning initial ideas about what is going on) there is no basis for deciding what information may be relevant.
The knowledge which research provides is most useful when it goes beyond description of events to providing a basis for future action.
As a scientist by training, I see an interesting similarity between the way in which knowledge is developed in science and in educational research.
This is not in terms of methodology, I hasten to add, for I learned by first-hand practice in the late 1960s that the application of scientific methods of investigation in the so-called ‘agricultural-botany’ model had little value in developing understanding in education.
Since that time, not only have views of education and educational research changed, but so have views of science.
So it is in the nature of the enterprise as currently understood, and the status of the produced knowledge, that I find the parallel.
Science is no longer characterised as being about objective truth, about ‘proving’ things, being value-free.
Instead it is now recognised as a human activity which seeks to advance understanding of the world around, through building upon previous knowledge and understanding.
The knowledge which it produces at any time is tentative and always open to challenge by further evidence.
Scientific ideas and theories are accepted for as long as the known evidence supports them.
The same points can be made about the activity and products of educational research.
We have to recognise it for what it is; to see it as a way of generating understanding and knowledge, yielding ideas and theories which are accepted for as long as they help our understanding of evidence, but which are constantly superseded and changed when new evidence is obtained which conflicts with them.
There is no end to this process; no ultimate truth or understanding of either education or of the scientific aspects of the world around.
So out of this comes a view of educational research as starting from present ideas and knowledge, using these to develop questions which focus the collection of information in a systematic way, and leading to their modification or reconstruction in the light of the new evidence.
The new understandings then become the basis for further activity — and so on it goes.
But note that each cycle depends on communication of emerging ideas to those who can use them; hence the importance of telling others about one's findings and ideas and of finding out what others have reported about one's own current concerns.
Editorial
Researchers — and cynics — say that research doesn't give answers but only throws up more questions.
Observations No 2 does give some answers (as to which college library facilities are open to teachers doing research for example).
It is also full of questions (some more explicit than others) and middle-stage answers.
Wynne Harlen considers what counts as research, highlighting three characteristics of ‘real research’: that it is systematic, purposeful and shared.
Ruth Barr's research alias ‘personal time-and-motion study’ described in answering her own ‘why am I doing this?’question would seem to meet these criteria.
The last question on the registration form asks ‘what kinds of help do you think the Network should provide for teachers?’
The answers given by members to date are given on pages seven and eight.
Next questions?
Next answers
Please write  
Next Time
The next issue of Observations will appear in January 1993.
Among the items planned are articles on ethical issues related to doing research; a report on the recent CARN conference (for what CARN is see page 5); more about recommended books, more about research and local authorities, and more about research methods.
What topics would you like to see covered in Observations?
Copy dates: see page 8.
Practitioner Award Winners 1992
In the first year of the resumption of the SCRE Practitioner Award, the prizes have been awarded to Ally Budge and Ron Scrimgeour.
The prizes are awarded for educational research studies conducted by teachers or other practitioners whose jobs do not normally include doing research.
Ally Budge, a teacher at Hillhead Primary School, Caithness, won first prize for his study entitled ‘A Chronometric Analysis of Simple Addition Problems in Primary Seven Pupils of Differing Arithmetical Ability’.
The second prize was awarded to the Assistant Rector of Arbroath Academy, Ron Scrimgeour for his work on ‘Equal Opportunities: languages is a powerful influence in the classroom’.
Details of the 1993 Award are on page 3.
SOED Research Grants
The SOED mainly funds research which is related to Government policy concerns but a small proportion of the budget is reserved to fund ideas which come from the research community.
This funding is also available to encourage and support less experienced researchers, including teacher researchers.
Teachers interested in exploring this source of funding for small research studies should contact .
Enquiries may be made at any time (and indeed should be!) but applications are normally considered in April and September each year.
‘Why am I doing this?’
Personal research: getting started: getting finished
Ruth Barr reflects
At times I wondered why I had ever embarked upon my personal research study.
It was certainly never more than an individual analysis of my own work practices — a personal time-and-motion study.
Nonetheless I am pleased that I did so and grateful to the SOED-sponsored grant scheme for assistance.
The research was concerned with that common complaint of lack of time in school to do all that is required.
I know I say this and I hear others, but I wondered how often the complaint was truly justified.
This doubt had been in my mind for some time but the research was undertaken due to a number of reasons.
Firstly, as a fairly recently promoted primary headteacher I was suffering from periods of anxiety about meeting the responsibilities of the post.
Secondly, I had enjoyed the research element of my in-service B Ed course.
Lastly, and by far the catalytic event, was my school's involvement in Strathclyde Region's initiative in the delegation of resources to schools.
Doubts were raised at the time about the possible increase in working hours for headteachers in order to operate this system.
I was concerned that my complaint about lack of time was going to become more frequent.
I therefore decided to investigate my time management before and after the implementation of the scheme of DMR within my school.
My first step was to gather information on how I spent my time on school-related activities and attempt to create some form of time-analysis schedule.
I used a diary at this pilot stage.
From this the following broad headings emerged: administration, pupil time, parent contact, staff contact, curriculum development, resources, policy matters, meetings, DMR liaison, property matters, and of course, the inevitable ‘others’ section.
I drew up a form with these headings and time was calibrated in fifteen minute interval boxes which, by the use of a marking code, could also show five minute intervals.
This fine division was found to be necessary especially in dealing with pupils or parents.
The schedule was used daily on alternate months for three periods before, and three periods after DMR was operational within the school.
The data was converted to average daily figures and comparisons made in this way.
Gathering information became part of the routine and only very occasionally did I find it impossible to do.
Crises have to be dealt with!
Gathering research data has an impetus of its own and this part of the research procedure was carried through reasonably smoothly.
I resisted the temptation to analyse the results until all information had been gathered in case I sub-consciously distorted the data-gathering process.
Having gathered the data and not working to any specific time limit for analysis of the results or need to report, I found my self-discipline waning.
This is when the cavalry arrived in the form of the Scottish Office Education Department's sponsored grant scheme.
I was successful in my application for assistance with clerical and photocopying costs.
This grant, though, was more than just money.
It was either the carrot or the stick which helped me to complete the analysis and report on my results.
Someone, other than myself, required information from my project, I had found an audience.
From the results of this limited study, the system of DMR was not found to be overly time-consuming.
Indeed, it appeared to be absorbed into the management of the school.
I was able to have as much personal contact time with pupils, parents and staff after DMR as before.
The most vulnerable areas of working time for me are those of contact with pupils and curriculum development.
Whenever there was an increase in time spent on that area described as ‘other’ in the analysis sheet, there appeared to be a corresponding decrease in time with pupils and on curriculum development.
The study has helped me focus on my strengths and weaknesses in the management of the school and hopefully will encourage me to respond appropriately.
The feeling of satisfaction and relief when the project was completed was exhilarating.
No doubt sometime in the near future, mid-way through another topic, I will be once again saying —‘Why am I doing this?’
The experiences gained from this topic will positively answer that question.
Good idea you want to develop?
You might get a grant from…
The Stirling Mathematics Education Development Fund
The name of Geoff Giles, one of Scotland's most imaginative and creative mathematics educators, will be known to many teachers through  his DIME materials — motivating activities which encourage thinking about mathematical ideas such as probability, symmetry, 3D shape, patterns and relationships etc.
DIME Projects began when Geoff lectured at the University of Stirling and when he retired the separation of DIME from the University realised money which Geoff has now asked the SCCC to manage.
The resulting Stirling Mathematics Education Development Fund exists to provide grants which ‘could lead, directly or indirectly, to improvement in mathematics education of children within Scotland’.
Grants are normally limited to £500 but, in exceptional cases, may be more.
Applications are encouraged from teachers or schools — primary, secondary, special — but others amy apply.
Proposals likely to lead to the development of ideas or resources of use to others will be given priority.
Grants will not be made for purposes which should be covered by schools' normal funding arrangements.
If a grant would help you to develop an idea that you have please tell us about it.
Send proposals to .
SCRE Practitioner Award 1993 Calling all Teacher-Researchers
The closing date for submissions will be 1st April 1993.
For more details contact: Fiona Cowie in Information Services, SCRE
To qualify, you must be a practitioner (or a group of practitioners) working in education (in Scotland) whose normal job does not include doing research and who does not have the support available to those doing research as part of a degree or diploma.
Access to College of Education Libraries
The following table provides a summary of the library services available to teacher researchers at (what were…) the Scottish colleges of education.
It is intended to serve as an introduction to the library rather than a detailed guide.
However the main services are covered and it gives an idea of facilities and help available to teachers when undertaking research.
In all cases access is arranged by applying in person, at the main library issue desk, where proof of identify may be required.
The asterisk in the table identifies those libraries which charge a subscription.
Northern College (Aberdeen Campus) offers an additional service to teachers in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland.
They are invited to write to the Principal Librarian to arrange a postal loan service.
For information, contact the appropriate library direct.
Tous ensemble
Janet Cross
Looking through the contents list of the first edition of Observations , I cam across the following titles —‘Money from SOED’, ‘Local Authority Support for Teacher Research’, ‘Classroom Observation’ and ‘Your Observations’, and I realised that the report of a small scale study which I recently submitted to RIU contained all these features.
It was a piece of work that I very much enjoyed organising and following through to completion.
Did I say completion?
Like all research, it is still continuing to generate questions to be explored, and the work is still on-going.
Here, though, is a very brief account of what has been done to date and what was found.
During the session 1990–91, a study was made of teaching modern languages to pupils who had difficulty learning in school.
This study was funded by SOED and supported in practice by Strathclyde Regional Council (SRC).
It involved the pupils, teachers and parents of three schools — one special, one primary and one secondary school.
The pupils were observed and assessed as they participated in their modern language classes, and their parents and teachers were asked to give their comments on a variety of aspects of the modern language curriculum.
The four most significant findings of the research were:
1.
That children who experience a level of difficulty in learning significant enough for a Record of Needs to have been opened up for them can learn a foreign language within a special school setting.
With effective teaching, they are able to achieve the attainment outcomes of listening, speaking and reading, and they remain well-motivated when the materials and methods used meet their learning needs.
Moreover, their parents are supportive of modern language, not only in theory, but also in practice, and they wish their children to have access to the modern language curriculum.
2.
The size of modern language classes in ordinary primary and secondary schools is thought by the teachers in them to inhibit the development of effective teaching methods.
Large class sizes (25+) are thought to promote teacher-directed, teacher-led, ‘class’ lessons which seem to disadvantage the most vulnerable pupils.
3.
Teachers regard time for cooperative planning to be crucial to effective learning and teaching for the wide range of ability their pupils have.
They wish principally to undertake staff development on a cross-sectorial basis, where the joint expertise of primary, secondary, and special school teachers can be shared.
4.
Parents and teachers are largely in agreement in terms of supporting the most recent developments in modern languages in schools.
They generally support the notion of a European dimension to the curriculum and voiced a commitment to working cooperatively together.
The notion of Languages for All was proposed in Circular 1178 and supported in Working Paper No. 9, and both publications are undoubtedly beginning to influence the work of schools both in special and mainstream sectors.
Although, at this stage, there is still some mismatch between policy and practice since the research findings revealed that some children do not yet have access to an effective modern language curriculum.
However, this need not be a cause for concern in the circumstances.
With the kind of support so far received from SOED and SRC, the indications are that the learning and teaching of modern languages will become increasingly effective — especially for those children in need of support.
Book Shelf
This section will be devoted to recommended publications relevant to educational research.
Bring us your ‘tried and tested’ favourites and your requests ‘for information on how to…’
Paul Rideout reviews: CARN Publications (1991/92)
The Classroom Action Research Network (CARN) is an international network of practitioners representing the full age range from nursery to adult.
CARN has been holding conferences about every 18 months since 1976.
The Conference proceedings have been consistently published over the years and the 1989 Autumn Conference reflects the expansion and interest in action research in as much as it extends to the three separate publications listed above.
What is in these and would they be of interest both to the beginner and more experienced teacher-researcher.
Conference papers can be notoriously esoteric and dull as a collection and I would not claim to be gripped from the first page to the last.
However, there is a range of content and styles from international research names to the local teacher round the corner in print for the first time, which continually enliven and interest the reader.
Thus there are over 40 contributions ranging from the single page to one of 30 as differing aspects of the conference are covered.
There are more formal lectures by the invited keynote speakers, but also summaries of the workshops and buzz groups held, reports on individual research undertaken, snapshot views of the conference and even a flavour of some of the social functions in more jovial mood.
10A contains the conference keynote speeches by John Elliott and Rosemary Webb, each reflecting on how central control of the curriculum might influence action research.
These follow Bridget Somekh's address on the history and future development of CARN.
The main thrust of the reported research is collaboration, whereby groups of teachers combine to tackle a variety of problems, whether within a single school or a local area.
The diversity of individual reported research in 10B is linked by reflections on the themes of confidentiality and honesty in reporting, the nature of the power relationship in the research process, the interplay of emotions and differing motivation by research participants.
It is these aspects which might surprise and even refresh those readers who have been brought upon a strict diet of formal, objective research papers, and which constitute one of the differing dimensions of action research.
The distinctive nature of nature research is also captured in the first three papers of 10C , examining issues of theory and methods, including a very readable paper on ‘getting started’.
This volume then continues with a section on studies in higher education and ends with reports on studies involving information technology, including an open session on the Pupils Autonomy in Learning with Micros (PALM)project.
It would not need too keen an eye (nor a cynical disposition) to spot a coincidence between one of the editors of the volumes and the present author of this piece and think…
However, I should say editors gain no financial benefit from sales, all monies helping finance further publications and conferences, including bursaries to classroom teachers to attend the next CARN Conference.
This happens to be in Worcester College of Higher Education on the theme Cultures for Change between 11 and 13 September this year.
I hope to have seen some of you there.
Regional Policies on Conducting Research in Education
Do you want to do research in schools — especially in schools other than your own?
Due to the increasing demands on schools some Regions have been developing procedures which those who want to do research in schools must follow.
Whilst the procedures may in some cases be limited, at the same time they offer protection for staff and information for researchers.
Strathclyde Region has developed a set of guidelines for research organisations and researchers who wish to undertake research in any of the following sectors: pre-five and nursery, primary and secondary.
The guidelines describe procedures for obtaining approval for research to be conducted and specify steps to be taken in contacting establishments, and items for inclusion in letters seeking parental consent for use when the research involves pupils.
Teachers employed by the Region who wish to conduct research in their own school only require approval from their headteachers.
Those wishing to research in other schools should contact their Divisional Education Officer.
Requirements for other researchers involve detailed specification of research topic, methods etc.
Such details on these projects are held centrally, and may be accessed through John McMahon (see below).
This could well be a useful source of information on local educational research.
Those wishing to access centrally-held computerised data in Strathclyde should contact the Assistant Director of Education: Head of Research.
The full guidelines are available from:
Lothian Region also has a screening committee for those wishing to conduct research in Lothian schools.
Enquiries should be addressed to .
Teachers wishing to undertake small scale individual research work in their own schools are, again, not required to contact the research committee.
More news from more Regions in the next issue.
Thoughts on being Members of the same SERA Teacher Research Group
As a newcomer to such work, I became involved through a meeting with Johanna Carrie.
As a physics teacher, I was concerned that students, working on their practical investigations, were achieving success in assessment terms without showing any understanding of the generative skills during one-to-one discussion with me.
On a more pragmatic, but related, issue, students were finding it harder to ‘pass’ inference skills IN 1–3, than IN 4–6, and since this had important implications for their grading, I was attempting to remediate the early skills on an ad hoc basis with some non-subject-specific pencil and paper exercises.
Although the work of the group is documented elsewhere, I feel I've gained considerably from the hidden agenda.
Very valuable has been the chance to discuss issues with other science staff, which the lack of timetabled departmental meeting does not permit during the school week.
The group has given me a better insight into the similarities and differences between S Grade physics and biology.
Furthermore, it has been good for morale to have an ongoing project, the success of which has not been tied to the everyday ups and downs in the hurly-burly of school life.
However, life in such a group is not all a bed of roses (seriously!), and, for me, the downside was the leaking from ‘certain sources’ that the future of inference skills in assessment was far from assured.
Notwithstanding this assault on our raison d'être, I don't regret my involvement, and wish to point out that without both the enthusiasm generated by Johanna, and her experience of what was required from the group, my own involvement would have been non existent.
When I was approached to become a member of the group interested in ‘the teaching of practical skills in biology’, I was only too pleased to become involved as I had been concerned, for some time, about my own teaching skills and strategies used in the classroom situation.
I looked forward to discussing these problems with other teachers who shared my interest and concern.
The informal discussions prior to the firming-up of our area of study were one of the most beneficial (although the most time-consuming) parts of the project.
Everything discussed received excellent critical examination.
I gained confidence in the preparation of trial material which I knew would not only be used by the other members of the group but the necessary improvements were made prior to testing.
(Despite this, additional refinements are often required.)
As the group consisted of both biology and physics teachers, the regular meetings ensured that good classroom practice and many teaching strategies which were successful in one subject area could be incorporated or modified in the other.
The meeting with the HMI, and regular correspondence with Tom Bryce were a great morale boost as recognition of our work, and the time being spent was valued by the SED.
Our group has been led by Johanna Carrie who has given encouragement to those of use for whom this is a new venture.
Perhaps the most positive outcome, on a personal basis, has been the opportunity to participate in discussion and share ideas on an area of my work which I have not previously discussed in depth.
The opportunity to work with enthusiastic teachers from different school situations was indeed most supportive.
The Open University and Teacher Researchers
The Open University supports the professional development of teachers, including that of teacher researchers, in a number of different ways.
In the School of Education we offer a wide range of courses and study packs which cover just about every aspect of the education system.
For example, we currently offer three advanced diplomas — in Special Needs, Management and Mathematics Education — as well as a Professional Diploma in Post-Compulsory Education.
Students usually study for these over 2 or 3 years and completion of a diploma gives one credit towards a master's degree.
The master's degree is generally taken over three years and from 1992 it will be possible for teachers to take a Master of Education (Management) degree.
Included in the range of modules on offer within the master's programme is one on Educational Evaluation and another — the Dissertation Module — which requires students to write a thesis of about 10,000 to 12,000 words.
(It should be noted that the latter may only be taken as the final module in a masters programme).
These modules, which have a strong emphasis on research methodology, may be of particular interest to teacher researchers.
We are also in the process of introducing a new Certificate in Professional Development.
This is made up of a series of 100-hour modules each lasting over two terms, with the certificate being awarded after 200 hours of study.
The certificate modules have been specifically designed to support teachers undertaking research in their own schools.
The next presentation of the certificate will be in October 1992 when some of the modules on offer will deal with aspects of the primary curriculum while others are ‘cross-sector’.
One of the modules likely to be of most interest to teacher researchers is Professional Development in Action.
This module provides a research framework to help teachers examine some aspect of their own professional development.
The course materials include a handbook of research methodologies as well as a structure for deciding on an area of research, the formulating of two or three research questions and the designing of appropriate research instruments to answer these questions.
Certificate modules are all assessed by means of a project report of about 3,000 words.
There are no examinations in the programme of study.
Completion of a certificate will give students a half credit towards a master's degree and we are in the process of developing a half-credit MA module on Research Methods to complement this.
Many of our courses include a project in the continuous assessment element.
These projects are useful in that they provide teachers with supported experience in actually undertaking some research and in addition they help to make a significant contribution to the educational research community.
Finally, it is also important to know that many of our courses can be studied on a ‘one-off’ basis through our Associate Student programme.
As well as courses which contribute to certificate/diploma and/or degree programmes, there is also a wide range of study packs available.
These vary in that some are video-led whereas others are based on a collection of written materials which teachers can work through on their own or in a group.
Two examples of new Packs are Talk and Learning 5 to 16 and Media Education: An Introduction for Teachers .
If you would like to know more about what the Open University provides or wish to view any of our materials, please contact either  
Ways of Supporting Teacher-Research
Researchers always warn ‘beginner’ researchers of the dangers of being tempted into data analysis prematurely, eg as the first flow of questionnaires returning slows.
However, the temptation to sneak a look, at the answers can be irresistible, and after all the purpose of a network is not research but sharing.
So here, from the registration forms returned to date, are the kinds of help which members think the Network should provide for teacher researchers.
Next time, some number-crunching, perhaps.
advice, constructive criticism, collaboration, networking, stimulate enthusiasm, etc
source of information, provide network of ideas, contact, confidence-building
advice on methodology, previous research on topic of interest, and suggestions as to usefulness of embarking on research
a structured training programme in research methodology
collaborative networking
putting them in touch with other teacher/researchers; training; workshops; resources; forum for exchange of ideas
financial — photocopying etc…mutual support — talking through research techniques etc…embarking on collaborative research
support on design and method, encouragement that useful work can be done
skills, interest support, sharing of findings
time off to carry out research, access to information
information as to 1) need for research in own interest area (does it exist) 2) time out of work situation — can cover be provided? 3) financing the operation?
opportunities for discussion, for learning WEW processes, methodologies and disseminating information
1) publicity re teacher research 2) finance for studying/disseminating
Exemplars of ‘starting out’ papers/research
keep records of research done/methods used and relay this regularly in updated form to STRSN members
collaboration where possible with teachers willing to undertake joint research of a similar nature
information about eg. contacts (warm bodies!), research in progress, conferences, seminars etc
forums for discussion
people to talk to, encourage teachers and criticise constructively when required
finance, advice from experienced researchers, support (financial) for attendance at relevant conferences
network of those involved in similar fields, names of those willing to help with questionnaires etc, meetings, information, speakers on issues/techniques/work in progress
1) information/advice point 2) publications 3) facilitation of occasional meetings (? perhaps on a thematic basis) that combine listening (to a paper) with opportunities for members to give each other support 4) ideally provision of grants
I feel strongly that there should be support/workshops in statistics and data-handling for researchers in order to turn available research into quantitative research
contacts with other teachers with similar interests (support), information
availability of funds/expenses, materials, research data bank of other/similar studies
time and money to help researchers, as well as support and recognition for the research
Your Observations
…
OBSERVATIONS EXISTS FOR YOU .
Editorial policy is to publish all contributions received below 300 words (subject to the scrutiny necessary to avoid, for example, defamation, libel, sexism, racism or identifiability of subjects involved in studies…).
The author is responsible for obtaining any clearances (eg for copyright permission, consent of those involved in the study).
Editing will be minimal.
Proposals for longer pieces (to 600 words) are welcome — please contact .
OBSERVATIONS — About Observations and the Network
I would like to be associated with the movement because I believe strongly in it.
However, equally I believe that it should be spearheaded by teachers and others should keep a low profile.
I have appended a small article in the hope that you will find it useful and as a measure of my support for ‘Observations’ and I hope it does well.
I would like to see people being more supportive of one another throughout the UK.
I have enclosed some documents for your interest.
Thank you for ‘Observations’— it's a great idea.
— REACTIONS?
Classroom teachers are the last to be considered concerning views on teaching methods, discipline etc.
To get in on the educational field one must parrot the latest jargon even if it is rejected by ‘one’.
To counteract this I propose that all classroom teachers be sent a questionnaire on such matters as classroom teaching methods, discipline problems, alternative views etc.
SMALL ADs
Several schools are trying out Thinking Skills or similar schemes aiming to teach children how to think.
If you are using or considering any of these programmes (eg Somerset Thinking Skills or Thinking Science/Cognitive Acceleration through Science Education) I would be pleased to hear from you.
I am collating information with the aim of putting practitioners in touch with each other and sharing experience.
Contact me (as soon as possible, please)
Using Case Studies in Research
Case studies offer an opportunity to study an individual situation in depth.
Used on their own as a research method they have limitations but, within these, much can be achieved.
They may offer contextual detail, embedded observations, depth of understanding (or inference!) at the cost of unrepresentativeness.
A case study is a close study of real events reflecting their changing complexity and vividness, recording actual events, not what should happen.
Case studies take account of, and to an extent they celebrate, uniqueness.
They are useful in seeking to record the impact of a development or innovation in a particular context.
The drawbacks mainly relate to their atypicality (especially if the case has been chosen because it is ‘interesting’!), to issues of selection of events and confidentiality.
To be useful as a research technique, they must offer more than description, yet to go beyond description is to interpret.
Controversy over the use of case studies particularly hinges on how they may be most effectively conducted.
As with observation, researchers immersed in a context reflect the concerns of the context, while those looking ‘from the outside in’ may fail to understand the importance of particular events.
Those constructing case studies face problems of establishing validity, for example in trying to find common meanings of events.
Interpretations require to be negotiated or reflected back to those involved which may raise problems both of confidentiality and of altering events.
Case studies involve a variety of methods: observation, participant observation, interviews, perusing documents.
They are of particular value
in beginning to map out a new area of study
in generating hypotheses to be tested more systematically
when individual detail is required
Why does SERA want to Promote Teacher Research?
Teacher research is seen as a powerful means of bringing about effective curriculum development and promoting children's learning.
It provides opportunities for professional development through research.
It allows collaboration between teachers in schools and other educational institutions and with local advisory staff.
It allows the development of practice based on classroom research.
What does SERA seek to promote?
Support for teacher research.
Recognition for teacher research.
Time for teachers to undertake research.
Funds for teacher research.
What is a SERA teacher researcher group?
It is a network of people interested in teacher research, and is open both to teachers and other interested parties who support the aims of the group.
SERA teacher researcher groups aim to —
Offer opportunities to teachers to acquire research skills
Encourage teachers to research their own educational projects
Support teachers in the research they do
Represent the needs of teachers undertaking research
Provide a forum for the discussion and dissemination of TR papers
Organisation of teacher researcher groups
Teacher Researcher groups are expected to meet on a regular basis.
A group is recognised when it has a minimum of six SERA members.
Officers of the groups are elected.
A minimum of two members of the SERA executive have responsibility for representing the views of the TR groups.
The SERA TR sub-committee organises a national annual conference with a focus on school-based research.
Each recognised group receives an annual grant and is responsible for its own accounts.
Observations gives contact names for existing SERA Teacher Research groups (see page 10).
For information on setting up a group contact  .
Free for All!
SCRE Newsletter Issue 51 is now available
Copies have been sent through 1a distribution channels to all schools and colleges in Scotland (more than one per institution but not enough for all staff, unfortunately).
No 51 includes details for the latest research finding, new projects, the latest SCRE publications (Class, Race and Gender in Schools and the Action Against Bullying support pack for schools)AND a focus article on using cartoons in teaching.
Have you seen a copy yet?
Search your pigeon-hole, staff room or wherever it is that your school sends its copies.
Noticeboard
Glasgow TR Group
The next meeting of the group will be on Thursday, October 22, d at 5pm in Woodland's Teacher's Centre, Woodlands Road, Glasgow G3.
Gerard Higgins of John Paul Academy English Department will be talking about his research on developing reading and writing skills in S1 and S2.
The secretary of the Glasgow Group is .
Lothian TR Group
Meetings for Autumn 1992
The intention is that our meetings this session are both about the findings of research and the methods used.
There will be discussion in all meetings.
Thursday 17th September.
Teaching Process Skills/An account of writing up research
Johanna Carrie and Christina McInally will try to involve you in the traumas of turning research results into a coherent report that people might want to read.
Our research was on teaching pupils practical skills in Biology and Physics.
Followed by a brief discussion of how to make all our small pieces of action research available to each other.
Thursday 1st October.
Formulating Research Questions/ ‘Teaching Thinking’
This meeting will be led by Graham Dane.
Please come if you think you have any experiences to contribute as we want to try to find out who is using which scheme and to air hypotheses that might be worth studying.
Thursday 29th October.
Views of Management/Designing Research Questions
Jennifer Kerr worked on an evaluation of the management programme for headteachers.
Peter Hitt's topic is teacher's perceptions of management in schools.
They will discuss how they designed their written questions and semi-structured interviews.
Thursday 3rd December.
Using Computers with Very Young Children
Hamish McLeod from the University of Edinburgh will describe what he has been doing and discuss what teachers might do.
Future plans February 4th 1993
Doing research for a further qualification.
Pros and cons of ‘supervision’.
March 11th 1993
Results of Tim Wright's research on transfer of writing skills from LSS to mainstream classrooms and benefits/problems of doing research which involves a number of other colleagues.
May 1993
Teacher Researcher Conference.