

Getting Teacher Research on the Map
With the launch (see page 10) of a group in Tayside Region the number of occasions where teacher researchers in Scotland can exchange ideas, experience and tips grow.
Many of the meetings listed on that page will be over by the time this gets to you but the details are given as a way of providing a background of work in progress and ideas for future programmes for all the groups.
Geographical distance is a barrier to face to face meetings which is maybe why a network such as this is particularly attractive to teachers working away from centres of population.
Observations seems to be travelling well — we gather even to a teacher interested in action research in Latvia…
Sharing the Word
Observations does not have space for any but the shortest accounts of research.
The next issue (to appear in autumn 1993) will herald the launch of a new series of short briefing papers.
Based on the successful model of the SCRE Spotlights (A4 format with letterhead, easy to photocopy, relatively cheap to produce), this new series will be specifically for reporting the work of teacher researchers who are members of the Scottish Teacher Researcher Network.
The new series (title yet unknown) will enable members to comment reflectively on their work as well as give an account of its various outcomes.
Details are available now from SCRE Information Services (contact Rosemary Wake).
Research grants from SOED
Teachers looking for funding to support their research can apply to the Scottish Office Education Department for a grant under its sponsored research programme.
SOED's main funding effort goes into research related to Government policy but a small proportion for the research budget is reserved to fund ideas which come from the research community.
According to Education Research 1992 , the current edition of the SOED's register of the projects they manage, ‘sponsored research also enables less experienced researchers, including teachers, to be supported and encouraged’.
So how and when can you get at this money?
How : Applications should be made to the SOED's Research and Intelligence Unit (RIU).
A leaflet describing the guidelines and conditions of these grants is currently being prepared.
At present there is no standard submission form, applicants being asked to submit a brief proposal (approximately 4 pages long).
Notes on what should be covered in this are available from SOED.
Broadly speaking you are asked to detail your aims and research questions, methods, timetable and costs, the other support (including institutional) available to you, and the background to the proposed study including reference to existing research in the subject you propose to study.
This all sounds rather daunting but a number of teachers have received grants under the sponsored research programme, the most notable example being Andrew Mellor and his study of bullying in Scottish secondary schools.
The main RIU meetings to discuss research funding are in May and September.
However, applications for research grants are considered as they are received.
How much should you ask for, and for what sorts of things are SOED willing to pay for?
The current guidelines do not cover these matters and this will obviously vary from project to project.
Those thinking about asking for funding might find it useful to look at the SOED booklet referred to above.
For information about the SOED's grants, write to the Research and Intelligence Unit, Scottish Office Education Department, room 4/48 New St Andrew's House, Edinburgh EH1 3SY who will be able to provide information and guidance.
Gender and Education Research Network
A one-day conference is being held on 21st April to disseminate current and recent Scottish research.
The meeting will also launch a new research network for those interested in gender and education.
Details from:
Observations appears twice a year (autumn and spring terms).
Editor: ROSEMARY WAKE.
REFLECTIONS ON PARTICIPATION AND INTERNATIONALISM — THE CARN CONFERENCE, SEPTEMBER 1992
The Classroom Action Research Network, among other aims, sets out to promote:
recognition that action research provides a powerful means of bringing about effective curriculum and professional development
support for, and collaboration between teachers in higher education, colleges, schools, and LEA advisory staff, in developing research-based practice in their own institutions
conferences to disseminate action research questions and findings.
In what has always been a loose network, the international conference, held every 18 months or so since the mid' 70s, has always been most prominent in publicising the cause of action research.
Testimony that it continues to flourish was in abundance at its latest three-day manifestation in Worcester College of Higher Education on the theme of Cultures for Change .
Over 150 participants attended of varied backgrounds, with well over 20% from the school sector within Britain.
Space limitations mean one can only select a little from what was a varied and highly successful programme, so I will concentrate on two areas.
One can go to conferences where one is being talked at most of the time.
However, a worthwhile innovation here was to begin with a conference conversation whereby small mixed national groups were asked to produce a list of the key questions that they saw action research as needing to answer, and a summary of how the group envisaged moving from the question to an appropriate answer.
These were then collated and summarised by a planning group with copies made available for all in order to encourage further dialogue, debate and reflection at a second conversation the following evening.
In this way, delegates were able to see both the kinds of questions being asked by the wider conference and the form of solutions that were being proposed.
They also, of course, initiated much fruitful discussion and served as an essential icebreaker for many new to CARN.
More familiar, but also effective, was the notion of workshops, engaging participants in relevant exercises.
Here they were designed to offer practical advice and examples on the theme of ‘alternative’ and ‘exploratory’forms of reporting.
One other noticeable feature was that nearly 30% of participants were from institutions outside the United Kingdom, with Australia, Austria, Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Eire, Greece, Hong Kong, India, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Slovenia, South Africa and the U.S.A. all represented.
The two keynote speakers from America provided a suitably balanced focus.
Ken Zeichner from  Wisconsin addressed a broad theme of personal renewal and social reconstruction in action research, examining the tensions between the two in institutions.
Margaret Ely from New York, on the other hand, was equally compelling in providing many specific examples of both beginning and more seasoned action researchers struggling to create and reflect upon their own writing.
One can become very parochial in concentration on simply British concerns, so it was invaluable to hear presentations and discuss different educational perspectives within the action research framework.
If I had to select just two personal highlights from the many interesting presentations that were on offer, then I would firstly mention learning about the ideas and development of the inspirational Foxfire Teacher Network operating in a number of USA schools.
Closer to home, Marion Dadds' reflections in the feeling of thinking in professional self study , raised many often neglected issues about the emotional climate in which we undertake learning.
Sets of papers from the conference are likely to appear at the end of this year.
In the meantime, one might look for the first appearance of a new journal in March Educational Action Research .
This is intended to publish a wide range of action research and related studies, with the aim of making their outcomes widely available and exemplifying the variety of possible styles of reporting (ie not just another narrow, jargon-laden talking shop for academics).
The views expressed in Observations are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the Scottish Council for Research in Education or the Scottish Educational Research Association.
Ethical Issues for Teacher Researchers
As a teacher-researcher, clearly you have an obligation to ensure that everything you do meets generally accepted ethical standards.
‘Rules’, except in very general terms, are difficult to define because the issues will be different according to:
the scale of the research and how it is being carried out
who is involved
whether it is to be conducted in your own workplace or elsewhere
whether it is funded
whether it is ‘individual’ or ‘team’.
For example, there are major differences in the ethical issues involved for a teacher involved in a piece of action-research on language within her own classroom, and for a teacher exploring issues related to drugs and HIV across a range of schools.
Despite the wide variations there are common ethical questions we all have to face as researchers.
What follows is not a comprehensive list — what other relevant questions can you identify?
Some may not apply to your work — but, if so, are you clear why?
For teacher-researchers two preliminary points should always be kept in mind.
First, children are particularly vulnerable and we should always be careful about whether and how they should be involved in research, and whose permission is important.
Second, educational research operates under the same principles as the rest of the service: for example, codes of practice in relation to gender, race or social class must be strictly adhered to.
Few of us are paragons of virtue in all these matters all of the time, but we should all be committed to them.
Meeting ethical criteria leads not only to a relatively clear research conscience but to better research.
It also means that the research door is more likely to be opened to us (and to other researchers) the next time.
Our integrity as researchers and the integrity of our research are closely linked.
At the early planning stage
Have you identified the ethical issues which may arise in your research?
Make and list and add to it as you go.
Whose purposes will be served by the research?
Make sure that the answer is not simply ‘my own’.
If children in schools are involved, is it a genuinely educational experience for them?
It is easy to take children as a ‘captive audience’ for granted.
Have you a clear purpose and strategy in mind?
If not, you will waste everyone's time.
Before the fieldwork begins
Whose consent is needed?
Director of Education? headteacher? other teachers? parents? children? others?
You have a responsibility to those accountable within the system and to those personally involved.
Have you explained fully the purpose of the research and its implications?
There is a difference between ‘consent’ and ‘informed consent’.
If revealing the purpose of the research would jeopardise the outcome, can you explain later?
You have no right to leave people feeling anxious, depressed or puzzled.
Have you promised confidentiality and explained what that means?
No individual or institution should be identified in any way without their consent.
Have you offered to let participants read (and comment on?) a draft of your report?
Is this possible/reasonable?
You may have made a genuine mistake or misrepresented a situation.
During the fieldwork
Have you ensured: that participation will be made as easy and pleasant as possible?
It is in your own interests
that the research causes the least possible disruption to the on-going life of the school?
Every teacher understands the implications of this
Analysing and reporting
Have you analysed your data systematically and fairly, considering alternative interpretations?
Researchers bias can be unconscious as well as deliberate.
Have you given written or oral feedback to all interested parties?
Participants have a right to accessible feedback
Have you considered different kinds of reporting for different groups?
A one-page summary for some, a detailed report for others, are there other ways of reporting back?
Have you acknowledged all those who helped?
People deserve this and appreciate it
Will your report be written and distributed while the research is still fresh in everybody's mind?
Woe to most of us!
Attitude Questionnaires
An attitude is a mental state of readiness, organised through experience, exerting an influence upon an individual's response to an object and the situations with which it is related.
(Allport)
Attitudes are complex and difficult to measure.
There are many techniques but not all are suitable for use in school.
As a teacher researcher wanting to investigate the effect of new technology in school, one of the lines of research I followed was to use a questionnaire to ascertain the attitudes of my pupils to computers.
There are a number of different ways of measuring attitude, the two methods I found most useful were the Likert and Semantic-Differential scales.
A ‘Likert’ survey is made up of a series of statements which are related to a person's attitude to a single object, in this case using computers in school.
Statements are either favourable or unfavourable towards the object.
Example: Likert 
Using a computer in school is exciting.
I would prefer the teacher to explain things rather than the computer.
Each pupil then has to respond to each statement by saying whether they strongly agree, agree, neither agree nor disagree, disagree, strongly disagree.
The Semantic-Differential method of measuring attitudes devised by Osgood consists of a concept, in this case using computers in schools, and a set of bipolar scales.
The pupils has to indicate the direction and intensity of the association.
The response above would mean that the pupil found using computers in school very exciting, quite interesting and useless for girls.
Getting Started
Having decided to use an attitude questionnaire the following need to be considered —
1.
Do I know anyone else who has done this before?
Picking other folks brains is always useful, this is one of the jobs of the network.
There are lots of articles describing work which has involved attitude measurement, you can start your library search with ‘Attitudes’.
2.
What type of survey do I want to do?
You could use Likert or Semantic-Differential scales but whatever you choose must be appropriate and easy to make up.
3.
How do I generate questions?
This is especially important if you are using the Likert scale.
The more ideas the better, pupils and colleagues can be asked to contribute.
4.
How do I present the survey?
Worked examples help the people who are going to fill in the survey.
5.
Is my survey valid?
There is no point in spending time on collecting data that means nothing.
It is always a good idea to pilot your survey with a small group, it helps to iron out some of the problems.
The sample size must be big enough especially if you are going to subdivide into say boys and girls.
You should be getting similar answers to similar questions.
6.
What am I going to do with the results?
These scales will give you negative and positive attitudes.
You can also use them to compare two similar groups or to follow one group through a period of time and observe any change in attitude.
If you are comparing groups or two sets of data from one individual you can use a X 2 test to see if there is a change in attitude.
A good all-purpose reference to get you started is the International Encyclopaedia of Education (see below), hopefully available in your local college of education or university library.
This set of books together with the index gives further information about attitudes and their measurement, including the other types of scales available.
The standard text on questionnaire design and attitude measurement is by A N Oppenheim, first published in 1966, 2nd revised edition 1992.
My Inspiration
IN THE LAST ISSUE of Observations Wynne Harlen wrote about ‘what is educational research?’ and described her favourite quotations as coming from Lawrence Stenhouse.
Discussing this later at one of the Observations planning meetings, the idea of sharing ‘inspirational works’ appealed to all those present as complementing a tendency in review columns to focus on new titles and ‘how to do it’guides.
It does seem worth trying as a series, so — over to you.
Send me up to 100 words bout a book, paper, or individuals' work which has influenced you (you may have another 50 word if you go to say what it inspired you to do).
If, like many of us, you can't lay hand son the exact title and date of publication DO NOT be deterred but add contextualising detail of the kind which will help librarians as well as researchers to locate the item eg, size (in a great fat book); colour (bluey-green cover with photos…); age (quite old now I suppose, haven't seen it in bookshops for ages…).
Book Shelf
This section will be devoted to publications relevant to educational research methods and ideas, rather than findings.
Bring us your ‘tried and tested’ favourites and your requests ‘for information on how to…’
Below, Paul Rideout and Janet Draper discuss two books on ‘action-research’
Action Research: principles and Practice Jean McNiff (MacMillan 1988)
Despite the growth of the action research movement in the late '70s and early '80s, there was a considerable delay in specialised texts dealing with the phenomenon.
Articles in journals, a chapter in books on research methods and collections of conference papers (such as that highlighted in the last edition of Observations ), were available, but nothing that had quite the focus and range of explaining background, methodology and queries as well as providing sufficient examples.
A number are now on the market, which this column will be reviewing in the future, but Jean McNiff's book, continues to be worthy of prominence.
As the title implies, it begins with a basic description of action research within the educational context, comparing it with the natural science and historical/sociological research traditions, termed empiricist and interpretive.
It then looks at some of the ideas of the main proponents of action research, such as Stephen Kemmis, John Elliott and Jack Whitehead, with the author particularly recommending the latter (unsurprisingly as he was her mentor).
The first part concludes with a rationale and plea for teachers to adopt the action research approach, stressing the distinction between the teacher as technician and as reflective practitioner.
The second part follows the familiar pattern of research design, from the planning stages, through the collecting to the analysing of data, ending with three action research case studies at primary, secondary and further education level completing a competent exposition.
In the final section, however, there is a shift in style, with a commendable attempt to deal with questions and criticisms about action research, as well as offering some practical advice on support and network mechanisms.
One could quibble about some interpretations that are proffered, though that is not unusual amongst advocates of action research; but for anyone vaguely dissatisfied with more traditional forms of research, or more importantly for this publication, teachers wanting to undertake systematic analysis of their own practice, this book is a readable and stimulating introduction.
Let's Find Why: a practical guide to action research in schools Christine Macintyre, Moray House Publications (1991) £4.50p 85pp ISBN 0 9015 80 35X
This short book was written to help teachers and student teachers interested in researching what happens in their classrooms to identify what it is they want to investigate and the most appropriate way of setting about it.
It is, as the title implies, a book about action research rather than all types of research.
It thus concerns itself solely with attempts to systematically evaluate the impact of an action, where the choice of action has been informed by reading.
It gives due weight to action research as a process rather than just a set of things to do.
It gives a blow-by-blow account of the stages involved in action research, with an early emphasis on reflection, finding out what is already known elsewhere and refining research questions.
It then proceeds through a concise, but remarkably comprehensive review of data gathering instruments and issues of access to respondents, before moving on to a brief consideration of data analysis and the process of writing up work to enable others to benefit from it.
The text is built round real practical examples which demonstrate the very wide range of possibilities that action research can offer to teachers.
As a consequence of this approach it makes the whole process accessible, meaningful and feasible.
Overall, it is a handy reference text and well constructed guide to this particular form of research.
It is clearly written, and although it emphasises that much can be done, it in no way suggests that it can be done with little effort or time.
Rather it makes embarking on action research seem a worthwhile endeavour!
Teacher Research and the Regions
Do you want to do research in schools — especially in schools other than your own?
Due to the increasing demands on schools some Regions have been developing procedures which those who want to do research in schools must follow.
Whilst the procedures may in some cases be limited, at the same time they offer protection for staff and information for researchers.
Regional Support for Teacher Research The Robert Reid Fellowships
In Lothian Region there exist a number of sources of support available for teacher research.
Two of these are funding to support study for an MEd and the Robert Reid fellowships.
The fellowships, two per year, were established to enable Headteachers in Lothian to research an aspect of education which interested them by giving them time free of school commitments.
Originating from an initiative by the Lothian Headteachers Association and named after Robert Reid, a past headmaster in Lothian, the fellowships are offered as secondments for a term by the Region.
The fellowships are awarded by competition and the successful applicants choose to be supervised in their research by staff at either Edinburgh or Heriot-Watt Universities.
The range of topics which have been researched to date is broad, covering issues in assessment, staff development and appraisal and many others.
Scottish Educational Research Association SERA and the Teacher-Research Network
At the second SERA Teacher Researcher Conference, held in Glasgow in 1991, Wynne Harlen (then newly appointed as Director at SCRE)(Scottish Council for Research in Education) first suggested a Teacher Researcher Network.
At the following SERA Annual Conference the idea was carried forward to establish a network with a publication (called Observations ) as the vehicle for communication.
This has become a reality through the hard work of staff at SCRE, particularly Rosemary Wake and a sturdy group of SERA members who meet to discuss future issues of Observations and plan the development of the network.
Other SERA members and teachers (not as yet part of the Association) have contributed to Observations and played an important part in the development of the network.
SERA views the Teacher Researcher Network as vital to the type of support which should be available to teachers undertaking research.
The Association therefore wholeheartedly supports the venture and hopes that teachers will use the network to contact other teachers in their geographical are or locate colleagues who have a similar research interest.
SERA offers financial support to members who wish to form a SERA Teacher-Researcher group.
This money can be used for funding small research efforts and arranging meetings.
A feature of the Annual Conference of SERA is to provide a forum for teachers to discuss their research and share ideas with other colleagues in the Association.
Every two years there is a one day SERA Teacher-Research Conference.
This year the conference will be held on Saturday 8th May, at the University of Stirling.
This conference will concentrate upon the ways in which teacher-research can be supported.
Jack Whitehead (University of Bath) will open the conference describing how Avon authority has been able to promote teacher-research.
The Conference welcomes SERA members and teachers who are not members of SERA to meet together and find out more about the ways teacher-research can be supported.
Your Observations
OBSERVATIONS EXISTS FOR YOU.
Editorial policy is to publish all contributions received below 300 words (subject to the scrutiny necessary to avoid, for example, defamation, libel, sexism, racism or identifiability of subjects involved in studies…).
The author is responsible for obtaining any clearances (eg for copyright permission, consent of those involved in the study).
Editing will be minimal.
Proposal for longer pieces (to 600 words) are welcome — please contact Rosemary Wake.
In the last issue of Observations , M. Ross raised two issues which are of ongoing concern to many classroom teachers; that teachers views on education matters are not taken seriously enough by the decision makers and that to get on in education you must parrot the latest jargon.
Such complaints are symptomatic of a profession whose confidence has been eroded by the constant battering it has taken from politicians and the media over the past ten years, and who are shell-shocked by the speed and scale of recent curriculum innovation.
There have been frequent attacks in the media on ‘trendy teaching methods’ and falling academic standards, and there can be no doubt that this has resulted in a deterioration of teachers' status in society.
Many teachers feel aggrieved at having ‘taken the rap’ for the introduction and implementation of theories and methods over which they had little control.
I believe that in order to restore confidence and status in the profession, teaches must make the effort to be actively involved in research, and at least in the reading and discussion of the results of published research.
I realise that there are constraints of time and problems with dissemination, but you would not expect your local GP to prescribe a drug unless he was satisfied that its use was justified by reference to the available research material.
Many doctors are also involved in small-scale research in their own practice.
I don't wish to take this analogy any further but if the teacher-research movement can succeed in raising the profile of research in everyday teaching, I am sure that it would lead to not only an improvement in the status of teachers but also act as a spur to research itself.
The grass roots practitioner can play a major part in the process, by identifying phenomena whose investigation may lead to improvements in teaching and learning, and which may otherwise go unnoticed.
A teaching profession with a better understanding and a wider knowledge of educational research would be more able to question those who indulge in ‘jargon’ and also have a solid base from which to put forward their views which, whether rightly or wrongly, still rely too heavily on intuitive feel for what is happening, and I feel confident that the STRN can help bring this about if Scottish teachers give it the support it deserves.
Next Time
A central focus of the next issues will be on communicating research.
Anyone interested in writing a short piece describing their own efforts (whether in writing or by word of mouth) is invited to let me know by 1st May.
This issue has articles on grants from SOED (page 1) and on ethics (page 3).
Actual experience of dealing with funding bodies and of ethical dilemmas faced and surmounted is something some of you can contribute…please do.
Using Structured Eavesdropping to Collect Research Data
Whilst conducting research into primary teachers' views on questioning, I had difficulty in finding a suitable research method.
I wanted to gather teachers' views and opinions, I did not in any way want to influence their responses.
I wanted to establish teachers' genuine and initial views of questioning techniques within the classroom.
I was conducting my research with the staff of a school with whom I had previously worked.
In principle the teachers were interested and willing to become involved.
However, during the initial discussions I hinted at the desirability of video recording or tape recording their science teaching, to examine their use of questioning.
This met with a very negative response.
The class teachers felt very threatened, it was therefore necessary to reconsider access to their ideas in a less threatening way.
I decided to talk to the teachers in their year groups to elicit their personal views of questioning.
I decided to adopt a research technique described by Janet Powney as ‘Structured Eavesdropping’.
This means allowing participants to discuss particular issues between themselves while the researcher listens in but does not contribute at all: they almost interview themselves while the interviewer eavesdrops.
The most serious problem for a researcher is know the ‘right’ questions to ask.
The advantage of adopting the technique of structured eavesdropping is that the participants use their own terms of reference to discuss and make sense of the topic in question.
Using the structured eavesdropping technique allowed me complete freedom to sit and observe groups.
I was allowed to record each group and I found the transcribing of the tapes less arduous as I had also been able to make notes.
This technique was ideal for allowing teachers to think through and discuss their ideas and philosophies in relation to the important issue of question.
Access to College of Education Libraries
The table summarises the main library services available to teacher researchers at (what were…) the Scottish colleges of education.
Northern College (Aberdeen Campus) offers a postal loan service to teachers in the Western Isles, Orkney and Shetland.
Noticeboard
SERA Teacher-Research Groups New Group!
Tayside TR Group
The inaugural meeting of the Tayside Teacher Research Group will be held in Room C67, Northern College, Gardyne Road, Dundee at 5pm on Monday 8th March 1993.
The first meeting will be an opportunity for those interested in teacher research to meet, to formally establish the group and create a programme of activities for the next year.
The guest speaker will be Dr Jenny Tuson of the Educational Research Department of the Northern College who will talk on ‘Supporting Teacher Research’.
The meeting will finish at 7pm and refreshments will be provided.
Anyone interested in this topic is encouraged to attend and those intending to come should contact  
Central TR Group
Wednesday 10th March.
Discussion of matters relevant to teacher research including the May conference.
Lothian TR Group
Meetings Spring Term
February 4th 1993.
Doing research for a further qualification.
Pros and cons of ‘supervision’.
Sandra Percy is currently undertaking a study of the process of change in the assessment and teaching of English Language in a rural secondary school and one of its associated primary schools as a result of the implementation of the initiative Curriculum and Assessment in Scotland; a policy for the 90s .
This work is for a PhD with supervisors in the Education Department of the University of Edinburgh.
She has also completed an M.Ed., with a supervisor from the Centre for Educational Sociology.
Kirsty Jack has completed an M.Ed. dissertation on ‘The Role of the Depute Head Teacher in Primary Schools.’
She investigated both historical and research background as well as using a questionnaire to study the current picture in Edinburgh Schools.
She came to some definite conclusions about the importance of this post and the requirements of a Depute Head Teacher.
Both speakers will give an account of their work and of what they would like from a supervisor.
There will, of course, be discussion.
People with experience of research supervision, either as giver or receiver, will be especially welcome.
March 11th 1993
Results of Tim Wright's research on transfer of writing skills from LSS to mainstream classrooms and benefits/problems of doing research which involves a number of other colleagues.
All meetings of the Lothian TR Group are held in the Board Room at SCRE (1st floor of Charteris Land) in St John's Street, Edinburgh.
From 5 to 6.30 pm.
Convener: Johanna Carrie, Portobello High School.
Please contact her if you would like to call a meeting on a topic.
Glasgow TR Group
The next meeting of the Glasgow TR group will be on Thursday, June 10th at 5 pm in Woodland's Resource Centre, Woodlands Road, Glasgow G3.
When Kathleen Hannah of St. Mirrin's High, Paisley, will be discussing her action research on differentiation in P7/S1 with a particular focus on writing.
Ayr TR Group
Next Time…
More detail of groups??
More groups to have details of??
More notices??
Send details to Observations at SCRE as soon as possible for Observations Number 4, Autumn 1993.
The Scottish Teacher-Research Support Network is a joint initiative of the Scottish Council for Research in Education and the Scottish Educational Research Association.
It is being set up with the assistance of funds provided by the EIS, the SSTA, the PAT and the NASUWT to support teacher-research.
Printed by    