

The general aims adopted by the University are to
widen participation in higher education and to teach and research at the highest level; in so doing to continue to innovate within Scottish and British Higher Education;
secure and efficiently administer sufficient resources to achieve these aims;
relate to its local and wider community, taking account of community wants and needs;
develop close collaboration in teaching, research and planning with other Educational Institutions.
THE PRINCIPAL'S ANNUAL REPORT
1991–1992 saw the continuation of the University's planned expansion towards a population of 5000 students by the mid-1990's.
For the first time, the number of full-time students exceeded 4000, of whom 3250 were undergraduates, over 600 were postgraduates on taught courses and almost 200 were postgraduate research students.
Some 450 students, mainly postgraduates, were overseas students attracted from non-EC countries.
The expansion of the past few years has resulted in the majority of subjects now reaching a size at which they are academically viable in terms of staffing and the portfolio of courses they can offer.
It has also enabled the re-introduction of degree programmes in Mathematics and Politics to proceed with steady growth in student numbers.
The buoyancy and expected future increase in student numbers in biological and molecular sciences and environmental science has led to an increased demand for courses in chemistry and physics.
It should, therefore, be possible to re-introduce the teaching of these subjects to general degree level in the near future.
The re-building of the science base must be given a priority in the longer term planning of the University.
The University continues to exploit the flexibility of its modular course structure by the introduction of new degrees and joint degrees in new interdisciplinary areas, particularly those involving business and management and languages.
The introduction of new postgraduate courses such as those in Neural Computation, Psychology and Health, Quality Management and Marketing ensures the continuing vitality of this important sector of the university's teaching.
Our strong commitment to the quality of the teaching and learning experience offered to students is borne out by the increasing percentage of first class and upper second class degrees awarded.
The University can be justifiably proud of its achievements in this respect.
Quality assurance structures and procedures that the University has established to ensure the quality of its degrees were particularly commended in the Report of the Committee of Vice Chancellors and Principals Academic Audit Unit following the audit carried out by the A.A.U. in March 1992.
The following summary of recommendations, as set out in the CVCP report, is most significant.
‘The CVCP audit team would like to commend the University for its commitment to quality assurance, manifested in various ways and in particular 
i
the creation of an Academic Standards Committee as a major area of responsibility of one of the Deputy Principals, underlining the importance attached to quality within the University at the highest level.
ii
collaboration with other institutions of higher education in staff development, access course facilities etc.
iii
the care given to the development of access courses and to the monitoring of progress of non-traditional entrants.
iv
the development of departmental reviews and audits as principal instruments of quality assurance.
v
the Guide for Heads of Departments.
vi
the organisation of Information Services, with good integration of various elements provided for students and a conscious attempt to offset the continued pressure on library resource.
vii
the provision of a special fund to enable staff initiatives and innovations in teaching.
viii
the arrangements for probationary staff, including protected time; the use of senior colleagues as mentors; the teaching plan; and reporting procedures.
ix
the University-wide practice of collecting feedback on student satisfaction with courses through questionnaires.
In pursuit of quality assurance and its associated mechanisms, the University may also wish to consider the following points:
i
a greater degree of uniformity in the topics covered by audit handbooks would appear to be desirable.
ii
there may be scope for closer integration of departmental reviews and audit programmes, in respect of objectives and results, and for more formal follow-up procedures.
iii
the system of Advisers of Studies appears to be under stress and may not be sufficiently robust to meet the demands of increasing student numbers and course complexity.
iv
the University may wish to consider a review of the information about assessment and marking schemes which is provided to students.
v
the balance of responsibilities between supervisor and research student, and the effectiveness of their fulfilment, may need reconsideration.
vi
there would appear to be a need for closer monitoring of attendance on induction training for new academic staff and perhaps a higher priority to be given to further staff development and training of mid-career and senior staff in the area of teaching and learning-facilitating skills.
vii
the University may wish to consider how it can ensure that its procedures for probationary staff are being applied uniformly across departments.
viii
arrangements for the systematic collection of feedback information from research students do not appear to be in place.
ix
the arrangements for the administration and use of student feedback questionnaires appear to be limiting their usefulness, and might be revised.
x
staff-student liaison committees might make more use of the findings of questionnaires to enhance their effectiveness.
The University continues to attract a large and increasing number of applications for undergraduate courses, thus ensuring the high calibre of entrants as the number of places increases.
Undergraduate admissions over the past years show interesting trends in the number of mature entrants, now about one quarter of the total undergraduate population, and the number of Scottish domiciled students.
The rapidly increasing number of mature students is due largely to the very successful network of access courses that have been put in place in Central and Tayside Regions by the newly created division of Educational Policy and Development.
The very welcome increase in the Scottish student intake is also due to the increasing importance of Access courses as well as an increased emphasis on liaison with Scottish schools and colleges.
Expansion of student numbers has been accompanied by increased staffing levels in almost all subjects.
The total number of academic staff has risen from 284 in 1987/88 to 348 in 1991/92.
The University has been fortunate in attracting high quality staff to fill new lectureship posts although there has been some difficulty in filling senior posts, particularly in business and management, which is an area of acute national shortage.
Excellent appointments have been made to chairs in , together with internal promotions to chairs in .
Inevitably with the rapid expansion of the past few years the University is experiencing difficulties in providing sufficient academic as well as residential accommodation.
The optimum utilisation of space is constantly under review and the benefits of central timetabling of all lecture theatres and teaching rooms are being exploited to the full.
The University was fortunate in successfully bidding for a capital grant from the Universities Funding Council (UFC) towards the cost of a £1.5 million extension of the Pathfoot Building, now completed and being used to re-locate the Department of History with the rest of the School of Arts in Pathfoot.
This will release space in the Cottrell Building to accommodate expansion of the other Schools.
Nonetheless, academic space is under very great pressure and expansion beyond the present target of 5000 full-time students, now likely to be reached by 1994–95, will be impossible without further capital development.
Planning for medium to long-term development must now be a major concern for the University.
1991/92 saw two major developments of student residential accommodation.
Firstly, the new student housing complex built at Lyon Crescent in Bridge of Allan by Link Housing was opened in September 1991.
The complex, consisting of 37 houses each accommodating five students, provides high quality accommodation for 185 postgraduate students.
The first students were warmly welcomed by local Bridge of Allan residents, who donated ‘starter kits’, of kitchen utensils, china etc.
This generous action had led to the establishment of an excellent ongoing relationship between students and the local community.
Secondly, the University signed an agreement with Team Scotland Ltd to construct a new campus residence in the form of flats for 324 students.
Three of the four blocks of flats are already occupied and the remaining block will be completed shortly.
This new residence, recently named Alexander Court by the former Principal, Sir Kenneth Alexander, is the first of a series of residential developments planned for the eastern end of the campus, beyond Airthrey Castle.
A number of other building projects were also completed during the year.
The new Child-care and Nursery facility and Overseas Student Welcome Centre situated at St Anns in Bridge of Allan was opened in September 1991.
This is an important development, meeting the needs of students with families from both home and overseas.
The Matthew Nelson computer laboratory designed to meet the special needs of students with physical disabilities was opened in Murray Hall with equipment for the laboratory being generously donated by the Hewlett Packard Company.
The newly established Scottish Centre for Information of Language Teaching (SCILT) was opened formally by Lord James Douglas-Hamilton MP, Minister for Education in the Scottish Office, in June 1992.
The Centre will act as a source of information concerning research into and the development of teaching of foreign languages for schools, colleges and universities throughout Scotland.
The University continues to work closely with business and the community generally.
The Scottish Enterprise Foundation, the division of Educational Policy and Development, the Stirling Management Centre, the Management Development Unit and the Stirling University Innovation Park provide a broad framework for collaboration with industry in technology transfer and advanced management training.
The now highly developed Access Course programme and the newly introduced Evening Degree Programme provide wide opportunities in higher education for an increasing number of students who wish to enter higher education but do not have the traditional entry qualifications.
The UFC made up to £1m available under an initiative to encourage greater flexibility in teaching and learning and the University was awarded £100,000 to enhance the Evening Degree Programme.
It is now possible for mature students to study to general degree level over a wide range of subjects entirely in the part-time evening mode.
With its highly developed modular, semester-based degree structure and this ‘open-door’ policy, the University maintains an unrivalled position as a provider of higher education in Scotland.
The most notable external development in 1991–92 was the Agreement of Association signed in the Autumn of 1991 with Inverness College.
This established a Joint College/University Board to oversee the development of programmes in higher education to be provided by the College for students at Inverness reading for degrees of the University of Stirling.
The first students in Business Administration and Applied Computing were registered by the University in September 1992.
Other degree programmes in Engineering and Environmental Science are planned.
The University envisages the development of Inverness College in this way as a first step towards a University of the Highlands.
As well as being a year of further expansion, 1991/92 was also a year of consolidation.
The University's strategy of expansion over the past few years has been aimed to take full advantage of the UFC's new policy of rewarding those universities that have demonstrated their willingness and ability to expand by retrospectively awarding full grant for an increased number of so-called fully funded students.
This strategy has proved to be successful.
In February 1992 the University received an additional 458 funded students (one of the largest increases of all UK universities) and, as a result, an increase of 8.7 per cent in UFC grant.
This improved financial position has enabled the University to make provision in the present year's estimates for improved staffing in key academic areas, increased library materials provision and some improvement in administrative areas, including essential buildings maintenance.
Our Annual Accounts for 1991–92 show a generally satisfactory position.
Improved budgetary control imposed after the unexpected deficit in the previous year has yielded a healthy surplus of £419,000, well exceeding the target of £250,000 set by the University Court.
A similarly satisfactory outcome is anticipated for the present year.
This will be in line with the Court's objective of restoring the University's financial reserves to a more acceptable level.
It must be stated, however, that the rebuilding of reserves in a period of financial stringency, when the unit of resource is reducing and greater efficiencies are constantly being required of universities, is becoming increasingly difficult to achieve.
The maintenance of high academic quality, especially in a period of expansion, must be of paramount importance for this University and must not be prejudiced by inappropriate or excessive efficiency measures.
The aim to teach and carry out research at the highest possible level in the University's mission statement is key to the future successful development of the University.
Stirling has already established an undoubted reputation for innovative teaching and offers its students an excellent learning environment.
The strategy over the past few years has been to establish the University more actively in research, whilst retaining its commitment to excellence in teaching.
The objective is to re-position the University as a strong teaching and research institution.
The growth in total research grants held and annual expenditure over the past twelve years up to and including 1991/92, provides a measure of the very marked increase in the level of research activity.
The latest UFC Research Assessment Exercise based on a range of output measures, including research publications, covering the period, 1988–92, provided a timely review of the quality of the research being undertaken.
The outcome, published in December 1992, shows a very impressive improvement in the University's standing in research compared with the previous assessment.
Overall, the University's average rating has improved from 2.20 to 3.25.
This is on an increasing scale of 1 to 5 where a rating of 3 signifies that the majority of the research is of national significance.
On an individual subject basis the University scored top ratings of 5 in Applied Social Sciences and Film and Media Studies with ratings of 4 in , signifying work of national importance overall and international standing in some or all areas of activity in these subjects.
The fact that the research in 18 of the 23 subjects offered for assessment has been rated as reaching a level of national significance or better provides a very satisfactory base on which to building the University's future as a research university.
The standing of the University in terms of both the quality of its teaching and the significance of its research must be viewed in the light of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Act of March 1992.
The removal of the binary line which had separated the universities and the former polytechnics and central institutions will set new challenges for all institutions of higher education.
There will be greater emphasis on quality of both teaching and research as measures of the effectiveness and distinctiveness of individual universities.
The devolution of responsibility for funding higher education with the establishment of separate English, Scottish and Welsh Funding Councils will tend to emphasise regional priorities.
Stirling University, with its established reputation in teaching and educational innovation, its attractiveness to Scottish, UK, EC and overseas students and its increasing commitment to high quality research is well positioned to compete strongly in this new environment for higher education created by the new Act.
SCHOOL OF NATURAL SCIENCES
The year proceeded very much in line with the School Academic Plan, which placed emphasis on consolidating our position, following the establishment of the Schools three years ago and the relatively rapid expansion in student numbers which followed thereafter.
September 1991 saw an increase of 18% in undergraduate entry into Semester 1 course and a corresponding increase into Semester 1–4 courses of 12%, compared to a year earlier.
As a consequence, undergraduate teaching laboratories operated close to maximum capacity throughout the year.
Numbers applying for entry in September 1992 have increased even more sharply than a year ago and we currently anticipate a further large increase in first year entrants.
This will undoubtedly stretch existing laboratory resources, despite an expansion in the largest of the biology teaching laboratories due for completion before the beginning of session 1992–93.
Pressure on staff resources also continues to increase, and the goal posts remain as elusive as ever.
Nonetheless, the increased intake into the science area is a welcome development.
In line with our current policy of consolidation, no new courses have been introduced during the year.
The most recently introduced new degree course, Marine Biology, has experienced very buoyant application and entry rates.
The recent improvement in undergraduate numbers studying Chemistry and Physics courses continued.
A notable event in the year was the re-introduction of an advanced course in Physics, which offers students the option of studying both Physics and Chemistry for a full two years, thereby enabling our BSc Honours graduates with degrees in Biology or Biochemistry and Education to teach all of the three major science subjects in their subsequent careers as secondary school teachers.
The option is already proving popular, not least with our increasing numbers of Access students many of whom are attracted to subsequent careers as teachers.
Postgraduate teaching in Aquaculture continues to thrive with targets being met relatively easily, while the highly popular MSc course in Environmental Management will see a new record intake this year and a new record waiting list.
Against a background of increasing teaching pressure, research activities continue to flourish.
A major event was the opening of the Institute of Aquaculture's Marine Environmental Research Laboratories at Machrihanish, an advanced sea water facility that substantially enhances the Institute's already very impressive research and teaching capabilities.
Biological and Molecular Sciences was one of a relatively small number of University Departments in the UK to be awarded ‘Q’ status by NERC for Research Studentships, an award that essentially ensures a steady input of NERC-funded PhD students into the Department for the next three years.
The School continues to attract large numbers of postgraduate research students with the Institute of Aquaculture and the Department of Biological and Molecular Sciences being particularly successful in this respect.
As important as our research students to the well being of research, is the large number of research assistants and post-doctoral research fellows in the School.
The preparation of submissions for the UFC Research Assessment Exercise provided a timely opportunity to take stock of our research activities in more depth than usual.
The data gathered for the exercise clearly reflect the now very considerable research strength and performance that we possess.
Despite increased teaching loads over the past three years, the School, as a whole, has very substantially increased its research funding and its research output, over the 3–4 year period of assessment.
The total value of research funds held was almost £3 Million and a total of 243 research publications were produced, 138 of them in the Department of Biological and Molecular Sciences.
Clearly, there are limits to how far teaching and research productivity can continue to improve and quality be maintained, without the provision of new resources, especially new young staff, in certain key areas.
It is salutary to note that as we start the 25th Anniversary year of the University the mean residence time of the 23 staff members of the Department of Biological and Molecular Sciences, including the three staff appointed in the last decade, is now 18 years.
This is an obvious area where the increasing pressures of FTE-led resourcing without due consideration of research performance and income must become seriously counter productive in the very near future.
Nonetheless, most of us will continue to believe that the most important goal in the sciences at Stirling is to achieve the correct balance between excellence in teaching and excellence in research, that distinguishes high quality Universities.
In 1991/92 we got substantially closer to that goal.
SCHOOL OF HUMAN SCIENCES
In the Department of Applied Social Science applications for admission to undergraduate degree programmes were buoyant: changes in the curriculum were introduced, combining the previously separate Honours steams in Sociology and Social Policy into a single programme.
There were strong intakes to the postgraduate programmes in Applied Social Research, Social Work and Housing Studies.
The total value of research grants and contracts in operation during the year was £4.76 million, constituting one-quarter of the total value of all grants held by the University.
UFC support for the CTI Centre for Sociology and the Political Sciences was continued.
Three important studies in the Social Work Research Centre were completed during the year: on the community care for long-term psychiatric patients, on reconviction following community service and on the costs and quality of residential care for elderly people.
The last, in particular, has important implications for the private, voluntary and public sectors throughout Britain.
A major grant was awarded to staff in the SWRC for an evaluation of the efficiency and effectiveness of community care in Scotland.
The Dementia Services Development Centre undertook a number of evaluative projects and continued an active publications programme.
The work of the Psychology Department continued to show major strengths in a number of areas.
The most notable feature is the extent to which teaching and research are increasingly inter-twined, which is viewed as a healthy sign of intellectual achievement.
The two key areas of active research are:
i
Cognitive and Computational Neuroscience, which continues to deliver high quality output, receives major Research Council grant support, and attracts good quality staff and research students.
The new MSc Course in Neural Computation was successful in its first year, with several students staying on to pursue PhD degrees at Stirling, and most others obtaining PhD studentships elsewhere.
The course has significantly enhanced the Department's research programme in this way.
ii
Psychology and Health in which research income has remained high, includes a large grant from the Cancer Relief MacMillan Fund.
The MSc in Psychology and Health has been highly successful and integrates well with research programmes in this area.
There continues to be potential growth points in other areas of research, particularly where contacts with other Departments overseas are strong.
Human Communication, an important area of psychology, in which the Department has in the past had only piecemeal interests had been very significantly strengthened by the appointment of Professor Vicki Bruce.
This will now become a major growth area for research.
In Education there were substantially increased admissions to Initial Teacher Education (ITE) including for the first time intending teachers of Business Studies.
The Access to Teaching scheme was extended and now includes participation by 5 Further Education colleges.
In Spring 1992, a pilot version of a new Teacher Fellow scheme was introduced and Education courses became available in the Evening Degree Programme.
The Diploma in Education for nurse/midwife teachers now allows students with Masters' degrees to qualify within a reduced time-span.
A grant of £20K was obtained for the Enterprise Awareness in Teacher Education scheme, in competition with other institutions, enabling further staff placements in business and industry.
Working links were established with institutions in France, Germany and Spain, leading to an exchange of students in the forthcoming session 1992/93.
The Department's Award Bearing Courses (ABC) offered five programmes for lecturers and teachers from Scotland and overseas.
Two important developments in ABC have taken place.
Firstly the B.Educational Studies degree will, from September 1992, be offered at Honours as well as General degree level.
The second development is the establishment of a scheme of credits at M.Ed level within the SCOTCAT credit accumulation and transfer scheme.
Credits are awarded for academic and professional courses completed at other H.E.
institutions or through local authority inservice programmes.
Certain types of carefully evaluated professional experience are also eligible for credits.
A strong base of externally funded research projects has been created, and despite increased competition at the level of ‘new starts’ continues to increase.
The Department obtained more grants from the SOED in competitive tendering than did any other institution.
Research continued on existing projects with grants totalling £200,000 and new grants totalling £338,000 were won.
In addition, five smaller grants were received for studies by individual members of staff, totalling £9,500.
Research output continued to grow.
A comprehensive range of taught units for research students on research methodology in Education was developed, and a handbook produced for supervisors.
These have earned the Department provisional Mode A recognition from ESRC for the award of studentships.
A new initiative has been started to recruit part-time research students, initially from the graduates of the M.Ed degree programme.
A brochure was produced detailing the professional interests of staff and proposed topics for courses, and copies were distributed to all regional authorities in Scotland and to head teachers of local schools.
In the Summer, the University was the venue for the Annual Conference of the British Educational Research Association, which was attended by over 250 researchers from throughout the UK and overseas.
SCHOOL OF MANAGEMENT
During the course of the year, a number of administrative changes took place in the School.
The two Deputy Heads of the School were replaced, on his retirement, and  on moving to an appointment at Reading University.
Their places have been taken by  and .
A number of new Heads of Departments were appointed — in Accountancy and Finance, in Computing Science and Mathematics and  in Management Science.
Steps were taken to improve the staffing position in the departments, particularly in Marketing which has suffered most from acute staff shortages.
was promoted to the Chair in Retail Studies and a number of appointments were made at lecturer level; however, senior appointments in the department still require filling as a matter of urgency.
was promoted to the Chair in Accountancy and Finance and a number of vacancies in  have been filled or are in the process of being filled.
Undergraduate and postgraduate student numbers remain steady.
At the undergraduate level, there are around a thousand students following degree programmes in the School.
The School has taken a number of steps to maintain these numbers by continual monitoring and updating the programmes it offers; the Financial Studies degrees have recently been re-structured to make them more attractive to students wishing to enter the financial services industry; Mathematics continues to expand the portfolio of the degree combination it offers.
It is hoped to expand Business Law, an area with proven student demand in terms of UCCA applications.
Other new honours degrees are planned in Ecological Economics and in Politics, Philosophy and Economics.
On the postgraduate side, the School offers a range of around twenty taught postgraduate courses, delivered either as full-time, part-time or distance learning.
The full-time MBA continues to be the largest, although others such as Public Relations, Investment Analysis, and Information Technology continue to attract substantial numbers of  applications .
The MSc/Diploma in Quality Management has proved particularly successful in its first enrolment.
The School is in the process of widening its range of options with an MSc/Diploma in Marketing; it is also pursuing a proposal to introduce a modular MBA, in the first instance in Public Sector Management, but others are expected to follow.
Emphasis on the role of research work is continued throughout the School.
In the course of the year, a number of research groups were established to complement and enhance existing departmental research.
It is too soon to predict whether these will be successful in the longer-term but they, together with other measures, have highlighted to staff the necessity of increasing research activity, both in terms of output and generating research income.
The School continues to expand its range of collaborative work with industry and business through the Scottish Enterprise Foundation (SEF), the Management Development Unit (MDU), the Scottish Centre for Japanese Studies and other units such as the Institute for Retail Studies and the Scottish Centre for Quality Management.
The Department of Accountancy and Finance, in conjunction with the Institute of Chartered Accountants in Scotland, has recently won a 3 year British Council Know-How funded project based in St Petersburg, aimed at retraining accounting practitioners and teachers in accounting methods in a market-led economy.
This is in addition to its existing British Council  commitment in Poland.
Other areas in the School — such as Business Studies the MDU and the SEF — are also, in various ways, involved in projects throughout Eastern Europe.
SCHOOL OF ARTS
For the ten departments in the School, 1991–92 was a particularly dynamic and successful year.
Undergraduate applications for places increased in almost all areas with demand being particularly high for Film and Media.
Demand grew for places in Philosophy, English Studies and the European languages (French, German and Spanish), with combined degrees remaining popular.
The overall student target for the School was exceeded with virtually every subject reaching or exceeding its target.
At the end of the year, applications indicated that targets would be exceeded again in 1992/93.
Targets were also met for postgraduate taught courses and postgraduate research.
The most successful postgraduate course in terms of both applicants and admissions was the MPhil in Publishing Studies.
Research students were attracted to a number of departments, most notably English Studies, Film and Media and History.
Significant developments at the undergraduate level, were the reintroduction of an Honours programme in Political Studies, with a particular emphasis on Europe and the graduation of the first students with degrees in Japanese.
The quality and quantity of research in the School of Arts, continues to be a high priority.
In the last research review exercise conducted by the U.F.C. two subjects (English Studies and Philosophy) received a rating of 4 and three subjects (Film and Media, History and Religious Studies) a rating of 3.
The outcome of the most recent exercise announced in December 1992, is a very dramatic improvement with ratings of 3 in Politics, Religious Studies, French, English Studies and German, ratings of 4 in History, Japanese and Philosophy and a top rating of 5 in Film and Media Studies.
Research in the Arts is mostly conducted on an individual basis and it is not possible to do full justice to this activity here.
The diverse areas covered include: the songs of Robert Burns, the politics of pre-revolutionary Russia, the political leaders of the Weimar Republic, the Atlantic slave trade, the Treasury and Health Policy in Scotland in the early 20th Century, the New Age Movement, the philosophy of law, the Japanese and the Jesuits, medieval German literature and culture, photographic archive of the War memorials in Europe, and violence on television.
Ever since the earliest days of the University, Arts departments have been active in extending higher education opportunities beyond the 17–21 age group to a variety of mature students.
In recent years Access, day part-time and Evening Degree programmes have been introduced with a considerable input from the Arts.
The Evening Degree in particular has now been given a substantial boost as a result of the University's successful bid for UFC funding and this means that from 1992–93, three Arts departments (History, Film and Media and Politics) will offer courses in the evenings.
Changes in teaching and research methods have resulted in the Arts developing new initiatives in the area of information technology.
One such initiative is the Arts Multimedia Centre, due to be opened in February 1993, which will provide opportunities for the European languages to follow the lead given by Japanese in the development of computer assisted language learning.
Film and Media now employs audio-video technology, routinely in its teaching.
History will be introducing a course in History and Computing from Spring 1993.
Developments of this type are essential if Stirling is to retain parity with competitor institutions and benefit from the opportunities which the new technologies create.
DIVISION OF EDUCATIONAL POLICY AND DEVELOPMENT
The central importance of the developmental role undertaken since 1988 by the Department of EPD was recognised by it being formally constituted this year as a division of the University, with a status equivalent to that of the four Schools.
The remit of the division is to formulate policies for academic innovation, to promote wider access and to develop continuing education in all its forms, as well as to carry out a major teaching activity in English as a Foreign Language.
Access Courses and the Evening Degree Programme, are the two major channels by which wider entry to the University has been promoted.
Both initiatives made impressive headway during the year.
A network of Access Courses organised by EPD in association with thirteen colleges of further education located throughout Central Scotland is now in place, and, as a result, the number of mature students entering the University has increased substantially.
Mature students also make up the Evening Programme, which was given a major boost at the end of the year, by winning the highest award in the UK under the UFC's scheme to promote flexible teaching.
With this award the Programme will be expanded to more than three times its present size and become one of the University's most important academic developments.
The Division has a particularly important task in promoting training courses for industry and commerce.
Many such activities were organised this year in co-operation with academic departments.
In addition two key initiatives were launched.
Firstly, negotiations were begun with Forth Valley Enterprise with a view to establishing a training unit on campus.
The Training and Development Centre was duly established, under the joint management of EPD, the Scottish Enterprise Foundation and other university training providers, and will reach full activity in 1992–93.
Secondly, the appointment of an Accreditation and Training Officer gave a focus to the work which the Division is undertaking in the Assessment of Work Based Learning.
The ability to build work based credit into both academic awards and those using industry lead body standards, such as the MCI, will give added value, to all our PICKUP efforts.
The Centre for English Language Teaching continued to go from strength to strength, with increasing numbers in all its many programmes.
A new co-operative venture with Shue Yan College, Hong Kong, was inaugurated, adding to the range of institutions in the Far East with which the Centre is associated.
The opening up of Eastern Europe led to countries such as Poland, Slovenia and Montenegro sending scientists, business executives and government officials for professional training in English.
With its long established connections with the Japan Productivity Centre, SmithKline Beecham and Tatung in Taiwan, CELT now has a steady demand from important foreign companies for specialised training in English as a Foreign Language.
The Division has taken a leading role in developing research into the assessment of work based learning (AWBL).
Two research projects have been funded by Scottish Enterprise to a total of £80,000: the SHEEC project focusing on the accreditation of company in-house management qualifications and the DEAL project which is examining AWBL issues in relation to groups of workers at ICI and Strathclyde Region.
Another project Towards Environmental Competence in Scotland funded by Scottish Enterprise and the World Wild Life Fund, was successfully completed and significantly informed the Secretary of State's Working Party on Environmental Education.