

Meating the Challenge
Why do we consume animal flesh?
Nick Fiddes finds an answer.
I have a wonderful idea for a restaurant…all I need is the money.
It would be like those seafood emporia where you can choose your own lobster.
Only that this would be on a farm: a sort of gastronomic theme park.
Imagine how lovely it would be — you could take the whole family and make a day of it.
Enjoy a leisurely ramble watching the cows and sheep graze, and inspect the pigs and chickens in their cosy battery units.
Can't you just hear the children's playful squabbles at the rabbit hutches over whether to have that fluffy grey one as a pet, or as a casserole?
Having made your choice, it's across to the restaurant, with adjoining abattoir.
Under expert instruction, dad (of course) would administer the fatal blow, and mum would ensure everyone got their favourite cuts by overseeing the butchery.
She might even dismember the beast herself with the kids' help.
Just think of the educational value!
We would, of course, provide overalls to protect our clients' clothes from blood splatter.
I've thought it all through.
There'd be a fortune to be made in tempting the family with spin-offs while the meal was being prepared.
Take the spare bits of ‘your’ animal home for the freezer, and we could even sell videos, with stereo sound, of its death at your very own hands, to amuse your guests at dinner parties.
The concept has so much potential — so why don't you invest?
The thing is, for some reason, I'm finding it hard to borrow the necessary capital.
I can't think why.
Has no one any imagination?
Of course, the market would be limited.
Several years of research into our love of meat has left me in little doubt that most of us nowadays would prefer not to face up to the carnal origins of our flesh foods.
More and more we shrink from reminders of life before death.
Accordingly, butchers are learning to help us ‘think forwards to the meal, rather than backwards to the animal in the field’, as the trade press exhorts.
Much has changed since the Middle Ages when a large beast was ideally roasted and carved whole at table: head and all.
The modern popularity of burger bars, coated nuggets, and ready-made stir-fry mixes owes much to our growing repugnance at the bleeding carcases, the veins, the sinews, which to our grandparents were an everyday sight.
This is not to say that meat is unimportant to us now.
It still forms the centrepiece of most Westerners' meals.
Many cannot conceive of a dinner devoid of animal flesh, and steak, turkey, goose, or roast beef remains the orthodox stuff of celebration.
But still our discomfort grows.
Retail sales of the quintessential red meats are plummeting, whilst vegetarianism has become a fashionable norm.
No longer is a high meat diet regarded as vital to ruddy good health; now guilt-ridden consumers contemplate heart disease, cancer, and the wrath of the righteous.
So what has brought about this change?
To answer this, we need first to consider the source of meat's peculiar primacy in our hierarchy of foods.
But, curiously, although countless sociological, anthropological, psychological, and even psychiatric analyses have been published on the oddities of those peculiar vegetarians, no one had ever considered the reasons for our devotion to meat worthy of a major study — until now.
That is how taken-for-granted is our extraordinary love of animals, cooked.
My own interest in meat began as a general curiosity concerning our seemingly confused attitudes to this seminal substance, and a wish to sort the complex ideas into some sort of pattern.
In particular, I wanted to understand why we find meat so incredibly important.
Why, for example, do we go on eating so much, in spite of our evident discomfort when confronted with intimations of the suffering involved for the creatures consumed?
None of the standard justifications for our apparent addiction seemed to make sense when examined closely.
Meat's taste, for example, cannot explain its popularity, for flavour is not an absolute quality.
We learn habitual tastes.
That is why some people adore eating spiders and grubs, whilst others would throw up if fed a pork chop.
Nor can it be nutritional.
Most modern nutritionists would advise that, in our sedentary society at least, a low-meat diet is considerably healthier than a high-meat diet.
Indeed, many top athletes and even body-builders subsist on a vegetarian diet.
Nor can one talk about a ‘natural’ human diet.
Traditional circumpolar cultures live on little except animal fare, whilst some of the planet's largest populations are vegetarian.
Our teeth are those of omnivores: able to eat animal or vegetable foods.
Archaeological analyses say as much about the interpreters as about the extinct cultures.
And the evidence from other primates is equally ambiguous.
Having discarded as inadequate our orthodox rationalisations for meat's culinary centrality, the question remained: why is it so important?
I set about researching conventional wisdom for clues.
My aim was to assemble every type of reference to it, by butchers and vegetarian campaigners, by hunters and homemakers, by poets and novelists, by advertisers and pornographers.
My hope was, in the process, to find some method in the madness.
The one thing I did not expect to find was a single neat principle accounting for almost every odd aspect of Western usage of meat.
Clearly, no one explanation could cover why we eat cows but not cats; why big game hunting is the traditional pursuit of the wealthy; why furs are going out of fashion; why sexual slang employs so many animal and eating metaphors; why customary cannibalism is seldom if ever authenticated; why we worry so much more about high fat meats than about eating cheese; why so many religious sects espouse vegetarianism; why burger bars have been redecorating with pastel colours; why the Flintstones barbecue dinosaur steaks; why we eat beef rather than cow; why businessmen might eat steak tartare at a negotiating lunch; and why meat is said to give men aggression, strength, or heterosexual virility.
To my surprise, however, I found that that single, simple principle does, in fact, exist.
The principle may seldom be recognised, but that is integral to its efficacy.
The thread connecting almost everything to do with our consumption of animal flesh is that we love meat not so much in spite of the implications for animals, but rather because of that.
This does not — repeat not — mean that we each enjoy the cruelty inherent in the production of animal foods.
by no means.
As stated earlier, we go to considerable lengths to shield the horror of the shambles from our notice.
But as a culture, historically, we have placed extraordinary emphasis on our ability to master the unpredictable threats and challenges of the wild world, and there can be no better way of demonstrating our mastery of unruly nature than by eating the bodies of other animals.
Particularly the muscle flesh.
We further demonstrate our human uniqueness by cooking the meat.
Every human society cooks and we are the only animal to do so.
Thus we set ourselves apart from other beasts, carnivorous or not.
Prometheus (who stole fire from heaven to animate his clay men) is only one of countless global myths to accentuate the significance of fire in distinguishing the emergence of civilisation.
We have, of course, developed many other ways to show ourselves to be the masters of all creation — fox-hunting, fur-wearing, bull-fighting, and perhaps even scientific vivisection, to name but a few.
Each extols our earthly empire.
But none has quite such universal potency as our consumption of animals' flesh.
That is why meat has long been such a symbol of worldly power.
That is why the rich used to gorge on it; fighters are still fed on it; and ascetics reject it.
And that is why — now that human dominion is seen perhaps to be rather too complete, as we progressively eliminate the natural world on which our very survival depends — meat is now falling out of fashion.
Retail sales of the most vividly bloody ‘red’ meats have been first to suffer badly, but no one knows where it will end.
Slavery was once seen as normal and natural, as meat eating still is today.
But times change.
Social pressure towards more sensitive treatment of nature is unlikely to abate whilst our destruction of what remains of nature so clearly continues.
And no obvious reason exists why meat, so long a symbol of human hegemony, should not, in time, come to stand for the unacceptable face of consumerism.
The time may well be approaching when meat eating is generally regarded as a sign of barbarity, rather than of civilisation.
But meanwhile, I have a wonderful idea for a restaurant…
Many Computers Make Light Work
reports on supercomputing and Edinburgh's role in its future
The performance of computers improves at an astounding rate, perhaps unlike any other machine in the world.
Scientists are still anxious to obtain even more powerful machines than are now available, in order to tackle a large range of currently impossible tasks whose solutions could change society.
However, they are now hitting physical limits to increasing computer performance and if this impressive progress is to be continued new approaches to speeding up computer performance will need to be developed.
The most promising such new approach is called parallel computing , and The University of Edinburgh has a strong and rapidly expanding group of researchers dedicated to pushing ahead this new technology.
Thirty years ago computer users were happy their computer could perform each second one million simple mathematical operations, called floating point operations or Flops.
Every few years new technological advances, such as the improvement in silicon chip production methods, have led to a further ten times performance improvement.
Each of these improvements has allowed scientists to tackle problems that were ten times as large or ten times as difficult.
The first company to build a computer able to perform at 100 million Flops per second (100 megaFlops), was Cray Research in 1975.
However, development costs were so high for such a machine that its final price tag was nearly $20M.
Few people believed that a market for such high priced machines existed, but Cray continued to increase sales and growth, until eventually many other companies from around the world began building such supercomputers.
There are now companies in Japan, Europe and the US building computers which can perform over a billion operations per second (a gigaFlop).
Many researchers who use computers are still not satisfied with this impressive performance.
Weather researchers hope to predict more accurately short term weather with complex mathematical models, given faster computers.
Given more memory and faster processing, geneticists may be able to store and process huge amounts of information on the human gene, thereby shedding light on what exact differences cause hereditary traits and illnesses.
Biologists may be able to determine the shape of molecules made up of amino acid chains, thereby predicting the effect of drugs before such drugs even exist.
Other tasks which require immense computer power are modelling the behaviour of quarks, one of the smallest particles known to man, or studying the flow of air over an airplane wing.
In view of these needs and the long standing trends in computer speed increases, scientists naturally hope to have more powerful computers to allow work on these problems in the near future.
However, building such a machine will be by no means easy.
Most techniques so far used for increasing speed are now becoming inviable for the future, and new techniques must be developed.
The most important approach, which is reaching its limits, is to increase the rate at which the computer's components are ‘clocked’, how often they are told to perform simple operations.
This approach was made feasible by improvements in silicon chip technology, such that these chips could be clocked first 1 million, then 10 million, and now over 100 million times each second.
Ironically, such speedups are becoming limited by the fastest thing in the universe: the speed of light.
Physicists tell us that nothing in the universe can travel faster than the speed of light, and this applies to signals inside a computer, too.
Increasing the rate at which a computer is clocked also decreases the amount of time available for a given computer signal to proceed though the wires and circuits of the computer.
The ability to cut down the distance signals travel by reducing the size of the computer is limited by the amount of heat the components generate; a computer that is too small will get too hot.
Eventually a point is reached where the signals, even travelling at the speed of light, will not have enough time to reach their destinations if the clock speed is further increased.
We are near this limitation now.
So if increasing the speed of a computer's components is limited by the speed of light, how will one ever build increasingly faster computers?
The solution is simple; set more than one small computer, or processor, working on the same problem at the same time.
The amount of work in a programme is shared out amongst the different processors of the computer.
This is called parallel computing, and everyone trying to build supercomputers of the future has agreed it will be necessary to use it in some form.
However, despite this agreement on the need for parallel computing, many open issues about these techniques still exist.
The University has long been a leading centre for research in this field, and just over a year ago Edinburgh Parallel Computing Centre (EPCC) was established to focus further on these issues.
EPCC is an interdisciplinary centre, with people from backgrounds such as computer science, physics and engineering coming together to aid in the dissemination of this new technology, as well as to perform fundamental research into the correct way to build and use parallel computers.
The Centre now has some of the most powerful computers in Europe, thereby already establishing the potential of parallel computers.
As recently as September 1991 a new parallel computer, called the Connection Machine 200, was installed in the King's Buildings of the University.
This machine is being touted as the fastest supercomputer in the UK and is valued at over £2M.
With over 16,000 small processors working at once, it can achieve speeds of over 8 billion floating point operations per second, or 8 gigaFlops.
This is roughly the equivalent power of 10,000 personal computers.
The machine was acquired from the American corporation Thinking Machines, and highlights the growing international reputation of the Centre.
Another of the machines already at the Centre uses a smaller number of more powerful processors to achieve over 2 gigaFlops.
This machine, built by the British firm Meiko, uses 64 of the powerful I-860 processor chips from Intel Corporation.
It is used primarily to assist in the UK ‘Grand Challenge’, a government initiative designed to have computers solve some of the fundamental problems in physics and engineering.
The architectures for parallel computers still cover a large range, and these two machines represent two disparate approaches — using a small number of quite powerful processors, or a large number of weaker processors.
The diversity of parallel computers located at EPCC has allowed researchers to try to determine which of these two approaches works best.
A related question is whether each processor should execute its own programme, or if instructions from one programme should be broadcast to all processors, thereby allowing them all to execute the same programme with different data.
As important is how processors will share data amongst themselves, whether by writing to a common memory or by sending messages to each other.
All these problems regarding parallel computers have yet to be solved by the large community of researchers in the field, but their solution will dictate the nature of future supercomputers.
TALKING drums
travelled to Uganda to research her Master's thesis on the Kiganda Endongo, a musical instrument in danger of becoming extinct.
She returned to study the key role music is playing as Ugandan women fight for their rights.
Four am, still dark in the suburbs of Kampala.
The streets and passageways are empty; it is an hour until cock-crow, when the red murram mud dwellings begin to stir with life.
As I try to sleep, my mattress raised on corrugated iron sheeting to discourage the rats from running over me, I hear a familiar sound: click-click, click-click, click-click.
Mrs Kizza is working at her ancient treadle sewing-machine, making busuutis , the traditional Ugandan dress for women.
She sells these for 3,000 Ugandan Shillings, about £2 each.
Since she was abandoned by her husband — under Ugandan Native Law a man can freely acquire other wives — Mrs Kizza has had to support nine children with nothing more than the 1,500/ (£1) a week she earns from serving in a bookshop.
She works in the shop from 9 am until 5 pm, but as she awaits the infrequent customers she is not idle; she cuts her cloth and does all her hand sewing.
Mr Kizza lives in nearby Banda with his new wife.
He is not aware of having done wrong; polygamy is common.
It originally existed for pragmatic reasons.
Traditionally, a pregnant woman was not supposed to have sexual intercourse six months either side of the birth of the child.
She would be considered a slut if she did, and since it is almost unheard of for a Ugandan man to do without sex for a year, her husband would usually seek another woman.
Sometimes, however, polygamy could be liberating for a woman because the burden of household duties was shared.
In a monogamous marriage there are many more claims on time and labour because there is only one woman to do all the work; looking after a husband and children, tending crops, collecting water, firewood and preparing food.
Polygamy is now going out of favour, especially as the risk of contracting AIDS through multiple sexual partners is high, and as women become more liberated they are demanding that it be made illegal.
The teeming slums of Kampala are now coming to life.
The silvery yellow of the highland sunrise — the city is 4,000 feet above sea level — brings out women with bright yellow and green jerry-cans, collecting water from a communal pipe-line, office-workers and shop assistants beginning the hour's walk to work, men from the surrounding villages with matooke (green bananas), sugar-cane, charcoal and wood slung from ancient creaking bicycles.
For breakfast the family eats a thin maize porridge made from dried milk, prepared over an open fire.
If the family's chickens have produced an egg this is mixed with water and an onion and divided amongst the children, from Christopher aged 22 to Catherine aged 10, Mrs Kizza and myself.
We eat a meal costing about 50p in all.
This is a considerable sum, but the struggling mother would not be without her hungry family.
At first, the father brought the second wife to    live in his home and Mrs Kizza was forced to return to her father's village.
But when she heard her children were being maltreated she came back a year later and fought to have them returned to her.
Women who are divorced, separated or widowed have no rights over property acquired during the marriage or the children who by custom belong to the father's clan.
I had come to Uganda to observe how the women use music to give advice, support each other and express their need for political identity.
They are normally reticent about entering into public discussions on important issues, but believe opinions can be stated through music, without fear of retribution.
They believe music causes less offence to the listener than direct speech.
A minibus took me through the early morning light to Makindye, in the southern suburbs of the city, where the first Uganda National Women's Festival of Music and Drama was in full swing in a large church hall.
The noisy chatter of the women in brightly coloured busuutis competed with the hammering of rain on the corrugated iron roof.
On the stage, women sang of polygamy, divorce, contraception and the equality of women in a patriarchal society, accompanied only by drummers — also women, a surprising role-change in a culture where instrumentalists have traditionally been men.
The Uganda government encourages functions like this.
It has set up a Directorate of Women's Affairs and has sponsored a musical show, ‘The Women’ s Vision’, which is taken around the villages by travelling artists.
Because a great many of the women are illiterate, music and drama are the best way of making an impact.
But not all women want change; at one performance, a woman stopped the show by shouting that her husband would claim half her savings if the law were altered.
Under the old system many women amass secret savings unbeknown to their husbands.
I have to leave the clamouring Festival in time to help Mrs Kizza prepare lunch.
My namesake, ten-year-old Catherine, who broke her leg while playing, has been taken to Mulago Hospital, formerly a great centre of medical training.
Food must be bagged and boxed, and taken to the patient, for nothing nutritious will be otherwise provided.
As I enter the smell and heat of the building, I notice the peeling paintwork and cracked walls.
There is no reliable supply of electricity or running water and windows are broken.
Patients have to be carried outside by their carers to be washed.
Rats run freely over the shrouded corpses which lie abandoned in the corridors.
Catherine lies in a rusty bed on top of a filthy mattress.
On one side of her there is a little boy with gangrenous burns, and on the other an old lady who is dying.
The beds are cramped together along the walls and down the centre of the ward.
I pass by the ward where people are dying of AIDS; these are the lucky ones — their families have brought them to hospital and they are being cared for.
Later in my visit I travelled to a village where AIDS victims had been left to rot in a hut because they were thought to have been bewitched.
Daily food was kicked into the huts as they lay in their own vomit and excreta, with suppurating sores exposing their bones; large black  beetles were eating their eyesockets.
The smell was indescribable and the sight unforgettable.
We in the prosperous West have learnt that women make capable company directors, surgeons, politicians.
Until recently, however, African women had been considered as second-class citizens, working at the most routine and strenuous of tasks.
Women now want their daughters to be educated, rather than taken from school in their early teens and married.
They want them to obtain a good position and be independent, preferably in the city.
Many women are teachers and there is an increasing number of women politicians, accountants, lawyers, doctors.
I met one girl, Kidza Mugerwa, who was going to become a pathologist.
The rural women often become tired of their hard lives in the fields and over the years save up the proceeds from the goods they sell at market.
Once their children are old enough they migrate to town and with their savings start up businesses, often forming a syndicate with other women.
They sell prepared food, buy property and rent rooms, do hairdressing, sewing and make handicrafts.
Women have proved to be astute in business.
They are used to working long hard hours and often in their new independent state — with great delight — employ men for menial tasks only, or for other services, as they hint with a smile.
Women have always been farmers.
On marriage the husband gives the wife a plot of land, on which she grows cash crops.
If the yield is good, women have extra food which can be sold or kept for seed.
Women make up 80 per cent of the agricultural labour force and produce 60 per cent of the nation's food.
In previous times, mothers taught their daughters the skills of agriculture but this tradition is beginning to die out.
Moreover, as AIDS starts to affect the most productive section of the community (those between 30 and 50 years) there is not going to be the skilled labour available in the future to supply enough food for the nation.
The government is becoming aware of the threat and songs have been composed to educate rural women farmers on the use of fertilizers, pesticides and food storage in order that they can increase production.
You do not need a wristwatch in East Africa.
At 6.30 pm the tropical darkness descends — like a train going into a tunnel — and all at once the crickets begin their chorus.
It is time to prepare the evening meal of beans, peanut sauce, rice, cassava or sweet potato; if we are lucky we will have matooke.
The family laugh, jostle and shout good-natured insults as they enjoy the meagre food.
It has been a good day for them.
But their mother, still a victim of the immemorial plight of African women, begins to nod asleep, overcome at last by simple exhaustion.
There must be many songs, many dances and many festivals before women like Mrs Kizza are given the space and time to live full human lives.
(I don't like a man who beats me.
The men of today, they beat you, they go drinking; you just have the children to look after)
Departures
‘Departures’, a photographic study of workers and travellers in Edinburgh's Waverley Station, is the work of , Senior Photographer with The University of Edinburgh's Audio Visual Services .
The rebuilding of Edinburgh's Waverley Station began in 1892, two years after the opening of the Forth Rail Bridge.
The entire project took a number of years to complete.
One hundred years on, the life of the Waverley is captured in its people through a photo study by .
‘Departures’ will go on show in an extended form in the Corridor Gallery, Markinch, Fife, from 1–28 February 1992.
THE NORTH STAR
Scotland in Europe
looks at the federal option.
My diary for this academic session and the past one reveals a startling range of scholarly meetings, visiting lectures, conferences and seminars in all of Belgium, Germany, Italy, Sweden, France, Portugal, Spain, the Netherlands, Norway and Finland.
I have had undergraduate and postgraduate students under ERASMUS and other schemes from a good few of these countries and from Hungary as well.
This sets a context for research, study and teaching which unquestionably enriches the work we are able to do here.
There has been a Europeanisation of academic life over the past 20 years since I had the good luck to be appointed to Edinburgh's Regius Chair of Public Law.
‘Scotland in Europe’ is not so much a project as an accomplished fact.
We are there already.
What is true of academic life for a teacher of jurisprudence is no doubt equally true in other walks of life for people in business, industry, the civil service, legal practice, farming and indeed fishing.
I have a friend fishing in Ardrishaig who has taken to making his own deliveries to Dieppe, thus cutting out the middle man.
Quite apart from my academic concerns and duties — consciously removed from them, indeed — I have political interests and commitments focussed also on Europe.
As a prospective candidate for the Scottish National Party, and, indeed, Home Affairs member of the SNP's Scottish Cabinet, I have a strong commitment to the project of Scottish independence in Europe.
At a time when constitutional change and development at home and across the North Sea are much in the air, I am an unequivocal and enthusiastic backer of the idea that Scotland ought to seek as soon as possible to become a member state of the European Community.
We should not be satisfied simply to remain a ‘region’ within a member state.
There were times in the past when projects for Scottish independence seemed to involve things like passport  checks and a customs post on the border between Berwick and the Solway Firth.
Many people found such a prospect disagreeable.
The point now, however, is that there will no more be passports to be shown between London and Edinburgh than London and Paris or Edinburgh and Paris.
And this is true whatever becomes of the idea for Scottish independence.
In a Europe without internal customs barriers, the long-standing common market of the British Isles will necessarily remain in place whatever constitutional settlement we adopt here.
There is a sense in which the European context makes possible what has hitherto often seemed desirable to many but impossible of achievement.
I mean, the idea of some kind of a federal or confederal union involving both Scotland and England, and indeed Wales and Northern Ireland too.
At the time of the negotiations for the Treaty of Union of 1707, the Scots Commissioners proposed a federal rather than an incorporating union.
But the English Commissioners and English Government held out for an incorporating union, and prevailed.
Ever since then, under various ideas of devolution and home rule, especially ‘home rule all round’, the federal idea has been lurking in the background.
Could not the countries of the British Isles achieve whatever are the benefits of union without losing all opportunities for self-government?
The crippling difficulty about such ideas whenever they have been raised and examined closely arises from a problem about the nature of federal government.
Federation requires reasonable balance among the federated parts.
To have a federation in which one of the parts is as much as eight-tenths of the whole and the other parts amount to no more than the remaining two-tenths is almost inconceivable.
What happens if the federal Minister of Finance and the Minister of Finance for the largest internal state take different lines?
Or are of different parties?
How could there be an English policy seriously at odds with British policy and still a British policy worthy of the name?
Of course, in many federations there are larger and smaller parts, but usually several large and several small parts all of which can keep each other in some overall balance.
One suggested way round this in the United Kingdom is the way of sub-dividing England and creating a federation of Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the English regions with an overall UK authority.
The trouble about that is that nobody in England has ever sounded terribly enthusiastic about the dismemberment of England.
And, conversely, a part of the point for Scots has always been that Scotland is a nation equivalent to England, not merely the equivalent of an English region.
Against that background a European framework becomes more attractive.
All the difficulties of federating Scotland, England, Wales and Ireland become manageable if one contemplates a federation — or, preferably, a looser confederation — on the grand European scale.
Is that not what Europe now offers us?
For my part I very much think so.
Those aspects of union which are of enduring worth are available to us in a European union.
Our national and cultural distinctiveness, and our opportunity to pursue our own solutions to our own special problems, can be secured by pursuing our own independent courses within the European framework.
Especially with the opening of the Channel Tunnel and the drawing of London ever more closely towards the golden triangle of mid-western Europe, the problem for Scotland as a peripheral country will grow more acute.
I see no solution for Scotland short of seeking and gaining the status of a member state within the European Community.
There are of course other voices.
It is argued that a Europe must become a Europe of the regions not just a Europe of nation states.
It is said that Scotland should content herself with arrangements similar to those holding for Bavaria or Catalonia or Flanders.
But that throws you back to the problem.
Germany has successfully created an internal federation of well balanced parts.
The regions of Spain are similarly in a kind of balance which makes an internal federalism possible.
If the Catalans or the Basques should end up satisfied with that in the context of a confederal Europe who would press them to take on more?
On the other hand, if in the long run Bavaria or Catalonia were to join Scotland in a wish to attain full membership of the Community in their own right, is it evident that their rights are so very much weaker than those of Luxembourg or Denmark or in due course other  candidates like Lithuania or Estonia?
No doubt if the number of member states of the European Community grows considerably, quite new institutions will have to develop for the government of the Community.
But that should not distress us.
What would distress me would be if Scotland were not able in such a process to express democratically her own voice and her own vision of the European future and of the future of Scotland in Europe.
THE UNIVERSITY IN EUROPE
…
Edit briefing
The University of Edinburgh's most active link with Europe is the Europa Institute, founded in 1968 to teach European Community law and carry out research on Community institutions.
Through its programme of regular seminars the Institute also acts as a forum for discussion and exploration of matters of common concern to leading academic, legal and business figures in Scotland and their European counterparts.
The University is one of the leading UK universities participating in the European Community's wide range of research and development and training programmes.
Over 60 R&D contracts, involving collaboration with an extensive network of European companies have so far been negotiated.
The gross value of EC contracts for 1990/91 was in excess of £2 million.
In a university which aims to teach every official European language, it is fitting that the Centre for Speech Technology Research (CSTR), Europe's largest research institute dealing with speech-based human/computer interface, is a partner in the ESPRIT 2 (POLYGLOT) project to build multilingual speech input/output systems for seven of the major European languages.
The consortium is led by Olivetti (Italy) and includes Philips (Germany), Bull (France), Siemens (Germany), as well as a number of European university laboratories.
CSTR is responsible for the English language aspects of the work.
In collaboration with OROS (France), Alcatel FACE (Italy) and the Universities of Rome and Bari, CSTR is also involved in a second ESPRIT project (SPELL) to create a workstation to coach non-native speakers (of English, French and Italian) in good pronunciation.
The Unit of Fire Safety Engineering researches and co-ordinates information on all aspects of fire behaviour.
These include the ignition of combustible materials, smoke flow and smoke control in buildings, fire spread, escape route design, and fire investigation.
As part of the European Community STEP programme on the environmental impact of fires in storage  facilities , the Unit is assessing the risks associated with ignition and fire growth in warehouses.
The European Commission's COMETT programme is aimed at high-level technology training, and its projects bring together the providers and users of training.
One of its main activities is the development of training courses and training materials to assist in the application of new technologies.
The Department of Electrical Engineering, together with partners in Italy, Germany and Belgium, have developed training material for universities throughout Europe, passing on to others the benefits of Edinburgh's first-rate research facilities in microelectronics.
A spin-off has been the production of a new chip to provide Scottish school teachers with class and laboratory support in their treatment of electronics, so making it more widely understood at all levels in schools.
ERASMUS is the European Community Action Scheme for the Mobility of University Students, and was set up to encourage students in higher education to take part of their degree course in a different member state of the EC.
The University of Edinburgh has a number of Inter-university Co-operation Programmes (ICPs) with EC partner institutions enabling students at Edinburgh to study in Europe.
For example, there are ICPs linking Law at Edinburgh with Utrecht, Madrid, Bologna, Poitiers and Koblenz; Mathematics with Antwerp; Dentistry with Copenhagen; Agriculture with Valencia, Azores and Angers; Chemistry with Amsterdam; and Medicine with Leiden, Maastricht, Rotterdam and Grenoble.
TEMPUS, the Trans-European Mobility Scheme for University Students, aims to encourage interchange between higher education institutions in, currently, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania and Yugoslavia, and their counterparts in the European Community.
Four ‘free mover’ students — one from Bulgaria, three from Poland — are at Edinburgh studying computer science, medicine and law.
The University is also participating in a number of Joint European Projects (JEPs — the equivalent of ICPs under the ERASMUS programme) which operate at both student and staff level.
THE POWER of the PRESS
Next year, Edinburgh University Press celebrates its 355th birthday.
looks at its long history, in which the last five years have been arguably the most dramatic, part of a transformation which is by no means over.
One of six ancient university presses (four of them Scottish), Edinburgh had a distinct advantage in its early years with a patent from Charles II which made it Scotland's official publishing house.
As well as printing bibles, it was noted for its support of culture and scholarship north of the border, with publications including the first Gaelic translation of the New Testament, MacPherson's Ossian , and Jamieson's Etymological Dictionary of the Scottish Language .
In the early 19th century, however, new legislation inadvertently deprived the press of its fiscal advantages, and its publishing petered out, to be revived only after the Second World War.
The university Senate announced that the press's primary objective should be ‘the publication of commercially unremunerative research work’, a remit which its founding secretary, Archie Turnbull, jokingly paraphrased as ‘losing money intelligently’.
A brilliant if at times eccentric leader, he built up the press from scratch into a respected publishing house, noted in particular for its work in the literary field, and in machine intelligence, now known as artificial intelligence.
He developed an interest in archaeology, reputedly because this was what his daughter was studying at university; whatever the spur, EUP was rivalled only by Cambridge University Press in this discipline.
Despite the varied subject matter of EUP's books, they shared a distinctive appearance, their covers designed by ex-bomber pilot George Mackie, head of design at Gray's School of Art in Aberdeen.
Archie Turnbull took early retirement in 1987, suggesting as his successor Martin Spencer, then running Manchester University Press, which had been involved in several successful collaborative ventures with EUP.
Mr Spencer was persuaded north as the press's secretary, and dramatically expanded its output from some 20 academic titles a year to around 90, an expansion achieved with an increase of only the Polygon staff to EUP's 14 indefatigable full-time staff members.
Both Martin Spencer and Vivian Bone, who joined EUP from Oxford University Press in 1980 to boost its editorial coverage, worked as commissioning editors, ensuring that the dramatic expansion did not mean any lowering of standards.
The press's current output has built on existing strengths: its increased concentration on anthropology, social sciences and politics stands alongside established topics such as Islamic studies, history, linguistics and biological science.
Its long term best sellers are Youngson's The Making of Classical Edinburgh , Abercrombie's Elements of General Phonetics , and the ten-volume Flora of Turkey and the East Aegean Islands .
It also has a growing reputation as a publisher of journals and yearbooks, such as the prestigious Africa , the journal of the International African Institute, and Architectural Heritage .
Everything published by EUP is refereed by a Press Committee of University of Edinburgh academics.
While specialist refereeing is standard practice in academic publishing, Edinburgh's 15-member committee do not sit as specialists in their particular subjects, but discuss the reports from a broader perspective.
Members of the Press Committee are also alert to the work being done by their colleagues elsewhere, and are  invaluable in helping the press win the best books in their discipline.
Martin Spencer worked tirelessly to develop EUP until his unexpected and untimely death in 1990.
Vivian Bone was appointed acting secretary, and in a bold move, the University decided that when making a permanent appointment, it would split Mr Spencer's post on the industrial model of a chief executive and a chairman.
Ms Bone is now the publisher, responsible for the day to day running of the press, while David Martin was last summer appointed executive chairman.
Mr Martin comes to Edinburgh from Basil Blackwell, which he developed from a small family business with sales of under £1 million into a major international publishing group with a turnover of more than £14 million.
EUP is planning to consolidate its current output rather than launching another major expansion, but there is no lack of challenge in David Martin's job.
At present, EUP is effectively a University department, and Mr Martin's task is to transform it into an independent company, albeit one wholly owned by the University.
The press has a turnover of almost £750,000, but its finances are completely intertwined with those of The University of Edinburgh, which pays some of its salaries and charges no rent for its offices in George Square or its nearby warehouse.
‘My job is to effect the disentanglement, with the University having a clear view of how successful the press is, and the extent to which it is  calling on or contributing to University funds,’ says David Martin.
These days, universities cannot afford to lose money, however intelligently.
But the academic publishing world has been hit just as hard as the rest of the academic world.
EUP's business manager Allan Woods remembers 20 years ago when the press could rely on sales of almost 1,000 copies to institutions throughout the world.
These days, that figure can represent an entire print run.
The press has shifted its emphasis from being a backlist publisher, selling books over five to ten years, to selling its frontlist within two years, reprinting when necessary, rather than having vast stocks gathering dust in a warehouse.
Certainly, David Martin commented that EUP's warehouse in West Crosscauseway was one of the most dust-free he had seen, a tribute to its success.
The warehouse was custom-built for a publishing company almost 40 years ago, with EUP moving in in 1966.
Techniques are more sophisticated now, says warehouse manager Andrew Hanlon, with the acquisition of pallet trucks and stackers: when he started, he had to manhandle all the books from outside deliveries.
The warehouse sends out some 800 parcels of books every week, excluding journals such as Africa of which 4,000 copies are sent out annually.
‘There’ s not a country in the world we don't send to,’says Mr Hanlon.
‘If you didn’ t know your geography before you start, you soon learn it.’
One floor of the warehouse is devoted to publications from Polygon, founded in the 1960s as a radical student publishing  company, and losing none of its avant-garde reputation despite being taken over by EUP three years ago.
Polygon and EUP staff work alongside one another in the press's four-storey Georgian offices, effectively open-plan through everyone habitually leaving the doors of their small rooms open.
Polygon, which specialises in contemporary international literature, notably Scots writers including Edwin Morgan, Liz Lochhead, James Meek and Sian Hayton, and a stimulating Determinations series covering Scottish philosophy, politics and culture, has also had a dramatic increase in output, from around five to 25 books a year.
It also publishes the Edinburgh Review , described by Scotland on Sunday as Scotland's foremost intellectual and literary magazine.
Managing editor Marion Sinclair adds that there are plans for links with the University's School of Scottish Studies, with publications based on its unique and priceless oral history archive.
Polygon shares some books in common with EUP, publishing some of the press's hardbacks in paperback form, but its best seller has been one of its most atypical publications, Kathleen B. Cory's Tracing Your Scottish Ancestry .
EUP also has a Scottish role to fulfil, as the sole remaining non-commercial academic publisher north of the border, says David Martin, and it will provide a continuing output for scholarship in Scotland.
But he stresses that EUP is a Scottish publisher, not simply a publisher of books on Scotland: its aim is to publish the best scholarship internationally, wherever it may come from.
He is far from dismayed by the prospect of achieving financial independence at a time of a publishing recession.
He agrees that the market has dwindled because of cuts in library budgets and because academics' own salaries have not kept pace with inflation.
But the recession may even be healthy in making it more difficult to publish the second-rate, he argues: rather than having a clear strategy of which subjects they would concentrate on, far too many academic publishers were happy simply to print a selection of the manuscripts they were sent, including multi-authored books and conference proceedings which tended to be of limited academic market.
And university presses have particular advantages when it comes to competition, he comments.
They have a solidity and permanence, important qualities when the general academic publishing world is beset by closures and mergers.
Higher education staff see their academic imprimatur as more important in career terms than being accepted by a commercial publisher.
And there is the all-important local pull, with staff and graduates keen to write for their own university press, strongly supported in EUP's case by the scholarly expertise of its Press Committee.
‘Most people think of competition at the output end, libraries, recommended reading lists, journal funds,’ David Martin says.
‘But it’ s the competition for authors that is critical.
Unless you have the right books you will never be able to sell them.’
AN outdoors EDUCATION
There's a lot to be said for an up-market Scottish education but in retrospect you can come away with some pernicious ideas, particularly the idea that thought is superior to action.
Middle-class Edinburgh lads like myself are discouraged from an early age from being physical unless they're wearing rugby shorts at the time.
Most University graduates end up thinking that anything which involves manual work or shouting above the noise of machinery should be done by someone stupider than themselves.
Sometimes we so devalue a physical approach to the world that we begin to devalue action itself.
I fell victim to the thought-rather-than-action syndrome myself a few years ago and gave up a demonstrably worthwhile job as a doctor in order to write a novel called A Paper Mask .
The act of conception, staring at a typewriter for much of 1985 in a flat in Notting Hill Gate so depressed me that I immediately thereafter applied for a job as doctor for Amoco, who were then exploring for oil near Morondava.
You won't know where Morondava is.
I certainly didn't when I applied to work there.
But if you stand with your left foot on a map of South East Africa then the outline of your right foot will correspond quite accurately to the island of Madagascar.
In the middle of the instep there is a place called ‘exact coastline uncertain’ and this became my place of work.
I arrived there on a planeload of Canadian oil-drillers who were several inches taller than me even without their high-heeled boots.
They were muscle-bound men covered in scars and tattoos.
I recognised them vaguely as extras from the films of Michael Winner.
We drove in complete silence through the dusty scrubland to a camp made of portacabins bolted together.
The outgoing doctor — a Glaswegian called Dave Robertson — gave me a half hour tour of the makeshift clinic saying, ‘this is the microscope for malaria slides, this is the operating table, this is the equipment for pulling out teeth…
(Extracting teeth!
From those gorillas off the plane?
No-one had told me about pulling teeth)‘…this is the emergency kit, that's the radio operator waving his arms at you, this the X-ray machine you'll get the hang of it.’
Then he was gone in a whirl of dust and faded denim.
I sat on my bed feeling like the man who got drunk and woke up in the French foreign legion.
Things got worse.
I was taking off my trousers when the radio operator came in and said someone was having an epileptic fit in one of the seismic camps.
Suddenly I was in the helicopter with the doors off and a medical bag clutched in my sweaty hand, travelling at breakneck speed fifty feet above dried river beds, paddy fields, termite hills, baobab trees, beach, forest, more forest…
The pilot Win had flown in Vietnam and his right thigh was a patchwork of bullet wounds.
The co-pilot Jim had a scar on his chest from open heart surgery.
They were enjoying themselves tremendously.
I was in the company of madmen.
The person at the seismic camp wasn't having a fit at all.
He'd had a heart attack in a small tent and was fighting for air through a web of mosquito netting and canvas.
I sat him up, took him outside and injected him with some dangerously powerful drugs.
By luck he survived all this and afterwards his Canadian friends decided to adopt me as one of the lads.
I worked in Madagascar, rotating with Dave Robertson, for almost two years.
And in that time I became very close to the bunch of desperadoes I'd first flown out with.
Bob Leoppky, Henry Morgensen, Gilbert Winters, Steve Wyse, Wally Neish….
These men were welders and crane drivers and truckers.
They came from the badlands of the world: Queensland, New Mexico, Alberta and Aberdeen.
Oh, and a couple of fellows from Edinburgh.
It was ironic in retrospect that I had to travel half way round the globe to get to know working class men from my own back yard.
Together, every few weeks we'd dismantle the rig and transport it in sections a few hundred miles through swamps and desert and forest.
Then we'd reassemble it, a steel tower twenty storeys high, and drill another hole in the hard red soil of Madagascar.
It was expensive, high tech, brutal and, I don't doubt, ecologically unsound but I loved it all.
I loved the ring of sledgehammers on metal, the bellowing and roaring of the rig in the African night, the smell of diesel and brake pads, the scream of angle-grinders, the spray from the welding torches, the all-night poker games and the hare-brained helicopter rides.
Every other weekend we would drive into town.
There was a restaurant run by Monsieur and Madame Dubois, a pair of former French colonials whose patio collapsed every other week into the Mozambique channel.
There was a hotel built by the Catholic priests where local village girls would turn up dressed in outrageous outfits copied from old French fashion magazines.
We danced, we drank, we lay on the beach telling stories.
I can't remember ever being happier.
Amoco spent tens of millions of dollars on the project but they never did find any oil in Madagascar.
After two years they gave up prospecting and pulled out.
But I learnt a lot on that job.
I rediscovered the pleasure of a physical life, the intense satisfaction of exhausting manual work, and most important of all the fantastic richness of experience of ordinary working men, a whole sector of society who would otherwise still be strangers to me.
I also discovered, quite incidentally, that writing, like any other act of invention and creation, is not something you do best by sitting at home contemplating the meaning of life.
The writers I find most effective — Graham Greene, Ernest Hemingway, John Byrne, David Mamet….— are not bookish people.
They are people who engage with the world and use what they learn from experience.
And that goes for the doctors I admire as well.