

This issue of Welcome spotlights some developments in the way Historic Scotland is organised, as well as the usual topical items about our protection and presentation of Scotland's built heritage.
Since becoming an Executive Agency in April 1991, the increased local management and accountability arising from this status has led to considerable change in our structure, planning and management processes, financial systems and attitudes.
The annual exercise of producing a Corporate Plan helps us to stand back from our regular activities and review what our customers — including the Secretary of State for Scotland — expect from us, and to refocus our efforts on the main objectives and priorities.
This year we have set up Area Teams in Edinburgh, Stirling and at Fort George near Inverness, each under an Area Manager responsible for the conservation and presentation of the properties in their area.
A new Technical Conservation, Research and Education group has been created to co-ordinate research and conservation skills developments, and ensure that our practical conservation standards remain at a high level.
Under the Government's Citizen's Charter initiative, we have published a charter leaflet detailing what customers can expect from us, and the 1993 Corporate Pan emphasises areas where we are improving our services.
We welcome suggestions for any further improvements we could make, so please let us know your views.
William Morris Fellowship for gifted craftsman
ALLAN McCombie Smith, a gifted young Historic Scotland mason based at Kildrummy Castle, Grampian, has been awarded a coveted William Morris Craft Fellowship for 1993.
Allan, 23, fought off stiff competition from throughout the UK to win one of only four advanced training places for architectural craftsmen.
The Fellowship, organised by the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings (SPAB), is a six-month training programme during which the craftsmen travel thousands of miles round the country together, studying traditional methods of repairing historic buildings.
They also visit stone quarries, timber yards and specialist conservation studios and workshops.
Allan has been working for Historic Scotland since 1986 and has gained wide-ranging experience including masonry consolidation, hewing and building of all types of stonework at sites throughout Grampian Region and the Shetland Islands.
The exceptionally high quality of his work and his strong interest in conservation and historic work practices led to his nomination for the Fellowship.
During the training programme Fellows are encouraged to question the experts they meet ‘to be excited by the excellent and disturbed by the mediocre’.
The experience he gains will make Allan an even greater asset to Historic Scotland in the future.
Inchcolm welcomes new custodians
WHEN Derry and Fran Dunnett visited Inchcolm Abbey one day last summer they remarked to each other how lucky the abbey's custodians were to live on the island.
Little did they know that they would be stepping into Hunter and Rae Brown's shoes less than a year later!
(The Browns are now custodians at Dallas Dhu Distillery, near Forres.)
‘We saw the job advertised in January and applied right away,’ says Derry.
‘Two nail-biting months of interviews and waiting followed until we heard that we had got it — we were absolutely thrilled.’
Derry is no stranger to Inchcolm, having visited the island many times as a boy.
He tells the story of one occasion when he and two friends decided to swim across to the island from Aberdour.
‘When we finally got there, tired and bedraggled, the custodian sent us packing on the next ferry because we didn't have the 2/6 entry fee!’
Having worked offshore on oil platforms for the last 13 years, Derry and Fran were well prepared for the rather isolated nature of life on the island.
‘We get on very well and make a good team’, says Fran, ‘I know we have found our little niche in life.’
For the Dunnetts' dog Theo, there is only one cloud on an otherwise blemish-free horizon — no cats to chase!
Jarlshof clean-up assisted by weather conditions
IN the last issue of Welcome we reported on the effects of the Braer oil-spill at Jarlshof in Shetland.
Since then, a long spell of bad weather has helped to clean almost all the visible oil off the stones, although some of the building interiors remain contaminated.
Through hard work by the local Historic Scotland works squad, cleaning paths and mopping up residual oil, it proved possible to open the monument for the season on 1 April as planned, with access to the entrances of the prehistoric buildings roped of for the time being.
It is not yet know how the oil which soaked into the stones will affect their long-term weathering.
as if to prove that a Shetlander's work is never done, the same storms that sank the Braer and then cleaned away the oil caused erosion of the coast along the edge of the unexcavated portion of Jarlshof, and emergency coastal defences had to be installed prior to the provision of a permanent seawall.
It is planned to undertake a geophysical survey before this is done, to gain some idea of what lies below the ‘green empty bits’ at Jarlshof, which like many properties in care has only been partially excavated.
Jacobites and Hanoverians
Friends Autumn Tour 24–26 September
This autumn Friends can follow in the footsteps of the Jacobites and Hanoverians, visiting the battle site of Killiecrankie and Culloden and the fortifications of Ruthven Barracks, Fort George and Corgarff Castle, as well as other places of interest.
THE tour departs Glasgow/Edinburgh on  by coach 0845/1015.
In the morning we visit the Visitor Centre at Killiecrankie, site of the famous battle of 1689 when the first shots were fired in the Jacobite cause.
We continue to Blair Castle for lunch in the Gun Room Restaurant.
In the afternoon we visit Ruthven Barracks, near Kingussie, an infantry barracks built by the Hanoverian government following the Jacobite rebellion of 1715.
On Saturday we visit the late Neolithic Clava Cairns — an extensive and fascinating site in a beautiful setting — before continuing to Culloden, site of the crushing defeat of Prince Charles Edward Stuart in 1746.
After a video presentation at the Visitor Centre, we cross Culloden Moor, seeing points of interest including the Graves of the Clans and the Well of the Dead on the way.
Lunch is at the historic Culloden House Hotel.
In the afternoon we visit Fort George, an outstanding artillery fortification built soon after the defeat of the Jacobites at Culloden to hinder any more armed threats to Hanoverian law and order.
On Sunday we travel first to Sueno's Stone, the 6.6 metre high Pictish sculptured monument at Forres.
From there we go to Corgarff Castle near Strathdon, a 16th-century tower house converted into a barracks for Hanoverian troops in 1748.
We have lunch at the Invercauld Arms Hotel in Braemar and afterwards return to Edinburgh/Glasgow, arriving approx 1730/1830.
The party will be guided by Dr David Breeze, Chief Inspector of Ancient Monuments, assisted by Inspectors  and , and will be accompanied by Press & Publicity Officer  and Travel Consultant .
Our base for the weekend is the comfortable Golf View Hotel at Nairn, delightfully situated on the sheltered shores of the Moray Firth and with a 4-star AA rating and Egon Ronay recommendation.
The price of £190.00 includes coach travel from Edinburgh and Glasgow; dinner, bed and breakfast in double or twin rooms (single room supplement £15.00) all with private facilities; three lunches; six coffee/tea stops; a welcome cocktail party; an illustrated talk on the Jacobites and Hanoverians; entrances; and all gratuities.
It does not include travel insurance, wine and drinks with meals and room service.
To book, please send a cheque for the full amount made out to ‘Historic Scotland’ to   .
The itinerary may be subject to minor amendment.
These tour arrangements fall outwith the new EEC Package Travel Directive.
Raising the standard — a commitment to quality
Historic Scotland has recently spelt out the service standards customers can expect from it with the publication of a new charter leaflet.
The leaflet,Raising the Standard for the Built Heritage , is part of the Government's Citizen's Charter initiative.
It explains clearly and simply Historic Scotland's commitment to its customers in three broad areas.
Owners and occupiers of monuments and historic buildings can expect:
clear information about the purpose and effect of scheduling or listing on request
a decision on applications for listed building consent within 28 working days of receipt by Historic Scotland or clear explanation by the planning authority of any need for extension
initial response to enquiries about historic building repair grant within 21 working days
careful and fair consideration of all grant and consent applications, with the reason for a refusal clearly stated
Visitors to our properties can expect:
all monuments to be clean, tidy and well maintained with clear information about their history and architecture
staffed monuments to be open during published opening hours at a reasonable charge
a warm welcome to staffed monuments from well trained staff identified by name
a commitment to improving services for visitors — such as toilets, refreshments and shops
Everyone can expect:
correspondence to be answered within five working days, or acknowledged within five working days with a reply within 15 working days
that in setting and applying our standards, our staff will seek to be open, helpful and polite in explaining our position
well presented documentation (handbooks, guides etc) written in clear and plain language
The leaflet also sets out the procedures for complaints or suggestions.
It is available everywhere Historic Scotland meets its customers, or can be obtained by telephoning Historic Scotland on .
Planning ahead
The theme of raising standards is continued in Historic Scotland's 1993 Corporate Plan , which sets out the agency's objectives for the next three years.
New initiatives include:
a reorganisation of the agency involving increased delegation of functions to area level, bringing the delivery of service closer to the public
a new Technical Conservation, Research and Education group which will have a key role in raising standards of research on technical conservation of buildings and encouraging and disseminating good practice both within the agency and among the professions, trades and general public
further improvements to the presentation of monuments open to the public, based on the findings of independent customer surveys
The Plan also details Historic Scotland's achievements over the last two years.
Copies can be obtained by telephoning Historic Scotland on .
Historic Scotland — on the move
HISTORIC Scotland will move next year to new headquarters at the former Longmore Hospital in Salisbury Place, Edinburgh.
Work has started on converting the Category B listed building into modern, fully equipped offices for some 200 Historic Scotland staff who are currently housed in five buildings throughout Edinburgh.
The move to Longmore House, as it is to be called, will provide greatly improved public access to Historic Scotland services, expertise and information.
Bringing headquarters staff together in a single location will enable those services to be delivered more efficiently and in an integrated manner.
The new headquarters will also bring Historic Scotland nearer to other bodies with which it works closely, such as the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland and the National Library of Scotland.
The £4.4 million conversion project will take around 15 months to complete, after which the building will be leased through Property Holdings to Historic Scotland.
Linlithgow 1650
Visitors flocked to Linlithgow Palace at the beginning of May to enjoy two days of colourful period entertainment.
A major battle re-enactment, living history, Renaissance music and dance, a jester, traditional street games, a medieval market, magicians, jugglers, puppets and more — there was something for everyone to enjoy.
THE event, which was staged by Historic Scotland in conjunctions with West Lothian District Council, was the first in a programme of nearly 80 events taking place this year at Historic Scotland properties from the Highlands to the South West.
The programme includes battle re-enactments, historical drama, period music and dance, merry-making, living history and for some spooky fun, ghost tours.
Entry to most events is included in the price of admission to the property and is therefore free for Friends.
Why not make the most of it?
Copies of 1993 Events Programme are available at all staffed Historic Scotland properties, or by telephoning the Events Unit on 
Illustrated talks
IN addition to the published Events Programme , Historic Scotland presents two illustrated talks for Friends to enjoy this summer.
A Solider's Life
Inspector of Ancient Monuments, will give an illustrated talk on the 18th-century British soldier at home and how he spent his spare time.
Tickets £2.00 (including a glass of wine) available from the Events Unit on 
The Honours of Scotland
, Principal Inspector of Ancient Monuments, will give an illustrated talk, using specially commissioned slides seen for the first time, on the fascinating story of the oldest Royal Regalia in the British Isles.
Tickets £2.00 (including a glass of wine) available from the Events Unit on .
Symbols of Sovereignty
The Honours of Scotland are the oldest Crown Jewels in the British Isles and among the oldest in Europe.
Their fascinating story is told in Historic Scotland's permanent exhibition at Edinburgh Castle.
, Principal Inspector of Ancient Monuments and co-author of a new book, The Honours of Scotland, writes for Welcome.
On February 4, 1818, a distinguished group of men gathered on the stair outside the Crown Room in Edinburgh Castle.
Among them was Walter Scott, one of Scotland's foremost authors and antiquarians.
Scott's urgent pleas to the Prince Regent, the future King George IV, had resulted in a Royal Warrant permitting him to open the sealed Crown Room in search of the Scottish crown, sceptre and sword of state — the ancient Honours of Scotland, locked away since 1707 following the Treaty of Union.
‘The joy was therefore extreme’ wrote Scott later, ‘when, the ponderous lid of the chest being forced open, the regalia were discovered lying at the bottom covered with linen cloths, exactly as they had been left.’
The drama of that February morning proved a fitting climax to the fascinating and eventful story of the Honours of Scotland.
That story is now presented by Historic Scotland in a permanent exhibition —‘The Honours of the Kingdom’— in rooms adjacent to the Crown Room in Edinburgh Castle.
In designing it, special consideration has been given to the needs of the disabled visitor.
For the first time there is access to the Crown Room for wheelchairs, and full-size ‘hands-on’ replicas of the Regalia have been made for blind or partially-sighted visitors.
The exhibition begins in the Dark Ages with early king-making ceremonies and symbols of sovereign power.
It features the crowning of King Robert the Bruce on the Moot Hill at Scone in 1306 with ‘a circlet of gold’, traditionally believed to form part of the present Crown of Scotland.
However the main focus is on the Honours which are now on display in the Crown Room.
They date from the reigns of King James IV and King James V (1488–1542) and are the oldest Royal Regalia in the British Isles and among the oldest in Europe.
The slim Sceptre with its elaborate finial and the magnificent Sword of State were created in Renaissance Italy and gifted by two Popes to King James IV — the Sceptre probably by the Borgia Pope Alexander VI in 1494, and the Sword of State by the ‘Warrior Pope’ Julius II in 1507.
James V ordered that the Crown of Scotland be remodelled in time for him to wear it at the coronation of his second Queen, Mary of Guise-Lorraine, at Holyrood Abbey in February 1540.
The craftsman appointed to undertake the work, John Mosman of Edinburgh, melted the old crown down and fashioned an instantly more impressive arched crown.
James also had the Sceptre lengthened by the Edinburgh Goldsmith Adam Leys.
The Honours as seen today were first used as coronation regalia at the enthronement of the infant Mary Queen of Scots at Stirling Castle in September 1543.
They were present at all subsequent coronations until that of King Charles II at Scone on Ne'er Day 1651 — the last coronation at Scone and the last in Scotland.
The Honours were presented at sessions of the Parliament, where they symbolised the royal presence, particularly when an infant sovereign could not be present.
They were laid on a table before the canopied throne and an Act of Parliament became law only when the King, or his Commissioners, took up the Sceptre and used it to touch the relevant document.
After the Union of the Crowns of Scotland and England in 1603, and because the country now had an absent sovereign, the symbols of majesty became a substitute and took on an extra significance.
This enhanced importance explains why Oliver Cromwell was so determined to get his hands on the Honours following his victory at Dunbar in September 1650 and his advance into Scotland.
The Honours, then at Scone in preparation for the coronation of King Charles II, were taken to Dunottar Castle, near Stonehaven, after the ceremony and hidden in that formidable fortress.
The story of how the defenders withstood the might of Cromwell's  army, of how the Honours were smuggled out from the castle under the very noses of the English and hidden beneath the floor of nearby Kineff Kirk, and of how they lay buried for eight long years until returned once more to Edinburgh Castle, is one of the most well known, oft-repeated tales of Scottish history.
Once returned however, they were never again to be used as coronation regalia.
They continued to be present at Parliament until the day in March 1707 when they were laid to rest in the great oak chest.
Thanks to Walter Scott, the Honours were rediscovered and put on public display.
Visitors to the Crown Room in 1819 paid the princely sum of one shilling each — at least £7.50 at today's prices — just for the privilege of viewing them.
They remain on display today in the Crown Room of the Castle, the very room built for them in the reign of James VI.
They are moved only in exceptional circumstances.
During the Second World War they were taken down to the dark stone vaults beneath the Half Moon Battery and buried to prevent them falling into enemy hands.
In June 1953, they were taken in State to the High Kirk of St Giles in Edinburgh's Royal Mile and, during the National Service of Thanksgiving marking the accession of the new sovereign, they were presented to Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth.
The survival of the Honours of Scotland over the centuries has depended on many loyal Scots, some known but just as many unknown.
Crown, Sceptre and Sword of State epitomise the ancient realm of Scotland with all its history of promise, failures and triumphs.
For a small nation, jealous of its unique identity, the Honours are precious beyond price.
Bothwell —‘that stalwart towre’
Bothwell Castle, towering dramatically over the River Clyde, is arguably the most important medieval castle in Scotland, and certainly the grandest secular building surviving today from that great age of castle-building, the 13th century.
Bothwell Castle was built in the 13th century by Walter of Moray, a descendant of Freskin, Lord of Duffus.
The work had scarcely got into its stride before it was interrupted by the outbreak of the Wars of Independence.
By then, only the foundation courses of the extensive curtain-wall had been laid, the main effort having gone into the construction of the immense great tower or donjon.
Over 30 metres high with walls almost 5 meters thick, it represented a spectacular display of feudal pride by one of the foremost barons of the realm.
Shortly after the English army's murderous assault on Berwick, in 1296, Bothwell fell into English hands and for the remainder of the Wars of Independence the castle passed to and fro between the opposing forces.
In 1298–99 the English withstood  siege by the Scots for a remarkable 14 months, though few survivors remained when the garrison finally surrendered.
In 1301 Edward I of England recaptured the castle in less than one month, an achievement which however required the deployment of 6,800 men and a massive siege engine.
Bothwell's defences, although incomplete, were evidently not easily breached.
With the marriage of Joanna de Moray to Archibald ‘the Grim’, third Earl of Douglas, in about 1362, the castle passed into the possession of another great baronial house, the Black Douglases.
Much of what we see today dates from their time: massive curtain walls, defended on the south and east by four flanking towers, two round and two square; within, a large rectangular courtyard enclosure, terminated at its west end by the might circular donjon surrounded by its own moat, and on the east side a great hall and chapel.
Individual elements in the building complex were designed so that they could be separately defended if the outer defences fell.
After the downfall of the Black Douglases at Threave in 1455, Bothwell reverted to the Crown and in time came to be held by the Red Douglases.
The castle's end as a noble residence finally came in the late 17th century, and it was eventually given into state care in 1935.
Major improvements have recently been made to visitor facilities, with the provision of a new shop and car park.
Local affection for Bothwell is strong, according to Bobby Hardy, custodian for the last 13 years.
‘The walk along the Clyde beside the castle is a favourite among Uddingston folk — some of them come up here almost every day.
A couple of years ago we had a visit from a 91-year old lady who had left Uddingston in 1920 to emigrate to America — the tears flowed down her cheeks as she reminisced about playing here as a child.’
111 years of monument protection
The government first introduced legislation for the protection of ancient monuments in 1882.
We have come a long way since then, writes Dr David Breeze, Chief Inspector of Ancient Monuments.
ON 18 August 1882 Queen Victoria gave royal assent to a Bill for the Protection of Ancient Monuments.
This was the first national conservation measure to be passed by a British parliament.
It has been succeeded by over ten Acts designed to protect other aspects of our natural and cultural heritage.
There were 68 sites (21 in Scotland) appended to the 1882 Act.
Those monuments to be protected were included in a list or Schedule attached to the Act, and this is how the term ‘scheduling’ was born.
Scheduling is designed to protect a monument from any kind of damage and to control any necessary works to it.
The Schedule has now grown to a total of 5,600 sites in Scotland, with over 300 being added each year.
It encompasses sites from the earliest times to the Second World War, including burial tombs and standing stones, ancient farms and fields, Roman forts, castles, abbeys, chapels and military defences.
The 1882 Act also introduced the concept of the state taking privately-owned monuments into its own guardianship.
Two years later the first monuments were taken into care, and many more followed.
These were looked after by the Board of Works — the lineal descendant of the Office of the King's Works, which built many of the castles and palaces which its successor bodies, including Historic Scotland, now care for.
Today Historic Scotland's activities in the protection of ancient monuments are wide-ranging.
Inspectors work with colleagues in other offices and agencies, such as The Scottish Office Agriculture and Fisheries Department and Scottish Natural Heritage, to help protect the built heritage.
One subject currently under consideration is the place of the protection and management of archaeological and historical sites and landscapes within the wider framework of the countryside management.
The agreement that bodies such as The Scottish Roads Directorate should fund the archaeological work required by their developments has also led to a closer liaison on survey and excavation.
The Scottish Office will shortly be issuing new Planning Advice dealing with archaeology in the planning process.
We have indeed come a long way from 1882, and can look forward to the challenge of the 1990s — the closer harmonisation of our concerns with those of other conservation bodies.
Summer site visits
Three special guided tours of historic sites — this summer Friends have the choice of a medieval abbey, a prehistoric ceremonial and burial complex and a Cistercian abbey and excavation site.
Bothwell Castle
Bothwell Castle, Uddingston, is the largest and finest 13th-century stone castle in Scotland, much fought over during the Wars of Independence.
Part of the original great tower or donjon survives, but much of what can be seen today dates from the 14th and 15th centuries: massive curtain walls, defended on the south and east by four flanking towers; within, a large rectangular courtyard enclosure, terminated at its west end by the mighty circular donjon surrounded by its own moat and, on the east side, a great hall and chapel.
Chris Tabraham, Principal Inspector of Ancient Monuments, will lead tours of the castle on Saturday 31 July.
Balfarg
Balfarg, at the north edge of Glenrothes New Town, is the site of an important prehistoric ceremonial and burial complex.
The complex was in use from 3000 to 1500 BC.
The key sites were two henges (like Stonehenge but without the stone), a stone circle and a structure for the exposure of dead bodies prior to burial.
These sites have been preserved and reconstructed by Glenrothes Development Corporation.
Friends taking part in the visit will receive a free copy of the newly-published guidebook to the complex.
Principle Inspector of Ancient Monuments Gordon Barclay, who excavated the site, will lead tours of the complex on Saturday 7 August.
Dundrennan Abbey
Dundrennan Abbey, near Kirkcudbright, was founded as a Cistercian monastery by King David I in 1142.
The abbey was built at the time of transition from Romanesque to Gothic architecture, and its remains form an important element in Scotland's architectural heritage.
An archaeological excavation is being carried out this summer to reveal part of the abbey's latrine block and great drain, and Friends will be shown the excavated area as well as artefacts and fine stonework found on the site during previous excavations.
Doreen Grove, Inspector of Ancient Monuments and Gordon Ewart, the archaeologist in charge of the excavation, will lead tours of the abbey and excavation site on Saturday 21 August.
To apply, write to:.
Please state your choice of visit and the number of tickets required and your name, address, telephone number and Friends membership number.
The site visits are for Friends members only.
Making a good case…
Historic Scotland has combined with wine merchants Laurence Smith & son to offer Friends a high-quality mixed wine case.
Fragrant whites for summer drinking and rich reds for cosy autumn evenings — we think you'll find this one hard to resist…
Whites
1) Chardonnay, Sunnycliffe, 1992
Sunnycliffe Estates have extensive vineyards in north-west Victoria, Australia.
The grapes are harvested at night and processed within 15 minutes, enhancing the preservation of fruit flavours.
The 1992 vintage has light melon and apricot fruit flavours on the bouquet, with a rich and flavoursome palate.
The finish is attractive, with the intense fruitiness being balanced by crisp acidity.
2) Domaine de Rieux, Vin de Pays des Cotes de Gascogne, Pierre Grassa, 1992
Domaine de Rieux is the property of the Grassa family.
M. Grassa has been producing outstanding white wine from the local grape varieties for many years.
His Vin de Pays des Cotes de Gascogne, which has won many awards over recent years, is dry and fragrant, with plenty of fruit and well-balanced acidity.
3) Sauvignon Blanc, CJ Pask, 1991
Suffolk-born Chris Pask planted his first vines in New Zealand's Hawkes Bay in 1972.
His wine-maker Kate Marris is one of the leading wine-makers in the country.
This wine is fresh and fruity with ripe tropical fruit flavours.
It is full-bodied with a hint of sweetness.
Marques de Caceres, Rioja, 1991
The bodega of Marques de Caceres in Rioja, northern Spain, was founded by the Forner family in 1970, and today is one of the country's best known and  most modern bodegas.
Made from the Viura grape, this wine is pale in colour with a greenish tinge, and is fresh and fragrant on the nose.
The palate has a delicate and subtle fruit.
5) Chablis, Domaine des Manants, Jean-Marc Brocard, 1991
Jean-Marc Brocard is an exceptionally talented wine-maker producing classic wines using modern vinification techniques.
His 1991 vintage is an excellent clean, dry and flinty wine with a full-bodied richness characteristic of his style.
The wine is delicious young, but ages well, maturing into a softer style with great depth and elegance.
6) Chateau de Moulin de Launay, Entre-deux-Mers, Claude Greffier, 1991
Entre-deux-Mers forms a huge triangle within the Bordeaux region, bounded by the rivers Garonne, Dordogne and the south-west border of the Gironde Department.
The wine is made from a blend of Sauvignon and Semillon grapes, and is clear with green highlights and a refined bouquet.
The palate is clean, with harmonious fruit and acidity.
Reds
7) Chateau de Bonnefond, Cotes de Bourg, 1989
Chateau Bonnefond is situated in an excellent location on south-facing slopes overlooking the Gironde.
The exceptionally hot summer of 1989 resulted in wines of great richness and power, with plenty of ripe tannins to give longevity to the wine.
A high proportion of Merlot variety in the blend gives a rich fruity style with a good firm finish.
8) Cotes de Saint Mont, Producteurs Plaimont, 1991
The village of St Mont is situated about 100 miles south of Bordeaux.
The Plaimant cooperative is run by Danielle Hingan and Andre Dubosc, who have revolutionised wine-making in the Gascony area.
Made from the traditional Tannat grape, blended with some Cabernet Sauvignon and Cabernet Franc, this is an easy-drinking, full-bodied, smooth wine.
9) Peppertree Vineyard Shiraz, Mitchell, 1991
The Mitchell winery is situated in the Clare Valley 60 miles north of Adelaide in South Australia.
Jane Mitchell and Neil Pike, her talented wine-maker, have a reputation for producing some of Australia's finest wines.
The wine is deep red in colour, with an intense mint and blackcurrant aroma and rich, spicy fruit flavours on the palate, given added complexity by the use of French oak.
10) Cabernet Sauvignon, Santa Carolina, 1988
The climate and soil in the Maipo Valley in central Chile combine to produce ideal growing conditions.
This wine is made from 100 per cent Cabernet Sauvignon and is aged in small oak casks.
It is bright red in colour, with light, flavoursome blackcurrent aromas.
There is ripe fruit on the palate, with evidence of the light oak ageing.
11) Chianti Rufina, Villa di Vetrice, Fratelli Grati, 1990
The Chianti Rufina region is one of the smallest and coolest in the Chianti area of Tuscany.
Its wines are usually fuller with higher acidity than other Chiantis, and quality often surpasses that of the Chianti Classico region.
This wine has a youthful ruby-red colour and the scent of cherries on the nose.
The palate is smooth with delicious grapey fruit.
Sparkling
12) Rowland's Brook, Brut, N/V
Penfold's, one of Australia's leading producers, produce this sparkling wine using the transfer method whereby the second fermentation takes place in bottle, like the methode champenoise.
When maturation is complete, the bottles are chilled, opened under pressure into a tank, filtered and then rebottled after dosage, all under pressure.
This wine is light and fresh with ripe appley fruit.
Laurence Smith & son (Edinburgh) Ltd is a family-owned independent wine merchant, now in its 110th year.
The company is a founder member of the Merchant Vintners Company, a consortium of independent wine merchants who trade throughout the UK, pooling their expertise, knowledge and buying resources.
The price of £59.95 includes delivery within mainland Scotland and VAT.
To order your wine case, send a cheque for £59.95 made out to  .
Please quote name, delivery address, telephone number and preferred delivery date.
Delivery will normally be made within 14 days after receipt of orders.
New publications from Historic Scotland
Archaeological Information and Advice in Scotland
Finding a way through the maze of Scotland's archaeological organisations can be a difficult exercise for those seeking information.
This new leaflet sets out in clear and simple terms who to approach for what kind of information and advice.
Starting with an easy reference table, the leaflet goes on to describe the roles of Historic Scotland, the Regional and Islands Archaeologists, the national and local museums, the Royal Commission on the Ancient and Historical Monuments of Scotland and the Council for Scottish Archaeology.
Included in the leaflet is guidance on where to seek advice if something is found, who to contact if you intend to develop an area containing archaeological sites and how to get involved in an excavation.
It is fully illustrated with colour photographs.
The leaflet is being widely distributed to archaeological, environmental and countryside organisations, educational institutions and local authority departments including museums and libraries.
Copies can also be obtained by telephoning Historic Scotland on .
The Ancient Monuments of Shetland
by Noel Fojut and Denys Pringle, principal photography by David Henrie
64pp, full colour, £3.95
For the first time a comprehensive colour guide draws together all eight Shetland monuments in Historic Scotland's care.
From Neolithic Stanydale through the Iron Age with the brochs of Clickhimin and Mousa, and Ness of Burgi fort, to the Viking village at Jarlshof, into the Medieval period through Scalloway and Muness castles and closing with 18th-century Fort Charlotte, these monuments act as signposts through Shetland's long and colourful past.
As well as containing detailed site descriptions and guides, this new addition to the series shows how individual monuments integrated with contemporary society.
The information is complemented by maps, drawings and some superb photographs.
Jarlshof: A Walk through the Past
by Patrick Ashmore, principal photography by David Henrie
24 pp, full colour, £1.95
With its sequence of four thousand years of remains, Jarlshof is the longest-lived and most complex archaeological site in Historic Scotland's care.
As well as explaining the remains visible on the site tour, this guide provides an insight into the way of life of the various inhabitants: Neolithic, Bronze Age, Iron Age, Pictish, Viking, Norse/Medieval farmers, fishermen, craftsmen and part-time warriors, all are set into historical, geographical and social perspective.
A fascinating section describes the round of the seasons in the Norse village.
On one level a site guide, on another this is a mini-textbook describing changing society at one place over four thousand years.
To obtain copies of the above guides, write, enclosing payment, to .
Special book offer
HISTORIC Scotland has published a new fully-illustrated book The Honours of Scotland: The Story of the Scottish Crown Jewels , by , Ross Herald of Arms, and , Principle Inspector of Ancient Monuments.
Normally priced at £4.95, we are offering the book to Friends at the special offer price of £3.95 (inc p&p).
To obtain your copy write, enclosing payment, to  or telephone .