

 NEWSLETTER SUMMER 1993
Our Annual General Meeting is over for another year.
The tumult and the shouting dies The Captains and the Kings depart.
Purists may just possibly consider the analogy with Kipling's powerful verse a bit over the top, bordering on the hyperbole, but what matter?
It was a well attended meeting, thanks to all who lent a hand.
Your Committee being by nature shy, retiring, modest people, would be the last to compare themselves with the Captains and Kings — more like your temporary, acting, unpaid Lance Corporals,— Dogsbodies one and all.
However, the excellent turn-out for the A.G.M. indicates interest, if not pride in the affairs and  day-to-day running of our Village which is mellowing nicely with each year.
As the late Paddy Roberts used to sing:—
Our little Village is a real showplace Full of old-world grace and charm.
Work on the upper pond is progressing, and soon it should be a think of beauty and joy at least for the foreseeable future, if not forever.
The Ellan Vannin Diaries have obligingly altered the time of their deliveries to a later hour in response to one or two complaints of sleep disturbance.
Some Residents have complained of condensation in their windows.
If you have such a problem, please send a note to the Warden/Manager stating your name, Apartment No. and the windows concerned,before 26th.
May as the Wardens are due to go on holiday shortly.
If you have any complaints, please address them in the first instance to the Warden/Manager who is authorised to deal with them.
Incidentally, if you have any items which you think would be of interest to the Residents, your scribe would be happy to include them in the  Newsletter .
We have received a questionnaire from one of our Residents a copy of which is enclosed herewith, along with answers to the best of our knowledge, which we hope you will find informative and interesting.
Enjoy the Summer!
Harold Fletcher.
Scribe — Temp/Acting  Unpaid .
P.S. Please, Please don't feed seagulls.
They're well able to take care of themselves and they do make a mess.
May 1993.
Points referred to in accompanying letter.
1.
Q. Who has control of the Revenue Account and the Sinking Fund?
A. Crestacare Management Services (Saddle Mews) Ltd.,
2.
Q. Is Committee consulted about which work should be undertaken?
A. The Committee consults with Management Co. on a regular basis regarding necessary work to be carried out.
3.
Q. Does the Committee have to agree to the work to be done, and its priority?
A. First part is answered in point 2.
Priority is governed by cash available.
4.
Q. Who engages the Contractors and checks the specification of the work to be done?
A. Management Services Co.
Contracts Manager.
He works with local Contractors whose work is to a high standard, and in whom he has full confidence.
They have been responsible for the building of the Kings Reach Complex in Ramsay.
5.
Q. Does the Committee see details of specifications and estimates of e.g. work on the pools, or the paths?
A. these two items are the responsibility of the Group Property Manager who is qualified to determine the necessary work.
6.
Q. Does the Committee know and agree to the cost of the work?
A. Again, this can only be dealt with by professional people and we are advised of the cost.
7.
Q. Who checks that the work is done properly.
Has Cresta someone to oversee it?
A. Anyone carrying out work in the Village has to sign in and out at the Wardens Lodge.
Their work is supervised by the Manager and checked by the Contracts Manager on his routine visits.
8.
Q. What happens if Contractor finds his estimate too low, and more money is needed?
9.
Q. Who would make up the shortfall?
10.
Q. If the cost of the work became so great, and there was not sufficient cash in the accounts to pay for it, who would then be responsible for the debt?
Cresta or the residents?
A. Taking the last three points together.
As you know our Village is run on the terms of our Lease together with the Sections contained in the Property Service Charges At 1989.
In this respect it must be borne in mind under the terms of our Lease, Service Charge can only increase annually to the percentage increase awarded to the National Old Age Pension in the Isle of Man.
The sinking fund was established to cover extraordinary items such as:— regular painting of outside of apartments, tree surgery, any major repairs or renewals which, of course will be inevitable in the coming years, then of course there will be resurfacing of roads, replacement of boilers, drainage and sewerage problems etc.
One very important factor is, Management can only incur such expenses which must be related to cash available, this should eliminate any concern by the Residents on points 8–9 and 10.
Our main Service charge covers, Warden Service, Gardens, General Maintenance and Administration.
I assure you Committee have full confidence in the prudent manner our Management Co is looking after our Village together with Crestacare honouring the terms of our Lease to the full, not forgetting our Warden/Manager Mr and Mrs Philip Holmes whose co-operation is very much appreciated.
SADDLE NEWS RESIDENTS' ASSOCIATION
 NEWSLETTER — MARCH 1993.
Without wishing to tempt providence in any way, we appear to have got away lighting insofar as Winter is concerned.
T.V. pictures showing Arctic conditions in Yugoslavia give pause to reflect on the blessings of comparatively moderate weather, cushioned by central heating, from the harsher elements of the Northern Hemisphere.
Your Committee, far from hibernating, has not ceased from mental strife, nor has its sword slept in its hand, if we have not yet built Jerusalem, we have at least laid siege to the walls of Jericho in the shape of Crestacare Management.
On Monday, 22 February, Mr. Brian Henning, Director of Crestacare, and Mr. Manson, in charge of repairs and maintenance, flew to the Island to attend our Committee Meeting.
They were apprised in no uncertain terms of the matters requiring attention which have caused worry, and disturbed the otherwise even tenor of life in our Village.
The relative inaccessibility of Management, the nuisance of inconsiderate car parking and consequent obstruction by Non-Residents.
Maintenance of property, plumbing and gardens, particularly the ponds, were discussed at length, along with a request to permit our qualified accountant, Miss Muriel Jones (Hon.
Treasurer) access to the Annual Account regarding the Administration and maintenance costs and receipts from Service Charges.
The accounts were produced promptly and are presently being studied.
Mrs. Rene Henry, our Chairman, will undoubtedly make reference to these affairs in her report at the Annual General Meeting to be held, by kind permission of Matron Elder, at the Nursing Home at 7.30 pm. on Monday, 26th.
April.
Please note the date, and DO PLEASE COME ALONG.
Nominations are invited for:— Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Treasurer, Secretary and four Committee Members.
Please send names to Mrs. Joan Sherry, No. 120 S.M. before 5th.
April.
Please do not propose anyone without their consent.
Names must be proposed and seconded.
The names of the present Committee are:—
Chairman — Rene Henry
Treasurer — Muriel Jones
Bea Brocklebank
Joan Sherry
Vice-Chairman — Harold Fletcher
Secretary — Marjorie Lockie
Frank Crompton
Jack Stringer
They offer themselves for re-election.
Congratulations to Bernard and Clare Shimmin who celebrated their Golden Wedding Anniversary on 16th.
January, and congratulations to Marjorie Todd who was 90 on 3rd.
February.
Our best wishes to them.
The emergency service was used for the first time on 17th.
February and proved most satisfactory.
Happy Easter!
Harold Fletcher 
 NEWSLETTER .
DECEMBER 1992.
Dear 
Yuletide Greetings!
The new stone signs are now in place at the Groves Road and Castletown Road entrances, lending lustre to the Village, and negotiations are in hand to do the same at the Nursing Home end in the near future.
All parking signs have now been placed in position as requested by the Committee, and we are assured that twelve parking places are to be delineated at the Nursing Home end, which should alleviate the parking problem.
The new Alarm system is proving satisfactory.
The Senior Forrester reports that no trees in the Village have been infected by the Dutch Elm Disease, and he will inspect them again in the Spring.
Meanwhile, tree pruning has been carried out as requested on the Castletown and Groves Roads, and the Access road at the end of the Village.
Sadly, we have to report the death of Mr. Jim Parker, no. 112, on October 10th.
On a happier note, we are delighted to note that Mrs. Maud Quine celebrated her 90th birthday in September and wish her many more happy years.
Those of you who are listed for morning 'phone calls from the wardens — please notify them if  you are going on holiday.
This will spare them the necessity of checking to find out why you didn't acknowledge the call.
Give or take one or two opinions to the contrary, it seems to be generally accepted that their job is by no means sinecure.
Accordingly, at the last Committee meeting, a vote of confidence was passed and a letter to that effect was sent to them.
There have been reports of mice in one area of the Village.
Residents are urged to be very careful about food scraps put out for the birds.
These should be put on a properly raised bird table out of reach of vermin which are dangerous disease carriers.
Residents' Christmas Lunch.
Thirty four residents were transported by taxi to the elegant surroundings of The Admiral's Rest on Wednesday, 9th December, where a very nice Christmas lunch was served.
Mr. Philip Kirkwood announced with regret his impending departure from the Company.
On Thursday, 10th December your scribe and spouse had the honour to represent the Village at the ‘Island in Bloom’ awards ceremony at the Palace Hotel.
Present were Mr. Doug Baird and Minister for Tourism Mr. Alan Bell, and the judges were represented by Mr. Peter Dunn, retiring Parks Superintendent for Douglas Corporation.
Saddle Mews was awarded 1st.
Prize in the Village 500 — 2000 section and a voucher value £40 to be used to purchase gardening goods from any Island nursery.
Mr. Dunn said that he accompanied the ‘Britain in Bloom’ judges when they visited the Island.
They visited Saddle Mews and in Mr. Dunn's own words they were ‘ABSOLUTELY KNOCKED OUT’ by the Village and suggested that it might be a good idea to enter the ‘Britain in Bloom’competition next year.
So — how about it?
We've nothing to lose!
Christmas Day.
As was the case last year Matron of Saddle Mews Nursing Home — Elaine Elder — extends a warm welcome to any resident or couple who would otherwise be on their own to partake of Christmas dinner, entertainment and afternoon tea at the Nursing Home.
If you would like to avail yourself of this invitation you may do so by giving your names to either Mrs. Hughes, No. 97, or Mrs. Henry, No. 107 before December 16th.
Many of our residents have enjoyed the hospitality and entertainment courtesy of Matron Elder and on their behalf we should like to express our appreciation, and to thank all concerned for including us in their celebrations.
Still to come before Christmas at the Nursing Home are as follows:—
Friday 18th December .
Anagh Coar School Choir at 2.30 pm.
Saturday 19th December .
Laxey Brass Ensemble at 2.30 pm.
In conclusion we offer the following sentiments expressed in verse by that well known author ‘Anon’.
I'M FINE, THANK YOU
There is nothing the matter with me.
I'm as healthy as can be.
I have arthritis in both knees
And when I talk, I talk with a wheeze.
My pulse is weak, my blood is thin —
But I'm awfully well for the shape I'm in.
Arch supports I have for my feet
Or I wouldn't be able to be on the street,
Sleep is denied me night after night
But every morning I find I'm all right.
My memory is failing, my head's in a spin —
But I'm awfully well for the shape I'm in.
The moral of this as my tale I unfold
That for you and me who are growing old
It's better to say ‘I'm fine’ with a grin
Than to let folks know the shape we are in.
How do I know that my youth is all spent?
Well, my get-up-and-go has got up and went.
But I really don't mind when I think with a grin
Of all the grand places my ‘Get up’ has bin.
Old age is golden as I've heard said
But sometimes I wonder as I get into bed
With my ears in the drawer, my teeth in a cup
My eyes on the table until I wake up.
Ere sleep overtakes me, I say to myself
‘Is there anything else I could lay on the shelf?’
I get up each morning and dust off my wits
And pick up the paper and read the ‘Obits’
If my name is missing I know I'm not dead
So I have a good breakfast and go back to bed.
Happy Christmas!
Harold Fletcher 
 NEWSLETTER SEPTEMBER 1992
SADDLE MEWS RESIDENTS' ASSOCIATION
Dear…
John Keats, 1795–1821, described Autumn as the ‘Season of mists and mellow fruitfulness ’and observed that ‘her rich attire falls rustling to her knees’.
No mention of the fact that the Autumn gales will soon have her rich attire dangling round her ankles without a leaf to cover her dignity.
Mind you, he also said ‘A thing of beauty is a joy forever’.
Certainly our Village is maturing nicely.
Don't take my word for it.
Our Secretary has received a letter from Mr. Doug Baird, Press Officer for I.O.M. Tourism, to the effect that Saddle Mews has won the Island in Bloom award for the BEST VILLAGE — no mean achievement, and even better than last year when we were awarded 1st prize in the ESTATE AND NEIGHBOURHOOD section .
This reflects greatly to the credit of individual residents who labour lovingly and unstintingly to beautify our surroundings to the benefit of all.
We look forward to further aesthetic improvement when Mr. David Gregg eventually erects his ornamental signs at the Groves Road and Castletown Road entrances.
There have been mixed feelings about the siting of the WHEELIE BINS.
Your committee considered various sitings and concluded that the present position is most suitable for the 3 large 1100 litre bins which are eventually to replace the exiting heterogeneous collection.
Incidentally, would residents please ensure that the covers and properly replaced — otherwise wind and rain can play havoc with contents.
It is with some trepidation that I mention our feathered friends — LARUS CANUS — the common gull.
They are big strong birds, adequately equipped by nature to forage for food by the seaside where there is food in abundance.
Not surprisingly they take the easy way out when food is put out for them each day.
Unfortunately they are no  respecters of persons or property as car owners find to their dismay.
Besides they pinch the goldfish.
Please don't encourage them.
Congratulations to Stanley and Gertie Briggs who celebrated their Diamond Wedding Anniversary on August 8th.
May they enjoy many more Anniversaries.
It may not be generally known that on the first Tuesday of each month there is an Interdenominational Church Service at 10.30 am at the Nursing Home which is usually well attended.
Sadly we have to report the death of Mrs. de Beaufre Apps.
One of the drawbacks to being of mature years is the  tendency to forget or mislay things — like keys.
In the temporary absence of the Warden it would save possible inconvenience if a spare key were to be left with a friend or neighbour.
NOTES FOR YOUR DIARY.
The Annual Christmas lunch will be held on Wednesday December 9th at Molly's Kitchen, Groudle Road, Onchan.
Tickets priced as last year — –15.
Mr. Frank Compton, committee member, of No. 118 has kindly agreed to act as Secretary for this event which has proved very popular and enjoyable in previous years.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING.
For your future reference, the committee has decided to hold this meeting on the last Monday of April of each year.
The next A.G.M. will, therefore, be held on 26th April 1993.
Next instalment in December!
Harold Fletcher.
Vice chairman.
IMPORTANT
NEIGHBOURHOOD WATCH
This is a very important aspect of our Village life.
Much appreciation is due to those residents who have brought various incidents to attention resulting in appropriate action.
Now Autumn has arrived and the evenings closing in, it is important that extra vigilance be exercised, especially in the absence of our Village Manager/Warden.
In this respect any resident with a problem, please do not hesitate to contact any member of your Committee.
 NEWSLETTER JUNE 1992
SADDLEMEWS OWNER/OCCUPIER ASSOCIATION
Dear
Flaming June has transformed the Village.
Such trees as have escaped the chainsaw are now in full leaf, the grass is looking crisp and healthy, with the exception of the brutal scars inflicted on the ‘meadow’ stretch along the Castletown Road by the lorries of the heavy handed tree fellers.
The horticultural efforts of individual residents are a joy to behold, and reflect great credit on those concerned.
All of which bodes well for our chances in the ‘Britain in Bloom’(Prettiest Village — or whatever) Competition at the end of July.
Any further efforts on the part of residents will be beneficial to us all from the aesthetic point of view if from no other.
Your Committee, unpaid, unheralded and unsung, hiding its light under a bushel, has laboured untiringly in your interests.
Like the stately swan gliding serenely over the water, few suspect that under the surface the legs and feet are going at a rate of knots, with the result that the following items are in the pipeline, if not already attended to:—
1.
The light over No. 6 which has been burning night and day for 2 months, now operates as it should — from dusk to dawn.
2.
The fencing at Groves Road is to be repaired when funds are available.
3.
The birds nests on the roofs of 81, 84, 110 and others have been reported to Messrs. Cresta, and we are assured that these will be attended to.
4.
New and improved street signs bearing the legend ‘Saddle Mews Village’— Private — are awaiting costings.
Once these are to hand your Committee can decide whether or not we can afford the additional cost of up-grading the quality of the signs.
5.
Regarding the condition of the top pond.
Philip Holmes is keeping it topped up with water during the drought conditions.
Mr. Kirkwood is of the opinion that the luscious and varied growth of plant life is an asset to, and not a detraction from the overall look of the Village.
Since it is impossible to please everyone, there are bound to be divergent opinions on this.
6.
The emergency call bells are now working correctly.
In the opinion of the Committee, Mr. Philip Kirkwood has the best interests of the Residents at heart, and does his utmost to administer the funds available for the maintenance and general well-being of the Village, fairly and impartially.
On the premise that ‘too many cooks spoil the broth’, he asks us to reiterate that day to day management of the Village is in the hands of the Warden, Mrs. Pat Holmes, and any guidance, questions or advice on such matters should be addressed to her in the first instance.
This particularly refers to our gardener.
He has strict instructions to ignore all interference and diversions by individual residents, and to liaise with and receive instructions from Pat Holmes or Cresta Management Office only.
Sadly, we have to report the death of Mrs. Nell Cowin on 23rd May, barely a year after her husband.
On a less sombre note, Philip — Pat's better half and General Factotum, has made his mark as an Archer — of the bow and arrow type — not the Radio soap opera.
He won the third round of the Isle of Man Archery League long metric three.
Several residents have reported that their milk bottles have been torn open by birds.
A jam jar on top of the bottle seems to be the answer.
That's all for now Folks!
COMMITTEE