

Dearest 
Now that my machine seems to be working tolerably well again, here is some news, along with renewed thanks for the welcome and lovely meals whilst I was with you — and I was of course interested and glad to meet  and to know they would come and try and help with anything if you ring them.
I also hope June continues to get better from her bruising and nasty fall.
And let me know if Jean hears if the police catch ‘her’ Winchester burglars .
All went quite well in London.
I reached the  flat just after  so helped her carry clean sheets and towels upstairs as well as my luggage and B. The two bedrooms in the flat are small —‘compact’ in estate agency jargon I expect!— and the bathroom is very nice with a washing machine in it.
Then there is one big light airy sitting/dining room with the kitchen beyond it  accessed from the sitting/dining  room by part of the wall being taken away rather than a door, which allows the light from the equally tall and large kitchen window to permeate the sitting room, creating an airy light whole in a nice way.
It seems  knew the previous owner who had adapted his mother's former whole house.
The curtain material is lovely, and there are two sofas in the sitting area — one red, which is also a comfy sofabed and one blue, which matches an armchair.
Nice, if thoroughly upper-crust (very nice quality of  reproduction and  form ) rural pictures of pheasants and so on around the walls, plus antique tables and chairs bought by  along with all the modern up-to-the-minute equipment such as Compact disc music players and a facsimile machine (which transmits pages of written material verbatim and as sent by the telephone wires).
The kitchen is quite beautifully designed and has a staggering amount of storage space, along with really small double sink and a washing up machine, and electric gadgets of every variety.
Even the fridge freezer is hidden behind matching proper wooden doors to match the rest.
And the greatest joy of all to report is that young  has got a job in the ‘City’ working with some options traders, which is what he had months ago set his heart on.
He had been for a second interview last Tuesday morning and had a nail biting few days till all was confirmed on Friday last for a start yesterday, 22nd March.
I do hope it works out for him and am sure he has not found these last few months at all easy as he starts his working life.
felt too tired to drive me on to ESF's house, so I got there by bus, or rather by two buses (an easy change), the first starting from about a hundred yards from  and the other stopping just behind the Zoo by Primrose Hill and only a few minutes from Eduardo.
Eduardo took me out to a nearby restaurant on the Tuesday evening, saying he was too lazy to cook and that he  does not often nowadays have any or many chances to take women out (!), so in return on the Wednesday I got food to make up the rest of a meal using two wild ducks  had generously given me to roast, and we had the second one cold on the Thursday after my second meeting.
On the Wednesday morning, Eduardo and I had a foray to his son's flat in Tufnell Park to get some things Francis and Audrey need for the house in Brussels now they are working there.
After a shop at Sainsburys in Camden Town and a quick cold meat and salad lunch I set off by Tube to Finsbury Circus to one of the big offices of BP for a Management and Membership Committee meeting of the British Association of Industrial  Editors .
It was an interesting if much too long meeting lasting from 2pm to about 6.15pm — but interesting in that, with rather few of us there, it was a chance to range over a whole lot of issues on and off the agenda, and a chance to appreciate the efforts, interests, aspirations and voluntary input of many others — though of course they get support from their activities from their employers.
On the Thursday morning early I set off to go to Peter Jones before my meeting in Markham Square and I put your birthday money (for which my thanks) towards a tiny little black leather bag about the size of the one I came south with, as it fits under my jacket without  looking too bulky and my old similar one, also from the John Lewis partnership some years ago, recently gave up the ghost after three years of relentless daily use.
and  had narked and sparked at my comment I only had one decentish pair of black shoes for meetings and/or interviews and I have remedied that now back here using X's advanced (if a little critical) birthday money.
(I am still smarting at the MILLSTONE remark about poor little B, at which  simply roared with laughter, told me to ignore it and that he,, was merely getting crabbit, old, critical and jealous…).
But to revert to John Lewis and other nearby shops, I was amazed by the price of clothes in London and so on— just another world, to say nothing of the prices and clothes in  's magazines like Vogue and Homes & Gardens.
Charles , in Markham Square, did not seem very well briefed on the proposed development work I am doing.
I had understood he knew  the man who is to chair the said development committee and it transpires he does not.
A nice young man, but I gather he spends most of his life  playing sport and looking after their landed interests.
AH! how the other half live, but if he works hard and pulls in some loot, all to the good.
He mentioned he is also involved in a charity exercise for King Hospital — which is obviously linked to his family nearby.
The current, soon to retire, director of the Association, who came with me to meet him had been in London for a meeting of the environmental advisory group for  and so he was having a taxi to Kings Cross which I jumped into too and got dropped off at Goodge Street, right outside the door of my next (Industrial Editors) meeting with just a few minutes to spare, so that went more smoothly than one might have ever dreamt or hoped for.
The first of the two meetings then was of the regional chairman of BAIE (and I was standing in for ours in Scotland) followed by a meeting of the Council of BAIE.
There seem to be an extraordinary number of people on the Council, which makes it unwieldy in my view, but that is so often the way with professional organisations of similar nature.
A mass of mail when I got back here — replies saying NO for example for the part time post of editor of the Episcopal Church paper up here and a NO from a firm opening up a new range of discount grocery stores.
The pearl, the job with the , has yet to be advertised, and I still await the outcome of my February discussions with , who had two areas of interest to me — one in community affairs and one in training.
A former colleague, and the wife of a senior executive is coming to have lunch with me tomorrow and so I might raise the thing with her!
got home late last night — left N. at 2.30 which was 1.30pm our time and then got, just — with literally only about four minutes to spare once he had rung me, the 6pm train from Kings Cross.
I toyed with the idea of walking the station to meet him, but, having a sore throat and an impending cold, had gone out to get cough sweets from the ‘Paki shop’ just before it closes at 10pm and, coming up the street  , the heavens opened and a mass of snow began to fall, so I came in and stayed in, so that  's freshly home made onion soup was ready as he came up the stairs.
Deemed delicious, he ate the lot and then had a cheese omelette and pronounced himself satisfied, having only had a nasty old British rail sandwich en route.
Today we have had snow again this morning, but quite a nice sunny afternoon.
I went to association and  came in with me to see the place and to meet the outgoing director and the nice part time secretary.
When I came home the sun was shining brilliantly and warmly into the front of the house so I first of all had a read about the similar groups and then had a quick and short snooze till the phone rang and I began work on the laptop in the sunshine, as the battery capacity lasts about an hour or so.
Even so, I do not think they have mended the battery correctly as it said it was about to close down and stop when the battery meter said the battery was five-eights full…
If I feel strong enough I shall go back to John Lewis, but the whole previous saga was nearly too much for me.
got cod roe and fish cakes for supper and bought four salmon heads (OH how I hate those glazed eyes looking at me when first one steams them to get the good flesh off) for soup.
He is now talking of going to the theatre tonight with some  American widow friend passing through Edinburgh, as I said I felt I should not in case I coughed.
Said widow and her late husband had been kind to  on his 1991 visit to the USA, and had originally met  via very old friends of ours here — husband of whom had been one of Jack's first students in New  Zealand in about 1950!
The Warrington bomb is sad.
The tube I was in on Wednesday had to go slowly through a deserted and evacuated Victoria Station and one's heart beats a little fast wondering if something will go off.
Anyway, life must go on or the terrorists will terrorise us into changed patterns of living, bastards that they are.
All for now, save much love and a big hug,
Thank you so much for your generous Christmas present — as I explained on the phone, John bought, the day of its publication party, a book compiled by one of his colleagues.
The balance I have put towards something for us both — a new continental quilt for our bed here — and I got a king sized one, as JOHN always seems to get it all, but this may be big enough to let me hang on to my side.
It is very warm and rather bulkier than the old one, though the nice girl in John Lewis told me they get thin and tired after about nine years — and mine has done twelve, so it is going to go to  for our use there.
Stupidly — but I did have a lot of luggage — cheeses, books for John and my hill boots — I did not take it out with me this trip.
kept warm by using a sleeping bag when he stayed.
I am a bit embarrassed not to have written sooner but, inter alia, have been a little ‘below par’ this last week with a stinking cold and sore throat.
Madeleine came up to see me last Monday for a couple of days and arrived with a sore throat too, so she had a well deserved rest after the excesses of their very social Christmas and life and also encouraged me, the weather and the throats keeping us indoors, to do some MUCH needed turning out.
We sorted all the papers I brought from ex employers and quite a lot of other stuff too, and I have put out several sackfuls of old paper and so on…
I know it sounds daft, but I needed a push from her, as it were, to get started.
I have also, since her departure, caught up on the job applications correspondence, which in itself takes time.
I have now four inches of tightly packed paper — keeping mostly only the replies, to save space, as the ‘dole office’ nowadays frequently ask people to take in evidence of job search.
I hope that, if they ask me, they will let me take in alphabetical chunks at a time, as the full whack weighs about a stone!!!
The trip to Italy went well as did the few days when one of the twins,(full name Alexander) was with us.
Having previously discussed it with John, I declined to join them on their expedition to the temples at P. as I feel it is important to them both to have time alone with each other, especially as  is at the moment a bit jealous of the twin at school here (though of course he, chose to opt out of Gordonstoun) and has anyway not spent as much time with John in recent years as  no 2! has.
Given that they had the ‘weather works’ that day in the shape of sleet, hail, wind and rain, whilst simultaneously a view of quite a lot of snow on Vesuvius, I was glad that I had stayed at home with a good  book .
I got quite a lot of reading done — John managed to persuade one of the nice Italian staff at the British Council Library to let me have two more books than my five allowed, so I had them on her ticket!
Then a British colleague at the Zoological station for this and next academic year lent me another four, and I found a couple on our shelves that I had not read before, so was well away.
The weather was so vile most of the time, and John so busy that we had quite a contented and simple domestic time, John whizzing away at the  computer and me in the (cane) rocking chair with my feet up on another reading away.
Shades of  Darby and Joan??
We went to a divorcee colleague of John for Christmas lunch.
Her daughter works in Rome but lives with her mother when in Naples and her ex=husband, still a good friend, lives also very close and has the adult son, but they combine for Christmas, being on good terms.
A delicious meal — pasta (layers of lasagna) with broccoli and cheese sauce to start, roast meat, salad, then fantastic local neapolitan sausages and then a gateau thing (on which I ‘passed’) and fruit and cheese (on which I also ‘passed’).
There was also a mathematician there from the university who John has known for about thirty years and a young man from Rome, maybe the daughter's boyfriend, who John also knew, as he, the young man, is the son of a scientific contact of John's in Rome and the said Dave had sent son to John about two years ago to discuss what university course the son should do and where.
Small world.
's journey to Naples from Berlin on the day and evening of 1st January got a little fraught.
John had advised him to transfer from Rome airport to the railway station to avoid a five hour wait at Rome, but oh! no! big boots  insisted on flying, although the late flight from Rome is notorious — and, of course, just after John had left for Naples airport, having to do quite a lot of the journey on foot, as late evening buses stop at a given time on Public Holidays, rang to say that Alitalia was alleging weather problems at Naples and so the passengers would be transferred by coach arriving at 2am.
As there were only ten such passengers it was in fact a decision on economics and profit and not the weather.
I tried, in vain, to ring the airport to get a message to John.
He of course found out what was happening and the airport was deserted except for the  CARABINIERI , the particular type of police for such jobs.
He found that they were  suddenly eating pizza and jokingly said oh they might have got him one, so  one of them used a police car to take him to the nearest all night pizza place and then he walked back to the airport and waited, having done a deal with the one taxi driver who was there, and he and  shared a taxi, arriving home c. 0215 and then proceeded to have a meal of a MASS of pasta and sauce previously made by me, and of a type which both boys always ask day in day out when here or there!
Next day we went to a very homely lunch party with a friend who has her very vivacious, elegant and almost  magisterial 87-year-old mother living with her in winter (she spends the summer in cooler Torino in the north), Antonietta Dohrn, whose grandfather, the close friend of Charles Darwin, who funded and founded the Zoological Station.
There was also there a vociferous (John and  later said they thought he might have been drunk) Russian, about 35–40 who is currently on a short term study period at Florence University into the history of space travel and  aeronautics .
Given that this is a passion of  's it was very useful, given that he speaks no Italian.
He conversed with the Russian in French, and with Antonietta in German, so the party was very abstemious yet convivial.
My luggage had been weighed down quite heavily with cheeses — two pieces of packaged stilton from Marks and Spencer and four small cheddars.
Each of the six weighed half a kilo so I was glad John came to meet me on arrival.
He leapt off a regular bus — the excellent airport service seems currently in abeyance, threw himself through the doors and yelled at me to hurry, which I did, and we caught the same bus back into town.
He had asked the driver to wait two minutes whilst he saw whether or not I was through customs and in the foyer.
The Sabena flight out left Edinburgh well over an hour late, so I only had fifteen minutes or so for my Naples transfer at Brussels.
The ground staff at Edinburgh were very helpful, and when we finally boarded (in really raw and biting cold and -2 degrees centigrade) thanked me for having my luggage so clearly labelled as it had helped them get it to the hold doors for immediate removal at Brussels.
I had in fact made my own labels using some vulgarly bright pink fluorescent cardboard I had found lying about.
So many people nowadays have, as I do, these nondescript ‘squashy bags’ that it distinguishes it quite easily.
 We had lunch on New Year's day with another university colleague — a nice doctor who is a psychiatric consultant at a big hospital called the  POLICLINICO .
He had been on the phone in the morning and had gone in to work to check that all is well.
Given recent scandals about absenteeism in hospitals of many types and sizes in Italy, the carabinieri are doing spot and frequent checks — in one hospital in Naples recently, only 40% of the relevant medical and nursing staff were actually in…and, as a result on that occasion, about 80 people were arrested and charged with absenteeism and dereliction of duty.
We also went to the cinema one night to see an English (? or American) film dubbed into Italian, and starring Jeremy Irons.
I enjoyed it and followed most of the Italian OK.
John has been in Genoa and Sienna this last week.
The Genoa trip was to finalise an academic paper for publication with a nice colleague (who I have met) and the Sienna bit was to give two lectures.
He is due here around 27th as he has a seminar to give in the psychology department of Edinburgh University on 28th.
As you may recall, I may have a meeting of the Education Committee of the British Association of Industrial Editors in London on 29th — though these are always subject to last minute change.
His research here is worse than esoteric — he will be working with the man who holds the KOESTLER chair of para-psychology into the extra sensory and advance perception of weather changes.
(I ask you, and here is me just looking to earn an honest crust).
Academics are very privileged indeed to get a year's sabbatical on full pay after only five years full time with a department in Naples.
I have been asked to do a couple of days work in Aberdeen sometime next month and also some part time development/fund-raising work for a charity (The  Association for the Preservation of Rural Scotland).
The interview on 8th at the Western General Hospital is partly fund-raising and John is advising me very strongly not to take it, and I am sure he is right.
My second interview with the WM COMPANY PLC is on 25th, Madeleine and Bella's birthdays, which might augur well…
There were also three advertisements in THE SCOTSMAN on Friday to which I am replying, and the WS Society job has yet to be advertised.
That would probably be the most suitable and several senior Edinburgh lawyers are aware of my interest and keen to support me.
All for now — it is chucking down hail, so I am afraid it is the post lift near here tomorrow Monday and not the trek to the main sorting office.
MEA CULPA!
Belated thanks for a delicious buffet the other night and, more particularly, for including me in such a happy occasion.
May all the students you and  have go from strength to strength…
The main purpose of this letter, however, is to enclose payments in respect of.
As you know, you had the Fifty Pounds from  direct, and I have thanked him profusely for painting the sitting room walls!
The enclosed cheque is made up as follows:-and my personal NatWest cheque number 000833 is enclosed in the sum of One Hundred and Eight Pounds Thirty Pence (£108.30).
My friend , who has stayed at the cottage before, is going up 24th or so for about a week, so there will be her rent @ £7 per day and electricity @ 10p per unit (to cover standing charges etc) to come to you in due course.
Hope this keeps us straight and up to date.
I am sure that, despite my departure from   (the gate mender!) and D.E.
(the wall painter) will go up again.
Thankfully, and I pruned the roses and  scythed the nettles at the back to help Betty and Archie as Archie now finds it difficult.
If you wanted to send up any Christmas present to them in advance, I am sure    would help with something small if you drop it off.
She knows to turn the water off, drain the tank and so on and turn electricity off and count units used etc.
So she knows she may hear from you I am copying this letter to .
Much love to you both — and renewed thanks for including me last week.
It was deeply appreciated, especially at this difficult time.
Dear 
Glad to know you had a good visit to  — but am amazed you only used ten units of electricity.
I imagine you are (a) hardy and (b) had a bath in the proverbial asses milk on return to !
I say this as  and one or two others were there for only about 28 hours recently and used sixty units of electricity…!
Anyway, please could you thank GEORGE most sincerely for his endeavours — the fact that everyone pulls their weight up there ensures the place runs at minimal cost to all users.
(I am told the two storey six-bed house first on left as one descends the hill rents for £350 or so, yes £350, in high summer).
Any comments you have on the general amenity of cottage would be useful.
Did my copious scribbles help or hinder — and you'll see I now have my ‘Apple’ back after a saga which made Monty Python, Esther Rantzen and Bernard Levin's saga about his mother and the North Thames gas board look like child's play.
I could KILL  and their non-service.
And so to £: could you send me a cheque for £8 per day and power at 10p a unit, and get in touch sometime to confirm the wanted June dates.
Am busy doing near voluntary work for the  — if you felt amazingly generous and like joining I'd accept a cheque for £8 in their favour too — IT does staggering work on a shoestring the size of vanishing silk thread.
Joking apart, they do a really remarkable job, for example scrutinising and reporting on .
Keep in touch — I do miss you upstairs.
Julia Ashtiany came to lunch recently which was nice.
Funny neighbours now — spill fruit skins, rubbish and muck and even lots of broken glass this weekend on stairs and no effort to pick up clean up…
Much love
Rental of  's cottage is agreed at Eight Pounds (£8) per day, you to let  me know dates of arrival and departure, as I am sure  also will.
You referred frequently to how well you know  and the village, so I am sure she will, subject to your approach, be willing to go in and switch on a convector in each of the two rooms and read the meter.
Odd notes — adapted as you know the village.
Keep gates shut and treat roadside gate with care — it is FRAIL.
Payphone along the village — so take supply of coins.
Electricity: read meter on arrival and departure — cost is ten pence per unit to cover standing charge as well as unit cost.
Do NOT switch on immersion heater until you are positive the tanks are full — and see ‘Water’ below.
TAKE OUT ALL PLUGS ON DEPARTURE AND TURN OFF ELEC MAINS
DONALD'S BIG OLD STYLE RADIO ON SHELF THOUGHT UNSAFE
FRIDGE PLUG TO RIGHT OF IT AT LOW LEVEL ON WALL
METER IN HALL ON RIGHT AS YOU ENTER FRONT DOOR
WATER: mains stopcock beneath loose floorboard under sink.
Use pliers (should be in bathroom) to close the valve below tank above bath.
Follow instructions in the cottage re water on and off (arrival/departure)— and allow about 30 minutes for tanks to drain fully before departure — always slower than one thinks!
Coal, firelighters, kindling, firewood: buy and take your own.
(Ask Ian Mackenzie if he can sell you a bag).
CLEANING ITEMS and CLEANING THE HOUSE
Take washing up and house cleaning liquid — small amounts and leave them so we all rotate on this.
Ditto lavatory paper, soap, rubbish bags, shampoo etc.
Double bag the rubbish or the big wheelie bin gets revolting.
(First bag can fit into orange bin to right of cooker)
TO FILL WATER SYSTEM
Close drain tap under tank above bath.
Close all taps expect one HOT water tap
Open water main under floor under sink
When water has had time to fill tanks and flows continuously from HWT close tap
You can then turn on immersion
TO DRAIN WATER SYSTEM
Turn OFF immersion heater.
Turn OFF water main under floor under sink
Open all taps and drain hot water cylinder into bath.
CLEANING THE HOUSE ON DEPARTURE
Please clean to  perfection.
Empty the fridge, wipe it out, collect up thawed water from its freezer section and leave the door propped open.
Please do not leave the board mounted OS map on the wall, prop it down by table between cushions — sounds dotty but I hope it will keep it dryer rather than being against damp wall.
JOBS NEEDING DOING — IF YOU ARE FEELING DECENT
See if gutters need unblocking — leaves get in during winter.
(Tools in shed — key by barometer)
Front air vent below window in flower bed outside small bedroom needs clearing to keep in fully functional.
CHURCH AND SHOPS ETC
Assume you know all about these…
LINEN AND BEDDING
Limited bedding and few pillows — people seem to prefer to take their own.
Take bathtowels, drying up towels, pillowcases, handtowels, sheets and pillowcases and other bedlinen — most people prefer own for hygiene.
KITCHEN
Reasonable range of equipment, china and glass.
Please report breakages.
Take own sharp kitchen knives, clingfilm and foil
FOOD AND DRINK
Please use only your own — unless you are snowed in, when use, report and pay for any necessities found.
Stuff there is for those who may arrive without a car.
Longlife milk always useful.
Betty can give you number of shop and advise current shop delivery day and opening hours.
The petrol station at Shiel Bridge has a good range of groceries.
OTHER USEFUL ITEMS
First aid kit — which as climbers you should anyway have.
(Local GP said to be good)
Compass, maps, flares, boots, Scottish Tourist Board excellent book ‘1001 Things to See’, transistor radio, books, playing cards, board games, spare light bulb (say 60 watt)
MOUNTAIN RESCUE
Nearest team Glenelg — secretary  Locally, contact  at Corran, team member
Thank you for your invitation, declined as I am long since engaged for 6th if in Edinburgh.
For unexpected professional and family reasons this looks increasingly unlikely.
In any event, my movements are dictated by no income for such social travelling and my job search.
When you said you had been ‘meaning to ask me for some time’, did you mean over the five and a half lonely years to date of my grass widowhood or merely since I've had no car and no earnings?
I meant to pop the enclosed in a drawer of the chest of drawers to thank you for its removal — better late than never, and the card early to save a stamp.
Will and Deirdre came to supper recently — poor dears it was an uninspired meal but their visit cheered me immeasurably…
I am very fond of them both.
In midst of massive dental treatment — it feels like the rebuilding of Windsor Castle in my jaw.
Could we please NOT exchange presents this Christmas — has such dreadful expenses because of and I should prefer to give more to charity than I anyway do.
At the time , you sent us a delightful card, which I still have, offering good wishes and expressing the hope we might one day meet.
In consequence, I was particularly disappointed you were not able to accept the invitation I'd extended via the boys last year.
I am writing direct to say I hope we may meet when you are in the UK next month, and sorry I am you were too busy to manage even a few words on the ‘phone earlier this week.
Your response to this letter and our meeting, will, I hope, allow me  to enhance even further  's position under my Will, which needs changing following a bereavement.
Ultimately, it may be affected by my present precarious work circumstances.
The recession here remains deep, and, in common, of course , with many other middle, senior and even junior managers, I am worried about recovery.
I am glad that you have been able successfully to run your own practice.
I hope it affords you both personal and professional satisfaction?
I have marked this letter confidential, since I should prefer the proposals re my Will to remain confidential at this particular time.
Please respect this.
Many thanks for the reading suggestion — it raises many areas of discussion!
In order to try and get a resident's permit for the car you are so generously letting me have temporary use of, I need a mass of  bumf for the Regional Council in due course — they require sight of, and in original, car registration documents, MOT certificate, insurance certificate, driving licence, evidence of ownership or tenancy lease of this house (!) plus evidence of payment of property tax!
All of this has been introduced to try and stop the fraudulent or phantom residents who are commuters ‘trying it on’.
Last time I even had to produce my wedding certificate!!
I also need a formal letter in original from  as owner of the vehicle that I am the permitted registered keeper and user — in the same way as I had to have such a letter from .
The difficulty is I am not an employee of yours, so I hope they accept it.
Sorry to be a bore but the Council is getting stricter and stricter on all of this.
is now nitpicking and harassing me to a degree which might lead me yet again to write to my MP.
I have today received two assessments demanding early payment of substantial sums (over £ ) in the absence of the last returns due.
Neither is even marked an estimate.
Having allowed a particular expense for some eight years, they are now hassling me on it for the year 1991.
Why the hell they can't spend their energy pursuing the likes of  is beyond me.
As a result, it looks as though any rethink of  this weekend goes up the spout in favour of the ghastliness of paper for the beastly bureaucrats.
Hope Norman's card arrives all right and that you have a really super weekend and party.
Dear 
Thank you very much indeed for the gift which arrived yesterday.
It is most generous of you, when I know you need to keep your house warm too!
I am slowly getting to grips with the laptop, but sadly, on 13th, lost not only the biggest filling in my teeth but also twenty pages of type this size on paper this size.
Colin  gave the wrong advice about getting floppy disc out when jammed and then I deleted the stuff off the hard disc.
A disaster as contacts list is all fax numbers, telephone numbers and postcodes and therefore very fiddly to do, as I had had to do all the alphabetising manually which made it even slower.
Work proceeds slowly at the training place but it is a real joy going there ;the girls are all so nice, and it is a REMARKABLE cost-free facility.
Bella comes too, much approved of, and behaves impeccably (or else she would stay here, I assure you).
Did not get the  job — dear , former [xx]Manager, drove me up there (6 miles north of Perth) and then on to Dunkeld where he insisted on giving me lunch — he had originally thought of taking me to Gleneagles, but I had to get back to the outplacement people — and did so, only to find ‘my’ counsellor had, for the third time, failed to keep an appointment with me.
The job description for the  post has come — not for me, not enough experience and they want someone with multi-site retail experience as well as PR experience, ie someone from PR in banking, insurance or building society.
Wait to hear re Bank (ie if any i/view), and ditto Health Education Board for Scotland, Common Purpose (a fascinating organisation about which you may have read in the papers), the Scottish Rugby Union (!) and some others.
is also going to help me in an  approach to Michael Shea, former Palace press officer and diplomat (see Who's Who)— I met Shea last night at  one of the three seminars and receptions which  has set up to mark the summit.
Each has been very interesting, and, having offered to a partner,, to give the firm a vote of thanks at the end, was encouraged so to do as yesterday was the last in the series.
X's secretary, formerly for eight years secretary to Judge  now of the European Court of Justice and formerly an advocate who lives just along , came with me to see  get the Royal Bank/Univ Alumnus of the Year Award on Saturday.
I had also got a ticket for another friend and neighbour,, whose late father held the Salvesen Chair of European Governmental Studies in the University here.
I knew her father through doing UINL and CCBE stuff whilst at Law Society.
 LS of S has now opened a Brussels office in conjunction with the ‘English’ Law Society.
Can't remember if I ever sent you a copy of the autumn BAIE programme — the Intellectual Property Seminar is now 14th January next with a variable member and non-member fee, to try and boost numbers from undersubscribed earlier date.
All for now — in haste to get 5pm mail.
Dearest 
Here is another letter on the famous ‘laptop’ computer-cum-word processor.
I am indebted to husband John for pushing me into the purchase at a time I obviously needed the machine but was not very full of vim and zip to get it and learn it.
What I would have done without it in recent weeks I do not know.
It is an ASTONISHING piece of equipment — and I long to know how to use other design and text layout programmes which can be purchased and loaded into it, but want to cast around for sound advice as the programmes cost significant sums each.
I have felt really WELL this weekend — and it is a true joy to feel suddenly rather fitter in mind and body.
One of my longest standing friends commented to me on Thursday evening how I had started to laugh again and was much more relaxed rather than— and I quote —‘the grey ghastly sight you have looked for weeks’—(shades, if you recall of  's amazing remarks after my April  visit when forced to detour to document sign — and, incidentally on that  score, we have hit yet another legal obstacle, so heaven knows when that will all get sorted out).
Anyway, I had a purposeful shop yesterday walking along to REALFOODS where one can buy lentils, rice, chickpeas and an Aladdin's Cave of wonderful other things from herbs to dates, apricots to honey and tea, nuts, spices and organic veg and yoghourt etc.
I treated myself to some dried dates — very ‘more-ish’ so they have been guzzled by this Sunday evening!
But gosh, were they good…
John loves them too.
I also got two fleshy herrings and a couple of smoked mackerel (and a few tiny pieces of sole to put in the freezer as, sadly, John's nephew and nice Irish girlfriend cannot come to supper this weekend — they were IMMENSELY cheering and encouraging when here recently).
The live organic yoghourt can be the basis of some home made — the bacteria/enzymes or whatever they are  so much stronger in the good quality organic live yoghourts than some of the supermarket type).
Lots of exercise this week — one benefit of not having a car!
I went to CHRISTIAN SALVESEN PLC's head office to see their Group P.R.O.
who is a tough and widely experienced chap and he gave me a few more ideas to mull over.
Other PR people are getting the push — four out of seven for example at the head office of COSTAIN the big international civil engineering and construction company.
I recently helped one of the Costain girls on some research and she has sent me the final document, which I suspect will one day be of invaluable professional use, so it was nice she remembered.
As you will have heard perhaps on the radio or TV the Royal Bank of Scotland is to reduce its staff by 3,500 over about three years, mostly by natural wastage.
I was told in confidence last week, so by next week it will be public, that there are to be 200 redundancies now, and the rest will, hopefully, be effected by natural wastage.
I walked — in amazing Cecil B de Mille film type downpour yesterday for tea with a young lawyer son of one of John's contemporaries at Gordonstoun, so that he could help me finalise the leaflet for a seminar on 14th January in respect of INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY, which many think is akin to copyright and so on but it embraces much more than that nowadays, especially in respect of computers, TV and sound usage, collaboration in respect of research and development projects which eat investments budgets and so on.
He kindly gave me a lift home en route to get his bike: he had a nasty fall off it last week and so it had to be repaired.
I have also had three two-hour sessions at the job agency which has the training facility, and, having taken down some scribbled notes and typed them up have gone back over it all to improve my notes, so that I can continue re-reading them till I improve my knowledge.
On Wednesday evening I went to the second of three seminars at my lawyers to do with  Europe — set up to mark the SUMMIT.
The new (American!) chief executive of Edinburgh District Council was there, and I reckon he must be a remarkably well informed, purposeful professional of substantial intellect.
Dynamic too.
The two speakers were the man who heads the EC Office in Edinburgh (who spoke and did not really touch the first and certainly not the second of his two advertised subjects on the programme) and the other one of the law partners — who was informed and effective, so it was interesting, followed by wine and superb little sandwiches and canapes.
One of the secretaries kindly dropped me off on her car route home, which — as it was bucketing rain yet again — I appreciated.
One of the other secretaries in the firm — who works in fact for my own  solicitor — is coming with a friend and myself next Saturday to see Judge David Edward (a Judge at the European Court of Justice) receive the ‘Royal Bank of Scotland and Edinburgh University Alumnus of the Year Award’— the secretary because she worked for D.A.
when he was an Advocate and then a QC and Kate Mitchell, who works for Christies, because David succeeded her father, after his death, as Professor of European Governmental Studies before he, David, was recently promoted to the EC Judiciary.
Neither had been invited, so I managed to get invitations for them organised, which each seems greatly to have appreciated.
One of my other SCOTTISH OFFICE contacts has asked me to go in for a sandwich lunch on Wednesday (25th), which is kind.
At a guess, he may have heard from his colleague who came here to lunch that I feel rather isolated professionally at the moment.
I had a perm on Friday and then rushed off to the dentist for an emergency white cement type filling to fill my Friday 13th loss (!)— maddening to have to go back again as it is the other side of town, but I walked the two miles or so home, along with Bella.
She was refused entry at the dentist on formal hygiene regulation grounds, and luckily, oh so luckily, I'd met an old friend in a shop opposite the dentist so he took Bella off for a walk.
He and his wife have two puppies, but he was thankfully alone and ready to rise to the occasion.
Friday evening saw me at the National Gallery with  her boyfriend and, quite literally, hundreds of other people, to the opening of the annual exhibition, sponsored this year by BP, of the  Scottish Artists and Craftsmen.
Unusually for me, I saw a few paintings and so on which I thought were lovely, but of course purchase is quite out of the question — and anyway we have no wall space left here!
I saw a lot of old friends, and wore a dashing outfit purchased at perhaps an extravagance in a London second hand shop — but from the compliments, I feel now it was worth it and that, feeling good in it, I will wear it quite a lot.
Better stop and walk to the Post Office Sorting Office — the light is closing in and I would rather do the mile there and mile back in daylight.
The Fire at Windsor Castle is sad, but I hope, given the feeling of so many towards the monarchy and the Queen not paying tax, that she decides to pay some of the restoration herself.
She must be one of few with quite so many homes and such inordinate financial reserves.
I've been interested at the strength of comments made to be on similar lines by people I  thought out-and-out-royalists.
Had a splendid lie-in till about 10am — finishing one of Jilly Cooper's novels.
Immensely readable, and very funny and competent use of the English language though it is really pretty trashy.
I've also just been lent a political fiction saga by one of Mrs T's former advisers which is said to be excellent.
Had a nice letter from one of the Romanian boys you met very concerned about my job position — he had heard from one of the others who'd been in London in the summer and saw 
Much Much love as always.
Every time I wonder about going to  to join George and to use my TEFL qualification, I wonder how I would REALLY do teaching English to people, though I guess I have had quite a lot of ad hoc and ungrammatical (!) experience with the various language students who have stayed here.
Forgive the typed letter — bit impersonal, but I am trying to get to speedy grips with the little apple laptop powerbook 100 which I got when George was home — heaven alone knows how I would have done without it in the last few weeks.
Weather gets nastier here — my week in  21–28 October was warm and wet, so I lazed and read and ate — read a lot and ate a lot which, given the state of the bathroom scales, enriched both mind and body (HA HA) so I have been trying to eat and drink less.
Since the UK dole is so little, that is self evident, and indeed I am writing down all I spend which concentrates the mind appropriately, given that the standing orders for gas and power go on.
Sitting with tracksuit on, plus 3 layers on top thermal body vest job, geriatric cashmere sweater (with airvents — = undarned holes) and a sweatshirt to match tracksuit bottom on top.
I must say it makes a difference but oh god how the Kurds and Bosnians must be suffering as temperatures drop in their respective lands.
After Romania last year, and even with the worry of redundancy, I have a LOT to be thankful for.
And surprising people show surprising acts of kindness to those in my situation.
Boring to cite them, but suffice it to say one remembers them, like your PS re birth certificate being ‘all part of the service’.
Met someone today, the third of a partnership trio in which I have had contact with two over the years for different reasons and he said look in re CV for i/view practice if I  want — he was with a local enterprise company helping with startups and job searches and now voluntarily helps with just such a counselling group via one of the big churches in Edinburgh for  redundant  executives — the figure quoted to me recently re architects in Scotland is that forty per cent are redundant.
The said partnership is for economic strategy planning and they have current consultancy projects in what was the USSR, and the one of the three I have known for years, as he shared a Lothian Regional council office with our former upstairs neighbour, lovely  now in lake district is off to Moscow next Monday and then to another city (? sp) six thousand miles east of Moscow!
, the PA at the fine art people took me to Perth Theatre one Friday a few weeks ago to see a stupendous, lively, robust performance of ‘Mary Queen of Scots got her head chopped off’ I could see it again, it was so good.
I have just done her a return kindness by getting invitations for her and her mother, to the Alumnus of the Year award given by Royal Bank as holder of Chair of European Governmental Studies.
K has literally just rung over the moon that I had fixed this as her mother is very fond of David and has known him for years — and it is fitting that widow of first Prof of CEGS (as above) be included — her dad built up the department enormously and I knew him through  European seminars etc via Law Society with   and others including  who is a Heriot Row  neighbour .
The job scene is quite ghastly.
Few interviews, masses of people do not respond to letters and so on, usual dreary story.
The isolation is getting me down a bit— I have had to seek to be pretty resilient spiritually with George in , and so the extra resources are pretty deplete because of that.
But still, I must remain positive and as strong as possible and as self-sufficient as I can be.
, Chief Publicity Officer of the Scottish Office came to lunch here the other day and it was really good to see him.
I worked with him on Queen's Visit and then recently for the Royal Yacht visit to Leith (partly as a dry run for the summit) at the time of the June Scottish Financial Enterprise International Conference.
He has encouraged me to reapply to the  Government Information  service to be kept  apprised in case the two  departures from the Scottish office, one gone and one going December, mean there may be a vacancy.
He has also offered himself as reference vis a vis liaison with Scottish Office and Buckingham Palace etc, which is most generous and thoughtful.
The beautiful BELLA remains my ever welcoming ever tail wagging four legged companion, and is currently snoring not very beautifully — must be great gangs of rabbits in the dreams or something.
My last weekend with the car I went over to the Island of Luing, leaving the car (foot ferry only on Sundays) at Cuan Ferry.
A great adventure to two remarkable elderly women friends who met years ago teaching and then taught at a school for ‘maddies and baddies’ in Argyll funded by Strathclyde Region and then they developed and ran a world renowned restaurant on the Island of Luing.
Now retired the art teacher as was is painting flat out full time whilst the other runs the distaff side.
The restaurant has been turned back into a house — little expense spared and the quality of work by the local joiner is superb, no other word for it.
A real joy to see such real craftsmanship and pride in work.
My ever difficult  told me the other night I needed to change my attitudes and lifestyle and to realise I would not get another job at my age.
I BLOODY WELL WILL to show her, is what I thought so it was a shot of adrenalin I needed…not, I know, that she meant it that way.
Heard not a word from SW about the trees left on her doorstep brought up from Jean in September.
I tried to ring her the other day as going to a seminar at my solicitors office nearby and had hoped to walk up plus dog, leave Bella for  duration of seminar and pick her up again = kill exercise bird with seminar stone as it were.
Came back with newspapers cut to size s paper patterns for cushions for , my sewing skills is NIL, can't do much about it.
Bought a sale reduced skirt length in LIBERTY the other day to cheer myself up.
A dreadful extravagance on one level, but I am in no doubt it will be worth its weight — pure silk £15, so maybe it will be George's Christmas present to me.
An  impromptu purchase, and a bit extravagant, but remaining tidily or prettily dressed is an important investment in job search, marriage and social life, so I try only to slum it in track suit at weekends and totally quiet evenings at home.
 Although I had ‘backed up’ on a floppy disc from the computer I lost both floppy and hard disc record on  Friday (yes 13th) and it was all my address list — twenty pages this size of single line entries and with just a double space between As and Bs and Cs and Ds etc.; I could have  wept but had instead to laugh — only thing to do and a mistake or combination of same that I shall NOT make again.
Luckily I had run off a faint quality copy (like this letter) to economise on ink cartridge use as cartridges £14 or so each.
The same evening the filling — a huge one — came out of backmost right lower jaw tooth.
All a bore and to be sorted.
In haste to take walk round the block before the temperature drops too far.
One of my colleagues went up to D's cottage last weekend and PK was up for eight days about a fortnight ago, and had a really super week and not bad weather though  there was a lot of snow at the roadsides on their way back — she went with current boyfriend, a nice chap who lives in Midlands.
Scuse the errors — will whiz this off and put in for 0800 lift tomorrow.
I am so sorry I could not revert to the ‘phone at the very moment you rang on Thursday.
I was also very conscious that you had telephoned before the 6pm cheap rate because of the mackintosh nonsense, and did not want to detain you.
John was supposed to come and meet me from work to carry my heavy shopping and then changed plans and he had just walked in with JONATHAN (proper name JIMMY).
Having them both here busy looking for a flat for JONATHAN, who becomes nicer and nicer as he grows up (and who can it seems sleep twelve hours on the trot night after night) is quite exhausting, and at times annoying.
I am neither, nor intend to be treated as, a paid cook or a resident and beholden domestic, especially as I get tired very easily and neither of them is working.
Mind you, I am under few illusions: it is probably boredom in the short-term few months job I have found, and worry as it is, in real terms, a lot less than half my old salary.
I never thought I should be ashamed of my earnings (or non-earnings as it were).
I am truly scared I am on the scrap-heap — and it HURTS.
It might do politicians good to be ‘out in the wilderness’ for a bit.
I think that from the ivory tower of public office, secure salary, ministerial chauffeurs and cars and frequent invitations to events of interest, that they are totally out of touch with the concept and the reality of unemployment.
So it was nonetheless interesting recently to undergo a full battery of professional and occupational psychology tests which found me to be thoroughly rounded in skills and attitudes, a good communicator both normally and at times of stress and so on.
The tests are extraordinarily exhaustive (but not exhausting!!).
Mind you, common sense, a rounded personality, tenacity and integrity, coupled with a commitment to community activities over and beyond work are the theme of the various references past employers have given me.
Ageism in recruitment is an increasing problem.
And John meantime seeks always to dismiss me as incompetent and neurotic (probably, as people wiser than me, such as his own lawyer, say, he does this to suit his own ends and to give himself a good press and to live within his own fantasies and eccentricities.)
I often think of you, for example as at a recent and deeply moving funeral for a long-standing friend who had died of AIDS, when I sat inside the church literally underneath/beside your sculpture, but I am an increasingly bad correspondent, possibly as a result of so many letters re jobs!
(No real excuse, especially to someone like you, but I certainly have written hardly any personal letters since being made redundant — and I know that others who have faced this same trauma have reacted similarly.)
Had there been no — and certainly no just-arrived audience — It would have been utterly lovely to have taken the phone and settled down for a chat, to be inspired and encouraged as always by the love you offer your friends and by your own zest for life physical and things spiritual.
I referred to it and you oddly enough in a handwritten letter to my father the other night after referring to Lord XXXXX one of whose contemporaries and friends is coming to stay here a couple of nights next week, and who has been a pillar in the fabric of my life, a man for whom consistency, continuity and courtesy are all — and who is often concerned at the unhappiness which is my??????? it is in anything other than a bit of paper, which most of my old friends who wish me well, doubt)…
You were, after all, the first person — with that nice near neighbour of yours who we went to visit one evening — to encourage me in my poetry, a fact I shall not forget.
But the hall was full of six-foot-tall arriving smythe-watson men, hungry and in need of a meal, with knapsacks and crap everywhere!
I don't suppose you could be persuaded to come up by train for a night or two could you? = that would be so very super, a treat of the first order.
I very much enjoyed seeing you on SONGS OF PRAISE from G some months ago.
How blessed you are to live in such a lovely part of England — It is a source of IMMENSE pleasure to me that JONATHAN is such a keen mountaineer and is to make his home here — it will be nice for John in his old age if he, John, deigns to come back to Britain, the native land of which is so very critical, but to whose change or improvement he does what????
Did John tell you the Ombudsman found in my favour, and that of an adjacent Street  Association recently — a long battle re maladministration and incompetence in the local district council.
A three year battle against a vile aluminium flue on the building near to our kitchen window — some 16″ diameter, nearly fifty feet high and noisy to boot(apart from being illegal and erected without planning permission).
Did he also mention at all that I won a national award recently for five years sustained voluntary input to the educational and professional development committee and activities of a professional body — the Assoc'n of Industrial Editors.
Thankfully I have seen little of SARAH recently.
She is never punctual or on time in arrangements she makes, and is arrogant, muddling and patronising in the extreme, and quite one of the most utterly tiresome busybody quasi do gooders style people I know, time-consuming, a total joke and nuisance, certainly no threat which is I think how John thinks I view her.
But then both you and RIPPOE said that her mother was the same and always arrived late and so on for everything, so perhaps it is genetic!
I have been doing some work for a national charity recently and the director and one of the key office-bearers cannot stand sight or sound of SARAH, which was a trifle awkward when she rang up once or twice ‘wanting to pop in for a chat at your new office’.
Both my  Marguerite and STEPFATHER also found SARAH singularly and variously wanting when they, and each independently of the other, met her.
And similarly, most of the CTC and especially the , were utterly and outspokenly delighted when she stood down from the committee on moving to PLACE.
Said treasurer called her the SILLIEST woman he knew…
She has from day one showed her disdain for me as one opposed to hypocrisy and her type of esoteric or  pseudo intellectuality — being satisfied as I am with  intelligence , integrity and interest (!)— and has manifestly made it clear she overtly dislikes me because I won't be moulded or do what she wants or tells me — she suffers the matriarch/ bossy syndrome  (childhood nickname I am told was )and does not like the fact I am utterly my own forthright person who spoils the incestuous sibling smythe-watson quartet which she ‘ran’ so self-interestedly for so long…
And she still runs in manic circles round her ADULT children, which many professionals of different disciplines and styles here find totally bizarre as she approaches seventy!
I also cannot stand being ‘rushed at’ to be embraced in the manner she adopts — I decide who touches me, kisses me or who does not…nobody else!!
The unusual job I have for a few weeks is to collect unpublished or limited circulation material for whizzkid computer boffins in Oxford to tag and analyse on computers.
The aim of the whole project — and I will send you a leaflet in a day or two along with a ‘round robin' letter currently in production — and which John has improved immeasurably with useful comments — is to get one hundred million words of spoken, published and ‘limited circulation’ text.
I have to decide whether to put in my poems and short stories and a series of LETTERS, originally called LETTERS TO x (some 180 very short letters written in three days in  about two years ago) rather in the writing style of the legendary DEAR ABBIE written in the 1920s (or 30s? you are bound to know!) by Dane Chandos.
I am not sure of your current tastes in reading.
Mine seem to vary — I was given both a biography of Nancy Reagan, a quite old hardback of TV critical reviews and articles by Clive James and Muriel Spark's autobiography (about her childhood in Edinburgh) recently and have enjoyed them all in different ways.
They do not uplift or inspire by style or ‘credo’ as do, say, C S Lewis, Primo Levi or Bonhoeffer's LETTERS FROM PRISON, but James and Spark certainly have a richness of language and a liveliness which makes them a good read.
By contrast, the rather trashy and bitchy biog. of Nancy Reagan is compelling because of one's disbelief that she could and did actually get away with as much as she did.
Writing this whilst hopping up and down to stir lemon marmalade on the stove (and it seems reluctant to ‘gel’!) and to the  accompaniment of wonderful J S BACH fugue and prelude and tape.
 the organ is quite one of my most favourite instruments — it has that combination of depth, harmony, majesty and spirituality that can raise the soul, bring joy to the heart and let one cast aside the ephemeral tedia of everyday life.
There are free entry concerts on Sunday evenings at 6pm at XX and I often walk up there (plus dog!) and enjoy the calm, the battery charge as it were, amidst the chores and bores of life ‘in the high street’.
I am setting up — helped by others of different and wider experience and ability — a seminar on ethics in management and communications, which should take place in Edinburgh before the year end.
For those who have survived the recession intact there has been too much self-interest, need and greed, stab and grab, call it what you will, and companies I believe are suddenly beginning to realise that integrity, ethics and pragmatism may have a ‘bottom line’ value in the years to come that the accountant's profit culture attitude may change a little.
I hope so, and if I can contribute something to that culture change I shall be glad to do so.
I have also been writing an evening class programme which a colleague and I hope to get some funding towards from the local enterprise culture.
Well, this letter is longer than anticipated — and perhaps says things we would not have chit-chattered about on the phone.
I am immensely kindly supported in my lonely periods here by a whole host of interesting and talented friends — nearly all of whom are John's age or nearer yours as it so happens.
Their views are balanced, their visions diverse, but they have had interesting lives both here and abroad, and have each, in different measure contributed to society over and beyond their work (one of my yardsticks of measuring people because of the effort involved).
One is one of the most charming, musical and literary and cultured people I shall probably EVER have the privilege to know, met — as are so many such people — in our annual backbreaking endeavours sorting some 50,000 books (annually) for the CHRISTIAN AID BOOK SALE at the church up the road.
It is one of the most FUN and PURPOSEFUL things I have every been involved with — and when  interviewed on the BBC RADIO in May about it, I said that I thought industry and commerce could take a leaf out of our book and learn something from the spirit of common purpose, good humour and teamsmanship — a statement provocative enough to get transmitted, as you might imagine.
And we are cheerfully helped in our work by prisoners from Saughton, who come in work parties each year.
I am in the process of talking to the education co-ordinators at the prison about getting creative writing input from inmates for the project at work = British National Corpus of Current English — as the prison has had some notable successes with inmates finding new skills and talents whilst ‘inside’, even to the extent of prizes and publications, which must be a  tremendous lift to their spirits.
Do come up for a day or so if there is the remotest possible chance.
I felt bad about the phone the other night but I was dropping with exhaustion — I really need a holiday — and the right kind of holiday (which is a different kettle of fish, as it were).
I hope you see something of SUSIE, of whom I am truly very fond.
I am so very very glad to have had that opportunity to help both Brian and SUSIE when they stayed that month with me — and only wish I saw more of her.
I'd come down and see you all if ever invited.
I like SUSIE's sisters-in law too — I expect you know them.
Did you know one of my very oldest friends (family knew mine before I was born) is a W cousin but he was said to get no reply when he wrote to them some years ago.
I have not worked out the exact link but the motto on all silver is same and ditto some old aunts in the west of Ireland perhaps by now dead).
Off to bottle  marmalade = go on, come and see us and try some!
Darling 
I hope this term has gone well for you.
I am sorry I have not been up to see you but, as you know, I have no job and therefore no income and no car, so life is both difficult and cold (as I cannot keep the heating on at home all day).
I was delighted you met up with  over half term.
I am still waiting for  to give me one or two ideas for his 18th birthday present — though I shall make the final decision!!
I am trying very hard to find new work, but I expect you see in the papers that many jobs are made redundant — mine was ‘cut up’ for about seven people to each do some more.
I find it quite ghastly being at home and not working — I LONG to get a job, and meantime, YOUR FATHER and I must be careful about money as the State only gives me £40 a week for everything including local tax (POLL TAX), heating, food, gas, electricity and phone and so on.
So you may have to wait till next year when I find a job for this year's Christmas present — but this MUST NOT stop  giving me his ideas as his birthday present is long overdue.
Work hard these last two terms, darling — it is YOUR WHOLE FUTURE remember!
(Lots of time for girls later on…)
Much much love, and have a happy holiday when it comes.
Much love to  too of course.
Dear 
Thanks for your letter — but it is not a separate flat we let, it is our (untidy) home, and in saying ‘you could have the flat if we are away’, I meant that my husband, the owner, is happy for you two (ie you and your husband) to be here if for some unlikely reason we are unexpectedly away at that time.
The days you are here on your own you would use the bed in Andrew's study and when your husband is here we will do our usual exit from our bedroom in such circs. and sleep (i) in A's study (me) and (ii) in the bunk bed built at high level in our boxroom area or on sitting room floor.
There is no problem or  embarrassment about this as long as you don't mind panic stricken knocks on door (s) to get clothes if the right things not previously taken for next day!!
I am sure my husband would not mind if your daughter came but it may need to be the (comfortable) sofa for a night!
Hence a lower price than you would pay elsewhere in this part of town (£25–£30ph pn).
Still, if you knew the pressure on beds here during the Festival you would be glad not to be in a tent in the gardens — often the fate of the young I do not, however, anticipate being away, as I cannot really afford to be (either literally £££) or away from job search which gets daily more depressing.
In haste to get the mail.
You are so right about Robin — he will probably always be one of the most special kind and thoughtful people I'm privileged to have known.
Was in Torquay last weekend for one night at its expense to receive chairman's award for my voluntary input to British Association of Industrial Editors, notably to Education & Professional Development — bliss to be funded and have a night in a good hotel and a trip up and down the river Dart in quite remarkable sunshine — glorious countryside.
Yours aye
Thank you for your 12th May letter which, having now discussed with my husband, now back in , can be replied to!
We should be delighted to welcome you (and then also your husband if he comes for the English 27–30 August bank holiday) to this rather chaotic, friendly and yet ordinary rather than luxurious flat (which Meg I think knows).
It is very central, being about five minutes easy walk from the centre point of Princes Street (if one takes that as being the foot of The Mound by The National Gallery and RSA, so you can pinpoint it on a map!).
The price per head for bed and breakfast would be c. £20 per head which is good value, I am told, given rates elsewhere in the centre of town during the Festival.
And if you want to collect ready made salad type things from M&S I am sure you can eat in on some evenings by arrangement, depending on our social plans.
We only have one bathroom so it will be showers rather than baths when everyone is here or the tank won't cope!
I am truly very glad to do something to help one of Meg's family — in fact I met Meg and Robin before my sister did…and have an abiding love and respect for both Meg and Robin.
My late mother was one of those who opened heart and home to them when they first moved in together in Lensfield Road — and that if I recall was 1963 or 1964.
I should have liked to have said come and be our guests, but, having been redundant since last October, Julia did indicate on the phone that you would be willing to pay the basic going rate.
If for any quite unexpected reason Andrew and I need to be away, you can use the flat on the above basis, collecting the keys from a nearby neighbour.
Please could you confirm this is all OK, as if it isn't I shall be looking around for other people as my financial situation gets monthly more worrying!
Sorry to have taken rather a long time to reply but Andrew was in transit back to and around Italy.
Good to get your card the other day and to know that you got safely home from , even if concerned by the cost of the visit.
I am bashing on all speed with the job.
Some of the time one gets a good response from people willing to help and some interesting periodicals to read or browse through briefly before doing the coding and counting.
I have words before my eyes, as you might imagine.
It takes me about a quarter of an hour to walk briskly to work — the maddening thing is that I do not bring  so that walking is reduced rather as my feet get tired in the heat, and we have had some really hot and humid days.
My two  European lodgers have gone, thank goodness.
The Italian, who was with me for two months, became really rather tiresome and disruptive, especially to the charming young  German working hard for her exams.
She, the  German , does an interesting physiotherapy job to earn money as her doctor father pays her rent but then expects her to fend for herself, which she does with poise, professionalism and purposefulness.
It would do the boys good to see how she got a qualification to teach people recovering from illness and so on(and they are paid by health insurance companies, so it is well structured and she actually gets paid reasonably).
She got a very nice reference from the surgeon she had been with and so is most grateful to me for organising it.
Her last evening — last Saturday — I suggested she asked a few hospital colleagues in for pasta, which she did.
One doctor did not come, and one did, plus two medical students and I asked some of my friends too so it was quite a mix of age and stage but went very well.
I had had ten for a meal about two weeks ago, so that is my entertaining DONE for a while!!!
I find it quite hard going being the first up every morning and then the last to bed after walk and doing the washing up machine and so on.
 The  German girl was excellent about helping here and there — and even swept the tenement stair, paid by us all, whereas the spoilt brat spendthrift  Italian did not even lift her cup from table to sinkside…
And last night an old friend of  invited herself and her adopted  Vietnamese daughter to stay for a night.
I was longing to say no when she rang on Sunday but simply could not — she is married to a  German and only comes home to  Scotland once a year because of the costs, and I know how much she likes to come through to  to see the shops and friends.
In fact I have said to her to stay tonight if she wants, as they are in sheet sleeping bags which reduces the washing!
I am going to supper with my former Port Manager colleague,, and a lifelong friend of his called , who is also retired but spend her working life dedicated to teaching and helping spastics.
Quite by chance in collecting material for  I have come across a  cousin who is the communications and Public relations person at  so I am to put them in touch with each other as the one in London has just had a letter from another in Vancouver trying to do family research.
What a silly small world it sometimes is!!
I had an interview for a job which is a four year term at the  — the job is based there but is to run the exams set up of the four major surgical colleges viz London, Glasgow, Edinburgh and Dublin.
Very much a hack and secretarial job.
The chairman of my lawyers and the senior partner of Scotland ‘s biggest firm are both profoundly shocked I did not get a look in recently.
But the shock is nothing to their profound distaste at the circular photocopy letter telling me it was NO — not even signed and not even on a sheet of proper printed letterhead — for a job marketing one of the oldest and most prestigious and national professional bodies!
My plump American friend,, who you have met, I think, has just shortened some curtains I got for Naples (for a donation to the Romania Appeal!).
One of the men in the physiology department of the university here is taking them tomorrow as he is to stay with  for a week, who is due home c. 13th and then the judge in whose house I so often stay in London IS coming for a long weekend c. 19th and then I have two or three B&B bods for Festival, giving up our bedroom (UGH).
But the price of the now critically needed boiler is over £2,300 and the loo, which leaked, is also necessary so needs must — and in fact the Festival people are  daughter of an old friend of Mummy's — though oddly enough I don't know her.
All for now — much love and look after yourself.