

further questioning.
was strangled at her house in the Peartree area of Derby.
Her body was found on Tuesday night.
Two years ago her husband  burned to death in a mystery fire in the same house.
Yesterday detectives arrested a man and a woman in connection with Mrs  death.
Meanwhile two people are being questioned in connection with the murder of a Northampton man.
Peter Howell was stabbed just two hours after being released from policy custody.
His body was discovered on Saint Andrews Road.
He was well known in the local drugs scene.
Police say they've arrested a thirty eight year old man and a twenty six year old woman.
One of the region's universities is to spend thousands of pounds installing the latest high tech computer equipment.
Derby University is one of the newest in the country.
Hundreds of students have just begun their first term and computers are essential in just about every subject.
Now the university has decided to spend one hundred and fifty thousand pounds installing more than a hundred of the latest computers.
Students from all faculties will have access to the machines at the Keddleston Road site.
Staff say the computers will be used for everything from report writing to course registration.
Hundreds of car enthusiasts turned up today for the South Lincolnshire Motor Show.
It was rough going for some of the exhibitors as they put a new four wheel drive model through its paces.
Meanwhile the public had the chance to try out their driving skills on a slightly smaller scale.
The show continues tomorrow.
That's the news so far we're back tomorrow lunchtime and don't forget to put your clocks back one hour we all get an extra hour in bed tomorrow morning.
For now though from all us goodb good evening.
Central Weather sponsored by Legal and General.
Good evening.
Cloud has been affecting most parts of the Midlands today but not quite as much as up there in Scotland although that's gonna make a bit of an impression on us tomorrow.
For tonight though patchy cloud'll feed back across the region from the northeast.
There might be some mist floating around down in the southwestern part but generally those temperatures will be above freezing.
This dry pattern will continue into tomorrow but the cloud I've told you about in Scotland will wander down towards us bringing some thicker cloud for a while.
But generally a dry and fairly bright Sunday.
Bye bye.