

LOVER AT THE GATE [1]
Eleanor Darcy's birth
‘I think I feel a pain,’ said Wendy Ellis, Eleanor Darcy's mother.
It was the middle of the night, in the summer of a year somewhere between 1959 and 1964.
Wendy lay in bed next to her boyfriend Ken.
Wendy was twenty-one and wore an apricot-coloured shortie nightie in brushed nylon.
Her hair, for all she was eight months and one week pregnant, had that day been coiffeured, lacquered and backcombed until it stuck out all around her head.
Wendy lay on her back.
No other position was comfortable.
Ken lay beside her, stiff and tense, not able to sleep.
Her body was warm and relaxed; she had no choice in the matter.
The baby dictated things such as maternal temperature and tension.
It seemed to have no power to affect the father.
Ken had come home late from a gig he had not enjoyed.
He played banjo for a living and did a little woodwork on the side: fitting a bathroom here, a kitchen there, anywhere but at home.
‘I think he's on the way,’ said Wendy.
‘She,’ said Ken.
‘He,’ said Wendy.
‘I know it's a boy.’
‘We only have girls in our family,’ said Ken.
He had five sisters.
Ken was twenty-eight.
He had a round pink face, little bright eyes, a small body, a lot of fair hair, quick fingers, a quick mind, and a great deal of energy.
He was no beauty, women agreed, but he had charm.
A twinkle from the back of the band and they were his.
If he wanted, which he told Wendy he didn't, now he had her.
Tonight he was tired and contrary.
Anger had tired him.
What he described as the class system had rendered him contrary.
A private party: mostly Rolls-Royce dealers: five hours' practically non-stop playing: family favourites only: raised eyebrows if the band took a break; stale ham sandwiches and bright yellow orange squash the only meal provided, part of the deal, and ten pounds  for the whole band divided by five.
Not enough.
The guests drank champagne.
The men wore  dinnerjackets : they brayed; the women evening dress and squealed.
The band wore dinner jackets too, the girl singer more jewels than the lady guests, but Ken had sussed that one a long time ago.
It was a joke played by the haves against the have-nots.
You don't work for money, the haves conceded, all you want is to be near us in order to become us.
So dress like us for an hour or so: come close, come closer: brush up against us if that's what you want.
We'll dance to your tune the happier, syphon off your magic the better.
Then take your money and go.
Back to your hovels.
Now he was back in his hovel and naked, lying next to a girl who was having a baby and had moved in with him on that account.
‘If you only have girls in your family,’ said Wendy, ‘how come you exist?’
She was quarrelsome.
That too the baby seemed to dictate.
She thought perhaps the baby was very clever: her friends remarked upon how sharp she'd got since she became pregnant.
It stood to reason, Wendy thought, that the mother-baby connection worked both ways.
With every child you had, you'd get infected with that baby's qualities.
The ‘friends’ were mostly girls at work: she had to have those independently of Ken.
Ken tended to put people off.
He slept when he was sleepy, ate when he was hungry, only talked if he had something to say, whether there were guests in the house or not.
Wendy liked him the way he was.
He made her feel real.
She would rather have him than a hundred friends.
‘By mistake,’ said Ken sharply.
‘Go to sleep.’
‘I can't,’ said Wendy.
‘I keep getting this pain.’
‘I didn't hear that,’ said Ken.
‘I'm so tired I'm deaf,’ and he fell asleep.
She soothed his brow for a little.
He smiled in his sleep.
Wendy rang her mother.
‘I keep getting this pain,’ Wendy whispered.
‘Do you think it's the baby?’
‘You woke me up,’ whispered Rhoda.
‘It's only indigestion.
You've three weeks to go and first babies are always late.’
‘If they're always late,’ said Wendy, a little more loudly, ‘then they're not late, they're just normal.
First babies just take longer to hatch than other babies.
So why don't they admit it?
Why do they insist all babies take the same time?’
‘I don't know what you're talking about,’ whispered Rhoda.
The phone was by the bed and her husband Bruno slept by her side.
Bruno was Wendy's father.
He was Italian.
He had grey hair and a black moustache which rose and fell as he breathed.
Rhoda liked to see it.
He stirred and woke and stretched out his hand towards her in an enquiring and generous fashion.
Ken, beside Wendy, did not stir.
‘I must go now, darling,’ said Rhoda.
‘But what about this pain?’
‘What does Ken say?’
‘He didn't seem to think it was anything,’ said Wendy.
‘He just went to sleep.’
‘Then that's all right,’ said Rhoda.
‘Ken's always right,’ and put down the phone.
One of Wendy's fears was that if her father died her mother would want to marry Ken.
She liked a decisive man, she said.
Bruno was not decisive.
He was a jobbing gardener by trade.
He liked to stand about to see what the weather was going to do next.
Wendy took after him, said Rhoda.
Wendy rang her friend Louise but there was no reply.
Ken slept on.
The pain grew worse.
She got out of bed.
The waters broke.
She mopped the liquid up from the floor with a clean towel, though she knew it meant presently lugging it all the way down to the launderette.
Ken didn't like washing machines, or indeed any domestic machinery, in the house.
Should it go wrong he would be expected to mend it: he was a musician, not a mechanic.
Presently Wendy wrote a note for Ken suggesting he came on down when he'd had breakfast, walked fifteen minutes to the hospital and admitted herself.
The baby was born at 7.20 in the morning, in the labour ward not the delivery room because Wendy failed to persuade any of the nurses that the baby was on the way.
‘Nurse,’ said Wendy politely, at least once or twice, ‘the baby is coming out.
I can feel it.’
‘Nonsense,’ replied the nurses, ‘you're not even three fingers dilated,’until one of them, a girl with a lot of red hair, opened Wendy's legs and looked and screeched, ‘But I can see the head!
Why didn't you tell me?’ and ran off for help.
The baby was wholly out by the time she got back with Sister, though in a caul, as if  giftwrapped in Clingfilm.
‘Holy Mary Mother of God!’ cried the nurse, crossing herself.
Then she fainted, hitting her head on the metal bedstead.
Sister attended to the nurse while Wendy attended to the baby, clearing its mouth, nose and eyes.
A passing student doctor clipped and tied the umbilical cord for her, and told her the baby was a girl and just fine.
These things sometimes happened in even the best run hospitals, he said, and this one was not even particularly well run.
By the time Sister returned Wendy had removed the rest of the baby's wrapping, and was reproached for so doing.
Heaven knew what harm she had done.
But the baby, so far as Wendy could see, was in good order, firm of limb, bright of eye, smooth of skin and, once released from its wrapping, extremely lively.
‘Why didn't you wake me?’ asked Ken.
‘Sounds as if you needed me.
You're too independent for your own good.’
It was four o'clock in the afternoon.
He had wakened at eleven thirty, only just in time for his lunchtime gig.
He'd come over as soon as he could.
He inspected the baby.
‘Are you sure it's mine?’ he asked.
‘Of course I'm sure,’ said Wendy.
‘Why do you ask?’
‘We're not married,’ he said.
‘How do I know what you get up to?’
‘Perhaps we ought to get married now there's a baby,’ said Wendy.
The girls at work admired her for living with a man and not being married to him, but she could forgo that pleasure, she thought, for the baby's sake.
‘Musicians make rotten husbands,’ said Ken.
‘When I took up music, it meant giving up all thought of a family.
It isn't fair to the kids.’
‘I suppose it isn't,’ said Wendy.
‘I hope this baby doesn't grow up to have your brains and my beauty,’ said Ken.
‘I hope it's the other way round.’
He'd brought her not flowers, not fruit, but a little orange kitten, which he'd found wandering in the street outside.
It dribbled something nasty from its back end on to the white sheet.
Ken put it on top of the locker, where it staggered around the perimeter mewing and testing space with its paw.
‘You'll just have to take it home,’ said Wendy.
‘I can't,’ said Ken.
‘I'm going straight on to a gig.’
He kissed her fondly.
‘Rhoda isn't going to like being a grandmother,’ he said.
‘I know,’ said Wendy, happily.
Ken went to his gig.
Wendy marvelled at her baby.
When Rhoda came she brought her daughter a bottle of sherry.
‘You're not supposed to drink while you're  breastfeeding ,’ said Wendy.
‘Nonsense,’ said Rhoda.
‘I did.’
Wendy drank half the bottle straight off.
‘You're only supposed to have a little at a time,’ said Rhoda.
‘It's not like orange squash.’
‘I was thirsty,’ said Wendy.
The baby hiccoughed.
Rhoda took the kitten home.
Its eyes were gummy.
The red-headed nurse said she'd put it in the incinerator herself if nobody took it away, and fast.
She said that babies born in a caul were born to great fame or great misfortune, certainly something special.
Sister said that was superstition: a caul was just nature's way of  giftwrapping .
‘Isn't that a sweet idea?’ said Wendy.
Rhoda said to Bruno that perhaps all Wendy's brains had gone into the baby.
She certainly didn't seem to have any left.
On the day Wendy was to go home a woman came to issue a birth certificate for the baby.
She was annoyed to discover that Wendy was not in fact married to Ken: it meant she had to tear up one certificate and start making out another.
‘He doesn't believe in marriage,’ Wendy explained.
‘I'm sorry.’
‘I don't take any moral stance on this,’ said the woman.
‘I just keep the records.
If you and the father haven't decided on a Christian name you have just six weeks in which to do it.’
‘We decided ages ago,’ Wendy said, crossing her fingers.
‘Jason for a boy and —’ Her eye fell upon her brushed nylon nightie.
‘Apricot if it's a girl.
Her name is Apricot.’
‘You don't have to decide now,’ said the woman, quite kindly.
‘You might like your thoughts to mature.’
‘Oh no,’ said Wendy.
‘I'm quite sure.
Her name's Apricot.’
She drank the other half-bottle of sherry: nobody had filled her water jug since she'd been admitted.
Apricot!
‘But you didn't even consult me,’ said Ken reproachfully when presently it occurred to him to ask what she'd called the baby, and Wendy told him.
‘I'd never have called a boy Apricot.’
‘The baby's a girl!’ said Wendy.
She didn't blame him.
She knew Ken's mind was on a new arrangement of ‘I Don't Mean Maybe’.
‘And Apricot's a lovely original name for a girl.’
‘I suppose it's better for a girl than a boy,’ said Ken doubtfully, ‘but all the same you should have asked me.’
‘I'm really sorry,’ said Wendy, and she was.
She could see she'd been impetuous.
If Ken had only put his mind to it he might have in the end come up with something even better.
It was just that in the end would have been so far the other side of six weeks as to be out of sight, and she couldn't stand any more writs, summonses or legal documents in long brown envelopes.
Lactation, or something, made her weak.
Ken bought her a bottle of gin to celebrate her return home.
She drank it all in a day and the baby slept beautifully.
Soon she was pouring herself a glass of whisky for breakfast, instead of a cup of tea.
‘Apricot!’ said Rhoda.
‘Did Ken think of Apricot as a name, or you?’
‘I did,’ said Wendy.
‘I don't like it at all,’ said Rhoda.
‘Poor little baby.’
Rhoda said Wendy wouldn't keep Ken long if she went on being so bossy.
It wasn't as if she were married to him.
The kitten had to go to the vet three times in as many weeks and was more expensive than the baby.
The baby slept in the bottom drawer of the dresser: the kitten had a feather cushion.
Ken had to take on more and more gigs to keep the family boat afloat.
It was a good thing, Ken admitted, that Wendy had such a placid and loving temperament.
Sometimes her eyes, he noticed, didn't quite focus, and the washing-up was seldom done, but he wasn't fussy about things like that.
There was a new girl singer in the band, whom he fancied.
She had an emerald in her navel.
It wasn't as if he was married to Wendy, or that she knew about it.
She was busy with her baby.
The baby had been her idea, not his.
Valerie stops work to listen to Hugo's tape
‘You must listen to this,’ said Hugo, and Valerie, out of simple love, stopped writing and listened, though Lover at the Gate was in mid-flow and she did not want her concentration spoiled: what she now put on the page was beginning to have the quality of automatic writing: she feared the cutting-in of her own rationality: doubt would come with it, and hesitation.
Q: But this Darcy's Utopia of yours, this paradise, is surely merely a dream.
The product of wishful and naive thinking — nothing but a cruel deceit: a phantasmagoria.
A: I promise you this: Darcy's Utopia is no dream.
It is here; it is all around: it is ours for the asking, the taking: it is the picking of the apple on the tree.
A ripe apple: just a touch and it falls into the hand, round, perfect, fitting just right.
We live in a world of unimaginable plenty, unbelievable surplus.
More than enough food for our millions and millions: high technology serves us.
We have become so clever: it has become so easy.
Houses to shelter us a-plenty: we know how to build them.
Clothes to cover us: so many old clothes in the world!
Brenda is on income support, yet you should see how the washing basket overflows!
The trouble lies in distribution: not in production.
Machines serve us: technology serves us; our habits oppress us, and enslave us.
One man has a house with twelve rooms: another lives in a cardboard box.
The man with twelve rooms is a decent guy.
What stops him sharing?
He'll put a coin or a note in a charity box: he uses money to salve his conscience: the very money that causes in its plenty the rich man's grief, in its absence the poor man's woe: it is the symbol of  our failure, not our success.
‘Let them spend more on health!’ we cry.
‘On schools!
On happiness!’
Spend what?
Coins, notes?
‘Money’ has stopped working.
Pour millions upon millions into a nation's health service, it makes no difference: still the people hack and cough and go untended, die for lack of attention, because money no longer represents what it did — labour, skill, concern, capital, organization, involvement.
It has become a commodity itself, to be bought and sold by people skilled only in doing just that, and they have taken the guts out of money, weeded it out.
Do you have a mortgage on your house?
Have you built up a debt to the bank?
If those paper debts were wiped out in the computer that prints your monthly statement, would it make any difference in real terms to anyone else?
Would there be less wealth in the world?
No!
Would it affect the communal resource of food, services, capital?
Of course not.
Those debts relate to the past, not now.
Their wiping out would merely free the individual from anxiety, heal his ulcer, lighten his step, brighten his eye.
Money has become a thing of no value: usury, once a sin, is now the faith of nations.
Buy on your credit card: buy, buy, buy!
What have you got?
Nothing that makes you happier than a child's Christmas toy, bought in the land of plenty, broken and forgotten by Christmas night, discarded, swept up, thrown away; some unbiodegradable bit of plastic, moulded into partial or sentimental shape.
Transitory, a panacea to stop the wail of the poor muddled infant: one that didn't even work for long.
What's it all about?
Money!
The human race has had enough of it.
As a medium of exchange it no longer works, and that's that.
We have to face it.
Work hard, grow rich?
You're joking.
Work hard, stay poor; that is the message of money.
The brightest are wasted: the cunning triumph: the robber barons are back.
Who saves, these days?
No one.
Who believes that by working now we can store up security for the future?
We can't.
We know in our hearts money is worthless but how can we escape its tyranny: how begin afresh to judge ourselves and one another?
Q: You have an answer?
A: Wait, wait!
For a few to have money in abundance and others too little is the root of all social ills: it is the differential which  results in unrest, riot, war, discrimination, class systems, crime, snobbery: the belief that one man is of more intrinsic value than another for reasons other than his temperament, his moral qualities, and his likeability.
The only real, the only true wealth lies in friends in abundance, company in plenty, comfort in abandon, love overflowing: what have these things to do with money?— except that we cheat and lie and use money to acquire them; knowing no other way to do it.
The man who gives a boat party knows in his heart that his friends like his yacht more than they like him: he is lonely and restless in their company.
He picks up his mobile phone, dials his stockbroker in Tokyo.
‘More money, more money!’ he demands, and clever minds set to work at his behest, the computers shift and change a little all over the world, and presently his bank balance shows another nought; and, so that that nought should be there, somewhere in the undeveloped world another ten backs break needlessly.
Lack of money causes misery, anxiety, early death: the cramping of personality, the limiting of human potential.
Lack of money prevents us eating properly when we are children, ruins our health, rots our teeth, makes our parents quarrel and take to drink, stops us having the clothes we want, the friends we like, the parties we long for, stops us having the tuition which would enable us to get an education — makes us end up street sweepers and not doctors; induces women to have babies because there is no money for travel or entertainment, or to leave the parental home any other way: lack of money humiliates us all our lives: lack of money makes us live with husbands or wives we no longer love: lack of money makes us age earlier than we need: makes our hands rough with toil and our brows creased with anxiety: keeps us weeping by day and sleepless by night: the terror in our lives is the bill through the door which can't be paid: our lives close in the knowledge of failure — we failed to make enough money.
We never did what we wanted with our lives.
How could we?
We didn't have the money.
We tell ourselves ‘money isn't important’, but it is, it is.
We couldn't afford this, we couldn't afford that: and our lives and our friendships and our marriages and our children were thereby curtailed, limited.
And we put up with it.
We put up with it because we need the differential: we like to feel superior to our neighbours, and if the penalty is that the man up the road feels superior to us, we'll put up with it.
We like to have kings to worship and admire: we love a bit of gold leaf to ooh and ah at: we don't mind being poor just so long as there's someone poorer than us.
Snobbish to our bootstraps.
We still believe money equates with worth.
That the rich are rich by virtue of being intelligent, bright, strong and powerful.
And once at the beginning, when the first few coins were exchanged, the first kings decided to mint the stuff, I daresay that was true.
Times change, times change; yet habits hold.
Money was handed down from father to son; it lost its merit as a token of worth; the idle and nasty could be a great deal more rich than the  hardworking and good.
Money and intelligence pretty soon had little connection.
Money and privilege, every unnatural link.
The rich no longer deserve to be rich, or the poor to be poor: there is no merit in having enough money: there is little pleasure in having too little money.
Sex is the source of all pleasure, money is the source of all pain.
Q: You mean lack of money?
A: I do not.
It is this assumption that so hampers our thinking.
Because lack of money is bad, we assume money itself is good.
It is another example of the Trap of the False Polarity.
You might in good time like to write a pop-psychology book under that title?
Or perhaps not.
We'll see.
‘I most sincerely hope you don't’ said Valerie.
‘You are a serious person.’
Hugo stroked the back of her neck with his strong fingers, and she quietened and went on listening.
Q: Perhaps you are not talking about the pursuit of money, but the pursuit of power?
Most people equate money with power, power with money.
A: What is power?
The desire to make other people do what you want?
The power of the parent over the child?
The tyrant over his subject?
The employer over the employed?
Take away money and  you deprive the unjust of power.
The child can have his football boots because the words ‘we can't afford it’ will be linked to the long-gone and not-lamented past: the tyrant cannot control against the will of the subject because he cannot frighten his people with notions of helplessness and poverty: the employer will have to charm and wheedle his workers if he wants them to work for him: he will have to sing and dance to entertain them: enthuse them with pleasure for their daily toil: they will be paid with the world's respect, and all around them there will be abundance.
We will not be wage slaves any more.
We will not need our wages.
We may accept them, to oblige: to save another's face.
But that's all.
In Darcy's Utopia there will be no wages, there will be no money.
Q: Oh come now!
Easier said than done.
A: Not at all; it could be done even here — merely increase the supply of money until it becomes something of little value, as plentiful as grass: let it grow on every street corner, pour from the high street banks: see how little by little it is of less and less value: soon it is only stuff fit to engage the attention of those who love to indulge in the act of recycling: we will probably find that, pulped, bank notes are an excellent media for growing acorns into oaks.
My husband Julian and I went on our honeymoon to Yugoslavia — annual inflation ran at 350 per cent.
A hyper-inflationary economy.
Yet people ate, drank, sang, laughed, rejoiced, loved and were happy.
Talked — how they talked!
The streets were noisy with greetings, chatter and friendship.
It was there my husband and I began to develop our theories, Darcian Monetarism as it came to be called: that the answer to our current economic ills is not to control inflation but to encourage it until we cease to be a money economy altogether.
Q: Perhaps, being on honeymoon, you wore rose-tinted spectacles?
A: It is true we had a perfectly wonderful time.
As I say, sex is the source of all pleasure, money is the source of all pain.
At this point the tape clicked to a stop.
Neither Hugo nor Valerie attended to it.
It had been running on unheard for some time, in any case.
LOVER AT THE GATE [2]
Apricot loses one mother and gains another
‘You can't go out like that,’ said Wendy to Apricot when she was four, ‘it's freezing,’and little Apricot, in nothing but vest and pants, ran straight out into the street and down the long suburban road to the small playground which a benign council had made for the children in the sharp triangle of land where the railway line intersected the water-purifying plant.
Wendy ran after her child but her spiked heels slowed her, so she gave up and came back home and made herself a cup of coffee and read the stories in the back of her magazine.
Or perhaps she took a swig of sherry.
That was in the sixties, in the years when it was safe for a small girl child to play unsupervised in a public playground, even in her underwear; all anyone had to fear was that she might catch cold.
Those were the days: oh yes, those were the days.
When Ken got up that afternoon — he hadn't come home till three in the morning — Wendy said, ‘I've really got to go back to work; I'm drinking too much: this life is driving me mad.’
‘What's wrong with your life?’ he asked.
‘You have everything a woman wants.
Why don't you change places with me?
Me, I'd love to do nothing.’
And he thrust his banjo into her hands and little Apricot, watching, winced.
‘But I can't play the banjo,’ said Wendy, which irritated Ken even more.
He made a gesture: she took it literally.
But then all his audiences, these days, were unsatisfactory.
He had his own band now; he was trying to make a go of it full-time, and it was difficult.
No one wanted to pay for music; the general feeling was that it should flow free from the celestial spheres.
Now he was off to a nine p.m. to one a.m.
British Legion do: they'd hired a Dixie Band but when it came to it would want Country and Western: six in  the band and a twelve pound fee.
If you charged Musicians Union rates no one hired you: if you didn't, your fellow musicians hated you: and to stand up there on a platform for four hours disappointing a room full of people was not his idea of living.
He'd given up woodwork, having driven a splinter through his thumbnail.
It was too dangerous.
His main income came through music.
He needed his hands.
‘I suppose if I had another baby, Ken,’ said Wendy, ‘that would fill in my days.’
He said he couldn't afford it.
She said she didn't think money ought to stop people living, actually living: making their lives little when they could be big.
But if she couldn't have another baby the newsagent on the corner wanted someone in the mornings.
She said Ken could look after Apricot because he was at home when she was out.
‘I'd be asleep,’ Ken said.
‘I don't think I'm the kind of man who ought to have a working wife.’
Wendy said, ‘You wouldn't be, because you never actually married me.
We were going to once but when it came to it you didn't have the money for the licence.
You said you'd spent it on a new banjo.’
Ken said, ‘I had to have a new banjo.
Some fool backed over mine in a car park.
It was a wonderful instrument.
I'll never get another one like it.’
She said, ‘More fool you for leaving it in a car park,’ and little Apricot said, ‘Yes, that's right, Mum.
That's what I think!’
Ken said, ‘I had to put it down while I put the amp into the van.
I forgot it.
By the time I went back for it, it was too late.
If you'd come out on the gig with me you could have held it for me.
But you're not interested in my work at all.
All you want to do is sit home and drink gin.’
‘I have Apricot to look after,’ said Wendy.
‘You forget that.
You forget everything important, that's the trouble with you.’
She'd put her finger on it.
Sometimes it takes people years.
‘Well,’ said Ken, ‘don't expect me to look after Apricot while you're at work.
I'm a musician, not a father.’
‘Oh well,’ said Wendy, ‘that's that,’and poured herself some sherry.
Rhoda said when she came to tea at the weekend, ‘You only remember what you want to remember, Ken; serve you right.
How many gigs have you missed in the last few months?’
‘Only one,’ said Ken, ‘and that wasn't because I forgot it: it was because they'd given me bad directions.’
But he smiled sheepishly and cheered up.
Rhoda always cheered him up.
Rhoda said, ‘What's that you're pouring into your cup, Wendy?’
‘Whisky,’ said Wendy.
‘You have a real drink problem there,’ said Rhoda.
Wendy sat at home and polished her nails.
She listened to the Beatles on the radio; it could only be to annoy Ken.
He was out every night and most weekends and if he wasn't out he was asleep.
She told Deval the newsagent all about her problem.
His wife had died suddenly a couple of years back.
He needed cheering up too.
Dev said to Wendy, ‘You don't need Ken, he'll never amount to anything: he treats you like shit: what you need is a man like me,’ and Wendy believed him.
‘Can I bring Apricot with me?’ she asked.
‘No,’ said Dev, ‘a woman shouldn't start a new relationship with a child hanging around.
It isn't fair to the child.’
‘I expect you're right,’ said Wendy, and left Apricot with Ken.
Rhoda said to Ken, ‘If you ask me, the girl's in love with love, not Dev, and she'll come back.
She was like this as a little girl.
Looking after stray kittens and then getting bored.’
Ken took Apricot with him on gigs for a time and quite enjoyed it, but found getting her to school and organizing her clothes and meals onerous.
When Wendy's father died of lung cancer, he asked Rhoda to move in and presently got it together to marry her, thus putting a stop to Wendy's sudden plan to abandon Dev and move back in with Ken.
‘She's just jealous,’ said Rhoda, comfortably.
‘Take no notice.
Older women with younger men never goes down well, except with the parties involved.’
Wendy and Dev presently parted; Wendy, who by then had a real drink problem, was hired to do a milk delivery round which took her to her own doorstep, and daily contact with Apricot, until Ken put a stop to it.
If Rhoda put out a note for half-cream milk, Wendy would deliver full-cream.
Ken complained to her employers, and she was put on another round, but kept forgetting the orders and was presently let go.
And that was how, in a gradual and non-sensational manner, Apricot's mother became her sister, and her grandmother her mother.
Her father at least remained her father.
Valerie leaps to conclusions
There is no getting away from it.
A study of life, death and marriage certificates show Apricot as the daughter of a certain Wendy Ellis and Wendy herself the legitimate daughter of Bruno and Rhoda Ellis.
Ken Smith is named as Apricot's father and Rhoda Ellis married a Ken Smith in June 1965, Bruno Ellis having died in March of that year.
The ages tally.
It puts perhaps a kind face on things: but sometimes families do just get into dreadful muddles, with no one doing anything particularly awful.
In 1973 Wendy Ellis, poor Wendy, a spinster, died aged thirty-five of liver failure.
Livers fail because of cancer, or hepatitis, or drug overdose, but mostly I suppose because they are assailed by alcohol and just can't cope.
And no woman, I daresay, can settle easily to the knowledge that her child's father has married her own mother: and drink, while ruining livers, certainly eases pain.
But I don't think the readers of Aura will want me to dwell too much on the pain.
I try to be unemotional, without much success.
Sex renders one tearful, I find.
A love song on the crackly Holiday Inn radio which the maid always switches on as her final flourish after she's done the room (Hugo and I go down to the pool and swim and use the sauna while we wait for her to finish) or a pop song on the telly as Hugo and I eat our continental breakfast (orange juice, coffee, a croissant and a Danish each), too languid even to stretch out for the remote control and switch it off — will make tears come to my eyes: move me with the desire to say, You do love me, don't you!
This love will last for ever.
This love, lasting forever, makes me immortal.
This love replaces death.
I don't say it, of course.
I have read too many surveys in Aura — written them indeed — which prove that men feel trapped and uneasy if the word ‘love’ is mentioned, especially in proximity to any other word suggesting permanence.
I just roll the phrases round inside my head, smoothing them out, absorbing them back into me, until they're gone.
When I heard Eleanor Darcy's eulogy on Hugo's tape, I was much moved.
Her soft determined voice inspired me: any doubts that remained evaporated: guilt and fear were dispelled, embarrassment fled: my body led me, not my mind.
Eleanor Darcy spoke and I left home and hearth to follow my lover.
‘Look here,’ Hugo said, ‘surely I had something to do with it?’and I laughed and said, ‘How could you not?
You too heard the tape!’
Lou has never seen love as a sufficient motive for anyone doing anything, which, when it comes to it, I daresay is why I left.
I can trust Hugo not to treat me as I have Ken treat Wendy in Lover at the Gate and, if he did, I would never indulge him as Wendy did Ken.
Look where it led!
Women do have to fight back.
Apart from anything else, I can't help feeling that if women let men get away with too much bad behaviour, men do not forgive them for the burden of guilt they then have to bear.
They feel their shoulders breaking beneath the load.
They get out from under.
I am a self-contained person: neat and elegant: or was until I met Eleanor, who, disgraced, childless, alone, sprawled and wriggled against the shiny black sofa with the big red flowers, and I knew I would rather be her, her life out of control, than me as I was with Lou; a woman whom an editor could describe as ‘the mistress of controlled reportage’.
‘Valerie,’ the editor of the Mail on Sunday said to me once, after I had filed a neat and convincing piece on an earthquake the ground had trembled beneath me in Rome, where Lou was playing with the London Symphonic and a wall had fallen on top of me and trapped me for two hours —‘you are the mistress of controlled reportage.
We can't run the piece, as it happens.
The stock market has collapsed.
I hope you didn't get your hair mussed.’
I just smiled and said ‘a little’— but I was hurt.
I thought he was laughing at me.
I joined the staff of Aura shortly afterwards.
‘Mussed’ is a word so outmoded I'm surprised the God of Media didn't strike him down on the instant with a thunderbolt.
Pre-Hugo, come to think of it, my hair never got mussed.
Now I can scarcely get a comb through it in the morning.
To each their own earthquake.
Valerie Jones returns to ask further questions of Eleanor Darcy
Q: Tell me about your educational background.
Were there books in your house?
Did your parents encourage you to read?
A: What you want me to tell you is how I, victim of a class-ridden society, managed to escape the long side streets of the outer suburbs and reach the shores of academia.
Well, a few of us manage it.
It helps to have a high IQ, though I suspect a talent for mimicry is more useful; being able to adopt at will the tones and attitudes of the educated middle classes.
That I have.
Valerie sat on the sofa.
Eleanor sat in a chair.
Why, Valerie wondered, did Eleanor share the sofa with Hugo, but not with her?
First, of course, you have to know what you are: that there is another life, another set of attitudes, other responses out there in the world, which prevent most of us from aspiring to better things.
We know what we like, like what we know, unless something quite powerfully intervenes to shake us out of it.
The child from the fish and chip shop can only end up running Liberty's if he has some idea of what Liberty's is.
How very snobbish of you, you will say; why should Liberty's be seen as superior to a fish and chip shop?
Q: I wasn't conscious of accusing you.
Aren't you being a little defensive?
A: I daresay.
I was married to Bernard Parkin for fifteen years, a man who came from the lower middle class, but identified quite violently, for a number of years, with the workers.
He would never set foot in Liberty's, let alone Harrods — those haunts of the rich  and the would-be rich represented for him the scornful laughter of the haves towards the have-nots.
While some downright starve, and others scrimp and save to afford the large cod and chips, not the small, a few spend thousands on sunken baths and antique rugs.
Poor Bernard.
He was a good man.
Q: Was?
A: One speaks of ex-spouses in the past tense.
Don't you do the same?
Q: I don't have an ex-spouse.
A: No?
Well, I daresay you will, from what Mr Vansitart tells me.
To cover her discomposure, Valerie readjusted the microphone.
She was flattered and excited that Hugo had talked of their relationship to Eleanor: offended that her privacy had been thus violated.
The pleasurable feeling won.
You have pushed the microphone out of range.
Shall I adjust it?
We live in a world of surplus but can't bring ourselves to believe that we do.
We go on behaving and thinking as if there would never, never be enough.
Gimme, gimme, gimme!
Before someone else gets it.
My sunken plastic bath better than your old cast-iron tub.
If the poor have their faces ground into a mud made sharp and painful by slivers of diamond and chunks of ruby, whose fault is that?
Those who shove their faces into it?— Bernard's view.
The consistency of the mud?— my view.
Or that of the poor themselves, for daring to bend their heads and stare?
Q: You went first to the Faraday Junior School, I believe, an ordinary state school.
What were your experiences there?
A: I understand what you are saying.
Badly born, poorly educated as I am, how do I have the nerve to pass comment on the society I live in — let alone marry a professor of economics and co-author with him — the publisher's term, not mine — a book on Darcian Monetarism?
She rose from the chair.
She paced.
Today she wore a tan silk shirt and tight dun-coloured trousers.
She had the air of a female terrorist; someone who might take it into her head to shoot at any moment.
Valerie thought, Good heavens, it was safer, after all, on the Mail on Sunday than on Aura, earthquake notwithstanding.
This may yet be the end of me.
Q: No.
I was not saying any of that.
I was asking how you enjoyed school.
Eleanor calmed, sat down again.
A: Yes, I believe you were.
I had a bad time at the hands of male journalists during Julian's trial and in the period leading up to it: some residual paranoia sticks.
They look for femme fatale, a Mata Hari of world finance, a seductress.
If a woman is to be taken seriously she must either be past the menopause or very plain, preferably both.
Let us return to the Faraday Junior School.
Fresh-faced and bright-eyed, we five-year-olds trooped off to school: troubled and sophisticated we returned, the stuffing all knocked out of us.
Schools are a strange contrivance; they do not occur in nature, yet somehow we suppose they do.
Because a woman, by virtue of giving birth to a succession of children, is then landed with the task of bringing them up, is no cause to suppose children are best taught by the handful, the dozen, the score.
Nature, as ever, provided a minimum, not a maximum, for our survival.
Any mother knows that it takes more than one adult to cope properly with even a single child.
The child has more energy and more passion than the adult.
To make it sit still, sit up and oblige, because it is smaller than you and you can compel it, is unkind.
To make it do so in company is bizarre.
In Darcy's Utopia the first rule of education will be that in any school the teachers shall outnumber the pupils, and no pupil need attend who does not wish to do so.
I suspect budding essayists and technicians will continue to turn up to be educated; those  others, who find lessons a humiliation because they are daily exposed and defined as dullards, will not.
Much will be gained by the individual and very little lost to society.
Teachers, teaching only those who wish to learn, will regain their self-respect and that of their pupils.
They will stay even-tempered from morning to night.
In Darcy's Utopia you will not see the eyes of the child dulling, the brow furrowing, as puberty arrives.
Children do quite like to gather together, in fits and starts, to enjoy one another 's company, to find out how others live.
It is natural enough for them to want to acquire knowledge from their elders.
But it is unreasonable from this to extrapolate ‘the school’ as one of the cornerstones of society — for what are schools but institutions in which, in the name of knowledge, we ghettoize the young, and keep them from adult company, coop up the violent with the meek, those who like learning with those who don't, and in general fit them for the modern world, which one quick glimpse of the television will show them to be a violent, murderous, greedy, vulgar and horrid place, in which people in a good mood throw custard pies at one another and in a bad mood chop each other to pieces?
Q: I take it you did not like school?
A: I liked.it very much.
I was sorry for those who didn't, who by far outnumbered those of us who did.
I daresay the Faraday Junior was no worse than any other school: indeed even a little better.
No one was moved to burn the place down and the teachers were not encouraged to beat the children: though I had my knuckles painfully rapped on various occasions when I had apparently failed to decode some mysterious message or other.
Teachers get irritated, of course they do, their elaborate and expensive training courses notwithstanding.
Why?
Because they are doing the most unnatural thing in the world, which everyone tells them is perfectly natural, in order that little children should all sit down quiet and good in one place and learn to take the world for granted, and not attempt to change it.
Q: But you tried to escape?
You did want to change your situation?
A: When you ask that you betray your belief that one class is indeed superior to another: that to be born to the uneducated lower classes is a singular life-problem: though I'm sure if I asked you straight you would, in your gentle, blind, liberal way, deny it.
The class distinctions we employ, you would maintain, are descriptive not pejorative.
The person with, say, the pinched and nasal accents of the English Midlands is no worse than the one whose language has the rounded and lordly ring of London's Knightsbridge, merely different.
Tell that to employers, boyfriends, doctors, the dinner party hostess.
Second-class citizen! goes up in neon lights when those who use the pronunciation of the streets and not of the written word open their mouths.
Rightly they are discriminated against!
Woe unto them, say I, who do not seek to improve themselves but cling with misplaced loyalty to the speech of their parents, as they do to the homes they were born into.
In Darcy's Utopia it will be as normal to practise elocution as to brush your teeth.
If more than lip service is to be paid to the notion that we are all equal, then it must be first acknowledged that we are born unequal, and that some of us have to work harder than others to make up for it.
We must be prepared to make value judgements — allow Milton to be better than Michael Jackson in absolute terms, not just because that one's your cup of tea and that one's mine.
The politeness of the cultured towards the uncultured, the hurt defiance of the latter to the former, compound one another.
With misplaced kindness, the best of us refuse to discriminate against the worst.
All things are equal, we say, and we lie, and know we lie.
Q: You seem very conscious of class discrimination.
Were you much aware of it as a child?
A: Yes, but I can't say I suffered from it.
To have hurt feelings is not a particularly painful kind of hurt.
Toothache is much worse.
I was certainly made very aware, as a child, of the strange and complex attitudes people had towards my father, the entertainer.
They depended upon him for their pleasure, they admired him because he had a skill they did not, they liked him because he was charming and energetic, but they did not treat him as their equal.
The best were patronizing; the worst could not help but insult him.
The band would be required to eat, in the kitchen, cheaper food than that offered the guests: be offered beer if the guests had wine, wine if they had champagne.
Should that have upset him?
It always did.
Jazz was popular in all circles during my childhood — the demand now is for more structured music or the cold beat of the synthesizer — but through the sixties the music of Black Africa in distress appealed to softened hearts.
We went everywhere: from garden parties in the grounds of castles, wedding receptions in marquees, hunt balls in assembly rooms, university teas on graduation day, garden fetes in the bishop's palace, to the annual parties of car salesmen, the golden weddings of simple folk — once I even remember a gypsy funeral — ladies' night at the masonic lodge, and the British Legion get-together.
I went to them all and watched and listened and made my own judgements.
To be the hired help is to be helpless in the face of taunts and insults.
Just as the waitress gets blamed for the quality of the soup, so will the band get blamed for the non-vitality of the guests.
If the guests won't dance when the host expects them to, has depended on them to, that's the band's fault and they don't get paid, or only after an argument.
As the wine waiter trots back and forth to establish the status of the customer as connoisseur, so the band will be required to play the most tricky musical number —‘Maryland’ for example— to prove the musical expertise of one or other of the revellers.
If I, the child groupie, was noticed — and I tried to make myself invisible — I would be treated in kindly enough fashion, but as something of a curiosity.
Also, I used to think, as an embarrassment, as if the presence of children put a damp blanket on everything; made flirtation self-conscious, drunkenness difficult, dancing almost disgraceful.
If the English do not like children, it is because they think they ought to behave properly, responsibly and quietly in their presence and can never riot or have a good time when they're around.
Children are real party-poopers.
Ask Brenda.
I learned a good deal about the role of food and drink as a socio-economic indicator.
In the palace, the castle, the country house, the wine would be good but the food tasteless, and the band given beer and sandwiches on the assumption that this would be their preference.
The middle classes would serve sour cheap wine  but exotic foods and the band would eat whatever the guests ate, but not for long: the hosts having paid for the band to play, not to eat.
The lower classes — if we talk about upper and middle how can we not talk about lower?— served tea, beer, gin and stodgy food, cut as often as not into hamfisted wedges, fit to fill the belly not the hand, and, understanding that the band was working for a living, treated it with respect and decorum.
Everyone got happily drunk together and a good time was had by all; so long as the band kept the beat, what they played was immaterial.
I was given, in all circles, a great deal of orange squash, then as now considered the drink most fit for children, though only loosely connected to the orange.
I can tell you that the further down the social scale we went the brighter and sweeter and richer the orange squash, and the more I loved it.
In the palace, in the castle, at the hunt ball and the country house men brayed like donkeys and women shrieked and swooped like owls: the middle classes made me fidgety with their concern — was I not out too late?
Was my father being nice to me?
Not too nice?
Wouldn't I fall asleep in class tomorrow?
Wouldn't I like to curl up on the sofa?— and mostly I enjoyed the sweaty heaving pleasures of the British Legion do, where the guests galumphed and the men got drunk and waved bottles around — and one thing I noticed through all the ranks of society, no matter what the background, or the income, or the form the party took, was that as the evening wore on women would begin to look pained and patient and longed to get home, but didn't like to say so for fear of being accused of ruining the evening's fun.
Men do so dislike women who stand between them and drink.
In Darcy's Utopia there will be no drinking before six in the evening and no one will mind, because life will be okay without it.
It will be the custom rather than the law.
We will have as few laws as possible.
Persuasion will replace compulsion.
To be drunk will be recognized as a symptom not of manliness but of extreme unhappiness, and since only on rare occasion do we want to broadcast the fact of our unhappiness to the world, the lager lout, the whisky soak, the sherry drunk will become a rarer and rarer phenomenon, until finally withering away.
Q: Were you brought up in any particular religious or political persuasion?
A: My father was converted to Communism when I was eight.
I would stand on street corners with him while he sold copies of the Morning Star.
He would instruct me in the history of the world while the people of the world walked by, ignoring the salvation we offered them, and the icy wind blew around our ankles.
In the evenings we would have readings from Das Kapital.
Yes, we did what we could to save the world, my father and I.
Q: You were very fond of your father?
A: I adored him.
There was no denying he was forgetful.
He forgot to hand in such little money as he collected from sales of the Morning Star; they prosecuted and he was put on probation for two years.
That upset him very much.
He felt keenly the ingratitude of the Party and lost his faith.
During those difficult years, when he drank rather more than he should, he would sometimes even forget on the way home from gigs I was his daughter and not just an ordinary groupie.
Q: You mean you were a victim of child abuse?
A: How simply you put it.
Never quite.
Often nearly.
But who isn't, at least in their own minds?
That is all for today.
It is tiring to think about the past.
How are you getting on with Lover at the Gate?
Q: I am not sure that it's an appropriate title.
Why are you so keen on it?
A: Because of the way life changes when the lover at last appears.
Haven't you found it to be so?
In most people's lives the lover stands there, at the gate, faithful, waiting, unnoticed.
All we need do is ask him in.
Not all of us have the courage, of course.
Q: But you had, Mrs Darcy?
A: Oh yes, and still have.
So have you, Mrs Jones.
One little push  and the whole world's one, no woman's better than the next!
Here's Brenda with more coffee.
Or is Jones your maiden name?
Many women choose to work under their maiden names.
Q: Jones is my married name, as it happens.
A: I can see that might in the end cause some complications.
Valerie Jones made her excuses and left — she had had more than enough coffee.
She felt sleepy rather than tired, as a result, she told herself, of having had so little sleep of late.
She felt rather superior to Eleanor Darcy on this account and left Brenda's house in good humour.
Valerie and Lou manage a conversation
Eleanor Darcy told me I was welcome to call her if necessary; if I needed any further factual details for my Lover at the Gate.
She didn't go so far as to give me her telephone number, but I prudently copied it from the instrument at a point during the interview when she was distracted: when one of Brenda's children had somehow slipped into the room to find a drum stacked halfway down a pile of similar toys.
My own children, Sophie and Ben, managed their early childhood well enough without the help of noisy, let alone musical, toys.
My husband Lou was musical — a professional musician, in fact — and, I suppose understandably, couldn't endure the sound of good instruments badly played, or bad instruments played at all.
I notice I refer to him in the past tense.
One speaks of ex-spouses in the past tense.
Don't you do the same?
But Lou is still legally my husband: Sophie and Ben are certainly my children, not my ex-children.
The title outruns even death.
I suppose if a court denied me access to them, I might speak of them as ex-children.
But that kind of thing doesn't happen now.
It used to, of course.
Adulterous mothers would be prevented from ever seeing their children again, lest they spread the contamination of sin.
Then I suppose they did turn into ex-children.
Lou is a kind, understanding and reasonable man: friend as well as spouse.
All that has happened is that I met Hugo at a party and came to understand that, as well as having friend and spouse, a woman needs the excitement of a lover from time to time: a re-basing, as it were , in the physical: the reincarnation of the carnal self in a body which gets, over the years, far too controlled by spirit and mind.
The customary sex of the marriage bed does so little to stop the mind working, and the mind must stop working  if the flesh is to have its due gratification; the acknowledgement of its glory.
I called Lou.
It seemed to me I owed him some explanation.
Besides, he might be worrying about me.
It was 10.23 according to the Holiday Inn's radio alarm clock, which flashed on and off on the bedside panel, redly.
I wished it would just steadily and quietly glow.
My nerves were a little on edge.
Shortage of sleep was beginning to tell.
Lou would be in the middle of practice.
He was — is — a man of regular habits: up at seven thirty, breakfast at eight, mail at eight thirty, and so on.
Even his phone calls were planned and made on the half-hour.
I should have postponed the call for seven minutes.
It might have gone better.
‘Lou,’ I said, when I heard his quiet, familiar voice on the phone.
‘I think I'm possessed by the Devil.’
It wasn't what I meant to say, but that's the way it came out.
‘General belief is,’ he said, ‘that you've gone mad.
My advice to you is to see a psychiatrist.
I'm in the middle of practice, as you surely know.
Have you anything important to say?’
‘How are the children?’
‘As well as children are when their mother fails to come home from a party because she's shacked up with some gorilla in a cheap hotel.
The children have rather a low opinion of you, I imagine.’
Lou is a slight, controlled man with a sensitive face: Hugo large, grizzly and loose-limbed.
‘Lou, you haven't told them?’
‘We agreed to be honest with the children, I seem to recall.’
I could have taken him to task about how he was defining ‘agree’ and ‘honest’, but just somehow didn't.
‘The Holiday Inn is far from being a cheap hotel,’ was all I could think of to say.
‘On the contrary, it's rather expensive.
They've taken a print of Hugo's Amex, but I don't somehow think he's on good personal terms with them, and you know how tight everyone is on expenses, these days.’
‘You just stay in the media world you know and love,’ he said.
‘It's all you're fit for.
Leave me and the children in our little patch of civilization.
Roll round in the gutter as much as you like, but don't call me to tell me all about it.
We're doing just fine without you.’
And he put down the phone.
No, it was not a good phone call.
It brought back to me the reality of the life I had so abruptly  left behind: I had somehow assumed it would fade out of existence when I wanted, fade back in when convenient, unchanged.
That that was what years of impeccable behaviour earned you.
A holiday.
Apparently not!
The clock flashed 10.27, 10.27, 10.27.
I wondered if Lou would take up his bow and play until ten thirty, or whether he would extend his practice time for four minutes.
He would probably do the latter, and hurry through the change of clothes which would prepare him for the half-hour's weight-training which he did between ten forty-five and eleven fifteen every Tuesday and Friday.
Today was Tuesday.
I had not seen Hugo for three hours.
Already my body was beginning to feel restless: demanding reunification with the object of its yearning.
I could feel Hugo's body similarly missing mine.
What confidence, what pleasure this physical certainty of need and equal need  begat .
I felt my breath come short, my eyes seemed to roll in my head: I wore no clothes.
I stalked the room naked.
I, Valerie Jones, ex-wife of Lou; poor Valerie, uptight Valerie, Valerie of mind triumphant; ex-mother of Sophie and Ben: the phone rang: it was Hugo, of course it was.
‘Darling.’
‘Darling.
Christ I miss you.
I can get there at one.
Only for half an hour.’
‘Make it thirty-three minutes.’
‘Why thirty-three?’
‘Any time without a nought on the end.’
‘You are all mystery.
Stef was never a mystery.’
Stef was his wife.
He'd used the past tense.
The phone call eased the torment of desire a little.
I found that if I settled down to the tape and the life of Apricot Smith, I became quite comfortable.
Presently I remembered that it was when I had been about to call Eleanor Darcy and confirm the year of her marriage to Bernard Parkin, when I had found myself calling Lou instead, on impulse.
I called the number.
Brenda answered.
Eleanor Darcy was out.
No, she could not confirm the year of Eleanor Darcy's marriage to Bernard.
‘But you were Mrs Darcy's school friend.’
‘I can't remember; I'm sorry.’
‘When will Mrs Darcy be back?’
‘I don't know: I'm sorry.’
‘I wonder whether you could help me a little, Brenda.
I'm writing a pen picture of Eleanor Darcy's father Ken.’
‘I'm not able to help you in that area.
I'm sorry.’
So much for leading questions.
I wondered where Eleanor Darcy went.
I had somehow supposed her to sit in that room for ever, real only when Hugo or I were with her.
I could see that writing Lover at the Gate had implications more profound than I had supposed.
The boundaries between the real world and its imaginary reconstruction became stretched thin, almost invisible.
Already I had ceased to be sure which side I was on.
Even Lou's piranha snapping now began to seem like something read rather than experienced.
I put my conversations with Lou and Brenda from my mind, at least for the time being, and had switched on the WP and was enjoying the little moans and buzzes of its warming up, when there was a mighty banging on the door and there stood Hugo.
‘Why weren't you in the corridor with the door open, waiting?’ he asked.
I scarcely had time to close it before he was upon me.
For some reason I thought of President Kennedy, bounding down the corridors of power, forever chasing the flick of a skirt, the back of a knee, the glorious in pursuit of the grateful.
It was a couple of hours before I could get back to Eleanor Darcy.
LOVER AT THE GATE [3]
Apricot Smith marries Bernard Parkin
Apricot was in the sixth form doing her A levels.
Rhoda had a nasty pain in her stomach but refused to see a doctor.
A faith healer, Ernie Rowse, moved in to No. 93 Mafeking Street, two doors down from Ken, Rhoda and Apricot.
On Sundays men, women and children would collect in Mr Rowse's back garden, dressed in white robes, singing strange hymns and raising their hands to heaven.
They were collecting, they claimed, divine energies for Mr Rowse to dispense during the coming week.
They would shake their empty hands over a barrel lined with tinfoil, from which he could at a later date draw out benison.
They saw gold and silver dust drift downward from their hands, they told Rhoda.
Rhoda was forty-eight, blonde, buxom and so cheerful Ken said she ought to be a barmaid.
Rhoda could not see the heavenly dust, but liked the idea of it.
Mr Rowse's followers said when she was whole she would see it.
During the week supplicants, bent, bowed, ill or in pain, fell in line down the path between the narrow  rosebeds and out into the street, in search of a miracle cure.
Every ten minutes, when Mr Rowse was working, the line would shuffle forward one place.
When Mr Rowse took a rest, the line stayed as it was, sometimes for hours.
Occasionally, in the evenings, Mr Rowse would catch up with himself and the line would clear altogether.
But it wasn't uncommon for clients to stand waiting all night.
‘Just like Harrods’ sale,’said Rhoda.
‘Not in the least like Harrods’ sale,’said Ken.
‘These people are destroyed by the system, not those who lick its arse.’
‘Neither of you have ever been to Harrods’ sale,’said Apricot.
‘Oh-ah,’ groaned Rhoda this Thursday morning in November, holding her stomach.
It was a warm day for the season, though  damp.
The roses had given up their annual struggle to keep things cheerful and now hemmed in Mr Rowse's path with thorns.
‘You'd better go to the doctor,’ said Apricot.
‘And sit in his waiting room and catch God knows what?
I'd rather die.’
‘Then why don't you go to Mr Rowse?’ said Apricot.
‘The line's only as far as the gate.’
‘Ken wouldn't like it,’ said Rhoda.
Mr Rowse's patients, forever winding down the path, oppressed Ken with the sense of his own age and mortality.
‘Ken won't know,’ said Apricot.
So Rhoda went.
Rhoda came home without a pain, besotted by Mr Rowse.
‘When he touches you his hands strike fire into you,’ she said.
‘I'm still tingling from head to toe.’
‘Did he say what caused the pain?’ asked Apricot, who, perforce, spoke and behaved pretty much like Rhoda's mother, rather than her granddaughter.
‘He said I'd done something bad to deserve it,’ said Rhoda.
‘And he's quite right, I have.’
‘What was it?’ asked Apricot, interested.
Burned Ken's sheet music by mistake or on purpose, argued with him, failed to stay up till he got home, and/or have his supper waiting in the oven?
Those were the normal and acceptable patterns of Rhoda's crimes.
Apricot's were to spend too much time on homework, not to have a boyfriend, not play an instrument, talk too much and be too big for her boots.
‘You remember your sister Wendy,’ said Rhoda, ‘the one who died of drink so young?
Actually she was your mother.
I should never have married your father.
I told myself it didn't matter because they weren't husband and wife but Mr Rowse said the ceremony made no difference.
Sin's eaten a hole in the lining of my gut.
Now I've got that off my chest I feel much better.
Make me some cheese on toast, there's a dear.
It will give me a pain but it's worth it.’
Apricot made Rhoda some cheese on toast, overcooked it and shrivelled the cheese.
‘Poor me,’ said Rhoda, ‘poor me,’and she poured herself another cup of sweet strong tea, which burned all the way down.
She  wasn't looking well.
Her eyes were huge, her hair grey and her skin papery, but her heart remained childlike.
The longer she lived with Ken the more like Wendy she became.
‘Poor you,’ said Apricot, agreeably.
There was little point in taking offence, and no time to do so in any case.
She had to pass her exams.
Rhoda's pain and Mr Rowse battled it out for well over a year.
Rhoda took to table-tapping and seances and reported seeing the ghost of Wendy hovering over her bed at night.
Ken was always asleep when Wendy appeared.
‘I'm surprised she bothers,’ said Ken.
‘I'm surprised she isn't too busy delivering milk bottles in the sky.’
‘She's like she was the day she had Apricot,’ said Rhoda.
‘Her hair all frizzed out like a black halo and ever so sweet.
One thing you could say for my daughter, she never let herself go.
Even when she'd had a drink or so too many she still had her stocking seams straight.’
Since Wendy had taken to hovering over the bed, Rhoda had reclaimed her as a daughter and now spoke freely of the past.
‘She should have consulted me about Apricot's name,’ said Ken.
‘She had no business not doing that.’
Some things out-rankle death.
‘Are you sure you shouldn't see a doctor?’ asked Apricot, as Rhoda's cough grew nastier.
She smoked sixty cigarettes a day.
The white paint on the window frames was encrusted with black.
‘What can a doctor do for her?’ said Ken.
‘When your number's up your number's up.’
Money was tight.
Ken found it hard to adapt to the new age.
Music was now for the young, not the middle aged: folk had taken over from jazz as the language of the radical and the sentimental.
Ken's band dissolved and reformed under a succession of names.
The Dixie Syncopaters, Jazzorola, Folkwise, Folkways, the Red Resolution, and back to Dixie Railroad; too many musicians chased too few gigs: that's the way it was.
Rhoda had to give up work, and no sickness benefit was available since Ken had never let her succumb to the system and pay national insurance.
Not that she'd ever wanted to, as she told Apricot.
‘Better to live in the present, dear,’ she said, ‘while you can.
That's your father's motto and he's right, as usual.’
Apricot sometimes wished she lived in as ordinary a household as did her neighbours; though the more she considered the neighbours the less ordinary they seemed.
Mr Rowse the healer at 93 Mafeking Street, a Miss Potter and sixteen cats at No. 95, themselves at No. 97, a Mr Hill in a ménage à trois at No. 90 — perhaps all the normal people lived down another street?
She had good friends at school: Brenda, Belinda and Liese.
Brenda and Belinda, like herself, were scholarship girls, in a school where the others paid.
Their names went up on a list on the school board as being entitled to free lunches.
Liese's father owned a chain of garages: he'd been a prisoner of war, had married an English girl.
Liese was a vague, sweet girl who had all the pocket money she needed and kept Apricot, Brenda and Belinda in clothes and shoes.
Belinda, short and fat, knew most of Keats by heart, and large chunks of Shelley.
Brenda, tall and languid, was captain of the netball team.
Apricot came top of everything.
But they were still the scholarship girls, objects of envy because they were not ordinary, objects of pity because they were poor, their accomplishments scarcely the point.
‘You are all outsiders,’ said Liese's father.
‘That's why you stick together.’
‘Liese isn't an outsider,’ said all but Liese.
‘She doesn't have free dinners.’
‘She's half-German,’ he said.
‘That's more than enough.’
‘How do you win?’ asked Apricot.
‘Men never do,’ he said.
‘Once an outsider, always an outsider.
But girls can marry in.’
His wife was Jewish, he had converted to Judaism.
There'd be soft tomato sandwiches for tea, and chicken soup and dumplings for supper.
The lights were soft, the carpets thick, hot water flowed from taps; everyone liked to be comfortable.
‘You English,’ he said, ‘hate to be comfortable.
You think it will stop you getting to heaven.
You would rather stand in the rain any day than in a bus shelter.’
‘Bloody foreigners,’ said Ken, though he mellowed when he heard Liese's family was Jewish.
Blacks, musicians and Jews, all victims of an oppressive society, were of the same family of  misfortunates as himself.
There were eleven taps in Liese's house — Apricot had counted — including the garden tap.
Taps, she reckoned, were the real symbol of wealth and success.
At 97 Mafeking Street there  were four; and think yourself lucky.
Many of the houses had no bathrooms.
Ken kept his sheet music in the one he had constructed in the small back bedroom, so fear of splashing kept it on the whole unused.
There was carpet in the living room, lino elsewhere; gas fires downstairs and no heating in the bedrooms.
The beds were damp and the floor cold when you put your bare feet out in the morning.
‘What do we want money for?’ asked Rhoda.
Now she smoked eighty cigarettes a day.
‘You, your dad and me!’
‘So I can turn on the gas,’ said Apricot.
Gas flowed to cooker and fires when coins were put in the meter, not otherwise.
‘Put on your coat,’ said Rhoda, ‘if you feel the cold,’but Apricot never would.
She went round to Liese's instead, where there was central heating.
Brenda and Belinda went too.
Belinda sucked sweets and read Tennyson aloud.
Brenda talked about boys and Liese's mother provided food.
‘That girl's an opportunist,’ said Ken.
‘I don't know what that means,’ whispered Rhoda, ‘but I'm sure you're right.’
She lost her voice quite often.
Mr Rowse said he was helpless in the face of the extravagance of her sin.
It was unusual for anything in particular to happen in Mafeking Street.
The residents now took for granted the shuffling queue outside Mr Rowse's surgery, or temple.
Someone would get a new car, or a new cat: a tree would be lopped: the milkman's horse bolt.
A baby would get born and an upstairs window be lit at night: an old man would die and the hearse arrive, and a gap be felt for a while, but the very pressure of ordinariness, or whatever it was, soon healed it up.
Ken would annoy the same neighbours by slamming the same van door twice a week in the same early hour.
Now Rhoda had stopped work she would go down to the newsagent on the corner for her cigarettes at the same time every morning, each day a little lighter on her feet.
She was now scarcely seven stone.
‘At least I don't have to watch my weight now,’ she'd say.
‘Not like you, Ken.’
In the afternoons she would go and see Mr Rowse.
She was allowed in by the back door.
She didn't have to queue.
‘I'm a priority case,’ Rhoda said.
‘He's wrestling with my sin.’
‘He doesn't want the others to catch sight of you,’ said Ken.
‘They'd all be off home!’
Rhoda looked at herself in the mirror and said, ‘I don't see much wrong with me.
Nice big eyes at last!’
When Apricot was three weeks away from the examinations which were, in theory, to get herself, Belinda and Brenda out of school, away from home and into a preferable social and intellectual environment-Liese was happy enough to fail hers, and be allowed to stay cosily at home and be married off to someone suitable — there was an unusual uproar in Mafeking Street.
A group of students, chanting and carrying placards, milled round in the road outside Mr Rowse's house, accosting his patients, pleading with them to go home, abjure the Devil and seek proper medical attention.
Their placards announced them as ‘Catholic Youth Against Witchcraft’.
Rhoda went out to give them a piece of her mind.
‘Mr Rowse is a saint,’ Rhoda told them.
‘He's an agent of the Devil,’ they assured her.
Apricot followed Rhoda out to see what was happening.
The young man whom she was to marry approached her.
He was tall, he stooped, he wore a pale blue anorak and sturdy brown shoes.
His eyes were bright and intelligent.
He had a little beard, neatly and tidily cut.
He was sincere.
He explained to Rhoda and Apricot at some length the difference between religion and superstition.
He said his name was Bernard Parkin, and that he was studying theology.
His group were worried about the rise of superstition worldwide, and took positive action when circumstances warranted.
He himself was destined for the priesthood.
Rhoda nudged Apricot.
‘There's a challenge,’ she said.
‘Nice young man like that wasted.’
‘Oh shut up, Rhoda,’ said Apricot, embarrassed, but she could see what Rhoda meant.
The police were called and required the protesters to go home, in the name of religious freedom.
This caused further argument and noise.
Police reinforcements arrived.
Bernard took refuge in Rhoda's house.
Fortunately Ken was out.
‘Is it superstition to believe in ghosts?’
Apricot asked.
Rhoda  tactfully left them alone.
She could be heard hawking and coughing in the upstairs bedroom.
‘There's no such thing as ghosts,’ he said.
‘What about Jesus appearing to the apostles?’
‘That was a miracle,’ said Bernard.
‘But I'm glad to have this discussion with you.
Perhaps God has sent me to help you.’
He ate all the biscuits on the plate.
He said he didn't mean to worry her but her mother did look as if she needed to see a doctor.
Faith healers gained their power — if power they had — from the Devil, not God: they worked more mischief than anyone knew.
Apricot explained that her mother was a ghost and Rhoda her grandmother.
Bernard settled down to re-educate her.
She liked his mind: she liked the quality of his convictions, although, as she explained to Brenda, Belinda and Liese, she could not agree with those convictions.
Bernard told Apricot that to believe in ghosts was to insult God: the souls of the dead went to heaven, purgatory or hell, depending, but did not hang around afflicting the living.
Bernard and Apricot, at his suggestion, sat up all one night together when Ken was away to prove that the apparition of Wendy appeared in Rhoda's head, and nowhere else.
Apricot sat closer and closer to Bernard on the stairs, and he edged further away, distancing himself from temptation.
‘Sex before marriage is a sin,’ he'd already told her, ‘and if I read the Gospels right, sex after as well, unless for the procreation of children.’
He failed to quote chapter and verse when Apricot asked him to, and then said it was a personal matter, in any case: if he was going into the priesthood he'd rather do it celibate.
‘Look, look, my mother's ghost!’ cried Apricot, pointing, though there was nothing there, or hardly anything, just a warning shimmer in the air outside Rhoda's bedroom.
Bernard looked up and Apricot made a dive to undo his zip.
He shook her off and made his way, groping through a dark lit only by the red light of the fish-tank heater, to the front door and out into the street and away.
‘I didn't think you were that kind of girl,’ he said, ‘and I shan't see you again.
But do please get Rhoda to a doctor.’
Apricot persuaded Rhoda to go to the hospital.
‘What I don't understand is this,’ said Apricot to Brenda, Belinda  and Liese, ‘why was Bernard Parkin sitting next to me on the stairs in the dark if he didn't want sex!’
They searched for an answer but couldn't find one.
They were full of complaints.
They compared notes.
What was it men wanted?
They asked around.
Liese's father replied, ‘True love.’
They thought this was very continental of him.
Ken, when they put the question, replied, ‘A quiet life,’ but they didn't believe that either.
Exams were approaching; and, with them, trouble on all fronts.
Mr Rowse refused to see Rhoda any more because she'd been seen talking to Young Catholics Against Witchcraft.
Ken chatted Belinda up so she said she wouldn't come round any more, or so Brenda reported.
Apricot had a row with Belinda.
Brenda sided with Belinda, Liese with Apricot.
Rhoda vomited blood over the breakfast table.
The hospital said she had cancer of the stomach, the throat, the liver, the bladder and everything.
Ken, upset, tried to drive his van through the line of Mr Rowse's patients: he broke the ankle of an elderly man too feeble to jump out of the way.
The police were called: arrest narrowly averted.
Mr Rowse's Sunday Angels, or someone, put a dog turd through Ken's letter box.
The council tried to take Mr Rowse to court for fraud and deception, and asked Rhoda to be the star witness for the prosecution but she refused, and had a startling remission, as Mr Rowse had promised her she would if she were only loyal.
Mr Rowse left the area and set up elsewhere.
He had millions in the bank, rumour went, and had never in all his life paid any tax at all.
He went without even paying the cleaner.
Apricot waited until her exams were over and then went down to the Catholic church and hung about until she met Bernard coming out of confession.
‘What were you confessing?’ she asked, bold as brass, walking up to him in her everyday short skirt and torn black stockings, as if the terrible incident on the stairs had not happened at all.
‘Sins of the flesh,’ he said, ‘committed in the head with you.’
That quite compensated for the insult he had offered her on the stairs.
‘Please marry me,’ she said.
‘It's no fun any more at home.
If I don't get out I might go under.’
He understood her predicament, or seemed to, and, much to Brenda, Belinda and Liese's disgust, married Apricot in a registrar's office, in a civil ceremony.
She was seventeen.
This would do, he told her, until such time as she became converted to Catholicism and they could marry properly.
Or not, as the case might be.
They set up house in No. 93, which was now to let.
She would have to go out to work, it appeared, to see him through college.
But at least it was no longer theological college.
He could not marry and be a priest.
He would be a social worker instead.
‘Like mother, like daughter,’ said Ken, who had given his consent without argument.
He had started a new career as a singer.
‘Let's hope she won't have to do a milk round.’
When Rhoda died, a month or so later, Ken married his ex-saxophonist's widow, who understood the rigours and demands of the musician's life, and who had a teenage daughter.
It was the kind of household he understood.
Nevertheless, he felt abandoned and betrayed by the women in his life.
Eleanor Darcy speaks to Hugo, and Valerie listens
A: Why are you so buttoned up, Mr Vansitart?
So singularly  ungiddy?
You have a love bite on your neck, yet you go on asking me for my views on the multicultural society, on secularism, on Darcian Monetarism.
What you really want to know is what men always want to know about women, namely would she, if asked, and if not, why not.
And would they want to, if she would.
I meant to start the tape a little further on,’ said Hugo to Valerie.
‘However, let me assure you that the thought hadn't even crossed my mind.’
'I should hope not,’ said Valerie, but the thought was now in her mind.
They sat up side by side in the bed, naked, listening, but Valerie no longer felt safe.
But your training is at stake, your professionalism: you cannot ask the question: so few can.
Like everyone else you must have your face-saver; yours in particular being that, in the quality newspapers at least, the mind is interesting, the body is not.
Well, keep your face saver; stay buttoned up.
Don't ask; I won't answer.
So many things you refrain from asking that you'd love to know.
For example, how does it happen that I married a good Catholic at seventeen and here I am at thirty-something, childless?
Is it because I am a bad woman, a selfish woman, the kind who chooses to stay childless: or am I an unhappy woman, an unfortunate woman, and can't have them?
Barren!
Or just an unlucky woman because it just so happened my Catholic husband was infertile?
Let me answer, at least this one unasked question.
Certainly it was Bernard's initial belief, in the early days of our marriage, that contraception was a sin: Papal authority held it to be so, and Bernard's allegiance was to the Pope.
Because the Pope, according to Bernard and his friends, alone among all men had the ear of God, and God, it seems, thinks the more people down here on earth the better.
God is the Great Factory Farmer in the Sky; closer and closer we are crammed together, the Pope our Bailiff, hatching our young for his profit, for, as the Bishop said to Marie Stopes, the purpose of man is to increase the flow of souls to God and to stand between God and his purpose is surely sin.
And men like my husband Bernard, full of love and trust, look up to heaven with adoring eyes, victims of the phenomena of positive transference which the tortured so easily develops for his torturer, and plunge about in female flesh crying, ‘Only procreate and all will be well.’
Men do so long for someone to be in charge.
In Darcy's Utopia each man will attempt to read the mind of God and not rely on others to do it for him.
Q: Are you telling me that Darcy's Utopia will be a secular society?
A: Yes, Darcy's Utopia will be a secular society.
Men and women can believe whatever they like about the nature of God, and worship whomsoever they like, from trees to cows to Mohammed, but in the privacy of their own homes.
Q: As in the Soviet Union in the heyday of religious persecution?
A: No.
As in Darcy's Utopia, in the future we aspire to.
There are few lessons to be learned from history.
Because things went wrong in the past does that mean they will necessarily go wrong again?
Of course not!
Because we are different!
Do we not know more than we ever did about crowds, power, group behaviour, motivation, national and religious hysteria and so forth?
We know ourselves, as once we did not.
I promise you, we have progressed!
Had those early Communists received their education in a contemporary society, understood themselves and others better, they would have laid down a rather different and more workable framework for the new society.
We contemplate past failures of humankind in its search for the perfect society and become depressed.
It will never work, we say!
But it will, it will!
What did we expect?
That we'd  get it right first time round?
How could we?
It may take a couple more hundred years, a thousand, but we will get there.
Let me repeat, in Darcy's Utopia Church and State will be firmly separated: religious broadcasting will be forbidden on the grounds that it is divisive, racist, sexist, and an incitement to violence as belief structure clashes with belief structure — Christian at the hands of the Jew, Hindu the Muslim, Protestant the Catholic, Sikh of Buddhist, Capitalist of Communist, and of course vice versa— and no doubt the Moonies and the EST-ites will soon be kneecapping one another with a clear conscience.
Incitement to non-thought, conversion to blind belief, will be considered the most  antisocial of all crimes.
It is from closed minds that so many social evils flow.
Q: I thought you said money was the worst thing?
A: You try and catch me out, Mr Vansitart.
The streams of evil flow and merge: their source is myriad.
Are you hot?
Why don't you take off your jacket?
Here…
Valerie listened for suspicious sounds on the tape, and despised herself for so doing.
But only the occasional innocent — so far as she could tell — twang of the springs of the hideous black and red sofa punctuated the interview.
A: Mr Vansitart, what courage it takes to think!
To acknowledge that we stand alone on this whirling ball of rock which we call earth, hurtling God knows where through space, and that there is no God to hold our hand!
God not so much the Prime Mover we can do without him — but the God who understands what's going on.
There must be some really nice, other, stationary, less inconceivable place, we think, than the world; some permanent non-whirling static heaven somewhere where fairness and justice triumph.
Surely!
If we can conceive of it, it must exist.
And it would be really nice to think that the one who keep the rules are going to get there.
So we dream up sets of rules, we try and live by Holy Books, from the Ramayana to the Koran to Das Kapital by way of the Bible.
Words are magic, words are power.
Don't you think, Mr Vansitart, that the really nice thing about human beings is the notion we do have that things ought to be somehow fair — though nowhere in nature do we have evidence that God understands the concept at all.
Justice simply does not seem to be built into the system.
All I can conclude is that the human race, at its best, is really very much pleasanter and kinder than this God it invents to hold its hand.
The closer men get to God the nastier they get: the more judgemental, the more punitive, the more murderous in their determination to have got God right, and everyone else to have got God wrong.
The Pope says that since God initially made us multiply, as is obvious from looking around even the famine fields of Ethiopia, we'd better do as much of it as we can.
God needs his nourishment, his daily fix of souls as by the million every day we drop off the perch, and so Bernard and Apricot — renamed Ellen as a condition of marriage — if they're to do God's will, must reproduce till the cows come home, though nowadays of course the cows never leave home in the first place, they're linked up permanently to milking machines.
So how can they come home?
In and out, in and out, him into her, after the pub — drunkenness is encouraged in Catholic societies: another incitement to non-thought — bang, bang, whoosh, and bingo, there's another one.
If you don't look out.
Q: I take it you wouldn't describe yourself as having a maternal nature?
A: How right you are.
Congratulations on a comparatively giddy question.
Fortunately during the first few months of our marriage Bernard, how shall I put it, practised asceticism — I had no chance of getting pregnant, or very little, and after that he was converted to Marxism, and though we were at it all the time for years, he stood over me daily to make sure I ingested a contraceptive chemical.
‘Ellen!
Time to get up!
Time to take the pill!’
It was our duty, he felt at that stage, to desist from overpopulating the planet.
And what sort of world would we be bringing children into?
It wasn't fair on them to give them life.
Better not to exist at all.
Spared the curse of life!
With Bernard, if it wasn't one thing it was another.
In Darcy's Utopia the paradox of procreation is dealt with very simply.
But I think you're still much too stiff and male and professional: I will talk about that with Valerie, when she can  be bothered to come along.
What I do so like about Valerie is how relaxed she is!
I have talked more than enough for today.
Shall we ask Brenda for a cup of coffee?
Or I have some vodka in the fridge.
Q: Vodka?
What a brilliant idea.
Here the tape ran out.
Hugo told Valerie that nothing else of import had been said.
‘What did she mean by relaxed?’ demanded Valerie.
‘I'm not in the least relaxed.’
He did not reply, merely smoothed her lips closed with his fingers, only to part them again with his tongue.
‘Incitement to non-thought!’ ran through her head as she went under, into the soft seas of non-self.
Valerie suffers from emotion
I've never felt sexual jealousy before.
I have seen it in others, and despised it.
What a lack of self-belief is here displayed, I have thought; what lamentable failure of nerve.
I have noticed women at parties distracted and uneasy, seen them leave the group they're in to join another, where their partner, they fear, is having too good a time, his attention too focused for comfort on another woman.
Men do it too, of course, but I think women do it more often.
Perhaps they are just more practised in forethought, especially if they have children.
Act now, save trouble later!
But this particular act is  counterproductive : it brings trouble nearer.
The man knows quite well what's going on, sees his freedom restricted, his dignity insulted, his lust observed, if lust it is, and is angry and resentful either way.
And how public
Jealousy — destructive, pointless, pitiful, pathetic!
Or so I thought, in the good days, the wonderful days, before I felt it.
Now I see it's the energy that makes the world go round.
Mine, mine, you can't have it!
Hugo is mine, not Eleanor's.
Hugo is visiting Stef, his wife; I don't mind that so much, not quite so much.
Perhaps I acknowledge some former claim.
Wives are boring things.
How I must have bored Lou.
Always there, never jealous.
Never valuing him enough to be jealous, never arriving suddenly to catch him out, never finding his mail interesting enough to steam open!
Nothing more insulting than a non-jealous partner.
‘So there you go, Lou, off to Amsterdam with the Philharmonic!
Have a nice time.
See you Wednesday.’
Never even thinking what sort of nice time.
Isn't she rather attractive, the girl harpist: has he noticed the bend of her white swan neck, the discreet flicker of her fingers; wondered how the neck would seem, the fingers flicker, in more intimate a situation?
Or Lou, jealous of me?
Is he jealous  now?
Does he suffer?
I think not.
This is what irks, what irritates.
I have gone, and Lou doesn't mind, hardly notices.
Lou and I have always presented a good public face: we make a happily married couple, a busy professional pair; she in the media — seen as a little suspect, a little too clever for her own good — he in the interpretive arts: sensitive, hard-working, dedicated: often away.
Just as well, they say, that Valerie has the children and her work to keep her occupied.
Perhaps, in retrospect, rather a dull pair to have at a dinner party.
Lou and Valerie.
Most of the friends are from the music world, not the media: they don't mix easily.
Orchestra talk is very different from newspaper talk, and, as so often, the husband's occupation wins.
Musicians are by their very naming good — media folk are noisy, rackety, flip.
Lou, Valerie, Sophie, Ben.
One of the strangest things is how little I think of Sophie and Ben.
as if I were not one person as I had always thought, but divide very simply and cleanly into two — the erotic and the maternal.
The erotic has swept in and taken over: split the maternal off, like a tree split by lightning — one half stands and grows, the other simply falls and dies.
I say I do not mind Hugo visiting Stef but why is he so long away?
It's time he came home to me.
I do not like the thoughts in my head.
I need his presence to drive them away.
He said it was to discuss the children but what was there to discuss?
She will look after them, no doubt, as Lou will look after Sophie and Ben.
Let him communicate with her by letter, if he must: let solicitors arrange money matters.
Stef has a good job: she can support herself.
She is a financial journalist with her own by-line.
She is a cold, unfeeling and unresponsive woman: she must be, or Hugo would not have left her for me.
She was his youthful mistake: she is in the past tense.
She lives in time: Hugo and myself out of it.
I wonder if I were to kill her, if she were dead, if she were knocked over by a car, would that make the jealousy, that mixture of anxiety, grief and fear of exclusion, simply stop?
Is it Eleanor's notion or mine that sex in itself is a drug: that its effects are like heroin?
In which case I can see jealousy as one of the nastier withdrawal symptoms.
Only Hugo, once again in me, part of me, driving in like a needle into flesh, will stop this particular distress.
I look Stef and Hugo up in the telephone book.
I punch out the numbers.
The hotel phone sings its special little sickly Stef-and-Hugo tune.
A child's voice answers.
No doubt Peter, aged eight.
The eldest.
The other two are twins; aged four, I seem to remember Hugo saying.
Peter ought to be in bed.
What kind of a mother is she?
I find I am lost for words: put down the telephone, but not before a woman snatches the phone and says, ‘Who's that?
I know who that is!
Bitch!’ before I cut her off.
She shouldn't speak like that, behave like that, in front of her own children.
No wonder Hugo prefers Valerie the Comparatively Well Behaved.
Presently the phone beside the bed goes.
It is Hugo.
He can come for an hour.
Why only for an hour?
Isn't he living here with me?
Never mind, never mind.
I hear his step; I open the door into the hotel corridor.
It has a timeless, placeless look: it could be anywhere in the world.
There is not enough air on earth for me to breathe: my love is consuming all the oxygen in heaven.
We are on the floor together: the door has to swing to on its own, as it is designed to do, though more for the sake of security than lovers.
Oh, the fix, the fix!
Now I am myself again I can get on with Lover at the Gate.
LOVER AT THE GATE [4]
Bernard and Ellen's Catholic months
‘You're absolutely right,’ said Ellen to Bernard on the first night of their wedded life.
‘Sex is not only sinful, it's disgusting.’
‘You shouldn't not do it because it's disgusting,’ said Bernard, ‘but because it's carnal.’
‘Absolutely,’ she said.
‘The more you pay attention to the body, the less attention you've got left to pay the soul.
I really do understand that.’
She agreed with him whenever possible.
That way, she imagined, domestic harmony would lie.
They took the little house two doors away from Ken and Rhoda; her own to play with, to sweep and dust and arrange as she liked, and meals for two to cook at her discretion, and her father and grandmother just down the road so she had both a respite from them and could keep an eye on them, not too close but not too far.
Though what the eye saw was increasingly dismal.
Then one day Rhoda went off like a damp squib into eternity: and after that it went into a sort of déjà vu double vision, watching Ken and his ex-saxophonist's widow get together.
She slept a good deal.
‘But, Apricot,’ protested Brenda and Belinda, ‘you can't just give up and do nothing.
Not after all that.’
Brenda was going to a college where there was an excellent women's hockey team, and Belinda to university to read English literature.
Liese was doing a secretarial course, but they'd all rather expected that.
‘I'm not doing nothing,’ said Apricot.
‘I'm getting used to a new life.
And I have a really nice little part-time job at an optician's.
Goodness knows where it might not lead.’
‘You're the receptionist,’ observed Brenda.
‘It will lead precisely nowhere except sitting around will give you a fat arse.’
‘She'll never have a fat arse,’ said Belinda.
‘Not like me.’
Bernard came in and they moderated their language.
He had that effect on people.
For their parting present, before they went off into their futures, they gave Apricot six months' supply of contraceptive pills.
Brenda's brother was a certified drug addict and stole more prescriptions from doctors than he ever needed to use.
‘I don't need them for the moment,’ said Apricot, ‘because Bernard and I don't do it.
He says we can't until we're properly married in the eyes of God as well as man; he says it's worth waiting for.
I certainly hope he's right.’
Belinda said it was and Brenda said it wasn't.
Liese said she was not in a position to say.
Bernard said, ‘Ellen, the sooner your friends stop coming round and chattering the happier I will be.’
Brenda said, ‘Apricot, how can you do it?
He won't even let you have your own name!’
Ellen said, ‘I prefer Ellen to Apricot.
Apricot was my mother's fantasy and my mother was an alcoholic who deserted me.
She had no sense of responsibility, no vision of the future.
She was even worse than Rhoda.’
Liese said, ‘But, Apricot, you can't speak like that about your mother.
Anyway she didn't desert you.
She came back as a ghost.’
‘I'll have no talk of ghosts in this house,’ said Bernard, ‘that's for sure.’
She liked him to be masterful.
She liked to be frugal: to have money and carefully dole it out.
She would never be feckless; not like Wendy, not like Rhoda, not like Ken.
She listened to Bernard's account of his faith with increasing mystification.
She liked Bernard.
She liked the way his mind went back and back in layers: how he tried to justify emotion with reason.
She enjoyed figuring it out.
She liked his torments, his inability to be happy, his sense that he must be busy saving the world.
Where Ken wanted to jolly the world along, Bernard wanted to push it and shove it for its own good.
He knew, or thought he did, what was right and what was wrong, and she was glad he did, or thought he did.
She knew otherwise.
He was taking a degree in sociology.
He had a  government grant to do so.
As a married student he received extra money.
She wondered if he had married her to get the better grant.
As she had married him to get away from home, she could scarcely complain if he had.
She thought his Catholicism, the emotion he mistook for faith, was a pity.
As soon as she had recovered from the months of Rhoda's illness, and come to terms with her death, and adjusted to the sudden change in her circumstances, she would do something about it.
They slept in twin beds in the front bedroom of 93 Mafeking Street.
There was lino on the floor and lace curtains at the window.
There was no bathroom, but a bath in the kitchen covered by a shelf.
Bernard would lie awake for hours waging his nightly battle with carnality, slapping it down, groaning.
Ellen just went to sleep.
‘You're unnatural,’ he would complain.
‘I expect I am,’ she would say.
Then one day she said, ‘Please, Bernard, I want to become a Catholic.’
‘It's not possible.
You have no religious instincts.
I'm not blaming you.
You were brought up in a hotbed of superstition and anarchy: you can't help it but it's hopeless.’
‘But I do believe; I do have faith: I have recovered from my childhood.
Honestly, Bernard.
I believe what you believe, that God came down to Mary, who was a virgin, in the form of a dove — or was that to her mother, so that Mary could get pregnant and be an immaculate conception, which had to happen on account of how sex is so polluting, and give birth to Jesus?
That way everyone born after that particular time would have their sins forgiven so long as they believed in Jesus.
I don't want to go to hell because I don't believe in Jesus.
I wouldn't even go to limbo, Bernard, because I know about Him and haven't converted: I'll have to go to hell.
Please, Bernard, let me be converted or we'll be separated after death and I couldn't bear that.’
‘You're not sincere!’
‘I am, I am!
I'm your wife.
If you don't let me be converted, then you're sinning.
You're depriving God of a soul.’
Night after night she'd nag, and in the morning would peck his cheek affectionately if he walked by the cooker where she was frying up his bacon and eggs for breakfast.
She dressed trimly for work; neat white blouse, tight black skirt, bright seventeen-year-old  eyes: no ladders in her tights now she was settled and happy.
He didn't like her going out looking so smart and cheerful.
Who might she not meet?
He didn't trust her.
‘You aren't serious,’ was all he could say.
‘But I am, I am.
Isn't this what you believe?
Haven't I got it right?
Well, I believe it too.’
‘Not put the way you put it.’
‘That's why I have to have instruction, Bernard.
So I'll put it properly.
And then He cursed the fig tree because it was barren: I don't want to be cursed, Bernard.
So I suppose one day sooner or later we'll have to do this disgusting thing in order for me not to be barren, but I don't look forward to it.
Do you?
And then He was crucified and three days later rose from the dead, and at Mass the bread and wine actually turn into flesh and blood, so you shouldn't have breakfast that morning but take it on an empty stomach.
And when the Virgin Mary died she rose from the dead too; not just her soul went up to heaven, but her body too.’
‘No, Ellen, that is not the case.’
‘It is, Bernard.
The Pope declared it in 1954.
Transubstantiation of the Virgin Mary.
And it hasn't been rescinded.
It took them nineteen hundred years to decide, but then God dwells in eternity, and the Church too, so there's no hurry.
Fancy that, Bernard!
Isn't that somehow just neat?
Do you think she went up with her arms raised; I kind of see her that way.
And were they old arms or young arms?
Would they change on the way, or before her body began to rise?
I wouldn't like to rise to heaven except in my prime.
Would her wishes be taken into account?
I do need instruction, Bernard.
Where is heaven, anyway, for her to go to in the flesh?
I'd always seen it as in some other dimension.
Can flesh move from one dimension to another?
I am so ignorant I can't bear it!’
He locked away his books on Catholic theology but she took the bus to the Westminster Cathedral and bought more from the bookshop there.
When he came home from college she'd be reading The Catholic Mind.
She read the Catechism in bed at night, occasionally sighing; she would turn towards Bernard and her long hair — she wore it up for work, half-down in the home, fully down in bed — would fall over her face, over her white shoulder.
‘We're not going to succumb, Bernard,’ she would say if he made a move towards her, and she'd toss her head back in a swift, moving, golden curtain.
‘You and I are going to be strong against temptation.
We are going to nurture our souls, not give in to lust.
We aren't animals — God has blessed us with free will.
By sacrifice and submission and by the Grace of God I mean to become a truly serious person, fit to make a new beginning and become a Catholic and a proper wife to you.
We'll be married in the Catholic Church, and I'll teach all our children to be good Catholics.
I'll have eight, I think.
After that we'll stop having sex.’
Bernard's mother sent a Christmas card and in the name of Catholic family unity Ellen invited her to stay.
Bernard cringed.
Mrs Parkin smoked.
Bernard, who neither smoked nor drank, had to keep opening the windows.
She was a widow, fleshy, piggy-eyed, slack-mouthed, with a taste for sweet sherry.
She wore a cross around her reddened crinkly neck, wore black as befitted her widowed state, and her hair in tight grey curls between which lines of white, stretched skin showed.
She brought as a present a portrait of Mother Mary as she appeared to the children at Fatima, executed by someone of sentimental disposition, and a statue of the Virgin Mary, the mould fashioned by someone of a melancholy and austere frame of mind.
Ellen put them in pride of place above the fireplace in the front room downstairs.
The fireplace held a gas fire; the walls were a figured cream paper: the three-piece suite of maroon uncut moquette.
There was a glass-fronted mahogany cupboard where Ellen insisted on keeping Bernard's family photographs, which she had found at the bottom of a suitcase.
The Parkins had migrated from Dublin when Bernard was eight, young enough to take advantage of an educational system which allowed bright children to climb up and out of their allotted place in society.
Bernard's father had been a builder, his two elder brothers were house painters; his older sister was married to a carpenter: another just left nursing to be married; his two younger sisters were still at school and planned to go to college against their mother's wishes.
‘They'll never find husbands,’ complained Mary Parkin, ‘if they've too much knowledge in them.
It's unsettling for a girl.’
And she crossed herself.
A touch to the forehead, a touch to the left of the chest, the right, and the solar plexus: rapid, never quite touching self: Jesus crucified an inch before the body, forever.
‘It certainly is!’ agreed Ellen.
‘Look how I gave all that up for  Bernard!
It's so important for a wife to be able to look up to her husband.
It's because she can't we get all these divorces.’
And she too crossed herself.
Mrs Parkin would take quick sidelong looks at her new daughter-in-law, hoping to catch her out, but there she'd always be, merry as a chicken, tra-la-lahing amongst the pots and pans in the kitchen, or lipsticking her lips in the frameless octagonal mirror in the parlour, or telling her rosary in front of the Virgin, apparently more devout even than Bernard, the most devout of all her sons.
She'd hoped Bernard would grow up to be a priest: now he'd taken up with a woman.
She didn't trust Ellen one bit.
‘You mustn't worry about my not being Catholic,’ said Ellen.
‘I'm going to convert the minute Bernard thinks I'm serious enough.
Do you think being serious is the same as being unhappy, Ma?’
Bernard's mother was not accustomed to such questions: she shook her head and took another fag and another cup of tea and longed to be off to stay with her eldest son.
She felt uneasy amongst non-smokers and a home without children didn't feel right, and Bernard didn't look happy.
‘Your mother's bound to go to heaven,’ said Ellen to Bernard on the afternoon of the morning his mother left.
It was  teatime .
She had made scones.
‘She never misses Mass.
Lucky her, a proper Catholic!
And I expect if your father hadn't died she'd have had at least twenty children!
The salt of the earth, your mother.’
She stirred four spoons of sugar into her cup.
‘What a pity cirrhosis got to him so early!’
‘Don't do that,’ he begged.
‘You'll get fat.’
‘I'm not vain,’ she said.
‘You wouldn't want me to be vain.
Vanity is a sin.’
‘You'll get just like my mother.’
In the past, he had only ever spoken well of his mother, when he spoke of her at all.
‘I'd be proud to be like your mother,’ said Ellen, and she glanced towards Mary smiling on the mantelpiece and crossed herself.
Bernard put down his scone.
He had lost his appetite.
‘My mother,’ said Bernard, suddenly, talkative at last, ‘is a mean-spirited, disgusting bitch; a big fat mammy, and to think that I was born from between her legs makes me want to vomit.
She made my life hell.
She sneered and bullied and slobbered: she nagged my father to death, and when she wasn't nagging she was  muttering.
I hate her.
Why did you ask her here?
What are you trying to do to me, Ellen?’
And he got to his feet, skin white beneath his little beard and his brown eyes desperate, and swept the Virgin Mary to the ground, where she failed to break.
‘Just as well she's plastic,’ said Ellen placidly.
‘It must be very unlucky to break the Virgin.
More bad luck years even than breaking a mirror.
But that's superstition, isn't it?
I hope it isn't a mortal sin, for your sake.’
Bernard jumped upon the Virgin and she cracked and flattened.
‘I don't think you should,’ said Ellen doubtfully.
‘You weren't like this when I married you.
Jumping on poor Mother Mary.
It won't diminish her powers one bit!’
He wept, his head upon her knee, and presently his hand crept up between her knees and she didn't even pull away with a ‘Sweet Jesus, what do you think you're doing?’ but drew the curtains to and lit the gas fire to warm them both.
She had an approved menstrual calendar and knew it was more or less — or at least with an acceptable risk factor — her safe time of the month.
‘It was worth waiting for,’ she told Brenda.
‘You were wrong and Belinda was right.’
The next day Bernard went to talk to Father William, and came home to say yes, it was okay, Ellen could take instruction and, if all went well, could become a convert to Catholicism.
They would be properly married in church: they'd discuss the question of children later.
Ellen undressed for bed and fell on her knees and prayed, instead of getting into it.
‘Now what?’ he demanded.
‘Are you thanking God?’
‘I'm praying to Mary to restore my virginity,’ said Ellen.
‘Don't interrupt.’
‘What are you talking about, Ellen?’ he demanded, grabbing her by the hair.
‘Are you insane?’
‘She can do it, honestly,’ said Ellen.
‘It says so in a little book I got from Our Lady's Bookshop.
She can restore virginity not just in the soul — well, anyone could do that — but in the body, if you pray enough and feel sufficiently remorseful.
Actually in the flesh, the way she went up to heaven.
I simply adore Mother Mary.
I wish I could make an unconditional ‘yes’ to God the way she did.
I do so want to be pure in body and mind.
She had a head  start, of course, what with her mother being immaculate too.
I don't somehow see Wendy as having me that way.
We succumbed to temptation once, Bernard, but I'm sure Mary will forgive just so long as we never, ever do it again.’
Bernard let her hair go.
‘You win,’ he said.
‘I'll become an atheist.’
‘That's going too far too fast,’ said Ellen, getting into bed.
‘The position mightn't hold.
How about an agnostic?’
But he felt that position to be untenable.
It was cowardly.
If you lost your faith you lost your faith, and that was that.
He understood the absurdity of his beliefs.
He regarded them now as he regarded other ordinary but embarrassing habits of youth: odd hair styles, a passion for cheap cologne, eccentric dressing, strange obsessions — all things to be grown out of.
He even thanked Ellen for this new, sudden, unexpected leap into maturity.
But some few weeks later she happened to bring home from the library a volume of Marx's early writings.
‘It was a conversion experience,’ said Ellen to Liese.
‘His hand shook, his mouth fell open.
He believed.’
‘Well,’ said Liese, who was now engaged to a nice young architect called Leonard, and who was proud and plump and stuffed as full of delight as a feather cushion — over-stuffed, Brenda remarked ‘I suppose it's better to believe in something than nothing.
Leonard isn't orthodox, thank goodness, or I'd have to shave off all my hair.
He worships me, I'm glad to say.’
A bust of Lenin stood on the mantelpiece where once the Virgin smiled.
The theological books went to the jumble sale; political science took their place.
Friends no longer came to gather in prayer, but to further the revolution.
Bernard believed.
He understood that heaven and hell were here on earth, and that little by little heaven would drive out hell, and that the efforts of men of intelligence and goodwill should be dedicated to hastening that process; and that even the word ‘should’, with its implication of duty and overtones of guilt, was in this brave and newly discovered world, inappropriate.
The abolition of religion as the ‘illusory’ happiness of men is a demand for their ‘real happiness’,’'he read aloud to Ellen.
‘'The call to abandon their illusions about their condition is a call to abandon a condition which requires illusions.’'
How bright his  eyes were.
His shoulders squared and straightened.
He no longer walked in guilt, but in hope.
The twin beds went.
The saxophonist's widow refused to lie in Ken and Rhoda's bed, so Ken offered it to Bernard and Ellen: they took the offer, rightly, as a gesture of approval, and the four of them carried it one very early morning from No. 97 to No. 93.
‘You can't lie in that bed,’ said Brenda, ‘it isn't decent.
It's the bed your mother and your grandmother slept in with your father.’
She was engaged to a lecturer in economics: a straightforward young man.
They were saving to get married.
They would have everything new.
‘I like the idea of it,’ said Ellen.
‘It gives me a sense of continuation.’
The bed was old, soft and lumpy.
She felt she would draw strength from it.
She needed strength: her and Bernard's nightly love play would go on for hours, limbs lurching and surging in some kind of gladiatorial combat as if the one who weakened first lost.
Oddly, she felt less happy, less content, less well able to go about her daily business than she had in the three painful months of her sexual abstinence.
Perhaps sex was a drug.
The more you had the more you needed.
First the relief, then the surge of pleasure, then the peace: then the niggle of dissatisfaction growing into active discontent, into a sense of loss, of desperation, of craving — and then the fix.
People would do anything to others in order to get the fix.
But perhaps she was just short of sleep: there were other ways of looking at it.
‘Marxism is to Catholicism as methadone is to heroin,’ said Ellen to Belinda, ‘but enough of an improvement to count.’
Belinda said she didn't have a boyfriend, but Brenda, Liese and Ellen knew she was having an affair with a married man.
‘She has low self-esteem,’ said Brenda, ‘from being so fat, and a romantic nature.
That's how it ends up.’
Ellen said, ‘Then why doesn't she go on a diet?’
The remark got back to Belinda, who didn't speak to her for years thereafter.
‘Apricot was one thing,’ said Belinda, ‘but Ellen is just too ruthless for comfort.
Ellen and Lady Macbeth?
Nothing in it!’
Valerie's garden interview with Eleanor Darcy
Q: So you stayed happily married to Bernard for fifteen years?
A: Journalists always make the assumption that to be married for a number of years is to be happily married for those years.
What has the length of time to do with it?
Couples stay together for any number of reasons other than happiness: questions of money, children, accommodation or idleness, depression, habit, fears above all: fear of what the neighbours will say, fear of loss of status — fear of going without sex being chief amongst them.
And I daresay the worry about what to do with the cat or the problem of finding spare time in the executive diary keeps other unhappy couples together.
But yes, as it happens, Bernard and I were happily married for fifteen years, in the face of all likelihood, and against the prognostications of our friends.
Q: To what do you attribute this success?
A: Success?
Why do you equate being happily married with success?
However, we'll let that pass.
I attribute it to frequent and energetic sex, to our not having children, to my habit of deferring to him, and lying about my actions, my whereabouts, my politics, my emotions and my orgasms.
The day was bright.
They sat in the back garden at Eleanor Darcy's insistence.
Trains passing the other side of the wooden fence interfered with the recording.
Brenda's children played in the paddling pool.
Valerie faced into the sun.
Eleanor wore a pretty straw hat.
Valerie wore a little scarf around her neck to hide Hugo's love  bites.
She could not see the state of Eleanor's neck because Eleanor wore the collar of her crisp white blouse up.
Why, on so hot a day?
Q: But isn't this dishonest?
A: Of course.
You asked me how I stayed happily married and I replied.
The reply is honest; you just don't like it.
Q: But isn't marriage about partnership, trust?
A: Yours may be.
Mine are not.
Q: But surely women have a right to sexual fulfilment?
Men should work to achieve it.
The woman ought not to lie about these things, or how will men ever learn?
A: There is no such thing as a ‘right’ to anything: Right to Life, Right to Choose, Right to Housing, Right to Orgasm — all it means is ‘it would be nice if only’.
Of course it would be nice.
It is just that so many desirable ends are incompatible.
Or, if interests overlap, they do not necessarily coincide.
What is good for the child is often not good for the parent, and vice versa.
What is best for father and child may be perfectly horrible for the mother.
And where sex is concerned it is perilous to talk about shoulds and oughts.
Shoulds and oughts end in far too many impotent and guilty middle-class men writhing around hopelessly in the beds of friends and strangers.
The upper and working classes, being less verbal, less given to talk of shoulds and oughts between the sheets, have less trouble, if you'll forgive me, simply getting it up and putting it in, to the relief and satisfaction of everyone concerned.
In Darcy's Utopia there will in general be little talk of ‘rights’.
And in sexual matters men and women will aspire to individual pleasure not proper behaviour, and go about it however they see fit, and with any luck without too much talk about it.
Q: I am interested in this Utopia of yours.
I am sure our readers would like to hear more about it.
A: Then bully for you and bully for them, though I suspect you're  lying.
Now I know Utopianism has recently had a bad press.
Unrealistic, naïve, elitist to envisage a better society, a perfect state, and work towards it.
We have decided human nature is bad, that people only work for money, respond only to the profit principle, and must be controlled by threats and punishments.
They forget that it is ‘we’— or ourselves on a good day, ‘society’ as we call it — who understand that punishment is appropriate.
In other words, that we are good.
When we get it together to be so.
And what else are we to do, not just as individuals, but as a society, but plan some kind of future for ourselves?
Drift on as we have been: in our sour, brutish, dangerous cities, in our pesticide-soaked countryside: the will of the people increasingly triumphant, and not its best will, likely as not its worst will?
One day the electorate chooses a government to exterminate the Jews: the next day decides on one to take it down the Marxist-Leninist road: the next that all it wants is dishwashers and CD players.
Who wants the people's will to prevail?
Not the people.
They've too much sense.
Democracy is a dicey business: it must be seen to work, but not actually to apply, or else we're all in the soup.
Q: The readers of Aura might find that rather hypocritical.
Dangerously so.
A: Better a government that pays lip service to democracy than one which doesn't even do that.
Political parties have somehow got it into their heads that voters want to agree with them, so put up policies with which voters will agree.
But voters merely want to elect representatives who have the time and wit to run the country so they can get on with their lives in peace.
‘Democracy’, rule by the people, did not always have the good press it enjoys today.
It was seen as something to be avoided at all costs.
It was the demagogues of Ancient Rome who first made proper government impossible.
Citizens, whipped up into a fervour of indignation, simply stopped doing as they were told: started bringing horses noisily in by night for deliveries, not washing the sidewalks and so forth, just for the hell of it.
Just to show they could.
How the senators, the patricians, fumed!
Pure democracy has never worked: it works in a moderated form where there is a literacy qualification, or a property-owning qualification  — which usually amounts to the same thing — and the voter is capable of making an informed judgement.
But life has got too complicated to understand: the vote is no longer sufficient protection for the working man.
In Darcy's Utopia there will be elections, but people will be expected merely to vote for people they personally like.
It will be a popularity contest.
An annual ‘boy or girl most likely to run the country’ jamboree.
And annual; by the time they've got themselves together it will be practically time for them to disperse.
The civil service, again composed of volunteers on Community Tax Service, will spend time un-making regulations and shortening forms.
Most legal documents will merely state, ‘common sense will prevail’.
Q: So all the work in Darcy's Utopia will, as it were, be a tax paid to the community.
An ability tax, not an income tax?
A: Exactly.
Good for you!
Though workaholics will be free to work as long as they please, if they can find something to do machines can't.
You're a workaholic; you'll have a brilliant time.
Q: Thank you.
Now a question our readers always want to ask.
Is it possible to love two men at once?
A: Why do you ask?
Is it you who are interested, or your readers?
Shall we go inside?
The wasps are beginning to annoy me, and I see they quite frighten you.
And it's such a busy day for trains.
All those people, off to work, off shopping, off somewhere.
Do you think we have a group soul?
A group identity, the way they say black beetles do?
You seem quite tired and nervy; not at all the way you were last time: very trim and self-contained.
I hope nothing bad has happened?
As I said before — was it to Hugo, or to you, Mrs Jones?— curses have a peculiar knock-on effect.
I was never the focus of an actual focused ill-wishing, merely a bit part player in Bernard's drama, but look what happened to me!
They were inside, in the kitchen.
Brenda washed up mugs at the sink.
Eleanor Darcy made coffee, using a frugal quantity of powder and low-fat milk, too late for Valerie to murmur that she  took hers black.
She took the opportunity to check the tape was running.
It was not.
She would have to rely upon her notes.
Q: How could you tell if a misfortune was the result of a curse, or just ordinary bad luck?
A simple matter of cause and effect?
A: Ah.
Your wife leaves you, you lose your job, your friends quarrel with you.
In themselves these are not misfortunes.
It is in your reaction to them that misfortune lies.
You are humiliated by your wife leaving you.
You hate being on social benefits.
You are lonely without your friends.
Indeed, the expectation of such misfortunes quickly brings them about.
You may indeed deserve to lose your wife, your job, your friends — naturally it is easier to accept the power of the curse than the fact of your own selfishness, unlikeability , destructive bad temper and so forth.
Just as it is easier to blame witches, agents of the Devil, for male impotence, famine, drought, war, plague and so forth than it is to blame God whom, in spite of all evidence to the contrary, we insist on regarding as a benign and even moral being.
Q: You keep coming back to God and the Devil.
Why?
A: So would you if you'd seen the Devil, snarling and slavering and trying to get in a window of the second floor of a students' residence.
Even through the double glazing the glass was beginning to melt and you could hear this horrible panting sound.
Q: I thought you said your husband had seen the Dark Thing?
A: I saw him in Bernard's face.
If you believe in the Devil you had better believe in God, or else what a fix you're in!
If you have finished your coffee I think it is time you went.
I find myself very tired today, I don't know why.
There is very little to do here; idleness quickly makes one tired.
At least I expect that's it.
I never answered your question about loving two men at once.
Isn't it strange that men never seem to wonder whether it's possible to love two women at once?
They usually say to the old love about the new, ‘I love you but am in love with her,’ meaning that their nature is divided: their protective and uxorious souls reach out for  the old love: their sexuality towards the new.
I should consider that a little, if I were you.
And, as if she were the therapist and the journalist the patient, Eleanor ushered Valerie from the door.
When Hugo, later that day, tested Valerie's recorder he could find no fault with it.
‘You just forgot to switch it on,’ he said.
Such as had been recorded was all but inaudible; though the sound of trains, children and wasps was clear enough.
‘I have never in all my professional life forgotten to switch the tape on,’ she said.
‘Darling,’ he said, ‘you have never in all your life been in love with a man as you are with me, yet it happened.’
And she was obliged to admit he was right.
Valerie ventures out of the Holiday Inn
I was trying to make sense of my notes, and dabbing lotion on a nasty wasp sting on my finger, when Hugo turned up with the twins, two untidy little girls with red noses and pale wispy hair.
They were, fortunately, not identical, though why I should be pleased they were unidentical I don't know, as identical twins are conceived of the same coupling; unidentical very often of two separate couplings, and so far as I was concerned the less sexual congress Hugo and his Stephanie had the better.
Stef was turning out to be very trying; she seemed unable to accept that one love can finish just like that — poof!— and a new one begin.
She believed, wrongly of course, that Hugo was infatuated by Eleanor Darcy.
The timing of his leaving would naturally suggest just such a conclusion.
‘Valerie,’ he said to me, ‘I'll have to take these two to my mother again,’at which the little ones set up an ungrateful wail, ‘but I'll be back as soon as possible.
I'm sorry but Stef is really behaving in an impossible way.
The children were her idea, not mine.’
I set aside Lover at the Gate to attend to the children's needs — Coke and hamburgers from room service soon quietened them.
Stef, Hugo pointed out, was dead set against junk food.
It is unwise for mothers to be too ideologically sound in matter of diet — it makes it so easy for rivals to the children's hearts to worm their way therein, and win.
A taxi was called and Hugo and the children left for Liverpool Street and I was left alone with my own thoughts, in a state of mind I could only describe as lustless.
It occurred to me that I should perhaps wait for my daughter Sophie outside her school, to make sure she understood that I had not abandoned her, had  merely left Lou for a man who loved me and would make me happy; that things would presently calm down, and as soon as Hugo and I had sorted things out a little and established our new home she could join us.
In the meantime she was more than welcome to share the facilities of the Holiday Inn — room service and swimming pool and sauna.
Sophie was after all thirteen, and it's a rare contemporary child — especially born to parents in the communicative arts, that being the only umbrella heading under which both Lou and myself could suitably cluster: though he saw, probably rightly, greater sensibility and sensitivity in a Bloch quartet than he did in a Sunday Times editorial — who can expect both parents to live permanently and companionably together.
I left the hotel, feeling rather like the Lady of Shalott, breaking the spell, leaving her room, her castle, going only to the river's edge, there to drown herself, and made my way to the Navimore School for Girls.
One by one they sauntered out, or clustered together for safety in great rushes: all in theoretical navy and white, but with such imaginative variation in those two colours and where and how placed, and in what fabric, as to make their apparel singularly unalike.
The girls were, however, very much alike: wide-eyed, glossy-haired, with a hunch of shoulder and ease of hip that made them all the sisters they longed to be.
And there, yes, that was Sophie.
She had a little mole above her pretty upper lip, so I knew it was she.
I approached.
‘Sophie-’ I said.
And she cut me dead.
My own child looked through me with her wide, hazel, dark-fringed eyes and cut me dead.
Was it Sophie?
She swung round and I recognized the broken metal heel guard on her right shoe.
Yes, it was Sophie.
She would not part with her shoes for long enough for me to have them properly repaired.
‘Sophie,’ I begged, but she walked on, with a flick of a navy pleated skirt on which I recognized a cigarette burn.
Lou smoked three cigarettes a day: it was his one bad habit — and on one occasion Sophie's skirt and a stub had somehow come into contact.
What had Lou told Sophie?
What had he said to her?
How had he betrayed me?
Poor child, she must be suffering.
What had I done?
I saw Sophie swing lithely on to a bus before it stopped moving.
How many times had I told her not to do it?— to wait.
But she was right: if you didn't get on the bus while it moved, you didn't get on it at all.
The driver seemed to be playing some kind of survival game with the girls of the Navimore School: he slowed down out of courtesy to the bus stop sign, but took it no further than that.
He drove, they leapt, all survived.
I stood, shaken, watching after the departing bus.
A dog, some kind of uneasy black and white mixture between collie and labrador, trotted happily towards me.
It looked at me in the kind of easy, assessing way dogs on their peculiar errands do look at strangers — and then looked again, and stopped dead: his hackles rose: he backed, he made a kind of howling noise, turned tail, and fled.
Abashed, I made my way back to the Holiday Inn.
I passed a church on the way and really believe I would have gone in to sprinkle myself with holy water — but it was locked, as churches are, these days, against vandals.
It was left to the glass, chrome and carpets of the Holiday Inn, the sense of un-exotic, common-sensical luxury, to sustain me.
The third floor was a no-smoking floor or I think I might have started smoking again after six years' abstinence.
The ambience presently calmed me.
The sense of order, of human needs being comprehensible, in fact meetable, was reassuring.
Plentiful towels, hair dryer, little bottles of everyday necessities.
— shampoos, conditioners, shoe horns — whoever uses shoe horns?— our one suitcase each, the few clothes neatly hung: our personal computers, reference books — the tools of our trade.
What else could a man and a woman need, I repeated to myself, except each other?
Poor little Sophie would by now be suffering pangs of guilt for her behaviour towards me.
I wondered whether to call and say I understood, I forgave her; we'd meet next week some time.
I decided I would.
I called home.
Lou answered.
On hearing my voice he put down the phone.
I was devastated.
Forget Sophie, who was given to drama and tantrum anyway, what about Ben, my little boy?
Apple of my eye?
Perhaps Lou had told him the monstrous lie that I didn't love him any more?
Of course I loved him.
It was just that I loved Hugo more.
I had met Hugo at a party and unforeseen and overwhelming emotions had consumed  me.
That was all.
The love of man and the love of children are different things: the one does not exclude the other.
Surely Ben would understand that, if Lou explained it properly?
Ben spent so much time playing computer games, barely pausing to eat, that lately I'd sometimes wondered if he knew I existed at all.
He seemed scarcely even to register the changing faces of au pair girls.
I looked at myself in the mirror.
I am not bad-looking, but no beauty: too thin, too earnest, too practical, I had always thought, to inspire sudden, romantic love.
And yet I had!
When the two halves, separated by that terrifying law which parts the two who were never meant to be divided, defy that law and meet, there can be no gainsaying them.
Hugo and Valerie.
There was something wrong here, something I didn't understand.
I wanted Hugo to return at once, at once , to keep the niggling doubts down where they belonged: what was going on?
I noticed I had my pen in my hand again.
When I wrote a line or two of Lover at the Gate I felt at ease, buoyantly happy, confident.
Put down my pen and I heard in my ears the howl of the fleeing dog, saw the metal flash of Sophie's shoe — I could not bear it.
I picked up the pen.
Anxiety dispersed.
The phone rang.
I ran to it but it wasn't Hugo.
It was Eleanor Darcy.
‘How did you know I was at the Holiday Inn?’
I was puzzled.
‘Is that where you are?
What a strange place to be!
Do you really like hotels?
I hate them.
I just called the number Brenda gave me.
She's good at names and addresses and details.
I'm hopeless.
I think we've got an arrangement to meet tomorrow.
I'm sorry, I can't make it.
It's visiting day for Julian tomorrow, in prison.
It quite went out of my head.
I know what you're thinking: fancy forgetting a thing like that!
The trouble is, it's quite easy.
Out of sight is out of mind, when it comes to people as curse objects.’
‘Curse objects?’
‘Well, that's what Julian is, I'm sorry to say, in relation to me.
My falling in love with Julian was nothing to do with me, nothing to do with Julian, but part of the curse put on Bernard that his wife would become the love object of a man more attractive, more wealthy, more intelligent and of a higher status than he, so he  didn't stand an earthly.
What chance did I have, fond of Bernard as I was, but also, as I daresay you have concluded, and like so many, including I daresay yourself, bored?
How is Lover at the Gate coming on?’
‘I keep getting interrupted.
Personal matters intervene.’
‘I expect they will.
It's hot stuff you're dealing with.
Is Julian standing at the gate yet, knocking?’
‘Not quite.
Just about.
I have to get Bernard into Marxism and out the other side.
I'm still not sure what you mean by a curse object.
Sex objects, love objects — but curse objects?’
‘It was none of our faults.
Though I do blame Bernard, for getting himself mixed up with ethnic minorities.
After he gave up Marxism, and was out there all on his mental own, as it were, without fear of hell or counter-revolutionary thought, it went to his head.
He became irresponsible-’
‘Would you mind if I taped this conversation, Mrs Darcy?’
‘Look, I'm not giving an interview.
All this is off the record.
I thought that would be understood.
I called merely to say I couldn't meet up with you tomorrow.
I'm sorry.
But if you'd like to come over this evening —?’
But I couldn't.
I was waiting for Hugo.
‘Oh well,’ she said, ‘Hugo's coming over tomorrow anyway.’
Hugo had left a full packet of cigarettes by the bed.
He left them around to prove to himself that he really didn't smoke.
I broke my faith and smoked one.
Just one.
LOVER AT THE GATE [5]
Ellen's Marxist years with Bernard
‘I'm so proud of you,’ said Ellen, and meant it.
Bernard hammered and puttied, putting their home to rights, at one with the worker, his brother; no longer above manual toil but now rejoicing in it.
He who had palely loitered, fearful of moral contamination, now boisterously stamped through practicalities.
‘Man's self-consciousness is the highest divinity,’ he said.
‘There shall be no other Gods beside it.’
He had shaved off his beard.
His chin jutted sexily forward.
‘The criticism of religion leads naturally to the criticism of social relations,’ observed Ellen.
‘How wise Marx is: how everything applies: as true now as then!’
They rivalled each other in anti-deist sentiment.
She worshipped him for worshipping Marx, or appeared to.
He had torn the little gold cross from around her neck, during love, with such force she was left with a welt which never ever seemed to vanish.
She didn't mind one bit, she said.
She was proud of it: proud of his masterful nature — or appeared to be.
‘'The social principles of Christianity preach cowardice, self-contempt, abasement, submissiveness, meekness —’ she read aloud from the early works of Marx, which she had never returned to the library, property being theft, and knowledge free for everyone.
Bernard looked robust rather than pale: had lost his translucency along with his soul.
He looked others straight in the eye, he shouted their arguments down.
‘Religion is the sigh of the oppressed creature, the sentiment of a heathen world; it is the very soul of soulless conditions,’ he harangued his erstwhile comrades in the streets, the vestries.
They crossed themselves and prayed for him.
This was what happened when you married a non-Catholic.
‘Accumulate, accumulate!
This is Moses and the prophets to the capitalists!’ he declaimed to his fellow students in the college library.
Unlike Ellen, though, he always returned his books on time, so the librarians put up with him.
Bernard now argued with his teachers about his grades.
Faint-hearted, they took his essays back for remarking and upgraded them, as an airline always will a seat for a vociferous passenger.
He plotted to overthrow the senior lecturer in psychology who was fifty-two and had not rewritten his lecture on Piaget for fifteen years.
He worked up a cabal against poor old Professor Litmus, who taught statistics and never did anyone any harm, but droned on, and on, and at least never minded when his students slept.
If Bernard could change, the world could change: and the sooner the better.
He sat in smoky rooms like like-minded friends, talking late into the night.
Wives and  girlfriends made coffee.
They rooted out revisionists, pilloried Trotskyists, jeered at the Anarchists, and even burned the works of Kropotkin in public.
They chose Guy Fawkes' night to do it and the gesture went unnoticed — he found a lesson even in this.
Brenda and Belinda were both by now feminists.
‘You shouldn't make those men cups of coffee,’ they told Ellen.
‘Let them do it themselves.’
Belinda had lost two stone, given up her married man and was speaking to Ellen again.
Ellen put the point to Bernard.
‘As Jenny Marx said in 1872,’ she observed, ‘'in all these struggles the harder because the pettier part falls to women.
While the men are invigorated by the fight in the world outside, strengthened by coming face to face with the enemy, we women sit at home and darn.’
What do you say to that, Bernard?
Or do we have to stay fixed in 1872?
Is it revisionism to see some improvement in the human consciousness since then?’
‘I doubt it was 1872,’ Bernard said tenderly.
‘You're just making that up, the way you make so much up.
And I certainly don't expect you to darn my socks.
I have other things to worry about besides socks.
Coffee's different.
Someone has to make it, and the women just sit smiling and nodding so it might as well be them.
Just remember that as the State withers away, so will the many  evils which accompany the capitalist state.
Sexism included.
Only work for the socialist revolution and you work for justice for everyone; blacks, women, oppressed minorities everywhere.
Even musicians like your father.
What did Marx say in his letter to Kugelmann?
‘Everyone who knows anything about history also knows that great historical revolutions are impossible without female ferment.
Social progress can be measured precisely by the social position Or the fair sex — the ugly ones included.
Why don't you ask Brenda and Belinda to come along to Friday meetings?
I don't think Liese would get much benefit from them.’
‘Brenda and Belinda are separatists,’ said Ellen, ‘and don't go to meetings attended by men.’
‘You mean they're lesbians?’
‘I do not,’ said Ellen.
‘Was that Marx's joke about the fair sex, the ugly ones included, or yours?’ asked Ellen.
‘Marx said it,’ Bernard said.
‘Why?’
There was a feeling at the Friday meetings — more men than women attended — that sexual possessiveness between men and women was out of order.
It was said that there ought to be more sharing and swapping, in the name of change, equality and the exploration of the self.
Men and women, everyone agreed, were after all free and equal; marriage was a symbol of bourgeois oppression.
One evening a row broke out when Jed Mantree slipped a beery hand into Ellen's dress.
Jed was a post-graduate student in psychology.
His wife Prunella was present.
She was pregnant and poorly.
‘Bastard!’ cried Bernard, belabouring Jed with his fists, splattering cheap red wine over books and walls.
Ellen had to take Jed to casualty to have a cut above his eye stitched, as poor Prune was too upset to do it.
They were away for hours.
Bernard was in a torment of perplexity.
Prune said dismally that she didn't think it was right to stand between a man and his freedom.
She went home to lie down.
‘See it in its historical perspective,’ Ellen comforted her husband when she returned in the small hours.
‘'Men make their own history,’ to quote the master, ‘but they do not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances directly encountered, given and transmitted from the past.
The tradition of all the dead generations weighs like a nightmare on  the minds of the living.
And just when they seem engaged in revolutionizing themselves and things, in creating something that has never yet existed, precisely in such periods of revolutionary crisis they anxiously conjure up the spirits of the past to their service and borrow from them names and little cries in order to present the new scene of world history in this time-honoured disguise and this borrowed language.’
Let me put it another way, Bernard, when you uttered your little cry ‘Bastard!’
Ireland spoke through you, and your mother, and a whole history of sexual repression; the kneejerk of an oppressed peasantry rose up in you when Jed's fingers tweaked my nipples and you hit him, comrade in Marx though he was.
You should have let him finger on.
You should have been above it.
All I had to do was step backwards.
I didn't mind.
Neither did Prune.
But how could you help it?
Marx acknowledges the inevitability of your protest.
Understands and forgives it, just like Jesus.
I really do believe sexual possessiveness is something we should struggle against, no matter how difficult we find it.
Of course Jed should not have tried to come between us; it was a counter-revolutionary act on his part, Trotskyite even, when you think about it, but in that act was Praxis, the moment when theory becomes practice, and you should not have interfered.’
Ellen had long ago given up her part-time work at the optician.
She too was taking her degree in the social sciences.
Bernard was by now a junior lecturer in the same college where he had taken his degree.
He was in a permanent state of outrage.
‘You are quite right,’ Ellen reaffirmed.
‘What are your employers but State parasites?
As Marx so aptly put it, ‘men richly paid by sycophants and sinecurists in the higher posts, absorbing the intelligence of the masses, turning it against themselves.’
Nothing changes!’
‘Let it work its way through him,’ said Ellen to Brenda, ‘let it work its way through and out; the harder I put it the faster it will happen.’
‘You want him to worship you,’ said Brenda, ‘the way Leonard worships Liese.’
Liese and Leonard had a wonderful wedding; now they lived with central heating and embroidered sheets.
‘I just want him to be rational,’ said Ellen.
‘I want, I want,’ said Ellen, pinning up above their bed her favourite William Blake print.
It was of a man reaching out for the moon, crying ‘I want, I want.’
‘Not babies, I hope?’ asked Bernard.
‘What sort of world is this to bring babies into?
Nuclear war is inevitable.’
‘Not babies,’ said Ellen.
‘According to Marx, you are quite right, war is inevitable.’
And she got out of bed, looked up the page, and read, A reduction in international armaments is impossible; by virtue of any number of fears and jealousies.
The burden grows worse as science advances, for the improvements in the art of destruction will keep pace with its advance and every year more and more will have to be devoted to costly engines of war.
It is a vicious circle.
There is no escape from it — that Damocles sword of a war on the first day of which all the chartered covenants of princes will be scattered like chaff: a race war which will subject the whole of Europe to devastation by fifteen or twenty million, and which is not raging already because even the strongest of the great military states shrinks before the absolute incalculability of its final result.
And failing that, the class war as interpreted by Engels, a war of which nothing is certain but the absolute uncertainty of its outcome.’’
‘Do come to bed,’ said Bernard.
‘Marx and Engels, messengers of God,’ murmured Ellen.
‘I believe.
Help thou my unbelief,’ and she got back into bed.
Bernard and she had discovered a whole new range of fashionable sexual positions.
Their minds raged free: they talked, they shared.
Nothing was shameful.
She watched a vase move of its own accord along the bedroom shelf and fall off and break.
‘Subsidence,’ said Bernard.
‘It's been a hot summer.
The ground beneath the house has shifted.’
‘More like poltergeist activity,’ said Ellen.
‘Perhaps the ghost of my mother came with the bed.’
‘I am sure Marx did not recognize the existence of ghosts,’ said Bernard, ‘but please don't go looking for the reference; not now!’
Ellen waited for something to happen, something to change, but nothing happened, nothing changed.
A little struggling lilac tree in the back yard died, because, Belinda said, too many men had  pissed on it, out the window, not bothering to wait for the lavatory to be free.
‘Men talk,’ said Brenda, ‘and it's all piss and wind and ends in death.’
Ellen would lie in bed at night watching the objects on the mantelpiece in the glow from the street light, hoping they would move again: that something from another world would intervene, give her a clue as to the nature of her existence.
The curtains were too thin and let the light through.
But books, papers, cigarettes and matches — they both smoked now — stayed where they were.
Nothing moved.
She read some more books, wrote some more essays, passed some exams.
Drank more coffee, poured more wine, sidestepped Jed's hand, sometimes didn't.
Nothing changed.
A stray, dingy orange kitten came yowling up to the back door one night.
‘Don't feed it,’ said Bernard, ‘or it will never go home,’but she did, and the next night there it was again.
She opened the back door; it rubbed up against her leg.
She let it in, fed it well, took it to the vet: the animal plumped up and out: it lost its dinginess, it all but glowed orange in the dark.
It lived with them.
They called it Windscale, after the power station.
Windscale slept on the bed, moving over reluctantly as warm comfortable pockets changed shape and form while Bernard and Ellen made love.
Ken said — he came for Sunday lunch now, often with his stepdaughter but without his wife, who felt awkward in Ellen's presence — that it reminded him of a kitten he'd given Wendy on the day she gave birth to Apricot.
Perhaps it was a descendant of that same animal.
Why not?
Ellen was pleased to think it might be so.
It gave her a sense of history.
But still she wasn't happy.
She didn't understand it.
‘I believe,’ said Bernard, in and out of the classrooms, cafes, kitchens, street corners, pubs, while Ellen nodded and agreed, ‘I believe.
That the aim and purpose is to bring about the fall of the bourgeoisie and the rule of the proletariat, to abolish the old society based on class differences and to found a new society without classes and without private property.
There is no such thing, mind you, as private property for nine tenths of the population: its existence for the few is solely due to its non-existence  for those nine tenths.
I believe that the revolution cannot just come and go but must be permanent, and it is our duty to further it.
I believe!’
‘Holy Mary Mother of God,’ said Ellen, sitting upright in bed in the middle of the night.
‘I know what the matter is.
I'm bored.
This can't go on!’
Valerie receives a letter from Eleanor Darcy
Jack, the Holiday Inn bellboy, came up to Room 301 with a letter for Valerie.
She put aside her manuscript, opened it, and read.
It took some courage to do so.
Missives from the outside world had begun to make her uneasy.
She who usually looked forward to the telephone ringing, had become nervous even of that.
Safety lay in words on the page.
Outside, all was danger and sudden, nasty surprises.
Dear Mrs Jones,
I drew our phone call to a rather abrupt end and I am sorry.
I felt we were perhaps rather straying from the point.
Let me give you the text of a talk I gave to the Bridport Women's Institute, before the Scandal, and when Julian and I were still developing our blueprint for the world of the future.
They were attentive listeners.
Housewives, like the readers of Aura, are not idiots!
Here goes
‘The rich have got to come to some accommodation with the poor.
The poor are winning; they are all around, making themselves felt.
They are victims, which means that though not necessarily good, or pleasant, they have a moral ascendancy over the rich.
Those who are in the right tend in the end to win: those who are in the wrong to let them win.
The war is hotting up.
The poor creep out of alleyways while the rich put the BMW in for the night and hit the rich over the head and steal the tyres.
The rich do not dare to be alone at night in their grand houses: who lurks to rape around the  panelled corners, swings to attack from the ropes in the work-out room?
Their talk is of property prices, hired bodyguards and stun guns, because the poor are at the gate, inside the gate in the form of the Mexican nurse, the Filipino maid, the Irish girl, the Yugoslav lass; the ones who stand while others sit, and wash the dishes while others eat.
The ring on your finger is their dinner for a year.
The homeless sleep up against the air vents of the great hotels, supping on the scent of hot fudge sundae and clam chowder.
‘Do not suppose the rich have taste: they spend for the sake of spending, to spite the poor, to say ‘see what I have that you don't’.
The poor have standards, dignity, taste, conviction: they live honestly, full of hate, shitting in the houses of the rich if they get a chance to break and enter.
And why should they not?
For the rich get richer and the poor get poorer, and no one troubles to hide it any more; to shut the poor away in poorhouses, the old in almshouses, the mad in madhouses, the orphans in orphanages.
They are all out in the street now, in every city in the world, and their eyes follow the rich and plan their revenge.
And why not?
The rich live as fearful princes: the poor live as angry beggars.
And there is no pleasure left in the life of the rich: for who can tell lumpfish from caviare any more, and caviare is cholesterol-rich anyway, and forbidden: and when the rich grow old and hired nurses dab away the dribble, can you trust the nurse to love you, or does she hate you?
She hates you.
She will twist your poor rich senile arm to pay you out, because you have an airy house on the hill, and she goes home to a room in the damp and humid valley.
No, the rich must come to some accommodation with the poor: must acknowledge their existence: must open their houses and their fridges and their bank accounts and let the poor in.
And there will be no poor.
‘In Darcy's Utopia this lesson will have been learned.
That if the poor are hungry they will eat your food, and why should they not?: that if they are dirty they will infest you with disease, and so they should: that if you ignore them they will mug you and steal what you have, which is no more than you deserve: that if they sit barefoot at your door they will hurt your conscience and you will have to let them in.
That  therefore there must bc no poor, and for there to be no poor there must be no rich.’
So you see, Mrs Jones, something has to be done.
The proportion of the underclass to the rest rises yearly, both nationally and internationally.
We have grown too good, kind and sensitive to mow them down with machine guns, starve them out of existence.
We must incorporate them, or die ourselves.
They'll see to that.
We must build our Darcy's Utopia before it is too late.
Our systems, our structures, have to change.
I do not expect you to agree with me on everything.
I do not maintain I am even necessarily right.
I just want you to think about it, and the readers of Aura too.
Okay?
I'm lunching with Hugo tomorrow.
Isn't that exciting!
With all good wishes,
ED
LOVER AT THE GATE [5 Contd]
Ellen's Marxist life with Bernard comes to an end
‘Perhaps we should go on holiday?’
Bernard suggested to Ellen.
Perhaps that was what she wanted: a holiday abroad might make her eyes look at him and not beyond him.
‘Oh I don't think so,’ she said.
‘I think going on holiday is a very bourgeois sort of thing to do.’
‘How do you know?
You've never been on one.’
‘Neither have you,’ she said.
It was true.
He longed to go.
His elder brother had been to Yugoslavia, one of his sisters to Greece.
‘In Russia,’ he said, ‘workers most definitely go on holiday.
They even get sent to health farms, to relax.’
‘The Soviet Union,’ said Ellen, ‘and herein lies the tragedy, has become a revisionist state.
We can take no lessons whatsoever from the Soviet Union.’
If he lingered in front of travel agents, she hurried him on.
‘Poor exploited things,’ she'd say of the couples who entered, hand in hand, full of pleasurable anticipation.
‘How they fall for it!
The sop from the bosses: the holiday abroad!’
And she'd take him off to the second-hand bookstall which specialized in the politics of the left, or to attend a useful meeting, and stand around with banners.
‘All the same,’ he said, when the spring buds burst on the seven trees that grew in Mafeking Street, along which Wendy had once half-run, half-walked, on her way to give birth to Apricot, ‘it would be nice to be somewhere different, just for a time, just for a couple of weeks.’
‘You will see the same pattern everywhere you go in the world,’ Ellen said briskly.
‘The exploitation of workers; the disruption of native cultures; evidence of the military-industrial ethos, you will walk like a fool amongst other fools: a tourist, staring at the  remnants of the past, memorials to worn-out cultures, galleries dedicated to the ostentation and decadence of slave-masters.
Bernard, if we have any time to spare, better to stand and gaze at the name of the very street we live in, ‘Mafeking’, and contemplate its significance.
How many died, how many wretches suffered and starved in that particular disgraceful military episode, so that the workers should be duped yet again in the name of the Empire?
Worker set against worker, race against race.’
‘You're quite right, of course,’ he said.
What else could he say?
He wanted to buy a car, but she said that was a waste of money and anyway what was the matter with buses, why should they ride, filling the air with fumes, while others walked?
She put all spare money into her bank account.
‘You'll only waste it,’ she said, and she was right and he knew it.
At the beginning of every term he filled in a form habitually distributed to all teaching staff, requiring details of authorized absences from college; for sabbaticals, or the marking of outside examinations, or simply because contractual staff-student contract hours had been fulfilled.
‘You shouldn't complete that form,’ she said.
‘What are you thinking of, Bernard?
This is nothing more or less than an abuse of your professional integrity.’
The degree of his paranoia rose and fell, easily and rhythmically, like some distant lake she had once heard of, which locals claimed breathed in, then out, as if a living thing, among pleasant groves: if she dropped in notions, like stones, when the lake was at its fullest with what power did the ripples surge and spread.
Bernard took the matter of the offending questionnaire to the union forthwith: the local dispute quickly turned national: Bernard spoke to the press, rallied his colleagues; but alas, all too many wanted no more than a quiet life: Bernard confided that sometimes he had to eat alone in the staff dining room.
‘The point is not to be liked,’ said Ellen.
‘The point is to seize the day!
There were times when even Lenin stood alone!
If we stand firm, the bosses will collapse.
All the same, Bernard, I suppose you could sometimes talk about other things.’
Ellen now worked at an adventure playground — the Christabel Focus — for underprivileged girls in an ethnically mixed section of  the city.
It was a wasteland of sour earth waiting development: wooden structures had been hastily erected: old tyres swung from ropes: a lean-to hut provided shelter.
The Focus, as it was called, had been organized by separatist feminists.
Muslim parents favoured it for their daughters because men were barred the premises.
Ellen was no longer a student — she had been asked to leave, having flung a pot of paint at a visiting Minister of Education.
She had planned both the paint-throwing and the expulsion.
She really could not bear to sit and listen for a minute longer, as she explained to Bernard, to the lies of the imperialist lackeys.
Besides, she wanted to give more time to the Focus.
‘But Ellen,’ said Bernard, ‘if you'd only stuck it another month, you'd have got your degree and we could have begun to live quite comfortably.’
‘I don't work to be comfortable,’ said Ellen.
‘Why should we be comfortable when all around us are living in poverty?’
On Friday nights, when Bernard thought she was supervising Karate for Girls at the Christabel Focus, she met Jed in a motel.
He fumbled and humped and heaved and never mastered the art of supporting himself on his elbows so she would arrive home quite squashed and breathless; which was only appropriate.
Bernard's second sister went to Corfu for a holiday and came back with holiday snaps.
‘Sometimes,’ said Bernard, ‘I too feel like going to a hotel somewhere and looking out over a blue Mediterranean sea.
You and I could have breakfast in bed, Ellen.
Wouldn't you like that?’
‘And who would bring us our breakfast, wash our dishes?’ she asked briskly.
‘The underpaid, the overworked, the exploited?
How about us going to the study group on Marx and the Hegelian Fallacy next month in Blackpool?
That's by the sea.’
They went.
Bernard fell asleep mid-seminar, and Ellen wept, or was seen to weep, from the shame of it.
There was an unfortunate incident at the Christabel Focus: two young girls, aged six and eight respectively, hitched up their trousers to better climb a rope ladder in the presence of a visiting male observer from a possible funding body.
Flesh had been exposed.
The elders of the local Muslim community objected: the girls were withdrawn from the playgroup.
Bernard, by now spokesman for the local race relations committee, accused the Christabel Focus of racism: of wilfully offending the religious sensibilities of a minority group.
Then a group called ‘Mothers in the Majority’ accused the Christabel Focus of lesbian activity — not without some justification — in front of the children; Ellen accused Bernard of being anti-feminist, and attempting to ghettoize ethnic minorities; he accused her of racism and white elitism.
Bernard slapped Ellen.
Ellen slapped Bernard back, and the next day, after a meeting of all parties at which the local Director of Social Services tried to please everyone and offended everybody, lingered after the meeting, provocative and yawning amongst the filing cabinets, until he caught on, locked the door, and embraced her thankfully.
That affair continued for some months.
She felt the balance of her marriage with Bernard was thereby restored.
Bernard and Ellen went to visit Belinda, who had renounced her separatist tendencies sufficiently to marry a graphics designer.
He was poor when she married him.
Now he was rich.
They had an expensive apartment of minimalist decor: spindly lamps, metal and glass furniture, real paintings on the wall and not a pot plant in sight.
Bernard loved it, and said so, as they returned to the dingy familiarity of Mafeking Street.
‘Bourgeois decadence,’ sneered Ellen, and he shut up.
They went to visit Liese.
Liese's father had died.
She had inherited a chain of garages.
Leonard had given up architecture to help with the business.
It flourished.
There wasn't a book in the house, but there was an indoor fountain.
‘Inherited wealth!’ said Ellen when they got home, before Bernard could say a word.
‘The very prop of capitalism.’
They went to visit Brenda and Peter.
Brenda was teaching PT in a secondary school.
Peter was now a colleague of Bernard's at the poly.
They had a new car, and went to the cinema and ate out.
‘These days it takes two people's wages to keep one household going,’ observed Bernard.
‘We'll manage on one wage,’ said Ellen.
‘That is to say, yours.
I have no time to work, I'm far too busy.’
Ellen had retired from the Christabel Focus over a question of principle.
The polytechnic staff were now on a work to rule, though only at local level — a  vote or so at national level having gone against them in spite of a good deal of cooking of the agenda — and she was, as she said, too busy getting a strike fund to so much as think of earning, let alone working; let alone getting to bed before Bernard had long since fallen asleep.
They had no television, of course: Ellen scorned it.
The new opiate of the people, she jeered; now that religion had failed, TV had taken its place: the gods and goddesses of the new world were the stars and  staresses of soap: the bosses' latest plot to keep the minds of the proletariat addled.
Bread and circuses!
Holidays and TV!
There was enough political theory for Bernard to read, God knew, without turning on the box.
Let him get on with Das Kapital!
‘Praise Marx,’ Ellen was fond of saying, eyeing Bernard, ‘and pass the ammunition.’
One day Bernard sat up in bed and noticed the bruises on his wife's neck.
He didn't think he had put them there but couldn't quite be sure.
He shook her awake.
‘Ellen,’ he said.
‘I have to sleep,’ she said.
‘So do you.
We have an important meeting in the morning.
If we're clever we can win a procedural point on the Matters Arising Item 4 (2).’
‘Ellen,’ he said.
‘You win.
I don't think I can describe myself as a Marxist any more.
I am resigning from the strike committee.
I want a proper life the way other people have it.
I want a car, a nice home, a working wife, a child, and to go on holiday.’
‘Capitalist swine,’ she murmured, and sank back into a sleep in which she tossed and stretched and he was sure muttered someone else's name, but in the morning went with him to a garage and they actually bought a car, albeit second hand, and she let herself be dragged into a travel agency and they booked a holiday to Spain just like anyone else.
And for some time after that they went to bed at the same time and Ellen gave up both Jed and the Director of Social Services; and when both threatened, in grief, spite and unreason, to report her infidelity to Bernard, said, ‘Tell away!’ and neither of them did, which rather disappointed her.
She felt no particular guilt: merely that marriage was a kind of old-fashioned scale: a tray on either side in which the fors and againsts had somehow to be kept in balance, and that  extramarital sex had sometimes to be heaped on one side just to keep it steady  because indefinable things were piling on the other.
Were Bernard to be unfaithful to her, she was convinced, she would leave him at once.
But she did not think he ever would be.
Now he could see the world ranging round him, as it were, free, exciting and full of possibilities, neither limited by the encircling arms of Jesus, nor somehow squared off in a kind of boxing ring, with Marx, Engels, Lenin and Hegel fierce at every corner, barring all the exits.
Now he could go inward, freely, into his own mind, Ellen had great hopes for him.
She thought they could even be happy.
She thought she could in the end be legitimized, be more than just the girl who had married the first man who came along in order to get away from home: daughter of a mother who'd shacked up with her own mother's boyfriend at that own mother's unconscious behest — and had thereby had her life negated forever.
Wendy betrayed by Rhoda's desire for Ken: betrayed by the author of her own being: no wonder she had faded out of the world so quietly and gently and quickly, as if understanding it were better she had never been born.
Apricot the accidental: Ken the instrument: Rhoda the foolish but all-powerful.
Apricot, who, like Wendy, should never have been born.
Apricot, now Ellen, reborn.
Windscale the cat stopped coming into the bedroom: lay on one of the new chairs in the living room instead.
At least that didn't keep moving all night.
Hugo's restaurant interview with Eleanor Darcy
Q: Would you say that feminism played an important part in your life, Mrs Darcy?
A: As I have already explained to your colleague from Aura, Mr Vansitart, I was a feminist of the socialist variety.
Don't the two of you discuss me?
I have a feeling you have become quite close.
Giddy, even.
Perhaps too close, too giddy, to allow much time for discussion?
Let me say I believed that the wrongs of women were interconnected with and subsidiary to the wrongs of man; that to work for the revolution was to work, indirectly, for women.
That as the State withered away, so would sexism, racism and all other unpleasant social evils.
Our agitations were of course not so much for ourselves, for we were all comfortably enough off — that is to say we could afford a bottle of wine every now and then and very few of us rose with the dawn and laboured until nightfall — but sprang from a burning sense of general injustice or a generalized sense of burning injustice, whichever quote's the best or whichever your readers prefer.
Gladly we gave our hearts and minds to others.
We were the intellectuals of the revolution: our function to rally and inspire the workers.
At my suggestion Bernard tried rallying and inspiring the college support staff — the groundsmen and the cleaners and the canteen ladies — but they weren't interested.
They wanted to get home to watch telly.
In Darcy's Utopia there will be no television.
Q: In that case I imagine people will flee Darcy's Utopia in droves.
Don't you?
A: No, actually, I don't.
I believe if you took a referendum today a majority would agree that television should be stopped forthwith.
Present them with a vision of a world in which meals were eaten at a table instead of on the knees before the flickering screen; in which conversation was commonplace; political and social ideas worked out by individuals, not spoon-fed into the mind by paid commentators; a TV-less world in which we danced and sang and played charades to entertain ourselves or even popped round to the neighbours; in which our children were not fed visions of death and dead bodies on the daily news, their infant imaginations no longer turned feverish and fearful by the sobs and sorrows of the bereaved; nor subject to the cruel, disagreeable and frequently morbid fictional fantasies of others — would we not really vote for this?
Are we not well enough aware that on the screen, as on the page, good news is no news?
Where is the drama in easy times, good times?
Where is the benefit in not raping when rape is on the cards, not killing when killing can be done?
Inasmuch as‘good’ television is confrontational, violent, full of event — why then, I think most people would agree, on reflection, yes, communally, we could do very well without TV.
We certainly don't want to do without it if others have it, for fear of what we might be missing, but if we all gave it up — Mr Vansitart, because the human race has invented TV doesn't mean we have to put up with it.
Q: But surely people need to know what's going on?
A: I suppose we could have one news bulletin a month, by which time what was important and what was not would have become apparent.
And the occasional newsflash, I daresay, should a swarm of killer bees approach, or a hurricane, or a radioactive cloud, might well be useful.
But the race to be first with the news which so obsesses journalists is quite pointless — a childish game they play at the behest of their capitalist masters: to be there first!
Why?
Who cares?
In Darcy's Utopia we will make do with listening to the radio.
Hearing voices in our heads, we must work to make our own pictures.
Hereby our imaginations will be educated and stimulated, not grievously curtailed and made afraid.
They sat in a fashionable Italian restaurant in the city.
At nearby tables people nudged one another and whispered, ‘Eleanor Darcy’.
There had been a month or so where her face had been  seen almost daily on TV: they had not yet quite forgotten.
She changed seats with Hugo so that she sat with her back to the other diners.
She had told him that Brenda was obsessively vegetarian, and that she longed for red meat: would he take her out?
It was her idea, in other words, not his.
Q: You don't imagine the TV industry would take kindly to its abolition?
A: Oh, we don't have to be quite so drastic.
Let them make programmes for each other.
They do it anyway.
Just let them not transmit them.
I'll have the lemon sole.
Q: But I thought you wanted meat?
A: Only in theory; when it comes to it.
Faced with the actuality of change, one avoids it.
One likes what one knows, and knows what one likes.
Now when I was with Julian, my second husband, I was a great meat eater.
Julian was fond of steaks: we got through jars of mustard.
While I was with him I even developed a liking for steak tartar.
Bernard was a pork and beans man, with a weakness for the occasional Irish stew, on the greasy side.
Rhoda and my father lived on sausages and mash, and little crisp frozen chicken pies.
She wore a dress of fine and flowing black fabric and many long strings of blue crystal beads and a rather affected little red hat.
Her hands were small, long-fingered and strong.
The tape recorder sat on the table between a fluted glass containing an artificial rose and the giant black pepper grinder the waiter had inadvertently left behind.
The more he required her to talk about herself the more he longed for her to ask him about himself.
Q: But what are people going to do all day in this TV-less world?
Can you give me some idea as to their sexual and marital mores?
I take it second husbands are allowed?
A: There, you see!
Trying to catch me out again!
The fear of governments always is that if people are not occupied playing competitive sports or watching TV they will be at it all the time.
That there will be copulating and fornicating wherever you look — beneath the counter of the wool shop, behind the grille at the bank, in the schools' staff rooms — everywhere you look there will be limbs writhing in ecstasy: only look upwards and you will see the mighty outspread wings of the Devil casting their reddish glow over all the land, and from the black and foaming pit of his fanged mouth the dreadful word will issue: ‘Fuck, fuck, fuck!’
Diners glanced surreptitiously over their shoulders.
Eleanor's voice rose.
‘|Hush,’ he implored her.
She apologized at once and moderated her voice.
He thought she was glorious, glorious.
Her green eyes glowed.
But no.
It will not be like that.
The inhabitants of Darcy's Utopia will have as much or as little difficulty getting together as anyone else.
Fear of rejection will inhibit many, others will cringe before fear of complications, responsibility, hurting others, failing to perform adequately, or having to reveal physical imperfections.
Cellulite of the thighs keeps many a woman chaste: a  potbelly keeps a man on the straight and narrow like nothing else.
Most will stick to a partner chosen in the madness and self-confidence of youth, as they do outside Darcy's Utopia.
Women will continue to choose men — or men women; each sex always believes it is the other which does the choosing — the man being a little older, a little richer, a little more decisive than the woman, for this is how the majority of the human race pairs itself off, and why the myth of female inferiority is so prevalent throughout the world — it being the direct experience of so many children in so many households that Daddy knows best and Mummy's a fool.
The woman searches — though these days she doesn't know it, matters of procreation being so far from anyone's thoughts — for a good father for her young, adequate in looks, more than adequate as a provider; the man searches for a good, kind and competent mother for his children, not such a dog as to make copulation a problem — both settle for the best he or she can do.
We rank ourselves amongst our peers very early on, so far as our physical attractiveness is  concerned: we make our sexual moves within the group appropriate to our vision of ourselves.
In Darcy's Utopia people will make up and change their minds, try something new, retreat to the familiar, suffer from requited and unrequited love as much there as anywhere else: how can it be otherwise?
But what they will be is discreet about it all.
‘What the mind doesn't know the heart can't suffer’ will be inscribed above every double bed in the land.
No man will publicly humiliate a woman because she is ‘old’ or he finds her sexually unattractive: no woman will deride a man for his sexual insufficiency or because he is ‘weak’or ‘wet’or a ‘wimp’.
It will simply be unthinkable so to do.
Thus happiness and self-esteem will be maximized.
Did you know, by the way, that statistically a woman tries out a new partner once in every two thousand copulations?
She ordered her fish unfilleted.
Delicately and discreetly she parted flesh from bone.
Her nail varnish was pearly pink.
He thought of Valerie waiting for him.
He did not think of Stef at all.
His children were safely in Norfolk, with his mother, so why should he?
Q: Really?
What is the figure for men?
A: I don't know.
I'm sorry.
In Darcy's Utopia, however, though love will flourish, and pleasure abound, furtive alliances be formal and reformed, and sexual excitements be breathless and secret and glorious, marriage will be beset around with difficulties and obstacles and deep seriousness: only the very determined will marry.
Livings together will happen in abundance, of course; but marriage will be another matter: marriage will imply intent to procreate.
Of all matters in Darcy's Utopia only procreation will be subject to rules and regulations.
It will be a most serious matter.
You cannot have women popping new people out of themselves just at random, when and where they want.
In Darcy's Utopia there are bound to be children, but their parents will be carefully selected, and being in short supply they will grow up in a world which loves and admires children and finds them interesting, and doesn't herd them together in schools to get them out of the way, dunk them in front of obscene videos to keep them quiet, and slap  them about and threaten them in the streets, which is what happens in this society of ours which you seem to find both perfectly ordinary, and, worse, inevitable.
Well, I don't.
How many children do you have, Mr Vansitart?
Q: Three.
A little boy of eight and four-year-old-twins, girls.
Loved and wanted children all of them.
I find what you say monstrous.
I cannot believe you mean it.
You're joking.
Hugo looked up in alarm as a woman in a black belted mackintosh and beret pushed her way through the restaurant towards him.
He got to his feet.
‘Stef!’ he pleaded, but she slapped his face, there and then, in front of everyone.
‘Your mother brought the twins back.
I'm taking Peter with me on holiday.
The twins are in the buggy outside,’ she said, ‘You'd better bring them inside before someone steals them.’
And she left.
Eleanor Darcy said, ‘Don't bother about me.
I'll find my own way home.’
Valerie meets her lover's wife
Reception rang through and said there was a lady waiting to see me in the foyer.
I was in the bath.
In the better hotels there is always a telephone by the bath — the sense of importance of those who soak in the provided scented foam being thereby increased.
‘Look, I am the sort of person who is always in demand — always!
Why, I can't even take a bath without being pestered for my time and attention.
I'll come to your hotel again, and tell all my friends.’
And I said, ‘Ask her to come up,’ without thinking too much about it.
It might have been my colleague Ann — who knew my whereabouts — or even my editor, come to congratulate me on the first pages of Lover at the Gate which I had faxed through from the hotel's secretariat — or even Sophie, come to apologize, though I hardly imagined she had been promoted from child to lady in the few weeks of my absence.
And I stepped out of the bath and wrapped myself in one of the big white towels in which these places specialize, and, with an innocence born no doubt of the habit of the past, opened the door.
A small indeterminate woman in a lightly belted black raincoat slipped in past me: she had wispy fair hair and I could see at once from whence the twins had inherited what I can only describe as their nebulousness — a sense of the nebulae or star cluster that is better seen out of the corner of the eye.
If you look too hard it disappears altogether into a kind of wistful, disappointed light in the night sky.
Yet she managed to be a rather successful financial journalist.
Perhaps all the figures permuting in her head had somehow sapped her reality.
‘Can I help?’
I asked, rather wishing I had more clothes on.
‘I am your lover's wife,’ she said, and then I was glad I had so little on.
I felt like flinging aside the towel.
Hugo kept telling me  my body was glorious and I had come to believe him.
Lou never even looked, on Tuesday and Friday nights, any more than he looked at the instrument he played.
He knew it too well.
Just as he practised the violin every morning between nine thirty and ten thirty, so I always had the sense he practised his lovemaking on me, getting ready for the real thing, only this with me was not it: I was not it.
With Hugo, I was quite definitely the performance: Stef, the more I looked at her, obviously a mere rehearsal.
I was surprised when she said:
‘Eleanor Darcy I could understand.
But you!
What goes on here?’ 'I didn't ask you here and I don't want to see you and I have nothing to say to you,’I said, showing her the door but, alas, she seemed to have no intention of going through it, so I capitulated rather too easily and offered her a drink from the mini bar.
She said she'd have a sherry, a nebulous drink itself, so I poured her as dark and sweet a one as I could find in the little tight tiny rows of sinister bottles, and while she drank it I put on trousers and sweater.
‘Hugo likes really thin women,’ she said, ‘when he likes women at all.
My own opinion, for what it's worth, is that he's a closet gay.’
I said I didn't think her opinion was worth very much: if that was the opinion she had of her husband then naturally he preferred someone who admired, loved, trusted and desired him, and why didn't she just go away?
‘I've been to see your husband,’ she said — I didn't like that at all—‘and he asked me to tell you that if you don't return home by the end of the week he is going to join forces with Kirsty Bull: she's coming to live in and look after your children.’
Kirsty Bull is a friend of mine whose husband left her six months back.
I know Lou admires her.
She plays double bass, and I reckon Lou is quite stirred by the sight of the hefty instrument so sturdily placed between, let's face it, equally hefty legs.
She tends to wear full denim skirts with lace borders and her hair falls over her face while she plays.
Not a style I wish to emulate; I prefer a kind of brisk straight-lined tidiness; but of all the women in the world Kirsty Bull is the one I would prefer not to move in to babysit.
It is one thing to move out — not to be able to move back in because one's place has been usurped is quite another.
I didn't like that one bit.
‘And Hugo will come back to me because he always does,’ she  said, ‘when the guilt gets too much.
So I've just come out of the goodness of my heart to warn you to save yourself while you can: you'll lose Hugo — where is he, by the way?
Not here?
No.
I can tell you where he is.
Chatting up Eleanor Darcy in a flash restaurant.
She's next.
Not only will you lose Hugo you will lose your home, husband and children as well.’
She was trying to frighten me off, of course.
I didn't believe a word she was saying.
The phone went.
It was Hugo.
‘Your wife's here,’ I said.
‘The bitch,’ he said.
‘Don't believe a word she says.
She said the twins were outside in their buggy and she was lying.
By the time I got back inside Eleanor Darcy was gone.’
So I didn't believe a word Stef said.
She went, and I got on with the life of Ellen Parkin, about to emerge from her chrysalis, to spread her wings as Eleanor Darcy.
LOVER AT THE GATE [6]
Bernard ‘s encounters with Nerina
‘Ellen,’ said Bernard one morning at breakfast, ‘I have made a breakthrough.
Nerina is going to stay on to take her degree.’
‘Nerina?’
‘I've told you about Nerina.
Her family is from Pakistan.
But her father's a lawyer and her mother does part-time filing work in the college office.’
‘What does she look like?’
‘The mother?’
‘No.
Nerina.’
‘Stunning.’
‘So she's not covered up with bits of black in case she turns you on?’
‘Ellen, she wears bits of jeans and bits of T-shirts like the rest of the group.
There is more than a touch of racism in your assumption.’
‘Yes, well you're liberal-racist.
Why don't you say right out ‘this middle-class westernized Pakistani girl called Nerina’?
You can't bring yourself to do it.
It's the little ‘but’ gives you away.
‘But’ her father is a lawyer.’
They were both trying to give up smoking.
Presently Ellen said:
‘What sort of stunning?’
‘A perfectly oval face: large almond eyes: rather like one of those plaster Madonnas made in India.’
‘Like the one you jumped on?’
‘No.
That was Italian.’
‘You're just saying that.
You've no idea where it was made.
I expect you'd just rather it was Mediterranean because it would feel less racist.’
‘Perhaps you'd better have a cigarette, Ellen.’
‘Yes, I will.’
They both did.
Ellen finally said:
‘Okay, what sort of breakthrough?’
Bernard told Ellen that Nerina had come to him in tears.
Her brother had joined the fundamentalists, and was putting pressure on the family to withdraw her from college and marry his friend Sharif.
‘What's Sharif like?’
‘Ellen, I have no idea.
It is hardly the point.’
‘If I was one of your students and you lot were counting up your staff-student contact hours, working to rule and refusing to mark exam papers, I might well prefer to give up the course and marry my brother's friend Sharif.
If he was halfway good-looking.’
Bernard left for college early and said no more about Nerina.
Christmas was coming and Ellen took a part-time job in the college office to meet the extra costs of the season, and there met Nerina's mother, a pleasant woman wearing a serviceable sari and black lace-up shoes.
‘I believe you have a daughter in the college, Mrs Khalid,’ said Ellen.
Both women were transferring confidential student records from file cards on to computer.
Occasionally, on whim, they would allow a finger to slip and up-grade exam results.
‘I'm just about coming to the Ks.’
‘Her name's Nerina,’ said Mrs Khalid.
‘N. S. Khalid.’
Nerina's card showed two years of B pluses and A minuses in communication studies and sociology, and then a term of Cs and Ds, and then back up to straight As.
Ellen turned the Cs and Ds into Bs.
The girl might yet come out with a first.
‘She went through a bad patch,’ said Mrs Khalid.
‘She fell in love with her brother's friend and wanted to leave college but we made her stay on.
I think she's over it now.’
‘Nerina's always on at me to wear western clothes,’ confided Mrs Khalid, ‘but I like to be comfortable.
I feel happier wrapped, and able to eat as many buttered tea cakes as I like.
And of course it keeps her brother Fariq quiet.
He's eighteen; he's turned fundamental  at the moment.
But I expect it's no worse than being a punk.
He's at us all the time, but boys of that age do so like to be morally superior, don't they?’
‘I wouldn't know,’ said Ellen.
‘I don't have children, or mean to.’
‘You're very young,’ said Mrs Khalid comfortingly.
‘You'll change your mind.’
Mrs Khalid had a soft expression and lively eyes but a never-say-die-ishness that quite reminded Ellen of Rhoda.
She wondered whether, if Mrs Khalid were in love with her son's friend Sharif, would she do as Rhoda had done, try to marry off her daughter to Sharif just to keep him in the family?
And thought no, probably not.
Sometimes Ellen felt the need for some understanding older woman in whom to confide.
Her mother Wendy hovered round the house in too petty and ethereal a form to be much use: the occasional glimmer of light where no light should be, an object in motion which by rights should be still.
And Rhoda, dead and buried, stayed firmly silent, finished and underground.
Perhaps the reward of the wronged was to have eternal life?
Perhaps the punishment of the wrong-doers was just to be finished, kaput, over?
Though to think in terms of rewards and punishments was childish.
Story book notions.
Nothing to do with real life.
‘I might not change my mind,’ said Ellen.
‘A woman without children might as well not be born,’ said Mrs Khalid.
‘It was to have children that Allah put her on this earth.
Can you think of any other reason?’
‘No,’ said Ellen.
‘Not really.
Unless we lateral think and it wasn't him put us here.’
‘I wouldn't want my son to hear a thing like that,’ said Mrs Khalid.
‘Especially not as you're wife to a member of staff.
It might be dangerous.’
‘Tell me more about Nerina,’ said Ellen to Bernard, over breakfast.
They had both settled down to non-smoking.
He put down a volume of Hume — he no longer read the daily papers, but was working through the world's philosophers, from Plato onwards, and had now reached the Scottish humanists.
‘What about Nerina?’
‘Why did she go from As and Bs and then down to Cs and Ds and then to steady As.’
‘I'm not having a relationship with her,’ he said, ‘if that's what you think.’
‘That is not what I thought,’ said Ellen, ‘but it must have crossed your mind or you wouldn't have brought it up.’
‘It is not possible,’ he said, ‘to move amongst these nubile girls and have no reaction whatsoever.’
‘I absolutely understand,’ said Ellen.
‘Any more than it's possible for me to work up at the college with all those strapping lads running round in jockey shorts and have no reaction whatsoever.’
'All brawn and no brain,’ he said.
‘Of no possible interest to you.
Even Nerina worries about the sudden jump to straight As.
It's happened since she joined the black magic course.
She finds it disconcerting.’
‘Black magic?
The poly now teaches black magic?
It is that desperate for students?’
Under the new educational regulations any increase in students meant a concomitant increase in funding.
‘Of course we don't teach black magic.
Jed is running a course in the psychology of group reaction.
Mass hypnosis, mass psychosis, as related to auto-suggestion.
That kind of thing.
It is the students who refer to it as the black magic course.
Please, Ellen, I'm reading.’
‘And they stand around in pentacles trying to raise the Devil?’
‘I really don't know what they do.
Please, Ellen, I'm trying to ascertain the nature of reality.’
‘Bully for you.
And all of a sudden she got straight As?
Does she have a thing for Jed, or Jed for her?
That would be a more likely explanation.’
Bernard put Hume down.
He had been paying more attention than she thought.
He had shaved off his beard again.
She liked the tender line of his lip: she could see now what he was thinking.
‘Jed is a married man,’ said Bernard, ‘of considerable integrity.
He does not have affairs with students and if he did it would certainly not affect their grading.’
Windscale the cat jumped off his lap and sat on Ellen's.
It had never properly mastered the art of sitting on humans.
It faced outward, not inward, and kept its claws out to keep itself locked on.
‘Ellen,’ as Bernard sometimes observed, ‘puts up with more from cats than she does from humans.’
Bernard, Ellen observed, had become rather thin.
He ate as much as usual, but gesticulated more.
He waved his hands around a lot.
She hoped that when he stopped smoking he would fill out a little and his knees would be less likely to bruise hers in bed, but no.
He went to bed late and rose early, and the space in between was lively with frequent, prolonged and energetic sex.
‘Sometimes,’ she said to Brenda, ‘I wish he'd just stop.’
‘I always wish Peter wouldn't begin,’ said Brenda.
Belinda said, ‘I told you so.
Now he's not a Catholic, now he's not a Marxist, there's no control at all.
Why do you think he had those belief structures in the first place?’
Liese said, ‘Len and I are totally happy.’
The springs in Ken and Rhoda's bed twanged apart and jutted sharply through the mattress.
Ellen wondered if she should perhaps look for a replacement, but put it off.
Money was tight, and the Christmas season approaching.
She thought they might have a Christmas tree; for the first non-ideological season for many years.
Nerina called in at the office to see her mother.
Mrs Khalid introduced her to Ellen.
Nerina was beautiful, in a languid kind of way.
Her palely dark skin glowed with the light of youth.
She was serene.
Perhaps too serene, Ellen thought: there was something static in her expression, as if the skin had been plumped out by a layer of silicone wax beneath, and made her doll-like.
Her bottom lip pouted.
She moved slowly and gracefully, conscious of a female-ness it would, Ellen could see, be quite natural to want to drape with fabric rather than exhibit.
Her bosom was too large, too suddenly plump, to fit neatly inside its T-shirt.
Her jeans were very tight, her feet tiny and her heels high.
‘Thank you,’ said Nerina, ‘for what you did with my records.
My mum told me.’
‘Don't mention it,’ said Ellen.
‘In fact don't ever mention it.’
‘Okay,’ said Nerina, ‘but I guess I owe you a favour, all the same.
A lot of us do.’
‘Nerina,’ said Mrs Khalid, ‘supposing your brother saw you wearing that T-shirt.’
‘My brother,’ said Nerina, ‘can go to Saudi Arabia for all I care.’
‘Or Sharif?’ her mother pleaded.
‘You know you like Sharif.
What would Sharif say?’
‘He won't see me to say anything,’ said Nerina, ‘will he?
I hope you don't suppose I'm insane!’
‘Since she started at the poly she's been very difficult,’ said Mrs Khalid.
‘I'm not sure about education for girls.’
‘My mother's quite right,’ said Nerina.
‘I used to have a head quite full of interesting things.
Now I'm at college there's only a kind of vacuum.
I fill it up with facts and theories, but it's going to take for ever: it's a deep, deep well.’
‘Nature abhors a vacuum,’ said Ellen.
‘You'd better be careful.
All kinds of things can come rushing in to fill it up.’
‘So I'd noticed,’ said Nerina.
‘Well, I'll be off,’ and she swayed away, leaving a drift of rather heavy scent behind her.
‘You're in her good books,’ said Mrs Khalid, ‘that's the main thing.
She can be quite tiresome when crossed.
I wish she'd wear trainers.
Those shoes are so bad for her feet.’
Now that Bernard left industrial action to others, the heart had quite gone out of the staff's work-to-rule and normal relations were resumed.
Neither side won.
A draw was declared.
But now both the academic board and the management team viewed Bernard with some apprehension, fearing where his energies would next take him.
It was with some relief that they assented to his desire to take over outreach work in the local community.
It was on his prompting that ethnic drop-out youths were now accepted onto college courses without formal qualifications; it was on his urging that examinations were now being set and marked in Urdu and other minority languages, the faculties shamed at last out of their insistence that English was the only language in the world that counted.
Bernard was triumphant.
The college was at last loosening up.
The Faculty of Art and Design now ran courses on graffiti in conjunction with the Faculty of Social Sciences.
‘The Role of the Magic Mushroom in Primitive Cave and Contemporary Wall Art’ won its author a first.
When Bernard went to the canteen there was a stir, a breath of recognition.
The young, the bold, the lowly paid and overworked, acknowledged him as their spiritual leader.
The few, the old guard, who could see what generations of scholars had endured for, struggled for, thus lightly swept away, were not so happy.
Notions of excellence, of the primacy of scholarship, the victory of steady thought over wild opinion, the sense of generation building upon generation, all thus abandoned  in the craven desire to please the student, entertain the student, keep the college in funds.
The few were shrewd, powerful, influential and dined in high political places; Bernard knew it, and did not care.
Indeed, he found it energizing.
‘No one worth their salt,’ he said, ‘but does not have enemies.
Once the mind is free from its self-imposed shackles anything is possible.
Even changing the world.’
Mrs Parkin came to stay for a week and went after a day.
Bernard would not let her set up Jesus, Mary and Joseph on the mantelpiece even though Christmas was coming.
‘Look, Mum,’ he said, ‘I can just about stand Christmas dinner as a family get-together.
But I will not have idols in the house.’
Mrs Parkin left, blaming Ellen for having turned her son from a faith that had sustained her family through death, famine, hardship, war, bereavement.
Ellen said it was nothing to do with her, but she was lying, and Mrs Parkin knew it.
Once she was gone Bernard and Ellen were able to ask Jed and Prune round for Christmas dinner.
Prune was pregnant again and wore a murky green long woollen smock.
Ellen wore a skin-tight gold dress with black glittery trimmings.
‘Isn't that dress rather low cut,’ asked Bernard, ‘for a simple Christmas dinner with friends?’
‘I bought it at Oxfam,’ said Ellen, as if that excused everything.
But Bernard paid the matter little attention.
There was a kind of dance of thought going through his head: he had to keep in step.
He couldn't stop it.
‘The synapses are twanging,’ he complained, on occasion to Ellen.
‘They get out of step.
The rules are gone: the safety nets.
Everything links, from cosmology to microbiology.
When it finally does link up the computer will explode.’
‘I hope you don't talk like that at college,’ she said.
‘Of course I don't,’ he said.
‘I'm not mad.’
Sometimes his eyes would glaze over for a second or two as if he were out of their world altogether.
Ellen wondered if he had petit mal and looked it up in a medical dictionary — neither of them went to doctors if they could help it — but the entry was not very helpful, and it seemed in any case the kind of symptom it would be better to be vague about, not define, not name, for fear the  naming made it worse, less likely to evaporate out of existence.
And sometimes Bernard would wake shivering, from a restless sleep, dreaming of punishments.
‘Well,’ he said in the new year, a couple of days after term had started, ‘I've certainly been and gone and upset Nerina, of all people.
And over such a trivial thing.’
‘Now what have you done?’
‘I told her God didn't exist and she took offence.’
‘But she must allow you your opinion.’
‘On the contrary.
You must remember Nerina's background.
The ideological war is as real to her as any war with guns and tanks.
If your idea is contrary to my idea your idea must be eliminated, especially if it starts getting a territorial foothold, and might just possibly catch on.’
‘Excuses, excuses, the girl's a fool.’
‘Don't say that, Ellen.
Don't even think it!’
He looked round anxiously, as if for bugging devices.
‘Now listen, Ellen, we've unhinged her from her original faith.
We shouldn't have done it.
Mention Allah, mention the Prophet, she laughs.
It's dangerous.
She worships the Devil, Ellen, and that's the truth of it.
To say aloud that God doesn't exist is to thereby negate the Devil.
What's more, you see, Jed's group is on the point of bringing Satan into corporeal existence.
She blames me because it's taking so long.
I know she does.’
‘Have you said anything about it to Jed?’
‘I know what he'll say.
He'll say it's all part of continual assessment: the whole point of the course is mass hysteria.
The control group will be perfectly sane.’
Married to a madman, thought Ellen.
If I don't look at it, it will go away.
‘Perhaps I'd better say something to Jed.’
‘Don't, don't.
Nerina might find out.’
‘I should just let them get on with it,’ said Ellen lightly, ‘so long as they don't start sacrificing goats.
On the other hand perhaps they should.
Then the Animal Rights Activists can campaign against them, and let you off the hook.’
‘You're not taking this seriously, Ellen.’
‘No.’
He thought a little.
He blinked.
His mind clicked back into  another, less agitated gear.
‘I mentioned to Jed that Nerina had a crush on him, and I'm afraid it got back to her.’
‘You and Jed sit in the senior common room discussing the emotions of students?’
‘Sometimes they are relevant, Ellen.
The staff is in loco parentis.
Some of our students are very young.
We were discussing the probability of Nerina's essays being all her own work: or whether someone's fronting her.
They really are remarkable.
She's sent them up to a London publisher who is actually going to bring them out — Multiculturalism and Pluralism in the New Europe.
Do you think she's sold her soul to the Devil?’
‘Is Jed's relationship to Nerina perhaps very close?’
‘It is perfectly proper, Ellen.
Of course there is sometimes an erotic element between teacher and pupil.
How can there not be?
The point is, Nerina apparently took offence.’
‘You mean you told Jed and Jed told Nerina and Nerina told you and blah, blah, blah.
Children's playground stuff.’
‘I suppose in a way a man remains a child until he has his own.’
He wanted a baby.
Ellen didn't.
‘Prune has nearly had lots of babies.
It hasn't grown Jed up, so far as I can see.
She has high blood pressure.
She's in hospital.
Did he bother to mention it?’
‘No.
Perhaps you should visit her?
You have lots of time.’
Bernard thought Ellen should take a proper job.
Ellen didn't.
‘What a good idea!
Perhaps it's the black magic group has put her blood pressure up?
Perhaps they mean poor Prune to die in labour so Nerina can marry Jed?’
She shouldn't have said it.
He started looking into corners for the bugging device, though he said he was searching for a stray cigarette, left over from the days when he smoked.
‘Ellen, don't joke.
They've put a curse on me now, for betraying Nerina.
I can feel it.’
‘Oh dear,’ said Ellen.
‘I wish I'd stayed on at college.
It seems much more exciting these days than it used to be.
Perhaps you should start smoking again?
It's been all trouble since you stopped.’
That night a bird hurled itself against the window pane and woke them both up.
After that a bird — the same one or another — fell through the chimney into the grate and then fluttered and banged in terror around the room.
Ellen caught it in a towel and put it  out and went back to sleep.
In the morning Bernard was pale and his hand trembled too much even to lift his coffee cup, let alone butter his toast.
‘You look as you did when you wanted to be a priest,’ said Ellen, irritated.
‘It was only a bird.’
‘Birds don't fly about at night,’ said Bernard, ‘in the middle of winter.’
‘Owls do,’ said Ellen.
‘How do you know it was an owl?’ he asked.
‘It had big eyes,’ she said, which seemed to satisfy him, though she hadn't noticed its eyes, merely the trembling flutter of the feathers through the thin towel as she caught it.
She hadn't liked it.
Perhaps her towels were too thin?
Perhaps she should buy new?
Bernard reversed straight out of the new garage into the road and hit a passing van.
Car and van were written off though no one was hurt.
But Bernard fainted so she took him into casualty.
‘If I speak to Nerina,’ said Bernard, whose blood pressure was so low there was talk of admitting him for a day or so, ‘she might lift the curse.
On the other hand it might make matters worse.’
‘For God's sake,’ said Ellen, ‘you put your foot on the accelerator not the brake.
You were tired.
The bird kept you awake.’
Bernard was admitted for tests.
Ellen went to find Nerina.
She found her sitting on a bench beneath a stark tree in the college grounds, in a snowy landscape.
She was alone.
She was wrapped in soft brown wool.
A snowflake or so glistened in her black hair.
She sat as if on a throne: her dark eyes glowed.
Her face remained impassive, but her expression was equable.
‘How nice to see you, Ellen,’ said Nerina.
‘How is your husband?’
‘In hospital.’
‘Well,’ said Nerina, ‘I understand he isn't really your husband.
You did not go through a religious ceremony with him.’
‘Who told you that?’
‘Your husband did.’
‘I see.’
‘So there is no protection for him in you.
And now he has betrayed us.’
‘How did he betray you?’
‘I don't think it's proper for me to tell you,’ said Nerina.
‘Besides  not being a proper wife to Bernard, you are also an adulteress.
In some countries in the world you would be stoned to death.
But you helped me out with my grades so I'll overlook that.’
Ellen thought it safer not to go further into these particular matters.
‘Well,’ Ellen said, ‘I am very fond of my husband, in spite of my western ways, and I know he has a great respect for you, Nerina; and is thrilled about your publishing contract, and any betrayal of confidence has been totally inadvertent.
I know he'd want me to say that to you.’
‘In my culture,’ said Nerina, ‘we take love seriously.
And if you had indeed repented and reformed — which Jed says you have — why did you have Christmas dinner in a revealing dress?’
‘Because it was cheap and I liked it,’ said Ellen.
‘Honestly, that was all.’
‘I suppose that might be true,’ said Nerina.
‘My mother says that though you were always very pleasant and she liked you, you never paid your share of the office coffee.
And she was sorry you had so little belief.
She thought it would do you good to be taught belief.’
‘I expect I'll come round to it in good time,’ said Ellen.
‘I daresay you will,’ said Nerina, waving cheerfully to the group of smiling students, brightly wrapped in woolly hats and scarves, who now approached her.
‘We're going to build a snowman.
What fun!
You don't have anything of Bernard's on you, I suppose?’
‘No,’ said Ellen.
‘I don't.’
‘Well,’ said Nerina, ‘we can do without.
Your husband looms quite large in many of our minds.
Some students had to do an extra year because of the staff work-to-rule.
Their exam papers weren't marked.
Many suffered because of your husband's principles.’
Brenda telephoned a couple of hours later to say she was well, considering, and how was Apricot?
She hadn't heard from her for some time.
‘Considering what?’ asked Ellen.
‘Considering I'm eight and a half months pregnant and haven't heard from you for a couple of weeks.
Not even a ‘how are you?’’
‘I'm sorry,’ said Ellen.
‘Well, I'm fine.
I just had a man round here declaring eternal love.
I looked out the kitchen window and  there he was, standing at the back gate with a bunch of red roses in his hand.’
‘How nice for you,’ said Brenda.
‘How's Bernard?’
‘In hospital, but nothing serious.’
‘That's really very convenient then,’ said Brenda.
‘It is, isn't it.’
‘Who is he?’
‘He is the Vice Chancellor of the University of Bridport,’ said Ellen.
There was a short silence.
‘Are you sure?
It seems a little out of character.’
‘I'm sure.
He's quite plump and I suppose quite elderly, but he has a wonderful mind.
Apparently I met him at a conference on the economics of multiculturalism.
I was taking the minutes of the meeting.
I can't remember him but he remembers me.’
‘It all sounds most improbable.’
‘It is improbable for those on the ground that an aircraft should crash on to them.
In fact the chances are a million to one against it.
But there the aircraft is, its fuselage sticking up out of your house.
His name is Julian.’
Hugo's further interview with Eleanor Darcy
Q: It's good of you to see me this evening.
I'm very sorry about the disturbance at the restaurant and that we had to cut the interview short.
I understand from Valerie — I've been seeing quite a lot of Valerie, as I think she's indicated — that you were visiting your husband today.
You must be tired.
I imagine such prison visits are very trying?
A: No.
Sometimes they can be quite heartening.
Julian has lost a good deal of weight.
He works out with  dumbbells in the prison gym.
A non-academic life suits him.
Nowadays when his eyes light up for love of me, they are somehow clearer and brighter than they used to be; the lighting up is the more flattering.
Julian used to be a good-looking man somehow clouded, dispersed, by layers of fat and the radiation of pure thought; now he is simply a cadaverous, eagly, extraordinarily randy man.
We managed a cell on our own for over an hour.
Q: How on earth did you manage that?
A: Some of the prison officers are friendly.
He has converted quite a few to Utopianism.
Many thought it a cruel injustice that Julian should have to go to prison at all.
Q: I am reminded of Chernechersky, that most fierce and feared of Russian revolutionaries, who was put in prison and then converted the guards to Communism.
They simply opened the prison gates and let him walk out.
A: If a thing can happen once it can happen again.
I suppose you  could describe Julian as that most fierce and feared of monetary theorists.
To every age, its terrorist.
Q: Valerie has asked me if you could answer a few questions on her behalf.
She is getting on well with Lover at the Gate, but sometimes the clues you provide are, well, enigmatic.
Of course my piece will be very different from Valerie's: I wouldn't want you to think there was duplication: that we were taking up your time unnecessarily.
Hugo was beginning to feel oppressed by his surroundings.
The shiny black sofa, the shabby furniture, the dull suburban road the other side of a forlorn garden, seemed some kind of irony.
He did not believe Eleanor Darcy lived here.
She merely pretended to.
He felt the minute he left she and Brenda packed up themselves and the children and took off to more exotic surroundings.
Yet was not this how most of the world lived, and thought themselves lucky to do so?— once survival was accomplished the struggle for ordinariness began.
A: You mean Valerie wants to know more about the role of children in Darcy's Utopia?
I thought she would.
Q: Well, you did speak of selection.
Her liberal antennae were alerted.
A: Tell her all babies will be automatically aborted unless good reason can he shown why they should be allowed to proceed to term.
Q: Isn't that a little drastic?
A: Yes.
Even in Darcy's Utopia it will take quite some getting used to.
The decision to ‘choose’, or not to ‘choose’ will be taken away from the parents and left to an ad-hoc committee of neighbours.
Are these two (or this one) not so much capable of loving a baby, as of being worthy of a baby's love?
If the verdict  is that they are not, there can be no baby.
Down the plughole with it, this little glob of potential life, this putative devourer of the world's resources!
The root of delinquency, the alienation, the violent and despairing habits of today's young, has very little to do with the fact that their parents failed to love them — most adults look round quite desperately for something, anything to coo over, however erratically — but that their parents failed to be worthy of their love.
Babies are born with a sense of fairness, justice, morality, and a great capacity for kindness and forbearance, and it is sheer disappointment in the character and nature of parent and world that changes this eager infant into a murderous teenager.
Some survive, of course: time heals a few wounds, wounds a few heels.
The teenager gets older, encounters some nicer, more controlled, more kindly people than he or she ever found at home — most people behave worst in their own homes — and with any luck comes to understand, yes, there is an aspiration or so floating around out there, and, if he, she, hasn't seen too many horror movies, been too beaten up in body and mind, regains a little faith in a world at least potentially redeemable.
He, she, grows up into a mortgage-paying, law-abiding adult who at least wants to give his, her, own children a better chance.
And may or may not have the resolution, the constancy, so to do.
Not to love, which is easy, but to be in truth, in fact, in deed, lovable.
I hear the divorced parent saying, ‘Oh, the kids are all right.
They know I love them,’ but it isn't true.
The kids are not all right.
You may love the kids, but you are not worthy of their love.
You look after yourself, not them.
You have betrayed them, and they hate you for it.
Q: Well, that is a matter of opinion.
And this notion of an ad-hoc committee of neighbours, with power of life and death, is surely very eccentric.
A: What are juries but ad-hoc committees of neighbours?
Juries saw no problem deciding whom they were to despatch from this world: let similar bodies decide who is to come into it.
Q: It seems to me that the citizens of Darcy's Utopia are going to be kept very busy.
A: Indeed.
Idleness, in this nation of no work, will not be encouraged.
There will be no ‘training in leisure’.
Darcians will be hard at work, repairing the past, safeguarding the future; they will have no need of theme parks.
Darcy's Utopia has a Mission Statement, as does any corporate enterprise in the business world.
‘We are working towards a secular, unicultural, multiracial society.’
When citizens are called upon to make up their minds, pass laws or make regulations — their decisions will be infused with the light cast by this statement, and so by and large will work towards this end.
It may be hard to take a step in the right direction, but it will be still harder to take a step in the wrong.
We have a time scale, too.
We give ourselves two hundred years to achieve it.
If it doesn't work, we rethink.
Q: Secular?
But isn't religion a civilizing force?
Aren't many of our social problems due to the decline of religion?
A: Now look.
Nice orderly home-and-family-loving people are the ones who believe in God and even still go to church.
They are nice people: they believe that everything ought to be fair, that is to say that virtue is rewarded and villainy punished.
Since they can't see it happening on earth they invent a heaven in which it does.
And a kind of consensus develops amongst right-minded people in your neighbourhood, that if you keep to certain rules and rituals then by God, by magic, you'll get to heaven, you won't even have to die.
Eat the wafer, chant the lyric, bow to Mecca: please God and he'll be kind.
But these people are not nice, orderly, home-and-family-loving because they believe in God.
The temperament comes first.
Acknowledging God is effect, not cause.
And institutionalize the religion, any religion, and you're in trouble.
Nice people become guilty people, cruel people, unhappy people, trapped in belief structures their temperaments don't agree with, taught peculiar beliefs in school, threatened by hell and afflicted by superstition.
And what terrible damage they do, have done through the centuries, from the Inquisitor General to Stalin, to your young neighbour in the IRA who believes in the Catholic God and uses that to justify his murdering you in your bed, to the Mullah who whips up the faithful to civil strife in the name of Allah, to the Moonie who steals your children's money and affections.
People like rules: it is not good for them to have them.
The individual must come to his, her, own decision as to where morality lies.
Do what you like in your own home, worship whatever God you please, but shut up about it in public.
In Darcy's Utopia church services of various denominations will exist, and blind eyes will no doubt be turned.
Common sense will prevail.
But the jury of neighbours who decide upon your fertility might not look too kindly upon you if they think you are going to bring up your children as Jehovah's Witnesses or Servants of Baal, or use the terror of hell as a way of controlling them: or beat the soles of their feet if they get the Koran wrong.
Q: Won't terrible injustices ensue?
A: Chance and luck will be a factor in Darcy's Utopia, as elsewhere.
But good luck attends the happy.
Darcians will try to be happy, to avoid self-righteousness.
The self-righteous seldom smile.
Q: Would you describe yourself as happy?
A: I'm getting there.
I don't have children, which makes it easier.
To have these hostages to fortune wipes the smile from many a woman's face.
Consider Brenda.
In Darcy's Utopia parents will have some reassurance in the fact that at least the neighbours thought they were fit to rear children: some of the responsibility for failure, should failure there be, will rest with the community.
But I like to think the neighbours, the ten just persons, men and women both, who have seen you in the shops, who have watched you cross a road, who understand your body language, will make the right decision.
Q: Could we get back to this uniculture of yours?
Don't you mean monoculture?
A: No.
Monoculture assumes the domination of the single majority culture: that ‘they’ will be subsumed into ‘us’.
That the eaters of curry must learn to love fish and chips, that husbands of four must become husbands of one, that young blacks must drive cars in the fashion of elderly whites: that the custom and laws of the majority will prevail.
In a uniculture this is not the case.
A uniculture is a  matter for rational decision: we will be prepared to make value judgements.
Better a culture in which men have one wife and women need not shroud themselves in black, we'll say.
Or perhaps we won't.
Better one in which marriages are arranged than left to love.
Let us all sing the Darcian Anthem every morning at ten a.m.
Let men wear skirts, not women trousers.
Let us all change our names four times in our lives.
Let us take our education in our middle not our opening years.
Or whatever is decided.
And if it doesn't work, we'll change it.
And if you don't like it, you can live somewhere else.
And we might even divide Darcy's Utopia into four and have a different Mission Statement in each, and citizens can move to the one they prefer: or work to change the one they're in, if they prefer.
Oh yes, Darcy's Utopia will be all freedom and hard work, and all alive and energetic with a perpetual sense of achievement.
Who will need religion when heaven is here on earth?
Q: This unicultural society of yours.
Isn't it going to be rather dull?
What about the richness, the diversity of the multicultural society in which all decent non-racist folk take such pleasure?
A: Goodness, how you do sometimes remind me of Bernard!
How all-pervasive is the orthodoxy of right-thinking people.
I have never heard a member of an ethnic minority obliged to dwell within the barbarous framework of a powerful, prosperous, white, allegedly Christian culture talk about the richness of the multicultural society.
That is left for members of the host community to do, as it busies itself ghettoizing the minority; and as it ghettoizes it mumbles, and if you listen carefully you can just discern beneath the self-righteousness, the self-congratulation, the following: ‘Okay, okay, so you were having a hard time in your own country.
You poor things!
Come over here and join us by all means — but not too many of you, so we'll vet you as you come in; and not make getting in pleasant or easy; and just please stick to your own districts, and keep your own religion and dance away to tambourines, or bow to the East, or whatever you like to do to remind you of home — or home as it used to be a hundred years ago but certainly isn't now — and aren't we clever, and kind, and good, the way we give you your roots back?, and with any luck your children will grow up well-behaved and pleasant; ours certainly aren't; because your children come of a society which, being  somewhere else and a long time ago, is probably better than ours.
And speak your own language, please: we'll even teach it to you in our schools to prove how understanding we are, just so long as you do our dirty work for less wages than our own kind are prepared to accept: just so long as you keep yourselves to yourselves, and don't let your children marry ours, because what we're all terrified of, so terrified the word's gone out of the vocabulary.
Let me whisper, can you hear?
MISCEGENATION.
The mixture of races!
The future, in other words.’
In Darcy's Utopia no one is frightened of the future.
We welcome it.
Because this is the world's future, and we must hurry towards it with open and welcoming arms.
There will be no black, no white, no yellow; no Asiatic, no Caucasian; we will all, individually, be multiracial, multicultural; and then indeed there will be a wonderful diversity, and God's will done upon earth.
So don't come to me, Mr Hugo Vansitart, with your ‘rich diversity of language and culture’.
The richness and diversity will be when your grandchildren, your great grandchildren, are of mixed race, mixed ancestry: look at each other with fondness and love out of eyes which slant every which way and who compare the shade of their skins with interest, not envy: because the paler the skin no longer means the longer-lived, the more prosperous, the more educated, the more capable of reaching the fullness of human potential.
And when that has happened, why, we might be able to invent a God as good, as moral, as human beings.
That is quite enough for today.
Q: Could I just ask, before I go?
You have on occasion referred to someone called Nerina
A: Is your tape switched off?
Good.
Nerina remains off the record.
Things are stirred up enough as they are, don't you think?
Nerina was someone — is someone — whom Bernard tried to help.
He shook religion out of her mind, as it were, and into the vacuum rushed something rather disagreeable.
Nerina is a very pretty, very bright girl; of Muslim background, though no one in the family actually ever went to a mosque — well, only her brother.
You know how fanatical the young can be.
Unfortunately and unwittingly Bernard angered her.
And that is why Julian is in  prison.
And why I sit here, husbandless, dependent upon social security supplemented by such pitiful amounts of money as I can wring out of the national press, and Bernard genuflects once more, fled back to his baptismal church, terrified by the very notion of living outside it.
All this, you might say, was Nerina's fault — if only it was not clear to me that Nerina was the symptom, not the disease: the pustule, not the pox: that to this end, without need of her intervention, all would still have come.
It is a terrible thing to laugh a person out of faith.
Q: A woman's faith, too?
A: As I said, the greater includes the lesser.
Q: When you say that I think you're laughing at me.
A: Now why should I do a thing like that?
You are the most serious person in the world, Hugo, with your very neat suit, your very quiet tie, your hotel laundered shirt.
I can tell from its whiteness, its crispness.
Let me feel!
Yes.
You have to be careful of hotel cleaners: things come back very white, but don't last long.
Perhaps Valerie would wash them for you?
Sometimes they have little bottles of stuff called Softwash on hotel shelves, which the guests take with them on leaving.
Shall we go to the pub and have a drink?
Valerie is shocked
What Eleanor Darcy has to say is of course monstrous, fascist.
Babies, aborted compulsorily in the womb!
What about the woman's right to choose, forget the baby's right to life?
Though Eleanor Darcy denies the very concept of ‘right’.
‘It would be nice if only’ is her replacement of the term, and I can see the point in that.
Babies selected to live by friends and neighbours!
Who'd ever agree to that?
What government would even dare?
It is true, of course, that women would be spared the agony of choice.
I think about my friend Erin, as I often do.
She has a Down's syndrome baby.
We all knew it would be disastrous; we foretold that her husband would walk out, that her other children would suffer: we saw she was the only one of the family unit who couldn't bear not to see the fruit of her womb, however sour, ripen, drop and live.
And that's how it turned out: the child, now twelve, is badly retarded, Erin is no more than its nurse; she manages without a husband, her other children are spiteful and embarrassed.
Erin talks about the joy the mindless child brings her — well, so it may, but her love for it has been most destructive for others.
Left to us, friends and family, we would have said no, Erin, sorry, not for you.
This baby you insist on having keeps other babies out, ones which won't cause this distress to you and yours.
Just not this one; Erin, try again.
All women have as many babies as they can manage: four, three, two, one, none at all: as many as they can afford — physically, emotionally, practically.
I managed two.
A woman spends years saying no, not this one, stay out of my bed: I'll wait, a better man will come along: and with the better man a better baby.
Let's hope, here's hoping he comes along!
The lover at the gate is the father at the gate.
Where is he?
I'll wait, yes I'll wait, for a baby I can feed better, love better, provide running  water for, give a father to, who stays around and bounces babies on his knee.
To this end she stays a virgin, or practises abstinence, or contraception, or if things get further in spite of her best endeavours — for both men and her own desires are importunate — terminates.
If she didn't, she'd have babies annually from puberty until death by childbirth around the age of thirty or so.
How it must have been for our Stone Age grandmothers — swell, oh, oh, pop, look, a little one — oh, it's dead — oh, I'm dying, dying; dead!
And even now we get it wrong; how often, for all our knowledge, we get it wrong.
Choose a husband who leaves, a father who doesn't provide; the genes don't match, the conjunction goes wrong — the wrong baby at the wrong time; oh, bad luck!
My neighbours, my friends, why did you not save me from this?
It wouldn't all be negative.
My other friend Edie gave birth to a baby with one leg.
It showed up in the scan — one child in three, they say, is now born with some imperfection or other, mostly minor, sometimes major, and whether that's due to pollution, or insecticides, or growth hormones, or radon gas, or nuclear power plants, take your choice, take your pick: and whatever the cause, the mothers stay healthy enough, are sufficiently medicated one way or another to bring babies to term — and we all said to Edie, what's a missing leg?
Keep this baby, look after this baby, you have a great husband, the other kids aren't the kind to care, and we were right.
It was okay.
This child has a metal prosthesis and kicks hell out of the others at football.
Of course he'd be happier if he had two legs, so would she, so would everyone, but he'd rather live with one leg than not live at all.
We did know.
We are born into a group, not just into a family, not just to an individual woman.
Let the group decide.
Ten good neighbours and true.
It isn't the perfect way; it remains horrible, but the lesser of many evils.
In Darcy's Utopia it has to be.
All babies terminated unless validated.
What happens otherwise in our two-hundred-year, five-hundred-year plan?
Can we wait for prosperity and education to keep mankind in check; so the humble villager, the wretched dweller in the shantytown doesn't choose the traditional, unthinking, long-term option of a dozen children, the decision which in the long term destroys both them and theirs?
We have lost that race: we must face it.
It is all paradox, this business of procreation!
Every way we look we see a barrier and on the wall is written ‘No!
Immoral!
Unkind!
Fascist!’
Everything but the free flow of natural selection is disagreeable to so much as contemplate, but the planet sinks beneath the weight of us, stinks because of the shit of us; if we don't do something we all go down together, gasping for air, for heaven's blessing.
Governments do what they can.
Time and time again they fail.
Let neighbours, simple neighbours, try and do better.
Meeting their quota, their too-small-for-comfort quota, always with generosity, understanding and compassion, understanding as a group what the individual woman knows by instinct, that this child, by existing, keeps that other child out.
Hugo says I am so persuasive in convincing myself on this subject he begins to wonder who it is who speaks through Eleanor Darcy, is it God or the Devil?
This is quite an advance on his initial assumption that poor Julian Darcy, the Rasputin of Bridport, economic theorist and prisoner of his nation's conscience, victim of its guilt, indolence and fear, is the motivating force behind Darcy's Utopia.
But how about the side benefits!
How religiously, if only in order to obviate neighbourly interference, the Darcian woman would observe contraceptive precautions!
If she wanted a baby, what a good neighbour she would be, if only to keep in well with them: how she would feed her neighbours' cats, take in her neighbours' mail, refrain from drunken disturbance!
My Sophie, for example— if she were in Darcy's Utopia and in a couple of years were to become a teenage primigravida, which is perfectly on the cards — I reckon the neighbours would know better than Lou or me if she was fit to be a mother or not.
As it is, it's the family who takes responsibility for denying the baby existence, though permitting its death rather than allowing its life.
‘Family physicians’ enjoy the most extraordinary regard in our society: somewhere in our joint head we need to see them as knowing, honest, trustworthy, benign and caring folk — the truth of the matter being that they are as forgetful, spiteful and drunk as the next person — and as likely to grow old, lecherous and incompetent as anyone else.
Your family doctor may know one end of a thyroid gland from another-with any luck — but no especial wisdom is granted him because he sits in a surgery seeing one coughing person after another all day; peering into ears and wombs and hearing tales of insomnia and worms.
I have been indecently  assaulted by many a wise old family physician in my time: the passion for mammary examination — which has saved almost no lives at all over the past few years, it now appears-has been fomented and encouraged by male doctors.
I wish Hugo would come back.
My thoughts are growing wild.
He somehow nails me, pins me, centres me in one spot like a butterfly spread for inspection, wonderful, beautiful; he steadies me.
This time he did not want to make love to me when he dropped the tapes off, and in truth I was a little tired.
It would be nice to have some conversation as well as sex — dinner out somewhere, say.
But his editor had to see him.
If Eleanor Darcy can manage a private room in a prison, perhaps she manages one in the local pub as well?
But this is paranoia; of the kind her poor Bernard suffered from.
The breathing lake, into which suspicion drops, like a stone, the ripples spreading!
I trust Hugo, of course I do.
My body is his, his is mine: one flesh.
What was it Eleanor Darcy said?
Love is the evidence you need which proves the benign nature of the universe.
Love lets you know you are alive.
Fate weaves its heady patterns all around; good luck attends you, nobody fools you: Hugo does not repair with Eleanor to the back room of the pub.
Of course not.
Babies by licence only!
There'd be abuses, there always are abuses: those with money would do what they wanted.
Except that money, in Darcy's Utopia, will count for nothing: just as it counts for nothing in Moscow today: where pockets are stuffed with roubles but there is nothing to buy.
In Darcy's Utopia money will be as meaningless as coconuts in a country where they fall from the trees: it will cease to be a corrupting cause.
Would my neighbours have let Lou and me have Sophie and Ben?
Of course they would.
I am a good citizen, a nice person; I am just at the moment in the grip of a sexual passion, in the throes of love; I am alive: I who have been so nearly dead for decades, which is why I am currently neglecting them, just a little.
The phone goes.
It's Ben.
How did he know I was here?
‘Mum,’ he says.
‘Dad said to call you if we wanted anything.
He's out at a concert.
Sophie and me haven't got a babysitter.
There's just us.
Sophie's got a pain-’
Sophie always has pains.
It's her age.
I tell Ben to tell Sophie to put a  hotwater bottle on it.
How dare Lou leave them on their own?
He either has to give up music, or organize live-in help of some kind.
Where is Kirsty Bull?
She can share his bed for all I care.
Bath from ten forty-five to eleven; teeth for five timed minutes, lights out by eleven fifteen.
Love from eleven twenty to forty on Tuesdays and Fridays should there be no concerts on either of those nights: otherwise do without.
I am sure the world is full of women who would appreciate a pleasant, hard-working man with regular habits, and would be happy to babysit Sophie and Ben.
What do the children expect of me?
I brought them into the world.
Isn't that enough?
In another ten years they can come and visit me to their hearts' content and I won't object.
Unless Ben remains a computer freak — he has his father's appreciation of the mathematics, the square lines, the patterning out of existence; unless Sophie fails to lose a little of her egoism — or unless Hugo objects to their visits.
I'm sure I don't want his puny little creatures visiting me.
I want his life to have begun the moment he met me, as he wants mine to have begun, simultaneously.
Together, we exist.
Separately, we are nothing.