

decor
When asked what frightens me most about London, I say, it is not the pinwheeled eyes of junkies on the street.
Their craggy faces are as safe as old bark to me; they are but remnants of a petrified forest I have left behind.
It is not the looming tyranny of prefab structures, square and scowling down on treeless roads of cracked cement, strangled shrubberies and dull-hued minis all in a row.
London frowns in its own colours.
I dignify it with titles stolen from tidy strips of paint samples, one ambling shopping-Sunday: Rembrandt brown for the autumn and brownstone brown, nighthawk brown, toasted spice, redcurrant, jasper, romany, marmalade.
Hastings green or Essex pink for the summer.
Gypsy rose and jamboree for the spring.
Lord Richard grey, flint grey, arctic shadow and smokestone grey the whole year round.
It makes me feel better to do this.
Less afraid.
Not that I am afraid of sprigs and shades; I like the detail, the city smells.
I would never cry at the sight of a battered Rover, nor shiver in the sad vacancy of a council estate.
I say to my friends, see the romance in it, the history.
See it juxtaposed: the Heath in winter and the slums in May.
And if they say ‘Go fuck yourself,’ then they are probably right, for I am lying.
But in a way, I'm not.
What frightens you most about London?
Asks a kind of friend who knows me well.
Is it the sullen sky, small and mean in winter, the rank dank smell of piss sharp through your nostrils  when you walk below the tracks at Gospel Oak or beneath the highway in the Edgware Road?
No, I say.
Not at all.
It is my hot little bedroom, heavy with mildew and mauve, and most of all, it is the bed.
It is the lint and fluff on my old winter coat, stuck to the sleeves like dead bugs, and it is the same old towel hanging from the rack in my bathroom, stiff with decay but still pink, still the shape it was over a year ago, the last time I used it, the last time I shoved it across my stubborn wet flesh and up between my legs and rough through my tangle of sopping hair, the same hair, the same hair.
It is the smell of Pears shampoo and Mum deodorant leaking milky white through the armpits of my blouse.
It is the heavy brass diamonds upon my window, the security grilles; when did I put them there?
Did I put them there?
I lie in my bed and stare at the cracked plaster in the ceiling, the smudges of handprints (how in the hell did they get there?), and I wonder why I am so afraid.
Sure, the bathroom door is weak with misalignment and it will not shut.
Sure, there are no working clocks in the entire flat, just one lively broken green thing that ticks happily as if it could tell the time, though the second hand only pulses and stays in one place.
Sure, the sheets are coarse and dusty like the head of a kitchen matchstick.
But these are only things.
I think to myself, if the walls were ivory instead of mauve, and if I put fine ash floorboards down where the fat grey carpet used to be, would I then be happy and unafraid?
I might.
I make plans and lists.
I purchase Elle Decoration and French Casa Vogue from my local newsagent.
I phone carpenters and painters, and a funny little man with glasses to dig up my garden.
I light a stick of sage and run through the flat with it, as I am told that it will dismember the evil spirits, like an exterminator murders termites and then removes them.
I do not know if the gesture is valid, but I enjoy the ritual; it makes me feel better.
The guys from ‘Love that Wall’ decorators arrive.
They stand around  with rulers and clipboards.
They say, ‘You have serious subsidence in your study.’
They say, ‘Don't know about those neon lights, they're sort of an acquired taste.
At the end of the day, you want something sunny and cheerful, something that'll make you smile when you walk in the room.’
'When can you start?’
I ask.
They tell me they will send an estimate.
It may take a week or two.
They're busy.
‘It's a busy time.
Choose your colours carefully.
At the end of the day, you want to be sure.’
So I lie in my bed in that same old bedroom, for there is nowhere else, just now, to lie.
And I stare at the handprints on the ceiling.
The bathroom door swings open and the light is on, the bare bright bulb.
The stiff pink towel glares at me, contorted and frozen like a hunchback caught in the ice.
I do not turn off the bathroom light.
I do not shut the bathroom door.
I stare at the towel and I am frightened.
strange fruit
It is a sick-making autumn.
Crilly and I spend all our time in bed.
Our lovemaking is long and moist, dozy and grave, but afternoons leave me frazzled and dizzy.
Even the inside of a plastic bag makes me want to vomit, with its musty smell of lumber or the back room of a small shop.
I spend much of my time at the shops; wandering through the aisles, faltering, never knowing what to buy.
I knock things off the shelves.
The old Pakistani gentleman, his face lined and patient, puts a basket in my hand and says, you need this, you drop things.
I don't cook much.
We have meals of tuna fish, instant noodle soup, baked beans.
And chocolate.
Late night Mars or Marathon bars from the petrol station.
Heavy foods are soothing with their easy, empty calories; we are lovers full of sugar, we are higher than the ceiling.
I do not worry about the vomiting — it comes naturally.
That is, it seems natural.
It erupts, rattles, and disposes of itself.
It's nice to vomit.
It leaves my skin flushed, my eyes bright, revelling in the cool relief afterwards.
It is a gentle cycle, and circular things give justice and symmetry; they make me calm.
Crilly is concerned at the state of me.
He tries to comfort me.
There is no need.
I tell him so.
We keep each other awake all night with our bodies, our food, our sex and, of course, the other.
The days are more difficult.
My periods come and go.
I have never been regular, so it is not disturbing to find them light, blotchy and short-lived.
Menstrual blood leaves me, but the sickness persists.
I am doing an art course, but I never go.
There are calls from college.
There is bed.
Crilly thieves and cons to procure the evening's comfort.
I have no energy.
My friends ask questions.
I elude them; my friends, that is, and the questions they ask.
I fly away at Christmas.
I go to California, and my family.
I am away for four weeks.
The first week is hell; jet lag and a sluggish nausea I can't explain.
I am visited by dense and dreamless sleep before the horrific wakefulness; hours in which I do nothing but watch.
…
Evangelists in Florida, wasp-green eyes reckless, unblinking, black spiders haunt the pink lids of preachers' wives, upholstered in satin stripes.
Commercials for cellulite products on early morning cable, cheaply lit and noisy, feel your thighs and buy our cream, thousands of buyers interviewed, send away.
Do it now.
Everything frightens me.
It is not death I fear, but dying, and the hallucinations I will have in its wake.
Shivering through to my wrists and nipples, I know it is not jet lag.
Eventually, I recover, and come to enjoy my mother and my old school friends, and the easy, sunny inertia of L.A. I swim every day and I love the blue sparkle of the pool, the glare of the sun and the sky on the water, and myself cleansed and pristine in the chlorinated wet of my morning routine, pre-smog, post-dope; boys with blond moustaches saying, ‘Have a good one’; my baby blue Rent-a-car.
I take to the freeways.
I am alive at last.
I resolve to leave my stagnant Irish lover.
I will be crippled no longer, I tell my friends.
I am precious about my newfound solitude.
I'll leave him promptly upon my return to England.
He meets me at Heathrow.
I leave him that night.
A week later, I am making amends at college, working out at the gym, and seeing people-friends who do not, to my astonishment, resent me.
They say I have only flirted with a temporary vice and its vice-keeper and, having survived them  both, I am still me and I am no junkie.
I visit their homes.
They visit mine.
I frequent pubs and clubs and brasseries, the neglected poky holes of single social living; watching the fat flamenco dancer weave her way across tables at the Spanish bar, eating tapas at four in the morning.
It is February.
I am twenty-four.
I even enjoy the shrill nagging pierce of my alarm, and slumber no longer claims me like the flu.
Sometimes I wake early to beat the clock.
I speak of Crilly and the fool that he is.
A poor, tragic creature.
Weak.
Besotted.
Missing me.
I picture him in the back of his friend's flat where he is staying.
I see him sluggish and stoned in my mind's eye, his ginger hair and heavy lidded eyes, his clammy, groping hands and nothing to call his own.
I hate him.
I come home later to hear his voice on my answerphone; slow and heavy, pleading, knackered.
His accent as broad as it ever was.
Forever a desolate Dublin man.
I do not sleep with other men.
Only once do I allow a man to stay the night, and I make him sleep upstairs.
We stay up most of the night, discussing music.
He is that disdainful sort of ‘artist’ who is gaunt and fine-featured and born to be better.
He is a dedicated musician.
He teaches me one of his songs and I sing it while he plays the guitar.
He knows Crilly, slightly; he says that for guys like Crilly, he shows no mercy.
He will not stop talking, drinking cups of coffee.
I make them, despite a stirring strangeness in my stomach.
There are so many places he's been, so many gigs he's done.
He has tried heroin, but risen swiftly above it.
I begin to despise him.
At two o'clock, the phone rings.
Crilly calls me ‘Jezebel’, and sometimes he calls me ‘Jez’.
His voice is low.
He asks me how I am.
Great, I tell him.
He apologises for phoning so late.
He tells me that I sound strange, just a little strange, as strange as the time of night.
I say I am fine and hang up.
There is little I can say.
I fetch a duvet for my guest, and I go to bed alone.
A few days later, I look at myself in the mirror.
My stomach is strange, as though something has tilted inside it.
Something more obtrusive than last night's supper.
I stop at the Health Centre on my way to the gym.
There is no doctor free to see me, but a nurse takes a sample of urine.
She is kind.
She speaks with an Irish accent; a country accent, not like Crilly's.
I wait five and then ten minutes in a cubicle.
I sit high on a table with a white paper sheet on it.
I swing my legs.
I think of when I was very small and lived in New York.
My mother took me to a paediatrician on the East Side of town, once or twice a year.
He had a waiting-room full of strange, swinging objects; animals with rounded bottoms rocking on a clean, shiny floor, while children played and young mothers looked on.
The nurse returns and sits facing me.
‘I think we have a baby,’ she says, and feels my stomach.
‘Four or five months by the look of it.
How could you not have known?’
‘There was some bleeding,’ I tell her.
‘I had periods,’ though upon reflection, the bleeding does seem mean and scarce, and I cannot exactly remember my last period.
I have blamed the sickness on smack and there is something simple and hygienic about this; my womb has nothing to do with it.
The nurse is elderly and lovely; a matron out of dreams.
She touches my arm.
‘It does happen, sometimes,’ she says.
‘Blood can come at any time.’
I phone Crilly in the afternoon.
I ask him to meet me that evening at the Three Pigeons.
I go to the gym in spite of myself, puffing and plodding along.
The treadmill is the hardest, but I keep on.
I feel a lively lump inside of me and a need to keep it vital; to keep on running though I am panting and sweating like a sore animal; to encase it in life, to keep it moving.
Deadish flesh hangs from all parts.
I run to remove it.
The sweat is good — like shedding poison.
I run in repentance.
No.
I feel a dead lump inside me, a parcel of old and tired meat; I run to destroy it, to spare it the misery of what will come, I run out of mercy, to quicken its demise.
I imagine its removal, my womb collapsing to follow, closing it on itself like a ball of orange peels without the fruit.
I doll myself up at dusk.
I paint my face, cover myself in beads.
I wear rosary beads from Mexico, bought from a veiled old lady in a church.
When I arrive at the Three Pigeons, Crilly twirls me about to look at me.
He buys me a double Jameson's.
We sit together in the wooden booth.
I keep my distance and do not look at him, though from the comer of my eye I can see him so smartly attired, decked out in scarves and jumpers, set to brace the cold and the street at any hour.
I am about to tell him when Henry arrives, sickly and sniffling.
‘Have you seen Perry?’ he asks.
‘Maggie said you were in here.
I thought Perry might be with you.’
‘No.’
Crilly is contemptuous of Henry, but the latter sits beside us just the same, not buying a drink but sniffing and staring dully out of eyes deadish and glazed.
Suddenly, he starts.
‘Oy!’ he says, ‘Do you want to buy some jumpers?’
He reaches for a plastic bag.
‘Lovely lambswool, from the Shetlands.
Rare.
Got loads of them.
What do you think?’
Henry holds the jumpers up for us to see.
We shake our heads.
Henry sits back and closes his eyes.
Ten minutes later, he asks us again.
His hair is greasy and his face is wet with perspiration.
‘They're prime choice these things.
Do you want them?
I'll give you a fine price seeing it's you and yours.
They are rare and pure…’
Perry strides into the pub, formidable as ever, following his long Roman nose, his hair black with rain and his blue eyes ablaze from the cold, among other things.
He wears a long trenchcoat.
Henry jumps up and tries to steer him away.
He  wants Perry all to himself.
Well, we all do.
‘Perry you handsome paddy!’ he cries.
‘Where the fuck have you been?’
Perry extricates himself and takes a chair across from us.
‘It's grand to see the two of youse together,’ he says, cool as you like.
Then softly, leaning into us: ‘Will I be serving youse?’
I turn to face Crilly for the first real time.
He is holding his breath.
He looks at Perry, then at me.
I give nothing away.
‘We'll be with you in a minute,’ he says.
‘Take care of that pratt while you're at it.
He's desperate.’
Henry stands in the corner, too expectant to be rude.
He seems to be panting.
Perry reluctantly recedes until we can no longer hear either of them, though we watch Henry gesticulate, wiping sweat from his mouth and brow, pausing only to sniffle.
Perry only nods.
Crilly gives a short laugh.
‘He's a dozy cunt, that Henry,’ he says.
From time to time, Perry glances at us.
I admire him; so striking.
Always the man you're looking for.
Mmm.
Crilly is not blind to my admiration.
‘Shall I leave?’ he says.
I laugh.
‘Don't be stupid,’ I snap, and I suck on my Jameson's.
‘Are you ever going to tell me what's wrong?’
I think about it for a moment.
I look at him and take his hand.
I put it on my stomach.
Crilly's eyes grow wide.
He takes me in his arms and holds me.
I do not feel anything much.
Perry is rid of his pursuer, fresh again.
He stands near the door, waiting for ‘What will we do, Jez?’
I look at Crilly.
‘What will we do?’
Crilly is stern and sad.
I look back at the door.
I say we'll do what we always do.
Crilly does not stir.
He gazes hard into my face, as though hoping I will change my mind.
The bell rings, closing time.
After another moment or two, Crilly  takes my arm and leads me from the pub.
We leave with Perry, in my car.
We wait in different places; the car park of an estate, a street corner in Archway.
Crilly and I sit in my living-room with a roll of silver foil before us, listening to Van Morrison; the cat an audible purring ball on my lap.
Crilly fixes us up with a brown powdered lump upon the foil.
He hands me the silver tube, lights a match and holds it under the foil while I suck in and follow the smoke.
It has been six weeks, almost, but the friendly hot flush fills me to the top of my head and it is beautiful.
Crilly makes popcorn for us.
I roll a joint and turn off the bright neon, leaving us with the sultry lilac glow of a smaller and older lamp, the first I ever bought.
We think of it as ‘aqua-velvet’.
Crilly says that it turns the place into a nightclub, in the Caribbean.
From the outside, a passer-by will gaze up at the window, and all he will see is that lavender light.
He kisses me now, cautiously, as I might refuse.
He eases me to the floor.
‘Jasus how I've missed you,’ he says.
He tastes of salt.
He puts his hands on my stomach.
‘Is he there?’
I move his hand until it feels correct.
‘There,’ I say.
‘I can feel it when I sit.’
Crilly touches me all over with one hand, keeping the other on my stomach.
He holds my breasts.
‘Who do they belong to?’ he asks, and I throw my head back, enjoying the rhetoric.
He reaches between my legs.
‘Who does that belong to?’ he asks, and I squeeze my legs together as though to resist him, and it feels good; so good that my back arches.
He again holds my lower stomach.
‘Who does that belong to?’
I allow him to explore.
‘He's yours,’ I say, and he pins my wrists to the floor.
Crilly has a bracelet which makes a noise like keys.
It rattles about my ears and head.
I feel dizzy.
I rub myself up against him.
‘He's yours as long as he's here.’
I'm whispering  now.
‘Don't get any ideas about having me back again.’
I do not think I am being cruel.
I feel excited and I tingle everywhere.
Crilly stops and stares at me, and then stands looking ginger and flushed, and he gathers his things.
He does not wait for me to protest but slams the door behind him as he leaves, leaving a 20 bag on the coffee table in his haste.
At the clinic, there is a chip-toothed, pink-faced sliver of a thing with lank highlighted hair and huge rabbit eyes.
She calls herself Jackie and she shares my room.
She is nineteen weeks pregnant, as I am.
Happily, our foetuses are small, and we can expect a standard termination.
We are grateful to escape the alternative.
The room we share is not large, but we are divided from one another by a plastic curtain.
Anita drives me to Twickenham Clinic at seven.
I have seen Crilly once or twice since telling him, but our meetings were brief and stilted.
I cannot remember whether he has arranged to visit me at Twickenham.
All practical things are settled between Anita and myself.
She drives me in my car and we do not say much.
I sit in the waiting-room for over an hour.
I watch the women arrive with their carrier bags, their boyfriends, husbands, mothers.
Eventually, I am called to the front to pay my fee.
A nurse takes me down a corridor into a white room with painted-shut windows and a hot-air vent.
I take the bed by the wall, behind the curtain.
I hang my clothes in the wardrobe and put on the plastic gown.
I walk on tiptoe.
The floor is hot and shiny.
Affixed to the wall at a considerable height is a small television on a swivel, facing the bed.
I turn it on.
At first, Jackie does not appear to notice me.
She wears a pink suede jacket with a studded fringe which she takes great care to hang.
Her lurex leggings, high suede boots and yellow sweatshirt are folded and tucked away with equal care.
She gets into bed.
She reads Harold Robbins.
She asks the nurse if her husband has left.
She speaks with a broad London accent.
She is nasal, but she is not loud.
A second nurse takes my blood pressure and checks my pulse.
She gives me a valium.
She tells me to rest.
I keep the television on.
I keep it low.
In the operating theatre, a tall and ancient nurse jabs me twice to find the vein in the back of my hand.
She sounds Dutch.
‘How am I to do this,’ she orders, ‘if you keep moving like an animal?’
There is a great gush of pain as the needle goes in, deep at last.
Veins convulse everywhere in my arm, so shot full of liquid I am sure they will burst.
If I shut my eyes, they surely will.
I fight to keep them open.
The stream is cold and cutting.
Despite my struggle, sleep comes at once.
I am awakened by the cramps.
Low and rumbling they are, like the threat of an earthquake or hurricane.
I am wheeled back to my room.
Once in motion, they erupt with abandon.
I cry out as if to keep them outside of myself.
They persist and grow stronger.
I double up in halves, clinging to my knees.
The nurse shifts me from the cart to the bed with some difficulty.
From a few feet away, I hear a doctor speaking.
‘This is the contraction of the womb,’ he says, in a shout or a murmur.
‘In pregnancies as far along as yours, one's womb will expand and then contract after the termination, causing some pain and discomfort.
It is bound to contract.’
I picture in my mind the womb, small and malleable as the heart muscle, expanding and contracting at ludicrous speed.
I laugh and then I shriek.
Someone shuts the curtain.
‘You don't feel anything, do you?’ a nurse asks Jackie, on the other side.
‘Fit as a fiddle, darlin,’ and I can hear, faintly, through the twisted frenzy of my own pelvis, a cheerful rustle as she turns the pages of her magazine.
I am plagued by awkward thoughts, like  splinters in my brain: the seventh grade and pocket radios, games of spin the bottle from which I am cheerfully excluded, tight jeans, Bonnie Bell lip gloss, me, boyish and baffled, the menacing breath of puberty.
I count to myself.
I pretend I am in a crib in a wood with the sky above me.
I pretend I am at my father's in the spring of my eighth year, staying awake late together, the two of us, miles past bedtime, eating cold takeout spaghetti from the local Italian deli, watching My Man Godfrey on hastily edited late night television, the tiny room dark but for the flicker of a tatty late night screen, our tired eyes bleary but soft, placid, from feeding.
I think of a time, not long after I met Crilly, in bed together, bound by tight covers.
He read to me from Brendan Behan's The Borstal Boy.
The pain subsides.
When it has gone completely, I venture up a flight of stairs in my bare feet to the phone box.
There is a small queue of groggy creatures in hospital gowns.
The girl speaking is small with stringy hair tied back in a knot, and glasses.
She wears a nightdress of her own, a faded pattern of lilacs.
‘I know it's a long way,’ she is saying, ‘I've never been here myself, before today.
Please try to come, try and make it down.’
When it is my turn to use the phone, I stand for a minute with two ten pence coins in my hand.
I cannot remember who to call.
I think of several people.
I consider a few.
Roger in his comfortable jacket, his hair receding and long at the back, the foetal guitar in his arms, singing a song about buffalo.
Pamela, in a cloud of artistic dust and her fine finished features; Anita, sensible, eating salad.
No.
I put the coin in and dial my own number.
I don't know why; only that I want to hear my voice on the answerphone.
But when I get through, even my own voice sounds strange and mechanical; an air hostess for British Airways, an operator for British Telecom.
I hang up and ring Crilly at his friend's flat.
I am met by another answerphone with the friend's voice on it.
I leave a message for Crilly.
I tell him I  am fine.
I say I am bored, and that I hope to see him that evening.
I am only bored.
I repeat the address of the clinic several times.
I ask him to bring a packet of wholemeal digestives.
I speak in a drone.
‘I know it's a long way,’ I say, ‘I don't even know which line to take on the underground.
You'll have to look at a map.
You'll have to look at a map, a map on the wall in the tube.
Or ask someone which line to take.
Ask the man in the tube…’
The pips come.
I am alone on the stairwell.
Through a doorway, the glare of a television light reflects upon somebody's wall.
As I pass, I see the girl with glasses as she sits in her bed; her spectacled eyes flashing bulbs on the screen.
I return to my bed.
I open the curtain separating Jackie and myself.
I ask her if she has any special preferences as far as the telly is concerned.
She says that she doesn't mind either way, though she wouldn't say no to Neighbours at 5.30, as we have missed the 1.30 episode.
We discuss the soaps.
I have one or two which I watch faithfully, but she likes them all.
She explains that though she works most days, there is a television where she works.
She owns a video shop with her husband, in Mile End.
She gives me her key-ring to look at; a plastic heart in which a photo of her husband and two children are encased.
Her hands drop to her stomach, clutching her absent bulge.
‘We're skint,’ she says.
‘We can't afford another.
And you?’
‘I'm not sure what happened,’ I say after awhile.
We are vague and polite with one another.
It seems the best way to be.
By three o'clock, Jackie and I are ravenous.
Lunch is a sparse plate of sandwiches with salmon paste or paper-thin processed turkey roll.
Jackie goes upstairs to phone her husband at work, so that he might make a trip to the shops before visiting hour.
I settle back in my bed to read, but I am startled by a wetness between my legs.
In the bathroom, I remove the sanitary napkin and belt I have been dressed with, while still unconscious, after the operation.
Blood gushes forth like nothing I have seen from my own body.
It is all over the toilet seat and the floor.
It seeps between my toes and the cracks in the floor tiles.
I fetch a handful of paper towels from beside the wash basin, walking on tiptoe to avoid bloody footprints.
There seems a great distance between the toilet and the wash basin.
I get on my knees and manage to wipe away nearly all of the blood, though some of it sticks stubbornly in the crevices of the floor.
I dampen more towels and scrub the whole of my legs and feet, though I cannot remove it all, and much of it smears into my skin, giving it a pinkish tint.
I think of lipstick samples at Bullocks department store, the way you rub the lipstick from your lips and it stains your hand the whole day through.
When I return to the room, Jackie sits upright in her bed, her books and magazines stacked neatly by her side.
‘I've spoken to John,’ she tells me.
‘He says he will bring us some fruit and biscuits and things.
I told him also to get cheese moments and scampi fries, and he may stop at McDonald's.’
‘Good,’ I say gratefully.
‘That's good.’
‘Don't mention it,’ she says, smiling.
‘And knowing John, there'll probably be Jaffa cakes for later.’
And so, hours later, when the room has gone a dusky grey from winter twilight and the smoke of our cigarettes, a most blank and bovine nurse accompanies Jackie's husband into the room, and he indeed bears an armful of Sainsbury's.
Both of us having slept and eaten since Jackie's phone call, we are no longer very hungry.
I do feel a rumbling deep in my stomach, but it is a restless churning rather than an empty one, much like the overturning of soil by an ambling tractor.
It is night.
We turn our bedside lamps on.
John smiles apologetically at me as he arranges himself at her bedside.
‘I thought you were starving,’ he says to her.
He is a tall, stocky chap with a husky voice.
He speaks in a tired murmur of business and the kids, dry rot in the house, his brother's pop band.
Holding the open gown tightly around myself, I rise to adjust the volume on the television, so that it will not disturb them.
‘No, it's all right,’ they say, very nearly in unison.
They are taking pity.
Bitterly, I tug at the curtain, but it remains ajar.
Crilly is not coming.
A few minutes later, the very same nurse appears with Crilly behind her, bearing gifts and flowers.
He is clean-shaven and well-dressed.
The nurse leaves, shutting the door behind her.
Crilly comes to my bed and sits beside me.
I am stunned to find him so fine and ruddy in the startling, bleak white of this room; so handsome in the face of my decay, my washed-out skin and faded eyes, my smears of blood and perspiration.
‘I've brought you your biscuits,’ he says, and he puts them in my hand.
‘Oh Crilly,’ I say.
‘I bled and bled.
I couldn't stop it!’
He holds me close.
I pull away and examine his eyes.
‘You're dressed for the occasion,’ I say sharply.
His pupils are large.
He is not stoned.
I ask, ‘Is it a slow night in Camden?’
He wants to know what I mean.
‘Otherwise,’ I say, ‘you may not have come.’
Crilly is hurt.
My eyes sting.
My accusation fills me with shame.
‘How could you say such a thing,’ he begins, ‘With me in bits and pacing the streets like a fockin' animal, with no one but the likes of Perry to pour me heart out to!’
I think of Perry with his mess of black hair and his icy, pinned eyes.
Crilly has known Perry since early childhood.
Their mums are both nurses at St Ita's Hospital and they play bingo together on Saturdays.
According to Crilly, Perry was the last kid in school to wear short trousers.
Thinking about it makes me smile.
Crilly relaxes.
We laugh a little, at nothing too much.
He takes my hand.
I tell him about the cramps, feeling like a child who has fallen and cut herself, demanding sympathy.
Crilly spares me nothing.
He fluffs my pillow and adorns me with trinkets; earrings and a flowery jar of perfume called ‘Fire Maiden’.
‘I bought it just for a laugh.’
He is sheepish.
‘The name reminded me of you.’
(O yes, me, with my stunned and sallow face, me with my drained and broken lump of a body!)
Crilly strokes my forehead.
‘Claudia,’ he says, ‘I'd be immensely pleased if you'd let me stay with you at your place and take care of you for a while.
Just until you're well…’
‘Or until you are.’
I look away.
‘I don't mean to be presumptuous,’ he continues.
‘I'm under no illusions about the two of us, on me mother's life…’
His words come in a rush.
I suddenly feel very hot.
I push his hand from my face.
On the other side of the curtain John is saying,
‘The little one was wheezing so I kept him home.
What did you expect me to do…?’
I listen to the sounds of the room.
Presently, I return my gaze to Crilly.
‘Can you get something special for us?’
I ask.
‘Just for a few days or so…something to ease the pain?’
Crilly smiles like a father.
‘Of course,’ he says, taking me in his arms.
‘Of course,’ and I begin to cry then, to really cry, while he whispers in my ear how brave I am, so very brave; the sweet, steady lull of his voice competing only with John and Jackie on the other side of the curtain, while the telly relents upon its silly swivel, hushed though it is, advert upon advert falling on all ears in a quiet, busy murmur.
In the thick of the morning, the cold is shocking.
I have half a mind to defy their demands of space and economy, and to sleep on until awakened by the next pale arrival herself, expectant to  abort and puzzled at my slumbering presence.
I become attached to that firm slab of practical mattress and look upon it as a sort of lily-white oasis cloud in a world of cold and sterile air.
I cling to my pillow.
A formidable West Indian nurse bellows at me as sure as the rooster himself.
She is brazen and loud, correct.
I eat breakfast in a hall full of silent women.
A low rumble of a cramp circles deep inside me like a fly, but it remains benign.
A slender, tawny-haired girl sits opposite eating cereal, avoiding my eyes.
I have seen her before, in a cocktail dress at someone's party, or at an exhibition perhaps.
I keep my mouth shut just the same.
After breakfast, I sit in the outgoing waiting-room, facing the door, with Jackie and the women of yesterday morning clutching their knees and their overnight bags, looking pale.
One by one, people arrive to fetch them; the mums, the lovers, the friends of before.
I recognise them and with each recognition I take some comfort.
The door is slow and heavy; we turn our faces up to meet its every clank, entrance, creak, slam.
A groggy morning.
It is sinfully early.
Crilly isn't long in fetching me.
The sound of his bracelet precedes him and he brings a rush of morning chill in.
I turn to Jackie.
I cannot think of what to say.
‘Good luck with your video shop,’ I say.
‘Thank you.’
Crilly takes my arm and leads me from the clinic, onto the green and into the car where Anita sits at the wheel.
He puts me in the back seat with my coat over my knees.
Anita asks how I am feeling.
I tell her I am tired and giddy from last night's sleeping pill.
We drive through Twickenham.
Suddenly I am cheerful.
Euphoric, even.
I lean forward and whisper into Crilly's ear.
‘Crilly?’
I whisper.
‘Yes, angel.’
‘You canny shove your granny up a bus!’
I sing gaily in a loud Scottish accent.
(My friend Simone has taught me this.)
‘That's very good, baby,’ says Crilly.
Anita groans.
‘Do you know anyone who lives in Twickenham?’
I ask Crilly and Anita, who sit erect in the front seat, like adults.
They don't.
It is a grey shallow-skied morning.
I tell Anita to follow all the signs north.
‘I know,’ she says, and I know that she knows.
Once in Kentish Town, we stop at the shop and Crilly buys me a carton of food: soup and cheese and biscuits and cereal, chocolate and bread and ham and whatever else takes my fancy.
I follow him down the aisle and throw random packages into the basket.
He lets me.
He follows.
Crilly has tidied the flat, and my bed is made up for a queen with extra duvets and fluffy pillows.
Cat O'Fun rubs up against my legs.
Anita makes a pot of tea for the three of us.
It is then that I spot the post.
Two bills and a threatening letter about a parking ticket.
It ends with a note from the bailiffs, saying that they will be around to collect compensation if the bill is not paid.
It has been forwarded from my previous address and it is well out of date.
I read the return address and put on my coat.
‘I must go to Holloway,’ I say.
Crilly and Anita are suitably perplexed.
They do not stir.
‘I must go to Holloway,’ I repeat.
‘The office is there.
The bailiffs will be around.
I'm going to Holloway…’
Anita pours out the tea.
‘They won't be around today, Claudia.
They probably won't be around at all.
Just send a cheque explaining that you only just got the letter.’
‘I don't have any envelopes,’ I say, pacing about the room.
The fact that I do not have envelopes causes me physical pain.
‘It may be too late for a cheque by post.
They'll take everything.’
The thought of being without my VCR, my television and my records is more horrible than anything.
‘They won't come,’ Anita counters calmly.
‘Not after a month.
And it isn't much of a bill.’
‘What the fuck do you know about it?’
I hiss.
‘There may be more bills at the old flat!’
The cat, who is hungry, follows me in circles.
Anita is silent.
Crilly rises to placate me.
He puts his hands on my shoulders.
I could scream, ‘Piss off you paddy wanker,’ but instead I sit.
‘They won't come,’ he says.
‘Not so soon.
Not over a trifle.
They only do that to scare you.
Now get to bed; you should be in bed.’
I bury my face in my knees.
I know they are right.
I am defeated.
Anita hands me my tea and leaves.
I complain about her.
I say she thinks she's got it together just because she's American.
Crilly reminds me that I'm American too, and just because I know a few words of British slang, I shouldn't be getting airs about myself.
His lecture is comforting.
He puts me to bed.
I ask him to lie beside me.
He does.
I tell him I can't sleep.
He says to close my eyes and rest quietly; sleep will come.
‘Crilly,’ I say as we lie together, ‘when the nurse gave me the anaesthetic, she jabbed me so deep that I could feel it throbbing in my veins like an explosion, and it hurt like anything.
Did you ever feel it like that — the needle, I mean?’
Crilly wraps his arms around my waist.
‘Every now and then,’ he says, ‘but that's the best part.’
He kisses me.
‘Funny,’ I reply.
‘I thought I would fucking die.’
We sleep.
When I awake, it is well past three.
Crilly has gone and there is a sheet of cardboard beside me on the pillow.
‘Gone to the shops for you,’ it reads.
I sit up and stretch.
I wonder how long he will be.
I know he hasn't really gone to the shops.
I turn on the  television.
A woman with a stupid wedged haircut is selling deodorant.
‘Shove it up your armpit!’
I yell, and collapse into a fit of giggles.
I decide to go out for cigarettes; a short walk will do me good.
I put on my coat and leave.
I walk to the newsagent.
It isn't far.
I feel okay.
I am not sore.
The newsagent is crowded, full of schoolchildren in uniform.
They make a great clamour; they take their time, just making noise.
They seem so brittle they terrify me.
I keep thinking one of them will shove me in the ribs, or tell me that I'm ugly.
I wait awhile, until they have all been seen to.
I am about to pay when I realise I brought no money.
I leave.
My legs are heavy.
I think of the gym; I wonder how I ever could have been there.
I wonder how anybody could ever go to gyms.
The sky is grey and abysmal; it has grown blacker since morning.
I hate it.
We are in the dead of winter — sooty blackness falls by four in the afternoon.
I pass more schoolchildren.
I hate them as well.
I start running, but my body puts up a fight.
How I hate my body!
When I get home, Crilly is there.
He has turned on the lights, the heat and the television.
He is making pancakes.
‘I hate them all,’ I say tearfully.
‘What?’
He comes and helps me off with my coat.
I collapse on the floor.
He follows me down and holds me in his arms.
‘You're shivering,’ he says, and carries me back to bed.
He tells me to relax and watch television.
He scolds me for leaving the flat.
He puts the lavender neon on.
He fetches the silver foil.
We sit together in bed.
Crilly makes a silver tube and puts it in my hand.
He lights the match below the brown patch and I suck in and follow the smoke.
‘Hold it in,’ he advises, ‘as long as you can.’
He watches as I hold it in.
When I cannot hold it any longer, I blow the smoke into his mouth.
We stay kissing for a bit.
When I pull away, I feel fantastic.
Lit from the inside, dripping with light.
We embark on  a second burn.
I love the shiny brown line, I love the crinkle of the silver foil.
Crilly turns off the telly and puts on a Billie Holiday record.
I love her.
I love her more than anything.
He knows it.
‘It's like Christmas,’ I say to him.
He caresses me.
I stroke his hair.
‘Don't be sad,’ I say, ‘everything is all right now.’
He gives me another burn and he has one for himself, blowing the smoke back into my mouth afterwards.
I flash on something but I can't think what it is; something empty, something white.
I start to speak, but I do not want to lose the smoke.
I hold it again, enjoying the tension in my bosom as I do.
He watches me.
I forget about the flash of white.
I release the smoke into the air.
‘I love you,’ he says.
We make love.
I am not permitted to have intercourse for three weeks after surgery, but there are other things we can do and we do them.
Technical things do not matter.
Behind closed eyes, I think: we're fused, Crilly and me, just fused, like euphoria, eu-fuse-ia.
And the hole is full of him, his consuming fleshy self.
I am his and his alone.
It rains outside.
I float and how I love to fuck.
There are tears on his face and I wipe them away.
He is beautiful.
He holds me like the devil himself.
I love the sound his bracelet makes.
Soon, my breasts are hard and lumpy and lactose dribbles from them.
I have been told that this might happen.
Crilly does not mind.
He kisses them and licks the milk from his lips.
Giving milk seems funny; it makes me laugh and then cry in a stoned, sleepy, dribbly way.
Crilly does the same.
We make love for hours and hours, long into the night, and I am not afraid.
the ladies' pond
The bleakness of my street in winter overwhelms me, though it is a pretty street on an uphill slope with a row of terraced houses on either side.
In the summertime, it is alive with hot fumes and rampant dogs and fashionable bathers crawling up Highgate Road on their way to the Heath, where they claim respective ponds and languor till the sky slowly turns to a soothing summer gold.
In these months twilight never comes before half past eight or nine o'clock.
And the bathers leave on foot or in jeeps or bikes or minis.
The summer is a hot one.
According to The Independent, our temperatures are Mediterranean.
I frequent the Heath, the Ladies' Pond, where I meet Kelly and Jo and lush Simone, sunning themselves in topless array and munching on nectarines which drip down necks and towels.
One day, I bring black cherries.
Topless and nude, ladies are strewn in abundance on a hilly grass beach and in the sunken leaves below the lifeguard.
Ladies swim in the pond itself, which is crisp and clean with ducks upon it.
Ladies sunbathe in  convival clusters upon a generous wooden float.
I chase the ducks, paddling after them in the water, though I am a grown woman and topless like everybody else.
The lifeguard, who weighs fifteen stone and does not shave beneath her arms, yells at me to stop.
I stop.
The first time I visit the Ladies' Pond, I exclaim to Kelly, ‘It's like a Fellini film,’ to which she says in a lazy Scottish brogue, ‘Perhaps…
I don't know…
I canny recall him to mind just noo.’
I do not elaborate but take my place on a towel with the others.
When I am asked to think of a happy London, I think of this place in July and of my lazy pondmates: Kelly and Simone and Jo, the acidhouse DJ.
I think of the eclectic women on baby blankets, bare beside picnic baskets and one another, pleased to be sated by nothing more than a book and a cigarette, a glass of cider and a chat or a piece of quiche, meatless, of course .
Butch tattooed women survey the hedges for Peeping Toms.
There are white, black and Asian lovers; the lovers are largely nude.
There are professionals feasting on rare weekday picnics of wine and poultry and biscuits.
There are long-haired, weather-beaten hippies, short-haired sprightly trendies, socialists and socialites, feminists and Highgate wives, and the women who are both.
There are women of relaxed obesity, and sylph-like creatures with firm and boyish bodies.
One time, I meet a girl whose name I don't remember.
She studies theology at Edinburgh.
She tells me she has been to every temple on the Greek islands of Mykonos and Santorini.
She is clever but her voice is soft and stupid like syrup.
She has no ear for irony.
I do not introduce her to my other friends.
Kelly is the sweetest thing I have ever seen, with a face like Raggedy Ann and ginger dreadlocks.
She is small and slight.
Her girlfriend, Josephine, does not take to the water, so Kelly and I go in alone with Simone, treading in unison till the chill is mellowed, and swim to the deep end where we cling to the buoy and discuss other people.
Simone is cheered by the Ladies' Pond, and in the course of summer she drinks less and dyes her hair a platinum blonde and tans herself till her eyes shine.
She forgets about her absent man.
Wet and splattering to keep warm, we giggle too much while small crowish birds squawk strange somethings in the swamp bit.
We are not maudlin.
Crilly does not feel alienated by my visits to the Heath, though he confesses to missing me by day and he is usually at home when I return.
He likes my sticky, sweaty body which smells of nectarine and baby oil and a spliff that Jo has rolled beneath a shadowy cove of eucalyptus.
I enjoy the heat of his hands.
Most summer afternoons, Crilly will have scored.
We sit upon our bed with a roll of foil, several bars of chocolate and the hardback edition of a Georgia O'Keeffe retrospective (nicked from Dillons) upon which he lays a tube and a neat square of foil flattened by his own deft fingers and the gear itself in its cosy half-inch envelope.
I hold my breath until it is melted, for fear it will fly away.
Taking the same precaution, he melts it quickly and carefully, acutely aware of rare summer breezes or the compulsion to sneeze.
And he blows the smoke back into my mouth.
I take the tube in my hand while he lights the foil from underneath.
His movement is steady and I admire him for it.
I learn how to follow just a split-second behind him.
Together, we make a smooth dry track upon the silver.
Unbathed and weary from the bake of the sun and the refreshment of cool water, I am delicious with the skag inside my chest and the sweet, smoky aroma surrounding me, and the touch of my lover and his hot arms about my waist, and his
'…
Hold it in flower, don't let it escape.
Hold it, hold fast…’
We linger before the telly and finish the pack and hold one another while dusk filters through the blinds, the silver blinds which are always shut.
We wait, as darkness falls, in the hollow of my home.
maggie delaney
Maggie Delaney is a lightly freckled, chocolate-haired, blue-eyed thing from the waterside Irish town of Malahide.
The first time I meet her, I wear an unflattering dress.
Unlike Crilly, she speaks in a clear and Anglicised accent and, more than once, I have heard her criticised by her countrymen for not taking pride in her own.
I don't know whether she does or not.
Crilly says that if you listen well, you can hear the Irish in her right enough.
She shows it in temper, and when she is ill.
Crilly would know; he was her lover for three years, before he was mine.
They remain friends, though she is quick to be petulant over telephone messages left unanswered and favours left undone.
But she calls him a friend, and I have no objections.
Not at first.
I meet her, in my unflattering dress, at the Warrior one muggy Saturday.
I am with my mother, stepfather and half brother who are in London for a week.
I show them the Camden Market, and my brother, Winchell, buys an old, funereal coat by the Lock, while I stand by and smoke spliffs with the bootleg sellers in bright berets.
In his coat, Winchell looks like a Dickensian undertaker; he embarrasses me.
Still, he wears it proudly, despite the warm weather and his age of only eleven, and who am I to deprive him of his girth, his boorish style, his fun?
We are heavy with packages.
My folks want to see the inside of a real pub.
I take them to the Warrior.
The beer garden is an urban embarrassment of grey pebble beach and picnic tables.
We sit there.
Empty cans and bottles  litter the turf and make crunching sounds like oyster shells when they are stepped on.
A clothes-line hangs between two high windows, hovering above like a tawdry hammock from the sky.
Larry, my stepfather, sits stiffly with a pained expression on his face.
A bearded vagrant with mucky skin and deep-socketed eyes tries to annoy him.
He croons a slurred and cheerful chain of obscenities: ‘fancy a grind my luv’.
He won't go.
We retreat to the inside, where marketers and pinstriped shirts from TV AM suck on Saturday Specials.
Guinness and Beamish and whiskey and lime.
The Warrior is crowded.
By a stroke of fortune, we find a rickety table to sit at.
The vagrant follows us in, grinning toothlessly at Larry, saliva dribbling from his purple lips.
He is barred by the manager.
It is a sunny autumn day.
Beyond the open window frame where the glass has been lifted, the sky is splendid.
My mother comments on what a fine afternoon it is.
Though she is an American tourist, she looks elegant in her high Italian boots and I think, I can always know my mother by the briskness of her gait and the suede upon her feet.
My mother swings her legs beneath the table.
From the bar, I spot Crilly in a corner in the back room.
He beckons me over and introduces me to Maggie.
There are no audible words between us.
She averts her eyes and pricks the tear in her tights with one incisive nail.
I will always remember what she looks like.
She is wet with elegant reserve.
She nurses a vodka and orange and sits still with long stockinged legs turned inwardly but not awkwardly.
She wears a black cocktail dress — the sort they wear in Soho at art school gatherings in flats white and minimal.
(I know those flats: copies of iD magazine on the one table, drinking something gold against whitewashed walls, snaking lines of speed in the loo with the cracked mirror.)
Maggie's eyes are long and wide like certain nuts, and they turn up at the ends like maidens from Disney.
Her hair is short and black.
She brings to my mind something  chic and continuous, like an Italic.
I didn't know she would be so attractive.
She makes me nervous.
Crilly tries to coax me into the booth but I shrug out from under his arms and make an excuse about the family.
Appallingly on cue, Winchell approaches us, fat and gnome-like and swimming in his new-old coat.
Crilly hugs my brother back warmly and introduces him to the languid one.
She nods her head.
I want to retreat to the opposite end of the room.
I hate my skirt; it has pale flowers on it.
I crave the safety of a tabletop and a Bloody Mary rich with pulp.
Sensing the chill in me, Crilly eases me to the jukebox and presses a small bottle into my hand.
Winchell stands eager and forgotten several feet away.
‘You wanted it,’ says Crilly.
I take the methadone and hold it fast in my pocket.
I narrow my eyes to stare into his; the light of the pub is dim as dust and I cannot make out the pinpoints.
Yet I detect the glare of glass in the emerald bit.
He kisses me.
He smells sweetly of sulphur.
‘I'll be round at seven,’ he says, and I know he means nine.
I kiss him back.
I now have two things to look forward to.
The bottle of green snug in my jacket, I return to my family.
Winchell follows.
I glance behind to catch Maggie's eyes.
She does not register the gesture, but I can feel her watching as we go.
Bad Billy McGregor, from Aberdeen, is talking to my stepfather.
He is telling Larry about his whippets.
I knew him once, I knew the whippets.
He was the sort of man who'd turn up only when he said he wouldn't.
He ran, often, up the Heath with the whippets, in the deadest night.
He loves fast skinny dogs and sulphate, driving drunk in someone else's car and sprawling, comatose, Saturday reprieves, watching the football.
His eyes are never still.
He made an attempt on Crilly's life with a pocket knife once; but now they speak amicably to one another, they just don't seem to remember.
It is only me who remembers.
Billy smells of stout and talc, and his voice is like the  scrape of something feral on a smooth steel pan.
‘Still shaftin' the paddy?’ he asks.
‘Yes, thank you,’ I say.
Maggie is drawing close to the bar.
She does not look my way.
I move in closer to Billy.
Does she know Billy?
Has she met him in the Three Pigeons?
Does Billy find her attractive?
She orders a cloudy greenish drink with ice cubes.
She walks tall and straight, a little stiff.
The barman hands her a second drink, a Tennents.
That will be for Crilly.
As Maggie turns, I catch a flash of eye, fairy blue but just a bit milky.
I wonder if she has used with Crilly today.
I wonder if one day Maggie and Crilly and I will use together.
Billy recognises Larry from a detective show.
‘Tha was magic when you jus bashed th’ fat guy to fock,’he says.
‘Yes,’ says Larry.
He exchanges a glance with my mother.
I squeeze the bottle in my pocket, making certain it is there.
I think of dashing off to the loo to drink it but I decide to wait.
The dribbling vagrant appears like a wayward soldier in the open window frame.
My mother laughs loudly.
Billy delivers a tirade of appreciation and Larry, sitting tightly with his brow creased, doesn't understand a word.
strung out
I have been back with Crilly for a month now, or two.
I sit alone one Sunday evening at the Old Ship, waiting.
At the next booth are three junkies, nursing pints of Guinness.
One of them, a bearded beer-bellied fellow in a tank top and tattoos, approaches.
‘You Crilly's bird?’ he asks.
‘In a way.’
‘You seen him?’
‘Why?’
‘Well he said he'd be in.’
‘Why?’
‘We've been waiting.
You know.’
‘He isn't dealing.’
‘I know that.
But he's helping us out.’
‘Oh?
Who?’
He gestures to his friends.
‘Me and some mates.
Johnny.
Terry.
Mick.’
I look at Johnny, Terry and Mick, and I decide that I hate them.
‘Who else?’
‘That's all.’
‘Well, I don't know where he is.’
‘You seen Maggie?’
‘Not recently.’
He returns to his table.
I am lying.
I am expecting Crilly and he is late.
Perry walks through the door, wearing a tall  trenchcoat.
I sit erect.
I am happy to see him.
I feel a stirring in my loins.
I call to him.
He turns and sits beside me.
‘How's it goin?’
His voice is deep and Dublin, like Crilly's, but unlike Crilly, his words are sparse.
His black hair sticks out from wind and rain.
He is such a handsome man and I know he will make us happy.
‘Weird, Perry.
I feel like shit.’
‘Don't I fockin' know it.
Have you seen Crilly?’
Something about his stance, so fidgety and uneasy, makes my heart sink.
Desire leaves my body and I am forlorn and full of hate.
I want to say, you stupid skinny Mick, why are you asking me?
‘Not yet.
Is anything happening tonight?
Can't you help us?’
Perry shakes his head.
His eyes unusually wide.
Being clean doesn't suit him.
I want to tell him so.
‘It's a slow night, darlin'.
Where's your man?’
‘I don't know, Perry.
Is Crilly the only one with any information round here?’
‘No, but Jane got fockin' stood up, and there's a rumour that Van might have something, but he won't serve fock all people.
He likes Crilly.
I reckon Crilly might have a better chance.’
‘What about you?’
‘Nothin'.’
‘Shit!’
‘I know.’
My stomach is churning.
Perry offers to buy me a drink, but I will not give him the satisfaction.
My innards are stiff and metallic, like broken machinery.
The smell of booze is making me nauseous.
Perry's fags lay half out of their packet on the table, but I do not want to smoke.
I hate cigarettes anyway, what's the point?
Sticks of nothing in your gob.
White rods the shimmery sheen of birdshit.
That queasy asthmatic sensation in  your chest, all that smoke and nothing, nothing but smoke.
Just smoke.
Maggie comes into the pub, her hair wet and pulled back from her face.
She wears jeans and a tatty jumper.
I have never seen her looking so sick and skinny.
She makes a beeline for Perry.
I know she will be disappointed, and this gives me satisfaction.
Her eyes, also, are huge with unwitting  cleaniless .
I don't care.
I pity no man, I pity no woman, I pity no dog.
She shakes.
Following a stint of desperate rhetoric with Perry, she turns to me.
‘Claudia,’ she says loudly, ‘have you got 10p I can borrow?’
I want to say no but I don't and I throw her a coin, aiming for her gut.
She takes it and makes for the phone box.
Perry looks at me and looks away, his eyes darting everywhere.
I follow his eyes from the bar to the jukebox, to the bearded one, to two like-faced girls with stocky builds and bleached blonde hair.
They are also waiting.
Crilly bursts into the pub.
I can tell by his face that he has not been successful.
He is stopped at the door by an emaciated woman with a grotesque burn injury, whom I have not seen before.
Poor ugly cow, a lot of good her waiting will do.
He speaks hastily to her and flies to our table, where he does not sit but squats in front of me.
‘No joy,’ he says.
Perry, who has heard, stubs his cigarette and swears.
I want to weep.
I swallow and speak in a tremor.
I try to be gracious.
‘What about Agar Grove?’
My voice is high and desperate.
‘No.’
‘Caversham Road?’
‘Nothing.’
‘Why not?’
‘Because there's nothing, Claudia!’
‘Why the hell not?
I feel like I'm fucking gonna —’
‘How the fock do you think I feel?
I'm the one running  around in the fockin' rain!’
‘But I'm paying for it, this time!’
‘You're not.
You're not payin' for nothing!’
‘Stop saying ‘nothing’!’
‘Look at you.
You're sounding like a fockin' junkie!’
‘Well…’
Maggie approaches, hovering at Crilly's shoulder.
‘You can save your breath!’
I snap at her.
She ignores me, whining about how he was supposed to meet her at the Bullet's Head.
Her voice is shrill and agitated.
Like mine, but Irish, as English affectation slips away.
I consider telling her to speak properly, just for spite.
‘Both of youse, just hold onto yourselves for a second.
Just hold on.’
Crilly wants to hold it together.
He crosses the room.
He speaks with the similar looking stocky girls.
I watch hopefully.
After a moment, Perry rises to join him.
Maggie sits in Perry's seat, not meeting my eyes, sweating.
The jukebox is playing ‘Ricky Don't Lose that Number’, and it reminds me of carpools in the seventh grade.
I take a deep breath and try to calm myself, to still the noisy, rusty jagged parts.
I think I'm bleeding on the inside.
After ten slow minutes, Crilly returns.
‘There might be something in Prince of Wales Road.’
‘Who?’
‘A Welsh guy called Richard.
Don't get your hopes up.’
But my hopes are up and rising.
Crilly tells me to meet him at the Hope and Vixen in half an hour.
He rides off on the bicycle, my bicycle, which is too small for him.
Perry stays behind to use the phone.
Maggie, who is dubious of the Prince of Wales connection, leaves in pursuit of something better.
I drive to the Hope in my ugly, crusty car which makes horrible squeaking sounds in the rain.
At the Hope, an Irish band called Mo and McNamara are  playing live upon a modest stage.
I order a vodka and orange and sit in a corner beneath peeling mauve and silver flock wallpaper.
The pub, usually packed full of young Camden locals, old men from Winterbottom's Home for the Vagrant and Elderly and crusaders from south of the river, is nearly empty tonight.
Several ancient men in worn and baggy clothes sit at separate tables drinking neat whiskey and half pints of Beamish.
The Hope smells not only of beer but of new sawdust, cheese and onion crisps, and mildew.
At a table crammed into the wall, I stare into space, trying to ignore an old man who yells at the barmaid and another who sits doubled over with his pink mottled head against the table, sleeping and snoring.
The band is made up of two men.
One is old with a shadowy face and long black hair, and the other is younger and pudgy, with a pale cherubic face and narrow green eyes.
He sings.
His voice is not bad; in fact it is rather lovely, like the lead vocalist of The Chieftains.
I try to listen.
Though my stomach is ruptured like a crushed tube of tomato puree, I manage to hear some of the words.
On Raglan Road on an autumn day I saw her first, and knew That her dark hair would weave a snare that I would one day rue I saw the danger, then I walked along the enchanted way And I said let grief be a falling leaf At the dawning of the day…
I gulp down the orange drink and order another one.
I consider moving to Ireland and marrying a road worker in Kerry.
I will produce many children and get fat and wear stretch maternity  jeans (even after I have given birth) and an apron with a daisy on it.
I will drink on my own and listen to the Dubliners.
I finish my drink.
Keep your mind free, I am telling myself.
Keep it clear.
Breathe deeply.
Don't feel the pain, the rust.
I return to my table and try to listen…
On Grafton Street in November We tripped lightly along the ledge…
But I cannot.
By the time the first bell rings, I have waited an hour.
The sleeping man is still asleep and the other has left.
A big-built Scottish woman, who has been playing pool in the other section of the pub, crosses over to the east side of the bar and puts in her last orders.
I know the woman.
She is called Josie; she used to visit my flat with her boyfriend, to stage violent, public rows.
Once she stuffed her diaphragm into one of my neon lights, breaking it, shattering it.
I pray that she will not see me now.
She doesn't.
I think, maybe if God has answered that trivial prayer, he will also answer my monumental ones.
Maybe it is good that Crilly has not arrived.
He has probably found some awkward connection on the other side of town, south of the river, where reggae blares, and they won't cut it with too much sugar…
When Josie has gone, I stand, unsteady, and buy another vodka, neat, thinking, fuckall good this will do.
I pour it into the remainder of my old drink, so that it still tastes faintly of orange juice.
Like a small child unwedded to booze, I don't like the taste of it; I like sweet things, like Dr Pepper and root beer, and white chocolate animals from Woolworth's.
I drink fast.
I am not drunk so much as queasy.
My nausea has not left me.
I shiver.
I am nothing but a stomach of cheap tin, empty but for the clanking of a few tin cans which have been squashed by a  gargantuan hand and thrown together.
They are ruthless, those squashed and empty cans.
The audience, sparse and sad, do not call for an encore, but Mo and McNamara embark upon a lonely farewell tune just the same.
I admire them.
Their arrangement is simple.
The older man plays an accordion, and the younger one plays a tin whistle in the musical interlude.
They sing a Pogues song.
One summer evening drunk to hell I sat there nearly lifeless…
An old man in the corner sang Where the water lilies grow And on the jukebox, Johnny sang about a thing called love And it's how're ya kid and what's your name and how'd you bloody know…
I know the song well.
In fact I love it.
I have loved it for years.
I try to feel it now, to let it crawl inside of me, to replace my sickness with sweet, melodic grief.
I want to lie in a sunny green field.
I want to weep the tears of dying soldiers and widowed mothers.
I want to hold something deep and soft beneath the flesh, something as easy and fluid as nostalgia (as tangible as a stuffed bear), as simple as a final lullaby, lulling me to softness, lulling me to sleep.
I want to hear the country rain on the roof of our house, where Daddy read to me from Where the Wild Things Are.
I try, try hard, to feel it.
But I cannot, for that which is sick is strong.
It holds on and keeps the gentle tears away.
On the other side of the pub, Perry scurries through the door.
I can see him through the open bar.
He does not acknowledge me.
He sits behind a half screen, perusing the faces of customers as they amble away, their arms full of cans for the road.
When he has not seen the man he has hoped to see, his long spine slackens  and he falls back upon the red vinyl of the booth with his eyes closed and his foot shaking in a livid tic.
One old, old man, drunk and limp as old laundry but standing, yells at another old man who is sleeping with his head on the table.
‘Jack, where's that fuckin' fiver you owe me?’
The sleeping man does not wake.
I leave the Hope and drive home.
I check the answerphone.
‘I'm out here in Walthamstow…
Jez…
I'm fockin' soaked.
I think we're out of luck.’
I crawl into my bed and crouch in a foetal position, a pillow stuffed between my knees and chest.
The room is dark, but passing cars cast yellowy shadows upon the wall.
I try to sleep but I can only doze, and I am frequently aware of a pulse, a rattle, a rustiness rippling through me.
In my bed is a faint smell of excrement.
At three a.m.
Crilly comes home, wet and defeated.
He reaches for me and holds me tight, and the tremble of him is tremendous.
I can't stand the weight of him.
I pull away.
‘You better not hold me,’ I say to him.
My skin hurts.
Crilly turns over and lies with his back stiff and petulant.
The sounds of the night are low.
I hear the West Indian boys swearing and yelling at one another in quick, hoarse voices.
I hear the thump of the cat flap as Cat O'Fun tumbles through it without the feline grace of his fellows.
I shake.
Sounds are no longer sounds to me.
They are scrapes and sores, mockers of failure, players in a relentless team of agitation.
I am not the same as I was before.
Not the same as I ever was.
I do not sleep.
nantucket
We went to Nantucket.
My father and I, and sometimes my mother.
Every summer.
We rented a tawny triangle of a house that smelled of sweet musty oak and Coppertone suntan oil and Bordeaux biscuits.
(In later years, adult years, while sitting in London stuffed with wholemeal digestives soaked in tea, I would be filled with the wheat and candour of this smell, and I would hold the digestive as long as I could in my mouth, as if aiming to grasp its exact ingredient and texture, to become its body and its recipe).
The house was built by a local architect called Cecil, an old man with a raspy white beard, who'd lost half an arm to a wayward chainsaw.
The house was set beside a wood.
In the wood, Cecil had carved into a tree trunk a small swing for a child that had since grown and died in Vietnam.
I took the swing for my own, and revelled in its leafy solitude and the soft pungent moss which grew beneath it, carpeting a pillowy clump of earth.
Also secluded in the forest stood a platform of marble.
It was for nothing but to counter the parallel sky, and I found it mystical in its impracticality.
I took a box of Lego to the slab and built cities of red, white and black until the cool white surface grew scarce beneath me and my concoctions.
The first time we rented the house, I was three.
My mother and father were married, though never in the same room together.
It seemed, in fact, that Cecil's house belonged to my father, who made a cave for himself out of its damp and its wood, the sweet musk of its corners.
He was busy, my father, with unfinished canvases from  art school, generous manuscripts about Beethoven and Medieval painters, a manual typewriter snug enough to fit upon a window ledge, and soup bowls heaped with cheddar cheese goldfish, gently serenaded by an old electric fan as 1, in my turn, busied myself with Lego upon that slab of perfect marble.
Mom was a visitor.
She came through on weekends, the smirk of the city still upon her face, wearing opal rings always cool to the touch, and highly glossed lips of mauve.
She was like a cube of chrome, sleek and symmetrical.
She was the Amtrak commuter line that one never catches.
She packed Rolling Stones and Ray Charles into a leather case, along with a tiny bottle of Chanel and a selected volume of Beat poetry, and she came to us.
Daddy's hairline was receding.
He wore simple plaid shirts and corduroys, even in summer.
He sat at a makeshift desk of unfinished lumber, and wrote and played with his thinning hair.
Occasionally he produced a camera and pointed it at me, as I played on the lawn with my limber chestnut friend, Katrina (who would later drop out of high school and become a porno star in Paris), or at me alone, mainly alone.
Our favourite photo was taken of me on the marble slab.
I was slight and crew-cutted, surrounded by tiny plastic wheels.
I was trying to build a car.
I knew the names of all the cars.
Daddy taught them to me.
In the city, I stood at the window and identified the cars as they breezed by.
I also knew all of the states and their capitals.
Later, in my teens, I would forget.
But then, I knew.
At night, Daddy read to me, and though I had many books, there were only four I wished to hear.
The first two were Where the Wild Things Are and In the Night Kitchen by Maurice Sendak, ornate with fabulous wide-mouthed forest monsters and small plump boys fallling through the night devoured by dough.
The third was Babar, though we always skipped the part where Babar's mother is shot by the hunter, and the fourth was a sing-a-long story called The Fox Went Out on a Chilly Night.
We sang along.
O, the Fox went out on a chilly night and he prayed to the moon to give him light…
My mother had a bicycle with a childseat.
Once or twice, we rode to the beach.
We stopped at the farmers' market for cheese and grapes.
I sat in the back of her bicycle.
She rode quickly, pausing only for traffic (which was scarce) or bumps in the road.
I did like the smells; drifts of Johnson's baby shampoo wafting from her hair and mine, the beachy, balmy smell in my face as we ascended Elderberry Road, that persevering odour of fresh tar and suntan oil.
Gaining the tar-sweated hill with my mother's lean legs pumping swiftly, the willowy sight of streaky high dunes on the horizon awaited us, waving to and fro as they did, sheltering an occasional beige box of a house, a modern cube.
My mother told me about the famous people who lived in them.
She knew some of them.
My mother's hair was fine and straight then, falling easily down her back.
No matter how often she sunbathed, her skin was always very white.
In contrast, I was like my father, and I darkened rapidly in the sun until I was nearly the shade of terracotta.
We left the beach at around six.
My mother told me it was six; I could not feel the lateness in the day, other than the westward blare of a reluctantly falling sun.
Soaked with it and languid from the heat, with the scent of salt and sand still heavy in my nose, I asked if we could stop at the high slope of grass off Elderberry Road.
My mother parked her bicycle in the shoulder and took my hand, and we climbed to the top of the hill.
We lay on the brink of its descent and rolled quickly downwards, our faces full of earth and grass one instant and then rotating madly and finally up to the brazen blue sky leaking through the trees.
My mother giggled all the way down.
We climbed up again and rolled down a second time, Mom sighing and giggling again, again.
Her laugh was always the same; high and birdlike, very  young.
It was wonderful to roll; that first second push off, sluggish with the anticipation of falling, that moment of tumbling when all was forgotten but frenetic strips of blue light and blades of green in our skin and clothes, and that next to last stretch when we knew we'd roll forever (or at least well into the shoulder of the road), and that final jolt and halt, nearly violent, as the bottom was reached.
Once there, we lifted ourselves and looked at one another, both of us laughing, trudging grass-stained to the top again.
More powerful even than the scent of newly-mowed grass or flickering glimpses of sky was the scent of my mother in her peach halter, her back slender and white, and the forever-ish trickly sound of her high giggle, the giggle of delight and fresh sloping green hills.
the cow's lip
Gemma wants to do something different on a Friday night.
So do I. We complain loudly about cliques at smoky Camden locals; the Devonshire Arms, the Bull and Gate, the Hen and Gentleman.
The names of familiar pubs exhaust me.
We consider bowling in Streatham.
We consider bingo in Plaistow.
Fringe theatre in Islington is too bourgeois.
Art exhibitions are too familiar; we are sure to run into a person we know — Slow Bill, angular Adam, a friend of a friend or somebody's ex.
We have been to clubs, those dancing  tornedoes , those ricocheting bodies under mad silver strobes, those siren samples, those scratch mixes, ‘CAN YOU FEEL IT?!’ crying over and over again.
Mind, I do like the girls I don't know in the ladies' room, gelling knives of black hair and saying, ‘He's a cunt, that one.’
I like the clubs when it's time to leave.
We are weary of Acidhouse and Warehouses and Ron's living-rooms; the plastic Cindy dolls upon the wall, the anaemic cat in people's laps, the dope and the drivel.
We pile into the car as if embarking on a real motor trip; Gemma and I are in front, Anita in the back.
Anita is content to let us decide.
I have always felt a proclivity for Kilburn.
I like to shop on the Kilburn High Road.
I like the wide-hipped, grey bobbed mothers with skin like old stucco, yelling in aggressive Cork accents to small, over-bundled children; I enjoy the tribes of  weird and underfed adolescents, swearing deeply in hoarse Donegal brogues, toting large bottles of cider and smooth Kerrygold butter for their mums.
I can tell, by the dialects, which part of Ireland the shoppers hail from; I have wilfully acquired a skill for accents.
And there are tinkers; grubby, potato-faced, carrot-haired children, running through the aisles, lifting packets of Smarties and banana cake.
Tonight, we are urban tourists; trespassers.
We are almost an affront, flamboyant voyeurs.
Anita wears a Tibetan scarf and high grey leg-warmers, her hair a tumble of untamed curls.
Gemma is glamorous as always, her lips a large pucker of blood red, her hair a shock of bleached white-blonde, her legs fish-netted and mini-skirted, high Doc Martens on her feet.
I wear black.
My hair is platinum, like Gemma's but shorter, finger-curled.
If I had the courage to grow out my hair and take on the streets without frill or face paint, bangles or heels and all such accessories of fear and vanity, then I would be seen far less and see much more.
But I have no such courage.
It is not enough for me to explore, to retreat graciously into the dust and floorboards of those exotic places.
I have to be noticed, appeased or approved of.
And yet, I know that I am cheating.
I settle on a place called the Cow's Lip.
It is a corner pub with two entrances, painted red.
In front stands a group of Irish Countrymen (Culteys Crilly calls them) wearing faded caps of rust and plaid, holding pints of Guinness to their chests.
The first thing that catches my eye is the mural.
Painted directly upon the wall, it takes up almost the entire pub.
It is an ambling Irish field painted in broad, sweeping shades of green; a rich green for the trees, a lighter green for the grass.
A farmer bearing a sack toils in the field, his martyred face half blocked by his cap, a sedentary cow in his tow.
The sky is of a rich sea blue that is almost grotesque in its fullness of colour, broken only by an indignant stream of clouds piping up in the distant horizon.
In one corner, a tired traveller plays the flute beneath a willow tree, his cheese and ale spread out before him on a handkerchief.
Gemma, who is an art student, gapes at the mural.
‘How awful,’ she says.
‘Shut up,’ I say.
‘I mean, it's so awful it's wonderful.’
Gemma is stark in the middle of the crowd, her shoulders slightly stooped.
I oughtn't snap, I think.
I buy drinks for her and Anita and myself.
Anita orders a Guinness and I am proud of her.
The Cow's Lip is divided into two parts; the front has the mural and stage, and a pool table off to the right, and several scattered booths stuffed with groups of locals who seem to have grown from their tough wood benches, like the clustered branches of an ancient, overgrown tree.
They hover together in their crowded safety, their tables littered by empty pint glasses rimmed and dripping with the foamy froth of leftover lager, and ashtrays overflowing like untidy clumps of ashen moss.
The locals are men and women, generally older, their bloated flesh spilling histories of things I do not know.
To the right there are darts; the dartmen and their flooding flannel trousers, stooped and intent.
I have seen it all in my very own Camden often enough, but it is new to me somehow.
Perhaps the mural makes it new, so shamelessly bright upon the wall like something spilt, and the restless assortment of weekend patrons who watch the stage with agitated and expectant eyes.
I wonder what they are watching for.
The musicians are innocuous enough; three middle-aged Irishmen with  somber and kindly red faces, playing gentle Irish tunes, meeting only the faces of one another.
When Gemma speaks, a woman flinches.
I see her.
A lank-haired, wild-eyed, ageless woman with a body like wire and a shapeless tunic.
I think she is very beautiful.
Gemma suggests we go to the back.
But I refuse.
We stand in the clearing amongst the watchful  eyes, the listless, standing bodies, still sober and milling about us.
In the event of a fire, we could not make our way out.
This brings to me a strange solace.
The crowd clears.
I see people who look very young, clad solidly in khaki; the girls in khaki dresses, their costumes tidy and generic like girl scout uniforms.
They wear straps across their chests and square caps.
One girl cannot be more than twelve.
She holds a drum.
All at once, we are surrounded by men.
‘Where are you coming from tonight?’
‘Camden.’
‘And before that?’
‘America.’
‘Where in America?’
‘Los Angeles.
But I was born in New York.’
‘Ah, the East.
Well.’
Gemma is not so fortunate, being a Londoner.
But she is so pretty, they forgive her for it.
Anita keeps her mouth shut, and lets the lads gaze at her fine dark features which have the look of something ethnic about them.
I am enjoying my own attention; a carpenter in a large mustard sweater, and a sweet-faced young lad with glasses.
He knew Bobby Sands.
He knew Frances Hughes.
He tells me about them.
The band is good.
They play ‘The Green Fields of France’ and ‘Carrickfergus’and ‘Don't Forget Your Shovel if You Want to Go To Work’.
As patrons pour into the pub, the band becomes louder.
Our suitors have to shout just to get our names.
But I am tired of my voice, I want to watch the band.
The khaki scouts sprout in number, appearing from nowhere.
They do not only make their way through stuffed and  clamoring doorways, but emerge from the unseen bowels of the pub, as though they have held themselves privately for days in the cellar, waiting with bated breath, presenting themselves only as the hour grows ripe.
There are more drums.
And flutes.
And whistles, not played but  held snugly in their arms, like babies.
Between each song, a chant pushes up like a hushed inhale, murmuring from a hesitant corner.
The scouts lead.
‘The Brets.
The Brets.
The Brets oot noo.’
I turn to the carpenter.
‘They have Scottish accents.’
‘Aye.’
‘But why?
You're all Irish, aren't you?’
‘I'm from County Clare meself.
But you'll be finding quite a few of the Scots in here tonight.’
‘Really?’
The carpenter nods.
He is pleased by my ignorance.
The chant starts again.
Louder, this time.
‘The Brets.
The Brets.
The Brets oot noo!’
By this time, the pub is so stuffed with people that I daren't take a deep breath.
I am hot.
I take off my jumper and stand in my tank top, sipping a whiskey I have been bought.
On the stage, the Scottish scouts form an even row behind the three piece band.
One boy, a child, begins a steady drum roll.
And then a drum march.
Loud.
Scouts of both sexes begin to march, in place.
Tookatookatook.
Tickatickatick.
Tookatookatookatookatookatookatook…
Anita is  enthralled .
She speaks.
‘Is today some kind of holiday?’ she asks sensibly.
‘In a way,’ replies a striking young man of white, white skin, black hair, black eyes (black Irish and he's lovely).
‘Today is the anniversary of the Derry slaying ‘72.
Bloody Sunday.
Today is the anniversary of Bloody Sunday.’
And now for the march.
I caress my naked shoulders.
One of the scouts, a woman, comes forward and plays an Irish bagpipe alongside the band.
And then the chant.
Everyone says it now.
‘The Brets.
The Brets.
The BRETS OOT NOO!!!’
The carpenter tells me about the Khaki scouts.
They are the Scottish Friends of the Irish Republican Army, on an anniversary jaunt to London.
He introduces me to one, a man called Graham.
‘Bloody Sunday,’ Graham confirms.
‘Good, isn't it?’
‘Yes,’ I nod, a trickle in my pores.
‘Welcome to London.’
The march grows stronger.
And the pipes.
And the chant grows louder.
The sublime back section merges itself with the boisterous front and all is similar.
The families, once sedentary, are saying it.
Standing and saying it and facing the stage.
It can be heard down the entire High Street.
I am sure of it.
I think of the bobbys, oozing down the street like thick jam, and I hope they can hear it as well.
Graham puts an arm around my shoulder and swivels me until I am staring squarely at the stage.
I join in.
‘The BRETS.
THE BRETS.
THE BRETS OOT NOO!’
Anita does not chant, but she does not stir, either.
She smiles.
And stares.
Gemma nudges my shoulder.
‘Claudia,’ she says.
‘I think we had better go.’
I shake my head.
No chance.
My feet tickle with the marching rhythm.
The music rips inside my ears and deep in my gut.
‘THE BRETS.
THE BRETS.
THE BRETS OOT NOO!’
This is a perfect place for me, I ponder.
I am young.
I have nothing to surrender.
I could give it up and go to Belfast.
I will grow my hair out to its natural colour until it falls long and lank about my shoulders, allow my skin to fade to a startling winter white.
I'll occupy a windowless room in Divis Flats.
Throw stones at the British army from a fortress of council cement.
Sell posters from an outpost of the Sinn Fein bookshop.
Find a coal-eyed, muscular Provo with a set jaw and angry brow, and  make love to him.
Hide.
Fight.
Get the Loyalist bastards out of our land.
The chant  perserveres , and so do my feet.
I chant loudly, to be heard.
‘THE BRITS.
THE BRITS.
THE BRITS OOT NOO!’
Of course, I will not go.
I know this.
But I love the feel of the magic march, that raw repeating thing that strikes beneath the bosom, rippling through my voice and body, strumming all my toes…!
‘THE BRETS.
THE BRETS.
THE BRETS OOT NOO!’
Don't stop.
perry and isabelle
Ah, Perry and Isabelle.
Feline.
Tall.
Skin like an elephant's tusk, and thick black hair pouring dogged and heavy on sharp, square jaws, stubborn mouths, those dark and even features.
As children, Perry and Crilly neighboured in a row of dwellings near the mental hospital.
Crilly took me to the old town once; it was a sooty place just north of the city, bordered by cakey cliffs and a greasy sliver of sea and a forlorn lighthouse jutting into the grey Irish sky, flashing blurry and red through the low clouds, omitting a lackadaisical moo only from time to time.
I liked the town, for all its drab and muted calm; it seemed a safe place to be.
The houses looked like shambling tents of black straw, their terraces devoured by the glutton of rot, their roofs low and sloped as though faintly hovering from some old and finished war.
Together, Perry and Crilly committed endearing and devilish acts; climbing to the ceiling of the asylum chapel to ring the chapel bell at precisely the wrong time, loitering upon the roof of the geriatric ward in pursuit of fat blue-winged pigeons, throwing craps in front of the Sinn Fein bookshop.
At the age of sixteen, Perry shot to his full height of six foot three, and his face, formerly hard and squinty and square, became stern and still and beautiful.
To look at now, he is a spark of unreal; his eyes a most violent green, his skin a shock of white beneath the moorish black of his hair, but to listen to him is to hear yet another city boy, a Dublin lad, sprung from a family of twelve, none of whom resemble him but speak exactly like him, even his sisters.
In his teens, he learned to drink and swore an allegiance to the pint.
He condemned Crilly for his hash, and once went so far as to yank a steaming thick spliff from Crilly's hand and toss it down the lighthouse cliff.
Not two years later, he was dealing smack in Ballymun where he met Isabelle at an unlikely pub near a client's flat.
He was instantly taken by the oozy Frenchness of her and the fact that she looked so much like himself.
She was a student of some sort, I don't know of what.
He sold her heroin and they fell in love.
They flew to Bombay the following spring, encased a two-grand package of smack in six Tibetan Buddhas and shipped the load to England.
On their return to the United Kingdom, Perry was searched and questioned at Heathrow.
He was sent to prison on the Isle of Man.
Isabelle stayed in London and found a job as a nightclub hostess in Soho, taking monthly trips to the Isle of Man and sneaking gear to him through credibly sealed packets of Twiglets.
He stayed in prison for one year.
I meet Perry for the first time at the Starry Arms in Kentish Town.
He wears a silvery trenchcoat falling to his knees.
It speaks to me, his coat, of high cliffs and low pavement and black December skies.
He is poker-faced and icy-eyed.
I think he will not be friendly, until I gather the nerve to talk to him and ask him — in a friendly way — about prison.
‘Did you get clean?’
I ask.
‘In the beginning?’
He says sure, he was clean all right, and the screws left him nothing but a shit-soiled bucket and two aspirin to sort himself out with.
But he relented at the sight of Isabelle smiling and bearing gifts, his Continental dream.
He says that he is clean now; Issy and him have been off the stuff for five whole days.
‘But aren't you dealing?’
I ask hopefully.
He has to make a living.
I breathe a sigh of relief and pleasure.
Crilly sidles in beside me with two double shots of Jameson's.
Perry fixes his gaze onto Crilly's; I am hurt that he has forgotten me so soon.
But then, he gestures to both of us, inviting us in.
‘Youse comin'?’
We go in my car.
Perry directs me down to Euston Road and forgets to mention the turnoff, causing me to make a rather dangerous and illegal U-turn at King's Cross.
I don't mind.
Eventually, we reach the council estate, which is shaped like a square C and ominous in the absence of lighting (the bulbs having burnt themselves out of lamp-posts scrawny like some thing starved).
Perry leads us up the unlit stairwell, the smell of urine sharp in our nostrils.
On the rail of the terrace overlooking the car park sits a small tinker boy, his ginger hair matted with dirt, and his face plump and spotted by soot or chocolate.
He concentrates on a derelict American car beneath him, which is without wheels and a windshield.
He holds a soggy triangle of chips, the grease seeping through the paper.
Though he cannot be more than five or six, he wears a man's anorak, badly zipped and uneven, a heap of purple fabric tilted to one side and a small freckled shoulder bare on the other.
He turns to face us and smiles when he sees Perry.
I am touched by his childlike affection and I half expect him to call Perry ‘Uncle’.
‘Oy, Romeo Bullocks,’ he shouts, ‘ye seen Shane tonight?
Ye goin' op te’ Heroes' Arms?’
‘No, Christy,’ says Perry, ‘and why ain't ye got to bed?
Where's your auld dear?’
‘Fock knows.
She's op te’ Heroes, I ‘tink.
And ‘tey won't be letting me in tonight.’
'Too bloody right,’ says Perry, ‘te’likes of yourself will lift everything tat ain't nailed down.
You're only a baby, besydes.’
‘I'm fockin' not.
Ye’ tink you're sometin' bot you're only tall.
I seen Shane tonight.
He's squatting te' flat at ground floor.
His mum's moved te' cat in and a snake into te' bathtob!’
The boy grins wildly.
His eyes are huge.
‘Is tha’ right, Christy?’
‘Aye.
And te’ ting is, when Shane takes his bath, he don't botter to move the snake out of te' tob!’
We share a hearty laugh, and ascend the final flight.
‘He's a rogue, ‘tat one,’ says Perry.
‘He comes in te’ flat sometymes, nicks cigarettes from right under me nose.’
‘He's cute, though,’ I say.
‘Aye.
I suppose he's cute all right.
Too fockin' cute, if you're askin' me.’
‘No one 's askin' you, Perry,’ says Crilly in a jocular tone, ‘and where's your fockin' keys?’
Crilly's own accent broadens in the presence of Perry.
‘Look at you, Crilly,’ I say, nudging him, ‘you're a real Jackeen.
You'd better dig your Flann O'Brien out from behind the radiator.’
‘Shut op,’ says Crilly.
‘What the fock do you know, Yankee pigdog.
Ye tink you're some major aut'ority on te Irish race?’
He turns to Perry.
‘She thinks she's a radical 'cause she's been to West Belfast once and scribbled Bernadette Devlin's name in pencil on the Falls Wall!’
Perry opens the door.
‘Well, it's more than most of ‘tem ever fockin' do.
And tha's includin' our own.’
‘Not at all!’
Crilly grabs my waist roughly and pulls me towards him.
‘She's a pretty face is all,’ he teases.
‘Aye, I wouldn't argue wi’ tha.’
I am in a good mood now.
Crilly leads me into Perry's flat and seats me beside him on the orange settee.
The sitting-room is small and close with an electric heater that has been left on.
‘Isn't that dangerous?’
I ask Perry, staring at the hot orange coil in its metal box.
‘Aye, I'm always meanin' te shut it off when I go out, but I keep forgettin'.’
‘You're gonna burn yourself out one of these days, Perry,’ says Crilly.
Perry sits down and unravels six tiny envelopes, cut of magazine paper, on the low coffee table.
‘It wouldn't be te’ first toyme,’he tells us.
I watch his hands.
He pours five envelopes onto one flattened paper square, and hands the sixth to Crilly.
‘You got any foil, Perry?’ asks Crilly.
Perry motions to his right.
Crilly makes for the kitchen.
‘And will you bring me works as well?’
Perry calls, ‘and put te’ water on!’
Crilly returns three minutes later with a roll of aluminium foil, a spoon, a syringe, a box of kitchen matches and a mug of boiling water.
‘I couldn't find the Vitamin c,’ he declares.
‘I've got it in me pocket.’
Perry produces a small bottle of vitamin c from his trenchcoat.
He prepares the works, while Crilly arranges the foil for us.
Again I think of Christmas: the wrapping of gifts, of Larry's parents' house on Christmas Eve, presents strewn like polished stones, tinsel draping the tree like angel hair pasta, the fabulous grand piano and the window looking out on Fifth Avenue, Ella crooning from a discreet speaker in a cosy nook.
I watch Perry's eyes narrow as he handles the needle, his coat still on.
He does not so much sit as squat upon the rug, kneeled over the low table as though in prayer.
‘See them boys at te’ Rose and Crown?’he asks Crilly, ‘tha fockin' Pete O'Callaghan.
Gobshite ‘tinks he's a rock star cause he's roadie for Paul's band.
Keeps nattering about some demo he decydes is gonna make it for him.
Yeah, he's a rock star sure enough, wit’ his guitar in hock, his ugly mug juttin' out every which way.
He's a promising specimen of a star till they find the needle up his elbow.
And he tinks he ain't usin'!
Always goin' on he don't have a fockin' ‘real’ problem!’
‘He told me he was going into treatment.
In Dorset or somewhere,’ says Crilly.
‘Aye, he's always sayin' tha’.
Last week it was Norwich.’
Perry taps his needle for air bubbles.
He begins to sing, in a distracted and toneless voice:
…as I was goin' over, te' Cork and Kerry mountains…
A key turns in the lock.
An elegant and weary young woman appears at the door, dressed in a short maroon cocktail dress, her eyes slightly smudged by old pencil, her hair loose about her shoulders.
Perry introduces me to Isabelle.
She regards me with suspicion, but when I hold out my hand, she takes it.
She greets Crilly coolly and takes her place on the floor beside Perry.
Real twins, I think.
And both wearing their coats in the stifling smelly heat of paraffin.
I think she will kiss him, but instead she pushes up her sleeve.
‘I'm exhausted,’ she says in a low voice, her accent seriously French.
‘Will you let me?’
Perry stares at her for a moment, and then examines her arm.
‘You're bruised as anyting.
Give me your hand.’
I am so intrigued I forget about Crilly, who is ready for me with an unwrinkled surface of silver, the smack neatly concentrated into a lump.
‘C'mon Jez,’ he says patiently, ‘melt it down.’
I take the tube and have my first puff and lean back upon the settee, my eyes closed, my legs spread slightly.
Crilly follows me back and kisses me, drawing the residue smoke from my mouth.
‘Do you want me?’
I ask him after he has kissed me, his face hot and close.
‘I want you something immense,’ he says, ‘and I love it like this, when we both feel the precise same way.’
He pulls back and lights his own.
I sit up and examine the room.
There is a tiny black and white television on an orange crate.
The walls are painted an avocado green and they are uncovered, but for a caricature sketch of Isabelle above the television set.
There is one narrow window, sticking shut from the inside with paint and nails.
A chair of grey-flecked green, fabric missing from both arms exposing splintery wooden posts, remains unsat in.
The  coffee table is a vinyl-surfaced thing bordered by a formica frame of yellow and lime flower designs; it reminds me of Tupperware.
The ceiling is low and a mustard colour, though dry rot has seeped through and chipped most of it away, leaving whitish, gaping blisters.
A faint smell of cabbage wafts from the flat next door.
An underfed black cat settles, unnoticed, at Isabelle's side.
I look back to the works.
I have never seen them before, so close.
Except in films.
Perry and Isabelle are arguing.
‘You know that you cannot do my hand,’ says Isabelle, ‘they will see it at work.
Do my left arm.’
‘I'm gettin' tired of this, Isabelle.
I'll do your arm, but don't be complainin' if it fockin' well hurts.
You're lookin' more like a battered wife every day.’
‘This is a lie.’
She is right, she doesn't, though when I catch a glimpse of her left arm, her bruises are pink and prominent, crawling the length of it like squashed insects.
Perry taps the needle one last time, taps her arm for veins and injects the syringe into a bruise.
Isabelle grimaces.
I can look no longer; I bury my face in Crilly's shoulder.
I have never liked shots.
As a child, I had to be held down to get my flu vaccination.
Crilly laughs and puts his arm around me.
‘You don't have to look at them,’ he says, consoling me.
But I look again, in time to see the needle fill with Isabelle's blood.
Isabelle leans back, takes her coat off, smiles and shuts her eyes.
When she opens them she smiles at me.
‘Crilly's told us so much about you,’ she says.
‘It's nice that you came around tonight.
I understand you're at art school.’
‘That's right,’ I say.
‘Are you interested in art?’
‘I am more into film.
In Paris I was very involved with a production company of Sabinet.
They are sort of an avant-garde organisation of documentary and film verité.’
‘What did you do?’
‘A bit of everything, really.
Acting, cinematography, you know, whatever was around.’
‘Isabelle, if you won't do me I'm doing meself.’
Perry is sulking, thrusting the needle in her face.
Isabelle shrugs amiably as though to say ‘boys will be boys,’ and shoots Perry up easily in the top of his hand.
Crilly hands me the tube.
I take another puff, give Crilly a blowback, gaze happily about the room.
‘I'm glad we did this,’ I say to Crilly.
‘I'm really enjoying myself.
And they are so beautiful, and so much alike.’
Crilly snuggles close to me.
We gaze at the other couple as though we were watching cinema.
Perry has taken a generous hit from his lover and is now nodding off.
Isabelle nudges him and his head falls forward over the coffee table, tips of his hair brushing against the largest lump of heroin.
‘Arrête, idiot!’
Isabelle hits him and he jerks up his head, his eyes wide and glassy.
The lump is more or less intact, though crumbs of it stick to Perry's fringe.
We are all relieved.
‘He always does this,’ says Isabelle, by way of apology.
‘Nobody's perfect,’ I say.
Isabelle watches as Crilly takes a burn, and lights another one for me.
‘You are wise,’ she says, ‘to do it that way.
It is very disciplined of you.’
‘It isn't noble or anything,’ I say.
‘I'm just afraid of needles.’
‘You are lucky,’ Isabelle says.
‘I am in love with the needle.
But today, I don't have a very bad problem.
Perry and me have been without it for five days before this only on methadone.
Tomorrow, I will not be sick.
It is so nice, like this, to finally socialise with you.’
Perry has fallen asleep, his long body stretched across the rug and floorboards.
Isabelle throws him a maternal gaze.
‘Are you going to France again?’
I ask.
‘Yes, I am going to Provence in the summer.
It will be good for me.’
Isabelle's lids grow heavy and she falls over, her head cocked to one side.
Crilly is also nodding, but at the tinny thud of Isabelle's needle striking the floor, his eyes grow big as though he has lost something.
He kisses me suddenly and hard.
‘Let's go,’ he says.
‘Have you got the envelope?’
I ask, feeling adult at last, the responsible wife.
‘What's left of it.’
‘Will there be any for tomorrow.’
‘A little.
Come, Jez.’
At the door I turn and look at Isabelle, who is half sitting up but asleep, her maroon dress neatly buttoned, her hair shiny and unmussed, her lips relaxed and full, her head heavy and turned to one side, her eyes glazed slits of half-slumber.
‘She's so glamorous,’ I say to Crilly.
‘God love her.
She doesn't like me,’ he whispers.
‘Why not?’
‘She says I'm common.’
We put on our coats and shuffle out the door, leaving Perry and Isabelle warm and asleep in the glare of the paraffin heater.
the back room
Larry, my stepfather, was tired of off-Broadway plays in creaky old theatres that nobody ever came to see.
He was wary of deodorant adverts.
He wanted a career.
He landed a part in a high drama cop show called Bobby, the Assassin and Me, and we moved to Los Angeles.
They bought a Spanish villa rooted into the hillside at many levels, a house rumoured to have been built for Rudolph Valentino.
Mom gave birth to a baby boy, and called him Winchell (not after the doughnuts, though the association would later cause him grief at school).
Mother cut her hair short, wore high Italian heels as always, and co-produced a television film.
Larry knocked down the partition wall between the dining-room and the kitchen.
He got a small part in a hospital drama.
Mom's film won an Emmy.
Larry's hospital drama was off the air in six weeks.
Mom produced another film.
Larry lifted the sticky brown carpet, sanded down the hard wood floors, stripped paint from the high beams in the living room.
He got a new series.
It failed.
He opened a French restaurant in the Westside.
It showed promise.
Daddy feared I would not be properly looked after.
He thought my mother was a shrewd and bloodless Hollywood mogul.
He told his friends.
He wrote her a letter.
He moved to Los Angeles to be near me.
Soon, he was co producing a soap opera with my mother called Chicago Suite.
The soap was wildly successful.
Larry did guest shots on it occasionally, but mostly, he cooked.
Daddy bought a house in the Hollywood Hills, not  half a mile from my mother's.
It was a stark and modern slab overlooking the city, sporting a salubrious entrance with a brass-topped stairwell.
He married his accountant's daughter in a hotel room in Las Vegas.
They bore a child and then another.
Carol was a short, tight shouldered, emaciated woman with a high peroxide wedge of hair.
She wore a blusher with flecks in it, and blue eye shadow.
Her voice was a sharp, high squeak.
She had a Long Island accent, though she came from Fresno.
She quit her job as manager of the Automoto Insurance Company.
As her second child grew within her, she convinced my father to branch out on his own, leaving my mother behind.
His second, ‘solo’ soap, a Southern Dixie drama called Salamander City, received an outstanding citizen award from the President of the United States.
Carol was proud.
She decorated the house with great big marbled leapfrogs, two matching ones at the door.
In my father's house, I took the back room.
It was not so much small as rectangular, with a low ceiling, two narrow windows and a slab of aquamarine industrial carpet, firm to the touch.
Through the front window lay a sprawl of hills, but the window above my bed butted the neighbour's garage.
The neighbour, a fifty-ish Iranian stockbroker, designed a mock-Disneyland moat on either side of his house, with spiralled gates and towers of purple and yellow, like a miniature golf course.
I slept facing north.
Upon awakening, I was stirred by the muted chug and hum of the neighbour's Cadillac.
The thing that struck me most about the room was its symmetry.
A set of steel shelves backed the north wall, upon which propped a full desk unit: a tidy slab of bulletin board, an empty roll top desk with a formica surface, and a pencil sharpener.
On the opposite wall, a print was mounted; an austere graphic design, white and grey to match.
The room was painted in a cool shade of dusty grey; Wedgwood grey, a hint of blue, a matching bedspread upon the bed.
I do not remember  how or where this decor was chosen.
Upon recollection, it seems to have been there when the house was bought, though I know it isn't so.
I liked it once; it had the clean, easy authority of my father's office, and I felt it was a place in which hard work could be done.
I would write a story on my new Smith-Corona; I would draw a host of painted women with my new ‘complete’ collection of Pentel pens.
I was twelve.
I did none of these things.
I dug my father's old short stories out from beneath the roll top desk and read them.
They were unpublished stories, filled with the plight of his affairs: an art student, bundled in the winter snow and as bright as Easter, a girl, really.
She was called Mandy and she met us, once, at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, bearing books for him, candy canes for me.
He wept over her in Central Park; he said to me, when I was nine, ‘My heart is broken’.
Our sadness was immense.
We spent the rest of the week at the cinema, stuffing ourselves hotly with popcorn so oily it stained our clothes.
I remember Mandy well; her tapered nails, the fragrant neck, that just-in-out-of-the-cold feel to her fingers, the festive bob of her hair.
She reminded me of my mother when I (or she) was very young; the perfume upon my mother's neck when she leaned over to say goodnight, a pearl of jade clinking warmly and lightly upon my chest, Mommy on her way to the Village Gate, to meet some dark Europeans, to catch an excellent set of jazz.
I read the story many times.
There was another woman called Helen.
She dropped cans of root beer all over my feet in the subway station; one broke and splattered and dampened my toes.
The affair did not last long, but he got a short story out of it.
‘It's worth it,’ he said to me once, ‘if you can write about it.’
Sometimes I asked about these stories.
He shrugged them off as he would soft core porno.
He said they were the self-indulgent ramblings of a patches-on-the-elbow peasant, and who the hell did he think he was anyway?
Now, he wore expensive grey suits, relinquished all  pipe smoking, and drove a BMW.
He still liked Irish music; I liked his liking, the exuberance of banjos duelling through the hollow bedroom walls when he was home.
I read Seventeen magazine.
I ate chocolate Zingers snuck into my school bag after school.
I did not throw the papers away.
They accumulated beneath the television until they threatened to be seen, at which point I smuggled them out of the house in my knapsack.
I don't know why I kept them for as long as I did.
I lived in fear of their discovery, and yet I kept them.
If someone had wished to find them, they could have.
But no one did, or at least, nothing was said.
Each morning, I made a list, in coloured pens, of the things I would do that day.
1.
Begin diet.
2.
Go to school.
3.
Come home from school — do all of homework.
4.
Write a short story.
5.
Eat dinner.
6.
Draw.
But…there were tacos and pound cake from the school catering truck, a eucalyptus tree in the park at recess to nap beneath, reruns of old sitcoms to watch in the evening.
One day I would sing torch songs in Rio, write five best-sellers in London, have no children, or live in a brownstone in New York, all by myself.
Life was a grid of stucco through which the cliches were sought.
I lived for the cliches, I awaited them.
Homework was irrelevant.
I couldn't do it, couldn't bring myself to turn the pages of my notebook.
Too many pages had already been unturned — it was too late now.
Marcus, a senior with a smooth black face, drove me home from school.
He was always late starting.
He loitered in the parking lot, pleasantly bemused by the coquettish chatter of  juniors who courted him.
He drove his car (a BMW, used) in a quick, staccato rhythm in time to an 8-track cassette of the Doobie Brothers.
Carol did not let me have a key of my own.
In contrast to the prairie-like flatness of the structure, a grand gold and white awning prefaced the house.
I climbed the high stairs breathlessly as though there were many more of them than there were.
The bell was loud and clear as a chime.
I rang, sucked in my stomach, adjusted my knapsack (already tattered and heavy with the weight of unread textbooks, crushed pound cake and dull-pointed pencils).
I listened for footsteps.
I forced rhetoric into my head: be nice and friendly, volunteer information about school, ask if you can help in the kitchen.
In that order.
She answered.
Her hair was stiff and phosphorous, a dome-like wedge.
Her eyes were heavy beneath streaked green lids.
I spoke.
‘Hi.’
She said it too.
She said it barely.
Hi.
Her sound was but a squeak, a mumble.
She retreated into the kitchen.
Resisting the temptation to take refuge in my room, I deposited my knapsack and followed her, holding my breath, staring straight ahead.
‘Did you have a good day?’
The kitchen was a foreign place, and always; centred by a cutting board, formica shelves the colour of butter and wicker, low ceilings and no windows.
I stood at the doorway, waiting.
‘It was all right.’
Carol busied herself with dishes and paper bags.
There were always groceries, and her baby lay sleeping beside her in a cushioned basket, wicker like the shelves.
‘What did you do?’
‘Oh, nothing special.’
‘Such as?’
‘You know what I do.’
I didn't really.
‘Well, did you buy a birthday present for Grandma?’
‘Yes, I did that yesterday.’
Her words were brisk, like the beak of a bird, and nasal.
‘Can I watch a video?’
‘Wait until your dad comes home.’
Stand up straight, I said in my head.
Improve your posture.
Ask her why.
‘Can't I watch one now?’
‘I would rather you waited.’
Her eyes averted, downcast.
‘Why?’
But I knew why.
I was not allowed in the master bedroom without supervision.
This was one of Carol's rules.
I was also forbidden to answer the kitchen phone before she did.
I knew that she was operating on a matter of some principle, something basic and territorial, something she had been taught, perhaps.
I pursued it anyway.
I waited to see her face tense as if it was an airtight balloon on a stick; never mind that it made me choke somewhere in my chest.
It gave me the impression of having worked for something and, once defeated, I could take my comfort in the cool blandness of the back room.
At least I had tried.
I wanted to say, I know there are no genuine secrets in that room.
Your room.
Your master bedroom.
The room, the master bedroom, was a dark, meticulous chamber of matching pillowcases and flesh-toned carpet, floral prints on the wall and a bedspread to match, identical bedside tables without drawers, a wardrobe of tall discretion, a VCR.
My own mother's bedroom was a bright white gallery fronted by an old Mexican balcony overflowing with fuchsia and courting pink wildflowers.
An oil painting of shocking reds, bought from an obscure Peruvian painter, cried out from above the bed.
The bed occupied a high platform of stained pine.
There were  mirrors and a bovine settee of turquoise and, adjacent to this, an array of handmade metal shelves, varying in size, sloppy and cosy with books, and an antique radio-lamp to glisten yellow and red in the evenings only.
A ‘Poor Pitiful Pearl’ doll, once belonging to a great-aunt, draped from a high shelf.
And there were more books.
And a cassette deck crooning the blues and Bach.
Only that.
My mother's room was teeming with secrets.
I wanted to tell Carol.
Real secrets, they were: the knotted bag of marijuana and zig-zags in Larry's rickety old night table, a forgotten wad of Italian cash at the bottom of a dusty cat-jar, the dildo in the underwear drawer, several adult videos.
(I watched the videos once, because they were rated x, but I found them terribly dull, and the leading man looked like my girlfriend's father.
I told my mother, and she agreed.)
I was always allowed into my mother's room, despite the secrets.
Or nearly always.
Once, in a rare burst of temper, Carol said, ‘Your mother didn't want you, she tried to abort you.
And why wouldn't she?’
I retorted, she isn't Catholic.
Carol's kitchen was silent but for the hum of the refrigerator.
Why did she never listen to music?
Didn't she hear it, the drone, the hum, that awful, teasing, dreary hum?
I didn't dare to ask.
My stomach knotted and queasy, I posed but one last question.
‘When is my father coming home?’
At around seven.
Always at around seven.
Dragging myself down the unlit hallway floor like a slug, I coiled myself back, back to the back room, and ate and waited.
Though the back room was officially ‘my room’, I began to hate it.
I spent hours there, evenings, days, late nights.
Years.
Listening to AM radio.
Trying to memorise the top ten.
Reading Seventeen from cover to cover; making lists of the fall fashions and vowing to buy them when I was thinner, older.
Sometimes I phoned my mother.
‘Could I come home tomorrow?’
I would ask.
‘I thought you were staying till Friday.’
‘Maybe I could go home tomorrow and come back on Sunday.’
‘Well, ask your father.
What's she like today?
Is it awful?
What's she wearing?’
‘Oh, the same.
Mommy?’
‘Yes, honey.’
‘Can we have a dinner party for my birthday?
With all your friends?’
We could.
She would ask Joe and Mary and Stanley and Clarice.
And she would bake a chocolate mousse torte.
I stalled, saying, ‘Mommy, I want to go home.’
She said she knew; ‘Baby, I know.’
There were sounds in the background.
Infant Winchell babbling.
The sizzling of Larry's huge kitchen grill.
Larry talking to a friend.
Cutting up arugula.
Mom had to go.
I hung up the phone and wondered who else to call.
Sometimes I called her back.
Sometimes I held onto the receiver without putting it back into its cradle; distractedly, I held it, with Kool and the Gang wafting from the radio.
When the radio began to grate, I turned it off and spread myself out on the bed, using the knapsack as a pillow, and then when it got too sharp, making dents in the back of my head, I took it away and lay flat.
I failed to turn on the light when the sky grew dark and heavy.
Twilight threatened to swallow my sight; I did not dare to defy it.
At dusk, there was only the news.
I sat and listened, to the radio which was not turned on, to the television whose volume was mute, naught.
I sat and tried to hear, waiting for the sound of my father's key in the lock, when I could emerge from the back, into the front, maybe, the dining-room.
But now, as evening dust blackened the room, and my loose black hair pressed dead against the sheet, I lifted my hand and looked at it.
There was nothing else to do.
I watched my fingers fade before my face.
pamela watkins
They say that Pamela Watkins is an English rose in denial.
Any attempt she makes to obscure her femininity backfires with absurd vengeance; there is no refuge for that face of hers.
Though I am envious, I would never think of competing.
I accept that whatever good looks I may possess are artful, concocted at large by paint and persona.
In truth, I suspect that I am bland.
At times I enjoy my plainness; it is young and puerile to me in the bathroom mirror, the mirror that steams from my bath.
I do not feel competitive with Pamela as I do with other women, because Pam, in her unwitting splendour, is not pretty as other women are.
She is not coquettish, nor is she glossy or pristine.
I have seen old pictures of Pamela; I have seen her pretty.
I have seen her in hats, in high boots, in fishnets, in stilettos.
I have seen snapshots of her arms extending cigarette lighters, her lips painted seamlessly in China red matt, each eyebrow plucked and lined with one rich stroke of a black pencil, false lashes on her eyes, ‘twinkle’ blue kohl beneath and drawn at a tilt.
I've seen her looking Greek, Egyptian, Japanese.
Now she wears nothing but the same thing, and always.
Her trousers have no heritage that anyone can define.
Her boyfriend found them in the back of his van, abandoned by someone months or years before their discovery, and they have collected chocolate stains from half eaten Minstrels and white smears from Quaker oats.
They carry with them a distinct smell of metal, tar and petrol.
Pamela washed them once and will not  bother to wash them again until they are saturated with her own smell, not a bad smell, made up as it is of tea, musk oil, turpentine and taramasalata.
Pamela is a sculptor, the sort that wittles her nights away until interest is shown in her work, at which point she abruptly withdraws.
Once it is forgotten again, she resumes her work in the spartan room allocated to her by a local co-op.
Through the years and a mess of assorted lovers, four changes in location and layers of silt (from art and carpentry) which cling to her pink and olive skin like something tropical, she has succeeded in relinquishing prettiness.
She turns up at plays and concerts with her baggy man's trousers belted at precisely the wrong curve of her hip, and her hair loose and slightly oily.
On her face she wears only a slash of red lipstick smattered across her mouth in brazen defiance of the rest.
Breezing by on her bicycle which she rides all the time, she appears as a sort of escaped young refugee, from Poland or some Dickensian work camp.
But there is no concealing her.
For all her industrious androgyny she is more beautiful than ever.
I have seen Pamela standing amidst fair and nimble-limbed Continental women, raven-haired leggy nymphets ten years her junior, and those local platinum finger-waved blondes, well-primped and perfectly petite; and still, they are outdone.
Whenever she attempts to dress herself, in the event of someone's wedding, she scours my wardrobe, giggling girlishly at herself, throwing off her garments as though she is a small child trying on school clothes for a mother or aunt.
I help her.
I paint her face and do her hair.
When she is finished and suitably stunning, regally stunning, I am disappointed.
She lacks the bare surprise of her own real features: the solid cheekbones ruddy with tiny veins in the cold, the wideness of her mouth, the black slant of her eyes, the strong patrician nose.
Shameless, is her face in its unaided solitude.
One evening Pamela comes alone to my flat and speaks of Nigel.
They have had a row.
She hit him and he held her head in the toilet bowl while eating tomatoes on toast.
The irritating thing is, he could not be bothered to put the sandwich down during the whole scene, and when she surfaced, she found his lip dripping with tomato seeds.
Disgusted, she went out and had sex with a sixteen-year-old boy in the unlocked bathroom of a neighbourhood squat party.
Nigel was annoyed, but he also found it funny.
They borrowed a car and drove to Cornwall, though between the two of them they were virtually penniless and had to make do with beans on brown bread for the entire weekend.
Their borrowed car collapsed in an anguished brown heap by the coast.
It is still there.
The owner, a Texan woman called Joyce, is far too besotted with both Nigel and Pamela to possibly object, and seems lackadaisical about retrieving it.
It is only ten o'clock.
The pubs have closed; our friends will not yet be at Paprika's Cafe.
We stop for passion cake and fried bananas.
Paprika's is a tiny restaurant whose walls are covered in extinct record covers (Julie London, Vicky Carr), menus which have nothing to do with its own, candid photographs of mouths and patrons eating.
We sit against the wall, beneath a slogan reading ‘Rescue My Foot’ which has been spray-painted not by a patron, but by the owner, Abel.
Abel is a fortyish man with round unblinking eyes and a perfectly circular head.
He manages several local bands and runs a private record label called ‘How Many Buses’.
One of his bands are at the Paprika tonight; they are called Dance Lance and they consist of three limber, head-shaven, androgynous boys who all knight themselves with the same name, which is Ron.
Ron One goes nowhere without his cat, Stepson, on a tartan lead.
Ron wears a kilt, a pair of orange Day-Glo tights, heavy green military boots, a pink macrame tank top and a yellow trenchcoat.
He carries a Star Wars lunch-box in which he keeps old tube tickets, cigarettes, make-up and money.
Abel plays with his overwhelming sound system; on bounces a heavily tampered cover of ‘Dancing Queen’, cut intermittently with a Scottish rap.
Ron Two, who is more effeminate than Ron One though less wildly dressed, stands on a table.
He likes to sing along.
‘You can sing!’ he shrieks, shaking his hips.
‘You can dance!
Having the time of your life!’
We laugh.
We love the Rons.
‘Christ,’ says Pamela, good-naturedly, ‘do you think we can have a few more poofs in here?’
Ron Two winks at Pam and continues to sing.
Ron One sits down beside us.
He tells me he is soon to release a single on his own.
I am not to tell the other Rons.
We finish our cake and plantains, and start on the wine.
When I have finished my meal, I roll a joint.
Stepson, a short-haired cat of some unaccountable breed, jumps up beside me on the seat.
The smell of hash is strong.
Abel comes running out from the kitchen.
‘We have to be careful,’ he says, sitting down, reaching for the spliff.
‘Here.’
I put the joint in his mouth.
He relaxes and tells me about a new band he is producing.
Occasionally the police drop by to complain about the noise, but they do so only after midnight, and they fail to notice the incessant smell of dope, sharp as burning leaves.
One time, during a late lock-in at the Paprika, I ran to the car to get my cigarettes, and saw my friends through the Christmassy frost of the window: silhouettes dancing, milling about and smoking; the cone-shaped joints, most unmistakable in their size, dancing from hand to hand.
A policeman walked by, wished me good evening and ushered a warning.
It was about the strobes.
‘You want to watch those strobes luv,’ he said, ‘they'll give you amnesia,’and walked on.
We leave the Paprika.
It is not cold.
Pamela suggests that we walk down the Prince of Wales Road to the Aegean Sea.
The Prince of Wales Road is dim for stretches, lit solely by  broken yellowed ovals falling deftly from tall street lamps onto scarred pavement.
We pass the desolate grounds of a school, fenced in by barbed wire and patches of trodden grass.
We pass a council estate and a forlorn shop which seems to have been carved into the ground level of the estate.
An elderly Indian woman in a sari is closing up and bringing down the grated gate.
The road grows bright at the Mother Shipton pub.
From within, I catch the trill of a Pogues song.
The song feels right, apropos to a midnight jaunt, a walk with a good friend.
It stays inside of me.
As I walked down by the riverside one evening in the spring Heard a long gone song from days gone by Blown in on the great North wind Though there is no lonesome corncrake's cry of sorrow and delight You can hear the cars and the shouts from bars and the laughter, and the fights May the ghosts that howled round the house at night never keep you from your sleep May they all sleep tight down in Hell tonight or wherever they may be…
We are craving wine and baklava.
The Aegean Sea is a Greek restaurant which stays open till three a.m.
The pubs have closed, and it is crowded.
We find seats in the front section, at a table shared by four Irishmen, diligently engaged in an inebriated medley of Beatles songs, improvising their own lyrics.
Six Middle-Eastern businessmen sit sternly to our left, over a bottle of retsina and three plates, messy and strewn with  houmous and broken pitta.
Behind the counter, the fat Greek chef stands in good stead, his apron cheerfully stained, a generous plate of souvlaki in hand.
He is always there.
When he sees us, he smiles in recognition.
The restaurant clogs quickly into a cosy fire hazard.
The clearing swarms with secretaries and punks, locals and junkies, chatting, sweating, awaiting a beer or a meal for the road, but in no real hurry.
At our table, one of the Irishmen has fallen asleep, his head collapsed in a puddle of beer.
A big-boned, red-haired Irish woman tears through the crowd, stands squarely in front of us despite pushing from all sides and glares down upon us, her gaze steady, her freckles flushed.
She throws down an empty glass, just missing the head of the sleeping man.
The glass does not break.
‘You're not me fucking father, right!’ she yells at the sleeping head.
He does not stir.
She yells it again.
‘You're not me fucking father, right!’
Nothing.
She turns on her heels and tears through the crowd once more and out the door.
The others gaze after her in a casual way and resume their Beatles medley.
‘Claudia,’ says Pamela.
‘Why don't you sing for us?’
I take a sip of wine and begin to sing.
Of all the stars that ever shun, not one does twinkle like your pale blue eyes…
They all know the words to this one.
The sleeping man lifts his head and sings along with his friends.
…
No matter where I wander I am haunted by your name The portrait of your beauty stays the same sailing on the ocean wondering where you are if you'll return again where is the ring I gave to Nancy Spain…
Pamela laughs.
‘You're a hero, Claudia,’ she says.
She's right.
I know all the words.
When we emerge from the restaurant, it is late.
We are tired.
We catch a mini-cab and share it back to Kentish Town.
We stop at my flat first.
‘Do you want to come to a Finnish film festival at the ICA tomorrow?’ asks Pamela.
‘Sure,’ I kiss her and run into the house, for by now the air has turned crisp and cold.
I fall into bed without taking my make-up off.
The ‘Nancy Spain' ballad reels round in my head even in sleep.
Soon, there is pounding on the window, the pounding of the Rons, Roger and Simone, Crilly and Pamela, who has had a second wind.
I am almost too drunk to hear them.
But not drunk enough.
crilly
My North London flat is filled with neon.
I collect it from a dusty shop in Hackney run by tall Italian twins.
I like the desert green for the cusp of the evening, Caribbean pink for the smallest dot of night, yellow, white and red for post-pub crowds.
The ooze of blue and blues.
The pulse of pink.
The bass of red and reggae.
What is this place?
Pedestrians might ask one another.
A cafe?
A nightclub?
A brothel?
No, it is my home.
Hash is abundant; I keep a steady supply of Moroccan in a Japanese basket on the mantelpiece.
It is my social catalyst, a lump of oil by which to lubricate the scenario that is my home, clamorous, everchanging, unhumble.
Without the brown lump, I feel inadequate as a hostess, abbreviated in my domestic duties, incomplete.
There are the quiet, maudlin times: injured parties, slighted lovers, Chet Baker playing to serenade them.
There are nights of anarchy: friends of friends and rivals in my home, rowing couples, drunken hooligans who sometimes break the neon.
I invite anarchy as a rebuttal to my greatest fear: the fear of isolation or even worse, the fear of mediocrity.
I do no productive work; I never really go to art school.
I sing in a band, from time to time, a woman's band, sort of a makeshift bossa nova affair, though not one of us can play a thing and we always need help from the boys.
We have a laugh.
I take stock of my bodies, my friends.
I am holding court, lady  of the mansion.
You can sit where you like as long as it isn't in this chair, this armchair, my armchair, the one with the dancing balls splattered loudly across its back and arms, across its stained and silver gut.
Live bodies are strewn restlessly about the flat, hands and eyes in ashtrays and record discs, tangerines and Rizlas, magazines and carpet and kebab wrappers, delving into the laps of one another, sparring opinions like rubber balls, reconciling in smoke and stereo and wide, generous laughing things.
I first meet Crilly on a crowded Thursday night in my local pub.
We smoke a joint in my car.
He is smartly dressed, deeply-voiced, handsome.
He talks to me about Ireland, about the troubles.
He is angry and dark, but courteous, with a heavy concerned brow, hot and engulfing hands, a paternal smell of brandy about him, a stern and steady timbre to his voice.
He is aggressive and kind.
Friends warn me about Crilly.
They admit he is charming, but fingers point to his eyes as warning signs, demonic pin points.
I tell him if he harbours any ideas about staying with me, he'd better kick the gear.
He doesn't argue.
He agrees.
But before he does, I add as an appendix, ‘Won't you give me a taste?’
He averts his eyes at my request.
He refuses, as any gentleman would.
Later, when I ask again, he is silent and I can feel him relent.
I ask again.
He gazes about the living-room, and he says it belongs to too many.
He is tired of competing with my friends and their heavy leather jackets, cramped into my floor and furniture, and those clankish guitars, owners unknown, propped unsteady against the table.
Bits of spliff, a comb that is not mine, Bukowski books belonging to no one, stuffed up in a pile beneath the telephone.
This is one thing we can share in solitude.
Give us a taste, just once, and then we'll live like monks  forever, in a tapered bed and a kitchen that smells of Pine Sol.
Give us a taste.
On our next date, he has gear.
Feigning fatigue, we urge a baffled party to evacuate before the witching hour.
Crilly sets me up with a tube and foil.
He runs the match beneath while I hold the tube in my mouth, in the light of the desert green neon, with Billie Holiday oozing from the stereo.
‘Just follow the smoke,’ he instructs, ‘and hold it in.
Keep holding in no matter what.’
There is a syrupy peace in the hollow of my chest.
Everything is filled.
I have never been so happy.
I go into the bathroom, vomit easily, and return.
I am elated.
And Billie singing her blessed heart out like she never has before.
And my wonderful blessed friends home and safe in their respective blessed beds.
And the handsomest Celt on earth kneels before me while I sit snugly in the big armchair, the best armchair.
Again.
And again.
Crilly, I have never known a man like you.
Tell me more.
Tell me about Bobby Sands and your mother.
Do it and do it more.
Claudia, oh Claudia, you are so beautiful.
My mother was gruff but she loved us.
My sisters dressed me up in their dresses and paraded me down the road and we listened to Van and I learned to love Van.
You are so beautiful.
I am so lucky.
It is like you're not even real.
I'll tell you, Crilly, about my first trip to Scotland and the men in chip shops who call you ‘Hen’ and the lads wearing green Celtic scarves at lunchtime and broad pointy-horned cattle and graveyards macabre with the tilting of tombstones caked with moss and weeds, sheep grazing and weaving amongst them, and a coastal fishing town in Harris where a night sky shimmers only to itself and I am without friends from, the real world and I listen only for the sound of the tin whistle while the boats rock gently in the jetty and the sky rages from beige to black and craggy  mountains dart until forever and a fisherman stands, stunning and alone, strong and unnamed, and leads me slowly into that everchanging sea.
I'll tell you about Penny Lane, my tiniest youth, I was tiny, so tiny, too tiny to spit on, and my friend Chock who lived in the bathroom radiator, hissing low inside my head, shrivelling at the clink of my mother's heels in the hallway, holding his breath, whispering, a lady is coming, dancing to the plaid of the bathroom tiles and to the records my father played; and the first time we heard ‘Penny Lane’, we knew we had heard it before.
There was a tapered garden on a hill, before those houses in a row, and though I did not understand reincarnation, I knew, he told me, about a narrow road smelling sweetly of petrol and roast potatoes, and though I'd never been, Chock had been, it was only across the street but I couldn't see it, he could see it, he told me so, and pointed to the ornate roof across the street, at the chimneys springing from a platform like stalks of green marble, the roof framed by edges intricately ribbed like steeples or the currents of the sea.
A pretty nest is selling puppies, he said, and sang to me of a nest (not nurse) from which puppies are hatched and sold, and there was a fireman and pedestrians with raincoats and walking-sticks, strolling the length of the roof as though it were an avenue, with a bright barber shop perched upon an antenna whose rust I couldn't see.
I did not know England.
I did not know Liverpool.
I knew Penny Lane and it was, alas, enough Crilly, and when my father came one day and asked what I was looking at, I said Penny Lane and he stood for awhile and looked for awhile, while the roof held its breath it seemed and then he said, after all that standing and all that looking, he said, ‘You're right’, and hoisted me up upon his shoulders.
I'll tell you about Ryan Buck, fifteen years my senior, an ex-felon, an actor, my first, though my mouth was raw with the  metallic taste of braces fresh on my teeth, and my features were like crooked, accidental things.
He wore a red bandana and drank white Russians and quoted Kerouac and spoke loudly in superlatives and sang along to the radio in a shrill and grating soprano.
His body was rich with the smell of sweat and kahlua and he sent me sprawling and hyper with untold hormones upon the bathroom tiles, but one day, suddenly, actually it was night, parked atop Mulholland Drive with the car windows steamed and the upright stick shift pressing painfully against my lower back and my head banging against the passenger door, I was paralysed by the heaving horny heaviness of him and my climax was full and first — first time ever — but followed by a limpness in my body, dull as the shade of putrid beige, and later I dreamed he had invaded me in sleep and crushed me with his broadness and with pillows, though Crilly it was not suffocation I feared, no, it was something more abstract, more bodily and carnivorous, something akin to nameless reptiles, and it was not so very different from the gun and the windbreaker blowing large and puffy about a stranger's gut like a tent in my car at Pico Boulevard, and I so sure I would be found dismembered and crotchless and gory and absurd, strewn from limb to limb across the green tweed upholstery, unrecognisable in death, and again the windows steamed, the windows steamed with that hot clenched nameless fist inside me and the glide of cool metal against my neck, and then there were no thoughts, no words in my head, nothing.
Crilly, I'll tell you about the sparkle of Belgravia, the shimmer of white marble, a sumptuous, salubrious white, the sugary white of fluffy friendship, cloudship, feely white, and the slim cobblestone road which led to the river where I met James who was fresh from Waterstone's with his arms full of Pinter plays, O he was as a young Terence Stamp, Crilly, but for the sly cracks of wisdom about the corners of his eyes, and we drank espresso and  he told me about Spain and the high mountains of India, and the Pyrenees he had taken on foot, and though I was as trite as my shopping Saturdays and my small muggy and squirming palms in summertime, he painted my body swirly-lined and peach upon a large canvas and made love to me upon the tip of the Heath with all of London a basin of rooftops beneath us while the sky loomed low in grey and pink, the Heath a dark pudding of sloping mountains, wild and white and wide as Brontë country, with only the smug suburban cliffs of Highgate Village peering from behind its sprawling hem, and big dogs scurried like brown birds to the crevice of foothills and then disappeared, so we made love for a while beneath that sky, which cast a blaze upon us the colour of cream.
I can't talk now I have gone so limp and languid and sugary with my flesh stretched and itching, so Crilly carries me to bed.
He tends to me as one would a convalescent child delirious with a terminal but ticklish illness; he tends to the outermost hazards of my body (he is so violent and so tender) and back to a cave of foetal musk, molested by warmth.
The light of day will soon be superfluous; and just as soon, it will frighten and appal me.
I don't care.
I stay with Crilly.
At last, I stay.
dublin
One damp evening late in autumn, Crilly receives word of his mother's train wreck.
The train, en route to a religious pilgrimage in a place called Knock, was derailed by a solitary cow and tipped onto its side.
Siobhan, Crilly's mother, bashed both of her legs in the accident, though this did not keep her from crawling to the aid of those more severely injured than she.
She saved a friend's arm and a cousin's handbag.
She is now in hospital in Dublin.
I watch Crilly after he has heard the news from his sister, Megan.
He sits on the bed for twenty minutes, sweating and smoking.
Presently, he asks if I will go with him to Dublin.
I say I will.
The following day is spent in preparation; persuading my bank manager to extend my overdraft, procuring a letter of transference from Geraldine at the methadone clinic, gathering supplies for the journey.
To contribute to our funds, Maggie gives Crilly two hundred tabs of acid to sell in Dublin.
My car is clamped two hours before we are to leave for Holyhead, though lifted within the hour, after much persuasion and a torrid sobbing session at the clamping office.
I return haggardly, as though I have been in a street fight, grotty from rushing and weeping and random taxicabs.
The sun is setting.
Crilly has procured six 20 bags and, in a burst of generosity, Perry donated a 200ml bottle of methadone to our cause.
We smoke the first bag, throw a heap of indiscriminate clothing together and set off on our long journey to Wales, our bodies leaden and our lids heavy.
Still, I am excited.
A journey.
A motor trip.
The sameness of yellow road lights, shaped like faucets, flash black flash upon the desert of the motorway, and then, the bit where the road goes dark, where there is no light at all, but for the torch-like eyes of our own headlights.
I have made similar journeys many times, with Anita: left London at four a.m., arrived in Glasgow by midday.
We sang songs and ate foam-tasting cinnamon pastries at gaudy roadstops, in places shaped like bugs with high modern bridges above the road.
Granada.
Rank.
Trusthouse Forte.
This journey is a little different; boats and maps and the challenge of getting there.
And I have never been to Ireland.
As Crilly cannot drive, I ply myself with junk food and coffee, preparing myself for the wheel.
The car is shaky as a tractor, heaving with the warning groans of broken parts, the rev of an angry engine.
The night is clear but very black.
Crilly falls asleep, much to my irritation.
Without his attention, I am martyred to the wheel.
We reach the Welsh border in five hours, but soon lose our way and travel thirty miles in the wrong direction, during which we are stopped by the Welsh police.
I shuffle through the glove compartment for my registration, MOT and insurance papers.
The policeman is civil and he lets me go, commenting on my eyesore of a car, warning me to get my tail-light repaired.
I charmed him, I say afterwards.
Crilly sleeps.
I know I'm on the right route when I spot a bus marked ‘Pensioners Touring Kerry’.
Crilly wakes and tells me about when he was little and slept in the same room as his father, while his sisters slept with his mother.
He awoke one morning with his eyes glued shut from condensed cigarette smoke; his mother had to prise them open with solution.
He tells me about the day his father died of liver failure; Crilly was only five.
He was not permitted to attend the funeral, and three older neighbour children were appointed to look after him.
But, through a  tawdry heap of bushes, he watched the procession and the bare wooden coffin lifted by altar boys.
He tells me of the only time he has seen his mother drink; her infant grandchild vomited on her coat, and she spouted a fine, volatile performance, screaming Christ Almighty the cross a woman has to bear, taking the Lord's name in vain for the very first time.
When sleep threatens to take him from me yet another time, I remind Crilly of a line from the film Drugstore Cowboy, in which the heroine says, ‘You never fuck me and I always have to drive’.
‘But I do fuck you,’ reminds Crilly.
‘Frequently.’
I can't argue with this, but I urge him to include driving lessons in his New Year's resolutions.
I want to share the wheel with him, to feel his power behind it.
I want to be languid as he steers, to navigate with my hands and eyes free.
We reach the port twenty minutes before the ferry is set to sail.
It is one-forty in the morning.
In the muted streetlight, Holyhead is almost picturesque, with whitewashed sandstone cottages and the rippled shine of the moon upon the harbour.
We buy our tickets and drive onto the bottom level of the boat, which reeks of fish and steel and human excrement.
We ascend the stairwell and buy drinks in the ferry lounge which is a wide, low-ceilinged room lavish with yellow and orange.
A huge fluorescent butterfly-shaped tube of rotating yellow and orange lights beams from an adjacent wall.
We sit.
Much to our confusion, the entire boat crew is Polish and speak scarcely a word of English.
A muffled announcement is made over the loudspeaker.
The accent is too broad to understand.
(It is later explained to us that as Irish workers are on strike, a Polish crew has been assembled.)
The boat sets off.
We stuff our faces with scampi and chips.
(The scampi is dodgy; later I will throw up in the smelly boat toilet.)
An all-Polish ensemble, dressed in loud pantsuits of  yellow and orange and red, performs ‘Girl from Ipanema’ and other Latin favourites on an electric piano and Day-Glo drum set, before the electric butterfly.
One old Irish couple slow-dances alone.
They dance for hours.
Or rather, they do not so much dance as cling to one another, rocking drunkenly with the tide.
The woman has bleached orange hair and a shapeless tweed skirt; the man wears a rust-coloured suit and a bawdy fifties style tie, and a top hat.
We are their only audience.
We watch in silence.
At one point, at some point, very late, the old man breaks away from his partner, and spins easily on a shiny patch of yellow floor, his long arms folded to his sides, not dancing at all now but simply spinning, spinning, for quite a while.
It is four a.m.
‘Look,’ says Crilly, ‘he's gone freelance.’
The Polish-Latin musak band continues to play.
To our left, an Irish family of six eat salmon-paste sandwiches without speaking.
We sleep.
We sail into Dun Laoghaire at seven a.m.
The car queue is not long and I am excited by the welcoming signs in Gaelic.
We drive to Swords and pick up a key from Crilly's sister, Lorraine, who occupies a small semi-detached house with her husband and her two children.
Lorraine is tall and neatly-featured; her tone is dry and caustic.
She gives us a cup of tea at the kitchen table.
She says that Siobhan will not stop asking after her Marks and Spencer coat, which was abandoned in the wreck.
I can barely keep my eyes open.
I cry.
We sit in the living-room for half an hour while members of the family drift by, sleepy-eyed, preparing for work and school.
Lorraine's elder son puts a Guns ‘n’ Roses cassette upon the stereo.
Crilly and I look at one another.
We are so awfully tired.
Eventually, Lorraine tells us the way to Siobhan's new house.
We thank her, get lost in Swords village and finally find it.
Crilly tells me that his mother has worked all her life to pay  for this house.
It is small, smaller than my flat, and tidy, purpose built, near the airport.
It has a modest kitchen in the back, and a sitting-room partitioned on either side by wood-panelled doors, frosted windows at the top of each.
The first thing I feel is cold; it seeps into my skin, soaks my limbs.
Crilly drags the electric heater into the sitting-room.
We huddle together on the brown carpet, between the beige and brown walls.
The sickness of morning is already upon us, unaccustomed as we are to being up so early.
I suggest we have a burn.
There is no silver foil, so Crilly sets us up with an empty chocolate wrapping from his pocket.
We smoke a bit of skag, feel better and nod off on the tweedy settee before the heater.
We are not due to visit the hospital until six.
Siobhan's bedroom is empty but for the pink carpet, a bed with a pink bedspread and a chest of drawers rattling vacantly from some obscure, whining wind.
A Sacred Heart of pink and maroon stands serenely upon one wall, reflected in a small square of mirror upon the other wall.
The room is very cold.
We huddle beneath the covers, but to our dismay, the one duvet is but a slim pink layer of fabric resembling a furniture cover.
I fetch another from the guest room.
Crilly reaches for me but stops himself; we are in his mother's bed after all.
We fall asleep instantly and do not wake until five-thirty when Crilly's sister Megan phones, instructing us to meet her at the hospital.
Crilly and I have a generous burn before leaving the house.
I shower quickly, spend some time painting my eyes, and select an attractive outfit to the best of my ability, given my makeshift twist of clothing.
I settle on a simple cotton dress, black, and a pair of dangling earrings.
I put my hair up, belt my waist with a red suede sash from Los Angeles and pencil my lips a deep red.
When Crilly is impressed by my appearance, I am also satisfied.
I have not dressed myself up for some time.
It is gratifying to find that I can not only look good, but I can look respectable too.
Crilly wears a smart blue shirt with the buttons done to the neck  and a pair of Italian trousers stolen from a shop in Covent Garden.
He shaves, washes his hair and borrows a modest silver stud for his ear.
Sufficiently stoned but not unreasonably so, we stand before the bathroom mirror, marvelling at the crisp clean surfaces of ourselves and one another.
‘We forget how good looking we are,’ says Crilly, and though his remark is meant to lift us, it makes me sad.
Palled by the bleak, dusty nooks of outer Dublin (my mother told me once that eventually, in some parts, all cities look like Brooklyn, and I'm beginning to see her point), I expect the hospital to be yet a stranger place.
But the shock of white corridors refreshes, as do the nurses and strangers milling about, both the sick and the visiting, a comforting sight after our lonely day of dreamless sleep.
I strain to hear clips of conversation; I long to hear Dublin in their voices, to feel that I am really here.
I hear it often enough at home, but there is something vital about the brogue within its native walls; it makes me feel there is no ethnicity, no affectation, no accident about it.
It's difficult finding Siobhan.
I don't mind.
I enjoy the clink of our heels on linoleum, the perplexity of lifts and maps.
I gaze about myself as I go, glancing through open doorways into clean white wards where patients sit erect in their beds eating trays of stew and potatoes, watching television from swivel sets on the wall.
Crilly doesn't feel the same.
His body stiffens as we reach the ward, St Patricia's, fifth floor.
Siobhan has her own room.
The door is open.
Crilly takes my hand and leads me in.
At first I cannot see her for the heaps of people about her bedside, brandished with packaged sweets and magazines and flowers of white and purple.
Siobhan is wide awake, sitting upright in her bed.
She is a pretty old woman with pure white hair and clear blue eyes, and skin that crinkles only slightly about the mouth and corners of her eyes.
She wears  a pink robe.
Her legs are covered.
She complains cheerfully as we enter saying, ‘Jaz I've never had so many people kissin' me in all me life, strangers and all, you'd tink I was in Italy or England or America, God forbid!’
Crilly kisses her.
I think better of it.
Her eyes are wide and curious upon my face, as though she knows the very name of me even without introduction.
Yet Crilly moves aside and introduces me.
When I extend my hand to her, she looks to Crilly before taking it.
I am suddenly nervous.
‘Rory,’ she says to an elderly man sitting to my right, ‘give the girl a chair now, won't you!’
I protest, but Rory leaps from his seat and I am obliged to fill it.
I sit and fidget like a child.
Siobhan embarks upon an extensive list of introductions.
Rory is her second cousin.
Frankie McCauley, a broad-faced man, is the local butcher.
John and Sarah Walsh are neighbours from the old neighbourhood.
Stevie and Patsy Mulligan are the sons of a dear friend who has recently passed away.
Father Moore is only a brief visitor; he has called in crisply to pay his respects, exchange a few words of banter with Patsy (also a brother-in-law of somebody), and to inform Siobhan that next year he will be personally heading a pilgrimage to Knock so as to ward off any unfortunate flukes of the road.
He leaves shortly.
Siobhan identifies me to everyone as Claudia Coe, Crilly's girlfriend from America.
Crilly stiffens again by my side, asking after other women who have been in the crash; he knows them all.
Siobhan offers a story for each, and though the stories vary, her tone stays the same.
‘Ah, Bernadette Kennedy.
Her body's intact but her mind's amok, though if you're askin' me, I'd say that was nothin' new.
‘Sally Dee Kavanaugh.
Lost her arm but not her life, well lucky I'd say, given her position when the cattle hit.
‘Ah, Theresa McCresh.
That one wasn't so lucky.’
Crilly congratulates his mother on the purchase of her new  house.
The older men in the room are fascinated by Crilly.
They have not seen him since he was a boy.
‘I see you've taken to wearin' that jewellery in your ear,’ says Rory.
Siobhan scoffs.
‘Ah Jaz, he's has that ‘ting done for ages!’
‘Are you workin' these days, Crilly?’
Crilly shakes his head.
‘I take what comes along.’
‘By the look of your hands now I gather what comes along is good and scarce for you.
Did you see the hands of your boy, Siobhan?
Woman's hands, I tell you!’
Rory laughs heartily.
Siobhan smiles to be polite.
‘Well, Cousin Rory,’ Crilly retorts, ‘some of us here use other means to work with besides our hands!’
Siobhan gives a good laugh this time.
Her laugh is the same as Crilly's.
‘O and Jasus, he's pickin' up a bit of that fancy Brit language!’ pipes Patsy, motioning to me.
‘You must have trained him well!’
‘But I'm American.’
‘Ah yes, America.
What part of America are you from?’
‘California.’
‘I have a cousin there.
In Orange County, I believe.
Joey McNamara?’
‘I don't know him.’
‘Tank God for that.
He's a miserly character, that one.’
A slim, smartly dressed woman appears at the doorway.
She looks very much like Crilly, though her hair is cut and tinted like a soap opera actress.
She is smooth-skinned and pretty, with a small nose, even lips, large green eyes, much mascara.
Siobhan introduces her to me as Kimberly, her eldest daughter.
Kim shakes my hand and tucks her briefcase behind the door.
Her accent is gentler than the others, and her words are clipped as though she was schooled in England as child, though I know she wasn't.
‘How are you getting on, Mum?’ she asks.
‘Ah I'm not too bad.
They've got me doin' lift-up ‘tings for me  legs.
As I was tellin' the others, by the time I leave, I'll either be fit or dead.’
She laughs.
Kim gives a formal smile, brushes her fringe from her face.
She turns to face Crilly.
‘Well, it's been a while.’
‘Aye.’
They embrace stiffly.
The other visitors leave in a clump.
Siobhan cringes visibly at those who kiss her cheek.
It is just the four of us now.
Kim gives me a smile of allegiance.
‘How exotic you are,’ she says.
I blush, though the compliment pleases.
The door bursts open again, with a kind of clatter.
A tall, broad-shouldered Amazonian woman towers above us, a sweet-faced, blond-haired man in her tow.
‘Crilly, by Jaz, me dashing broter.
Will you look at yourself, ya’ posh bastard!’
She throws her arms about Crilly's neck.
He reciprocates, beaming.
‘What about you, Megan.
You're lookin' grand.
Your hair is so long!’
‘Aye, I'm a real woman now.
Will you say hello to Peter?’
Peter shuffles to the fore, takes Crilly's hand, pats his shoulder.
Megan pushes to the edge of Siobhan's bed.
‘How are ye’ Mam?’
‘Well, as I was tellin' the others, I'll either be fit or dead by the time I get out of here.’
‘Rubbish, you're strong as a harse, I tell you!’
Megan's jaw is strong, her cheekbones high, her eyes loud and blue and busy.
Her tawny hair falls to her shoulders in an even crop.
As I have heard that Kim is the beauty of the family, Lorraine the sensible one, and Megan the tomboy, I am surprised by the strength of Megan's face, the magnificent width of features, the flush of her skin.
When she looks at me, I shrink.
‘Megan,’ says Siobhan, ‘this is Claudia Coe, Crilly's girlfriend from America.’
‘I figured it out for meself, Mam.’
Megan holds out her hand.
‘Did he tell you what a bastard I am?’ she asks me.
‘Not at all.’
From the corner of the room, Kim clears her throat.
Megan looks up but does not move.
‘How're ye’ keepin', Kimberly?’
‘I'm fine.
You're looking well.’
‘Been exercisin', you know.
Twice round the block after gettin' the little ones to school.’
‘It shows.’
‘Just a little.’
Peter shuffles forth to meet me.
Relieved by his mildness, I take his hand.
Megan and Peter take us to their local.
It is a squat and arid room of swirly carpet, above a shop.
The place is empty but for the bar and three or four slightly-built lads shooting pool without words.
While Crilly asks Peter about his postman job, Megan fills me in on Kimberly's scandal.
‘When Kimberley divorced her husband and made off wi’ t' other, Lorraine and she fell out and you could say I was fumin' as well.
Tere was tree young children involved, you know.
Horrible names we called each other.
Whore.
Traitor.
Jaz I can't bear to say tem.
Lorraine never went to Kim's second wedding.
Tey still don't speak.
It's mad — even Mum's after botering w' it now.’
‘And you?’
‘Ah me? well, me, I'm neutral, you know.’
Peter and Crilly and Megan drink many glasses of Guinness.
I can't stomach it.
I like the sweet easy syrup of Tia Maria, but dread the quizzical glance of the barman whenever I order it.
‘You look like that French actress,’ I tell Megan, after I have switched to Bloody Mary, ‘Marie-Christine Barrault.’
‘Now who the fock's that?’
‘A French actress.
You look like her.’
‘Is that good now?’
‘Yes, she's beautiful.’
Megan turns to face her husband.
‘Peter, did you hear tha’?
I look like Mary Burry, what te'…what was that name?’
She turns back to me.
‘Marie-Christine Barrault.’
I repeat.
‘Aye, Marie Christiane…some film star.
The French one.’
Megan asks me questions.
‘You're from Hollywood people yourself, are you?’ she asks.
‘Well sort of.
Behind the scenes, really.’
‘But your Da' invented soap operas?
Like Inferno's Village?’
‘That's right.’
‘So why are you not over ‘tere, bein' some kind of movie star, rather than sittin' in a pub in Santry, in the middle of autumn ta’ feels like winter?’
I think about this.
‘I prefer it on this side of the sea,’ I say at last, and I mean it, though I can't quite remember which sea I'm talking about.
As we walk out to our cars, Peter shuffles in beside me, telling me about his children.
Megan pushes forward to bid me farewell.
‘You'll have to excuse me husband,’ she says, ‘he get's a bit borin' after a few pints.’
She hugs me.
‘Let me tell you, chicken.
Before I first met ye’ right, I expected to fockin' hate you.’
‘Oh?’
‘Aye, well you know, rich tiny ‘ting from those United States, all ta’ money and breedin' and such.
But in the hospital you were smilin' like and I knew I was mistakin'.
Me broter's found a gem in you.
And he's lookin' grand himself, not pinned or stoned or nuttin'.
Seems you've done a good job with our Crilly.’
In bed I lie.
‘They think I'm straight.’
‘And why wouldn't they?’
‘Because I'm not.’
‘To them you are.
You're not emaciated, you don't have track marks, you look like a million.’
‘That's only make-up.
I'm white as anything.’
Crilly turns onto his side.
‘Crilly?’
I whisper.
But Crilly is silent.
There is only one methadone clinic in Dublin.
It looks remarkably similar to the one in London; the same pamphlets scarring the walls, the hard tile floor, an old copy of Mother's World upon the table.
The patients, too, are the same; skinny single parents in stone-washed jeans, hair longish and limp with bleach, oily-haired lads in dirty anoraks, babies in prams and famished couples.
The only difference is that there are more children, children everywhere, playing with torn-haired dolls and metal trucks upon the floor and vinyl seats.
In the afternoon, we visit a friend of Crilly's from childhood.
The friend is called Bobby and he lives in a slum near the city centre.
We drive there on an empty street which is barely rubble, strewn with rusty cans that look like tankers, sweet wrappers, empty beer bottles and hordes of children shouting by the side of the road.
A brawny, brown-faced old man looks as though his face has been squashed by a rock.
He stands before our car.
‘Shit.’
I say.
The man scowls at us, slitting his eyes.
He makes his way to Crilly's window.
‘Crilly Lynch, ya’ big bastard, are ye' slummin' it or wot?’
Crilly laughs and shakes his hand.
‘What about you, Murphy?
We're after your son!’
‘You're a lyin' cunt, Crilly.
Ye’ be makin' trouble as in te' old  days, wi' yer shiny motor and yer' posh girlfriend.
Showin' off, I should imagine!’
‘Can't argue with you there, Murphy.’
‘Not ta’ I blame ye, mind.
Your man's lazin' at home as he always is.’
‘Tanks, Murphy.’
‘It's grand te’ see ye', man.
And the auld dear's chattin' to Bernice just a' te corner there.
She'll be wantin' to see ye.’
‘Aye, of course.’
At the corner we stop to say hello to Bobby's mother, a weathered woman with a big head, wearing a tartan apron.
She stands squarely with her hands on her hips the whole time, beaming at Crilly and remarking often upon the colour of the sky.
‘At least we've got dacent wet'er for ye, Crilly.
The silver sun has takin' well to yer visitin'.’
And so it has, for the broken pavement is blinding white with sunshine.
The methadone is beginning to take effect.
I think the street is very beautiful.
Bobby, gay and slender and handsome, has always lived in the ghetto.
He rents a room above a hairdresser's.
He has a trendy haircut and wears a dangling earring, but his accent is like his father's.
He is delighted to see Crilly, and extends a hearty handshake to myself.
He apologises for the mess and sets to work clearing books and bottles and brochures off the one cracked settee for us to sit on.
‘Really, don't bother yourself, Bobby,’ says Crilly.
‘No bot'er.
Claudia, you may want to be checkin' yer motor every minute or so.
Them hooligans won't spare ‘temselves for no friend of mine.’
‘They still bothering you Bobby?’ asks Crilly, concerned.
‘Too bloody right.
‘Tem bastards go on queerbashin' tirades  at every opportunity.
Lucky for me ‘tey won't touch me, as I've got me family, just down te’ road.’
‘Aye, you're family's a fierce faithful bunch.’
‘Even at fifty-five, not a soul with sense in his head will go near me Da'.’
‘He's a good man, your Da'.’
‘He's a drunkin' auld bigot. lust last week he beat bloody hell out of some old tramp all legless like and pissed over himself.
He just put it to the poor bastard.
I do like him, mind.’
I look out of the window at my car, but it is really the street I am interested in.
Identical grey tenements line the road like toothless mouths with windows missing, windows broken.
The corner is vacant but for several ancient vehicles robbed of tyres and glass, propped up on petrol cans and boulders.
Five or six teenagers loiter in front of a newsagent, drinking shandy and smoking.
The methadone is hitting hard; I am dizzy.
I warned Crilly that 40ml was too much to ask for, and I was right.
He doesn't believe me.
He is full of chat now, feeling fine, gossiping to Bobby about old friends, his eyes bright and pinned; his eyes are like twins who are also friends.
I sit down and Bobby thrusts a gold-rimmed album into my arms, in which there are old photos of Gilly, Megan, Maggie and other people whom I do not know but have heard about.
As much as I try to enjoy the album, I am overcome with nausea.
The old photos of Maggie, straight and young and demure though she looks, make it worse.
Driving home is a dangerous chore.
From the inner-city I steer shakily over the Liffey and through the cobbled streets and mixed primary colours of old Dublin, through a wide stretch of bleak, bland suburbs and onto a motorway.
The urgency of nausea brings me to Siobhan's house without difficulty and, once there, I crumble to my knees and vomit into the toilet, after which I fall headlong into bed and sleep for three or four
When I awake, the sickness has gone, but the high has remained and I feel fitter than I have done in the whole of our visit.
Crilly comes to my bedside with a neatly prepared square of foil and a tube, and I suck from it happily.
Crilly cups my face in his hands, strokes my hair and kisses me long upon the lips.
‘Who do you belong to?’ he asks sweetly.
‘You and the devil.’
‘Everyone thinks you're beautiful.’
‘Good.’
‘And so you are.
I've just spoken to Megan.
After visiting me auld dear, we'll meet the others at Kimberly's house for a late supper.’
‘Lovely.’
‘This is a great novelty, you know.
Lorraine and Kim and Megan haven't been in the same house together since Kim was married.’
‘Will it be strange?’
‘I don't know.
Accidents do funny things to people.’
Siobhan is alone in her room today, watching a documentary about English people who eat moths.
She seems lively, her bed strewn with magazines and a pint glass of 7-UP by her side, reminding me of myself in childhood, when I stayed home from school with flu, drinking flat 7-UP, eating Saltines.
Her Marks and Spencer coat has been recovered from the accident and it is draped across the foot of her bed, as though she is fixing to leave.
‘Ah, Crilly,’ she says, as we walk through the door, ‘you're late.
Jimmy Shawn was askin' for you.’
‘Who?’
Crilly sits down by the window and opens a gardening magazine.
‘Now don't be pretendin' you don't know who he is!
Paddy Shawn's boy.
Used to work at the laundry in Bonner Street.
You knew him well when you were small.’
‘Oh.
Well I'm not small, now.’
Crilly turns the pages of his magazine.
‘as if I couldn't see for meself.
Anyway, Jimmy's engaged.
To some seamstress girl from Skibbereen.
They're to be married in May in Dingle.’
‘Why Dingle?’
‘Her people are there.
They've invited you to the wedding.’
‘Yes, I've been meaning to get down to Dingle.’
‘Don't be makin' fon now!
You ‘tink you're too good for Dingle!’
‘Dingle's too good for me.’
Siobhan rolls her eyes.
‘He's sure gettin' full of London airs.
Dingle's a lovely place.
I spent me honeymoon there.’
Gilly is intent on his gardening magazine.
‘Anyway,’ persists Siobhan, ‘Jimmy's an enterprisin' fellow these days.
He's opening a co-op market in the south side.
Not that you're the least bit interested.’
Crilly does not reply.
He is suddenly a sullen youth, a petulant teenager.
I want to hit him.
Siobhan turns her attention to me.
‘Do you believe in God?’ she asks.
Crilly looks up.
I swallow.
‘I'm sorry?’
‘Do you believe in God?’
Her eyes are so clear, I cannot shuffle nor stray from the beam of them.
‘Well…
‘I stutter, searching for the words, ‘not in the strict sectarian sense…
I was raised, you know, as an atheist, or really as an agnostic…
God is…
I mean my ancestry is so confused…
I mean, I believe in some force, but we make our own destiny…
I've always been intrigued by the Catholic church, by all the colours and the candles, but I know so little about it…when we studied existentialism in high school, I felt that that was exactly  right, but now I just don't know…
I mean, such strange things happen.’
Siobhan smiles.
‘Aye, they do.’
‘I suppose…
I suppose…
I would really like to believe.’
‘Aye.’
I expect her to say more, to preach or pose a second question, but she doesn't.
She leans back on her headrest.
As we stand to leave, she takes the hand of her son.
‘Crilly,’ she whispers, loud enough for me to hear, ‘she's a lovely girl.’
We make our way down the corridor, saying nothing.
Unlike her sisters, Kimberly lives in a rural cottage twenty miles outside of the city.
We take the narrow country road and we are low on fuel.
The night is black and there are no streetlights, and I feel as though I am not driving on a road at all, but forcing my way through clotted bushes.
I am afraid of many things; that we will run out of petrol, that we will get lost amidst the velvety nowhere, that my slug of an engine will give way at last and abandon us to our own feebleness.
I am relieved when we reach the drive of Kim's house, pebble-paved, warmly lit.
And I am not too tired, not too stoned and not too straight.
Contrasting considerably from the Spartan angularity of Siobhan's bungalow, Kim's house reminds me of American homes I have seen, lavish with plum and antiques to imitate English country homes.
Handel is playing on the CD and candles are lit, and the most beautiful children I have ever seen scurry about in pink and cream pyjamas.
Kim meets us at the door wearing a shimmering dress.
Her husband, Martin, is a husky, pipe-smoking, grey-haired man with a handlebar moustache, sitting broadly in his armchair, homey and smug.
Megan and Peter crunch together on the settee, both wearing jeans and gulping glasses of wine and saying nothing.
Their own four  children are stuffed between them.
Immediately after we have seated ourselves, Kim's sons and daughters come to us like honeyed fairies, gazing amorously into our eyes and asking questions about where we have come from and would we like to see their rooms.
Martin sends them off to bed, despite our protests.
Lorraine and her husband Cal are the last to arrive.
Cal is a dark and intense-looking man, and he has a guitar.
Cal and Lorraine accept drinks, Megan's button-faced little ones slither off to watch television, and the eight of us sit drinking and lost for conversation, once the civilities of work and children and Siobhan's condition have been done with.
Kim spends most of her time in the kitchen, charting the progress of her late supper.
I am drawn to Cal's guitar, and I finally cannot help but ask if he will play a tune, something by Christy Moore.
Cal embarks upon a soporific rendition of ‘I'm An Ordinary Man’.
I know many of the words, and I sing along with the others.
When he is done, I ask if he will play ‘Carrickfergus’.
He groans at this.
‘You Americans always go for the corny ones,’ he says, but he plays it just the same, and he delivers a good strong solo at that.
When he is done, Megan requests ‘The Knock’, on behalf of Siobhan's recent fiasco.
We all know the words to this one.
At the early age of thirty-eight me mother sent me West Get up, said she, and get a job says I I'll do me best I pulled on my Wellingtons to march to march to Kiljimock But I took a wrong turn at Charlestown and ended up in Knock Once this quiet crossroads was a place of quiet prayer Where Catholics got indulgent once or twice a year You could buy a pair of rosary beads or get your candles blessed If you had a guilty conscience, you could get it off your chest…
Cal wants me to sing a song.
I refuse, but after much heckling from the others, I agree to sing ‘Nancy Spain', if Cal will accompany me.
He does, treading slowly as I am uncertain of the words though in fact I do know them, having memorised them like a nursery rhyme.
Despite my nervousness, I sing it well and receive a hearty applause at the end.
Our limbs loosened by good wine and song and the penetrating aroma of simmering chicken, we sing for the rest of the night, breaking only to eat.
I am ecstatic.
This is the Celtic family I have always longed for, complete with live fires, family feuds, squirming freckle-nosed children a-playing in the next room, suggestive sighing and eyeing between the sisters, the indisputable unity created by the sick mother/grandmother in hospital, the indisputable union of songs you always know whether you want to remember them or not.
Even Perry knows them.
Even Crilly knows them.
I flash upon my own family; the way I have to think a moment before deciding who to include in my family, whether to include the step-parents or the siblings on my father's side whom I would not know should I see them on the street, the hastiness of Mom and Larry on Sunday swirls between galleries and sushi, untapered by excess or sentimentality, busy with books and foreign films and the Sunday supplement of the New York Times, the wisdom of Ivy Leagues and schedules too dense to live by, to wake by, to sleep and breathe by.
There are no perimeters in that world that I can feel; I am a trick of their fate, peripheral, unclassy, bored.
We sing.
I could live here, I could live in this place forever, and neither here nor there would blink an eye.
It is four a.m.
Crilly is plastered.
With my help, he makes his way up the steep stairwell to the bedroom, though the covers are slacken to him and he has no hope of getting beneath them.
He regains his strength when I sit upon the bed beside him; he  reaches for me, he kisses me violently.
I recoil at the strength of his putrid breath and yank myself away, but he grabs my waist and throws me upon the bed, pinning my hands down and forcing himself on top of me.
Queasy from 40ml and smack and so much wine, his stench makes me want to vomit.
I spit in his face.
He slaps me and I swear at him, growling now, guttural.
He tears my knickers and thrusts his hand inside me, and I hit him, hard.
He rolls off me and passes out on the pillow, the smell of his drunkenness lingering like something live.
He begins to snore.
His heaving shakes the entire bed.
I retreat to the bathroom and vomit.
I stagger to the bedroom and pull out the cover from beneath him.
I leave the room and the light on, bare and ugly, just for spite.
The guest bedroom is a small room with a tiny window, and it has nothing in it but a single bed, a lamp on a nightstand and Jesus hanging, plain and formidable, above the bed, I sit above the covers, staring into space.
I do this for a long time.
I have no sensation of hours, minutes, seconds.
My head and nose congest with the smell of toothpaste and vomit.
(Even my vision seems rank like the gelling of sour milk.)
Slumber does not take me.
I see only the face of Siobhan, lovely and awake in her hospital bed, her introductions and information, her Jimmy Shawns, her Rorys and Frankie Mulligans and Patsy McCauleys, and her words, Do you believe, do you believe in God?
I see me in my shame, the horror of this hour; mascara fallout littering my face like ashes, my skin dank with the sweat of Crilly and myself, my underwear torn and hanging from my hips, and me, small and stoned and sobbing, beneath the stern emphatic white of Siobhan's cross.
search
Our return drive from Holyhead is peppered by queasy naps at service stations, the shuffle of luggage thumping at our backs, and intermittent searches for Crilly's acid tabs which have been lost somewhere along the way.
In Dublin, Crilly bought four six-foot posters from the Sinn Fein bookshop, taking up the length of the car's interior, rolling back and forth and jutting into our chins like restless pets.
They block the rear view of the road and make our quest to recover the tabs all the more difficult.
The posters shout in bold slogans in yellow and orange letters with shadowy figures of fire and guns, gunmen hovering over hillsides, burning buildings beneath.
I am secretly relieved at the loss of the acid, for not only do I dislike hallucinogens, but I fear we will be stopped, yet another time, by the police.
But Crilly says he needs the money he should have gotten for them in Dublin.
He does not fear police pursuit.
Not for the drugs, anyway.
He says we have more to fear from the posters.
Less than a fortnight ago, the IRA bombed army barracks in Kent.
Nearing Birmingham, Crilly grows maudlin.
He talks about the Birmingham Six.
It's all right for you, he tells me, with your middle class accent and your American passport.
They'd never take you for a terrorist.
Then why buy posters?
I ask.
He doesn't reply.
The drive takes twelve hours in all.
At home we make a promise to ourselves.
We will not smoke heroin ever again.
We have generous methadone prescriptions  under pseudonyms.
It is an opportunity to pack it in, to make our leap from smack to medication, from medication to cleanliness.
Firm in our resolution, we keep our weekly appointments to UCH clinic, show clean urine on our tests, and visit the chemist daily.
Crilly gets a job raising curtains at a West End theatre and I become a barmaid at a busy Soho pub.
I am functional on the methadone; I can stand to get out of bed before three in the afternoon, I write poetry and draw from time to time, and even manage to socialise a little , dining at an occasional restaurant, catching the odd play.
Things are looking up.
The shelf above the television is cluttered with empty methadone bottles bearing our pseudonyms.
I don't know why we don't throw them away; perhaps we are charting our progress.
I am alone in the flat when the buzzer shrills one soggy afternoon.
It is five o'clock in winter; the sky steams with night.
The heat is on full blast.
I am hot and listless; I wear sweats and my hair is pulled from my face with a rubber band.
I speak into the entry system.
‘It's Brendan,’ says Crilly, giving his pseudonym, ‘with the Old Bill.
No joke.’
I run downstairs.
I shove my hash and papers into a bookshelf.
I assume that Crilly has been picked up on one of his many ‘wanted’ charges and that the police are calling to confirm the address he has given.
It's happened before.
He gets off, usually.
I open the front door.
Crilly stands handcuffed amongst six policemen; only one looks older than he is.
The older one steps forward.
‘Claudia Coe?’
‘Yes.’
‘We have arrested your boyfriend, Brendan McNally, for possession of hashish and two tabs of LSD, found on his person on Camden Lock, NW1.
Subsequently we have reason to believe  that he is keeping additional narcotics on the premises and we have a right to search your home without a warrant.’
I look at Crilly.
He nods.
I stand back and let them in.
They make for the stairwell with Crilly firmly in hand, blasting upwards like stiff navy rockets.
My one advantage is that they do not know the layout of the flat.
The flat is large.
I run to the bedroom, clutch the lump of hash from the bookshelf, and lock myself in the bathroom, turning the taps on.
I flush the lot down the toilet, staring at myself in the mirror, trembling.
When I emerge, a young copper is standing outside.
‘What are you doing?’ he asks.
He has a Scottish accent.
His head is narrow, his features pointy.
‘Going to the loo.’
‘Why did you not go before we came?’
‘I didn't have to go then.
I always have to go when I'm nervous.’
The copper pushes his way into the bathroom, scrutinizes the sink and toilet.
He finds nothing.
I edge away from him.
‘Where do you think you're going?’
‘Upstairs, with my boyfriend.’
His eyes are narrow on mine.
‘How do I know you haven't flushed something down there?’
‘I haven't, I promise,’ I try to stop the quivering.
‘I'm just frightened.
I've never had my place searched before.’
‘Perhaps it would be wise to search you?’ he asks, almost politely, as though it were not a rhetorical question.
I back away.
He comes closer.
I start to cry.
The copper stares at me and speaks into his static machine, spouting some code number and a location.
‘Get a policewoman here as soon as you can,’ he says.
‘I've got a lassie here that I just don't trust.’
When he finishes with the machine, he replaces it upon his hip.
‘Come with me,’ he says, ‘I don't want you out of my sight.’
I slowly ascend the stairs, the copper behind me.
Crilly sits in the living-room, cuffed to a cop beside him, watching the others as they tear through the shelves.
My shelves.
One of them frisks a large steel ashtray and hands a roach to another.
‘There's a bit of a spliff anyway,’ he says.
The second policeman lowers it into a plastic bag.
I sit beside Crilly on the footrest.
He puts his free arm around me and I hide my face in his chest.
‘Don't be frightened,’ he murmurs, ‘I'm the one who's been nicked.
Don't cry.
I love you.
Don't cry.’
‘No whispering!’ shouts a thin, quick copper.
He's young, this one, no more than twenty, and he wears street clothes, a yellow nylon shirt.
His hair is black and parted on the side.
His voice is a shriek, high-pitched cockney.
‘I'm not whispering!’ yells Crilly.
‘Me girlfriend's frightened.
I'm consoling her.’
Another policeman, fat and in uniform, comes forward and sticks his baton between us, separating us.
He stares down at Crilly.
His moustache shines with sweat.
‘I wouldn't be so cheeky, Paddy,’ he says in a low voice.
‘You're in a lot of trouble.
You and your bird.
Though what she's doing with a thick Irish cunt like you is beyond me.’
The plain-clothed cockney sidles up to the moustached man, grinning.
‘You're more trouble than the Wogs.
You Dublin geezers are so bent, you can't even lie in bed straight!’
I wonder if they will hit him.
But their movements are narrow, controlled.
The yellow shirt looks at me.
‘Any progress with that policewoman?’ he asks the Scot.
‘No,’ replies the Scot, who is busy pulling ornaments from the shelves, examining them, breaking them.
‘None available just now.’
He holds up a wooden multi-coloured fish.
‘What's this, Spanish?’ he asks me.
‘Mexican.’
‘Very nice.
Went there on me honeymoon, with the wife.
Very hot.’
He breaks the fish in two.
The two coppers ease off and rip up the carpet.
‘Should I offer them a cup of tea?’
I whisper to Crilly.
Crilly laughs, almost.
He pulls me close and tells me to sit tight.
‘No whispering!’ shouts the moustached man.
They divide us.
Three of them stay upstairs with Crilly, while the other three ask me to show them the bedroom.
We pass through the foyer.
The Sinn Fein posters stand rolled and erect against the wall.
I flash on the special branch: sleepless interrogations in windowless cells.
Crilly is right; drugs are nothing compared to this.
We proceed into the bedroom.
I sit upon the bed, holding myself with my arms, while the coppers empty drawers, shelves, closets.
The oldest one sits beside me.
He is balding and pleasant-faced, like a father.
‘You see love,’ he says, ‘LSD is a Class A drug.
Sort of a drug felony.
Did you know that?’
I shake my head.
The plain-clothed cockney ransacks my underwear drawer, sticking his hand into bras and panties.
He finds a letter at the bottom and reads it.
I cannot remember who the letter is from.
The moustached man opens a cabinet door.
We are all silent in the face of sixty empty methadone bottles.
‘What's that?’ he asks.
‘I haven't a clue.’
My mind blanks.
The copper reads the name on the bottles.
‘Who's Kathleen McGuire?’
‘You'll have to ask Cri — Brendan.’
I hear a scuffle as the others tear down the stairs to search the study.
Crilly keeps his illegal dole cards in the study.
Five or six of them, all in a carrier bag, all under different names.
This is his primary livelihood.
I prepare myself to lose him for years and years.
‘Surely, he's not Kathleen McGuire,’ he turns to face me.
‘Are you a junkie?’
‘No.’
‘Do you smoke hashish?’
‘No.’
He leans down, squatting before me.
‘You can tell me,’ he says  confidentally .
‘Hash isn't such a big deal.
We've even tried it; the lads and 1.
Everyone does it.’
I shake my head.
‘What are you doing with all those methadone bottles?’
‘They're not mine.’
‘And if your boyfriend says they are?’
‘He wouldn't say that.’
‘Is Brendan a junkie?’
I am silent.
The moustached man leans closer.
‘I've seen your boyfriend, your Brendan, in a great many shady places.
Only it seems they was callin' him by a different name, or names even.
Brendan.
Patsy.
Crilly.
Shamus.
Paddy names, the lot.
You're American, ‘nt you?’
I nod.
‘Are you here legally?’
‘Yes, I'm a student.’
‘No problems with immigration?’
‘Of course not.’
The moustached man opens his palm, presenting me with an old square of foil, streaked with dry runs of smack.
‘I found this under the bed.’
I shake my head, I bury my face, I deny all knowledge of the silver foil.
He tells me I'm a stupid girl, that all the posh solicitors in Beverly Hills can't get me out of Holloway on a drug charge.
‘Leave her alone, Mark,’ says the fatherly cop, putting his hand on mine.
‘It's him we want.
We've got him.’
He leans down and looks into my eyes.
‘Listen, love, we're not really interested  in old foil or empty bottles or roaches.
We have reason to believe that your boyfriend is in possession of a considerable amount of LSD.
You can make things easier for us.’
‘How?’
I sniff.
‘You can tell us a bit about him.
About his friends.
We know he's a heroin addict.
Heroin's a nasty drug.
It may be no time at all before he's got you in the racket.
I wouldn't want that for you.’
The moustached man hits the top bookshelf.
‘What are all these notebooks?’ he asks.
‘They're for my writing class,’ I say.
Years before, I did telephone sex with Pamela, from a musty office in Baron's Court.
We kept records of every client, including where he lived and what his preferences were.
We kept our notes in plain notebooks bound in black.
I can see them now, standing in the middle of the shelf, amidst college journals, old diaries.
The moustached man begins to read aloud from an old diary.
The copper reads,
‘The morning is hell.
I'm too fucked up to walk.
I hate the sky.
I feel like shit.
That prick Davy Mulligan's stiffed us with brown sugar…’
He looks up at me, his brow arched in prurient scowl.
As he goes on to the next, I glance at his fingers.
I don't care about the diaries.
I'm praying he'll somehow miss the phone stuff.
The fatherly cop asks if I plan to cooperate…
‘I don't know anything,’ I say.
‘I'm in my last year of art school.
I don't take drugs.
I don't even drink.’
‘We never said we minded if you drink.’
‘But I don't.’
‘Drink is legal.’
‘I know.’
The moustached man reads aloud.
‘Mr Carnegie, Aberdeen.
Likes to have cock sucked.
Fancies being tied down by red  headed schoolgirl beneath billiards table.
Likes watching Jeanette fuck black boxer resembling Frank Bruno in airplane…’
That's the one.
The fatherly cop is disappointed in me.
I can tell.
‘That's for your writing class?’
Again, the moustached man.
‘It's research.
For an article I was doing on telephone sex.’
The yellow shirt orders me off the bed and tears through the sheets.
He finds nothing.
He brings his face close to mine.
‘The people I have to deal with,’ he says.
‘The scumbags.
The retrogrades.
The whores…
’ He turns to face the elder policeman.
‘What's the matter with you?’ he asks.
‘I don't think ‘retrograde’ is the right word.’
‘Well, what is it then?’
‘I don't know…reprobate, perhaps?’
The third copper nods.
Not to be upstaged, the yellow shirt returns to me.
'…I know you, love.
You're the worse kind of scum.
At least with your paddy, we can see the dirt.
With you, it hides beneath.
It's all very well for you, with your posh flat, your Habitat duvet.
But you, you're devious.
A liar.
You're a devious liar.’
He's so close I think he'll touch me.
I sidle up to the older cop.
The moustached man points to the word processor.
‘And how do we know that everything in this dump hasn't fallen off the back of a lorry?’
The fatherly cop intercepts.
‘Leave it out, Mark.’
He looks at me.
‘You'll be all right.
We know you're not to blame.’
‘Like hell!’ shouts the yellow shirt.
‘Her Sloanie mates will be visiting her in prison if I have anything to do with it.’
Suddenly, he is absurd to me, like something out of The Bill.
I am dizzy, it feels very late.
My eyes glaze over, my muscles go limp.
‘I don't know anything,’ I repeat with exaggerated  lethargy.
The others crop up at the door, holding Crilly.
‘We've got it!’ announces the Scot.
I brace myself for the sight of the posters, unrolled and exposed, and the dole cards.
But it is the acid he holds, a hundred tabs of it.
An open copy of Nell McAfferty lies helplessly in the doorway.
‘Nice one, Greg!’ chortles the yellow shirt, folding a bra and putting it back in the drawer.
Reflexively, I tell him to leave it; I will do it.
As fast as they came, the assembly gathers and rushes us towards the door.
The yellow shirt stops and hands me a plastic carrier bag containing the soiled foil, the roaches and the methadone bottles, compartmentalised in bags like specimens.
‘Get rid of this, love,’ he says.
‘We're letting you off easy this time.
But we'll be back.
We can get a warrant to search your place at any time.
So look after your rubbish, if you know what I mean!’
The fatherly copper smiles at me.
‘Get yourself a nice bloke, Claudia,’ he advises.
At the sound of my name I jump a little.
‘You're wasting your time with this one.’
I stand in the early darkness and watch as Crilly is bundled into the back of the red and white van and taken away, siren silent but the bright lights flashing.
pentonville
It is no surprise to me when he is caught.
With his clammy hands and his face furrowed at nothing more than the flap of pigeons' wings or the sight of a meter maid, he seemed to be waiting for it.
He does not share my talent for deceit, the agility of lies.
But I wish it hadn't been tonight, for tonight we have been invited to Gemma's house for supper.
And the flat sparkled before the rampage; a place to return to, a home for afterwards.
For beans on toast at midnight or the Late Show in bed.
Crilly never saw it so clean.
He hung his head and crooked his elbow, conceding to the cuffs, waiting for the mess to be made.
It was inevitable, I know.
We both knew.
Now that the troops are gone, I sit back on the chaise-longue, that Japanese fish-tailed thing, and close the fan beside me, blocking the street and the living-room.
I sit and stare for some time, wondering if he is sick.
He phones at nine, from the local cells at Kentish Town.
He tells me to meet him at the magistrates' court the following morning, tells me to keep away from the scumbags.
To stay inside and keep warm.
To eat something nourishing and to sleep.
Behind him there are voices, growing closer, louder; the static of a walkie-talkie, an irate officer.
He has to go now, he says.
‘I love you Claudia, I hanker for you now, already, kitten, Jezebel.
I'll think of your body tonight to warm my cell.
Christ and how I really love you.’
The words seem unreal.
Not just his words, but my own, not spoken or thought, just lingering somewhere, dormant.
Like pulses in your ear when you're so tired that your skin is pudding and all sounds are amplified and irritable in bulk.
I wonder how I am physically.
Am I hungry?
I couldn't eat.
Do I want to buy more hash, a chunky offering for my wicker mini-basket?
No, it will make me dizzy, my thinking unclear.
There's only one thing I really want.
But I don't know the dealers, other than Perry, who wastes away now in Karachi.
Crilly took care of the gear, he took care of everything.
I am as an invalid housewife, unresourceful and unknowing, who leaves business to her husband.
Waits at the foot of her bed watching Home and Away, waiting for the goods to arrive.
Waiting for something to look forward to.
I don't want to know the dealers.
They probably wouldn't serve me anyway; little rich girl on the hill, her friends ‘dabble’ in the arts and they don't take smack and neither does she, really, except on weekends.
Or so they think.
Maybe.
No tracks.
Crilly's easy ride.
O fuck.
I don't really know what they think, or if they think, or if they give a shit about any of it in any case.
I don't dare to visit the methadone clinic tomorrow.
It's too dangerous.
I'd rather be sick.
I will be sick tomorrow.
It won't be too bad; my habit is small.
Smaller than his.
A day, perhaps.
And I then I will be clean!
I thrill at the novelty.
But will I sleep at night?
I go to Gemma's as planned.
I bring a bottle of Spanish wine.
I could walk but instead I drive.
The house is newly furnished with tasteful things.
A plump settee stands against the mantel, turquoise.
A sleek, low coffee table.
Polished floorboards and a South American rug.
Three deep-seated armchairs, blazing red.
The fireplace chequered with old Dutch tiles.
A roaring fire.
I think regretfully of my own fireplace; I have not had the chimney-sweep around; it can't be  used.
It would have been so easy to have the chimney-sweep around.
Several of Gemma's paintings adorn the walls.
Great big colourful things; jubilant with primary colours.
Five or six people I've never met lounge discreetly in chairs with their legs crossed, or spread themselves upon the floor, clutching their knees.
They are from St Martin's College of Art.
The women wear short black skirts and black tights.
One has a tidy French bob and oversized silver hoops in her ears.
Another has her hair cut in a short crop, dyed a deep pink.
Her earrings are long, falling almost to her shoulders, strands of tiny men and women climbing the chrome pieces of an antique watch.
I like the earrings very much.
We eat cheese and rice crackers from a platter on the coffee table, and in the kitchen, Stewart, Gemma's fiance, prepares supper on his new sushi-making machine.
Gemma is only nineteen.
Stewart is twenty-one.
He is a talent scout.
He finds bands to dance to.
He is tall and thin with mousey-coloured hair, long on one side.
Gemma sits like a reclining obelisk with messy hair dyed a shade lighter than his, large eyes resting at an artful slant, a full mouth.
She speaks with a London accent, though her father knows the Royal Family.
Gemma is one of the few prosperous people I know in London, other than myself.
In company, we both complain of debts and overdrafts, cringing from our easy parental money.
When it is only the two of us, however, we discuss gifts we are given, exotic restaurants in which we have dined.
Stewart is the opposite of Gemma; a working-class lad from Dagenham who speaks the Queen's English.
He speaks publicly of motorbikes and holidays he will take to Australia, Borneo, Malaysia.
Aesthetically, they are a pleasing couple.
I sit on the floor beside the art student with the pink hair.
She is called Bernadette and she is from Newcastle.
Her eyes are the  keenest green I have ever seen as though they, too, have been dyed.
Her face is a perfect circle.
Her lips share the pink of her hair.
She reminds me of marionettes I have seen.
As I settle into my piece of floor, she adjusts herself and smiles at me.
‘I've heard your name mentioned,’ she says, her voice high, her accent only slightly northern.
‘Are you Italian?’ 'No, I'm American.’
'You don't sound it.’
'Do I sound Italian?’ 'No.
You look Italian.’
'Is that good?’ 'Aye!
My cousin married an Italian girl called Francesca.
She looks a bit like you.’
'I've always wanted to be called Francesca.’
'My friend from boarding-school is called Claudia.
She's American.
Is Claudia an American name?’ 'I don't think so.
It's rather generic.’
'You sound English.’
'Well, I have a bit of an identity complex.’
'You don't want to be English, do you?’ 'Not really.
I'd rather be Apache.’
'Then why don't you live in New Mexico?’ 'It's too hot.’
'You look like you could be part-Apache.’ 'No, I'm mostly Lithuanian.’
'I thought you were American?’ 'We're all from somewhere else.’
'Except, of course, if you're Apache.’
'This is very true.’
I am exhausted.
I could ask to borrow the bedroom to sleep for awhile.
Instead I ask Bernadette about art college.
Gemma comes into the room, tiptoeing to avoid ashtrays and guests.
She carries a plate of seaweed things.
We eat.
Someone called  Sebastian says that he has named the movement to follow post-modernism; it is called belatedness.
I try not to clutch my pelvis, down there where the rot is.
‘Where's Crilly?’ asks Gemma.
‘He's at Holborn Station.’
‘What's he doing there?’
‘He's going to prison.’
Silence.
I eat seaweed.
‘It's weird to eat seaweed,’ I say.
‘I've been eating it for years but it's weird.
You know when you're small, you cover yourself with ropes of it and run along the beach?
Till you get all slimy and wet?
It feels weird to eat it.’
Gemma laughs.
She is good to me.
Her friends exchange glances.
I ask about the wedding.
Sebastian says he will get it on video.
I excuse myself and stand in the bathroom and stare at my reflection.
My hair is flat, it has lost its curl.
My skin is translucent, as though it were a pond, with a straining surface of pink at its bottom.
My eyes are without light, except for the glass of the day's methadone.
My nose shines.
I want to go home.
Instead, I return to the living-room and try to think about art.
I'm grateful to sleep soundly.
I awake at seven, amazed at myself, and bathe and dress in a bright colour.
I ride the tube to Bond Street and walk easily to the courthouse.
I feel pleasant as I go, pleased at the newness of a crowded centre at a civilised hour, cleansed by the cheery flush of early morning.
At Great Marlborough Street, Crilly is tired, wearing a T-shirt of mine and short trousers he wore yesterday.
He will not tell the magistrate where he lives.
He is protecting me.
The magistrate gives him a three-week remand in custody.
The brief is a fat effeminate, dead-eyed man.
As Crilly is taken back into the cells, he catches my eyes.
He shrugs.
It is a beginning for both of us.
Cleanliness.
Routine.
I come away from the courthouse, brushing slowly through the streets, gazing at Liberty's and the Haunch of Venison Avenue.
I am without the sense of purpose that woke me so early.
My body is lazy like loose yam, but I'm not sick yet.
What is heroin anyway, but a dark shadow, a temporary respite, smoked between one and a few hundred times?
Suck on a tube and smooch a bit, talk about childhood in a sleepy voice.
Listen to the Ink Spots, watch Paris, Texas for the eighth or ninth time, shut the doors and lie back on those same damp pillows.
(The big ones, from that little shop in Tufnell Park.)
What could it be but powder, poppies?
It will not leave me too sick, it will not punish me too much.
It isn't cancer.
I'm a three-year-old who hates shots and squeezes her eyes tight at the sight of a needle.
I'm not a junkie.
My boyfriend was an altar boy.
I won't be left in ruins.
I have endured a phase of my adulthood, a crucial phase.
It's over now and I deserve a rest.
I take a taxi home.
I strip the sheets and remake the bed with bedclothes which,.
while not altogether clean, are at least fresh with the cool of  unuse .
I roll a joint and fall into bed with my remote control.
I smoke my spliff and switch on the telly; I am just in time for Neighbours.
Eventually sleep comes.
Throughout the day, the telephone rings.
I do not answer, nor do I open my eyes, but I am stirred by the relentless bleep and static of the answerphone; words, artificial like a megaphone, filtering through.
Crilly, phone me, will you, it's Maggie.
Crilly, won't you ring me, I must talk to you.
Claudia, if you see Crilly, please tell him I called.
Crilly it's Maggie; Seamus was asking for you, where the hell are you?
Where the fuck are you Crilly!
Where the fuck are you?
FUCK.
Fuck.
My eyelids flickering and  then squeezed tense.
Her voice is shrill with urgency, it riots in the dark.
I double up, thinking I am hearing policemen or overgrown schoolchildren running amuck at recess, throwing their arms like darts, swords.
I waver inside of her voice and inside of her name.
My head throbs.
I cannot tell whether the phone has stopped ringing or not; at some point I think I hear a ring louder than all other rings, and a voice, not Maggie's voice, but another voice, a woman's voice, a slow Scottish accent, asking and begging for Crilly.
But I am not sure.
I fall through shades of black and red and wonder if I am dreaming.
Will you wait, Maggie?
Will you call at the house?
Will I see your slight and shaking form, your eyes shifty and sickly from an unwitting detox, your small quivering head, your rag-and-bone nails and skinny hand of screaming white?
Don't ring, Maggie.
Don't speak to my machine.
I see you now on the Prince of Wales Road.
You're walking my way with a dealer named Sport.
You are sheathed in black cloth and your freckles are pale and many.
You are still now, but a fence of tatty barbed wire courts and crevices behind you, stretching itself like a waking snake, miles and miles it is, bending and bent.
Where are you going to, Maggie Delaney?
Have you come for my man?
Have you come for his drugs?
Have you come to scorn me, to poke holes in my skin with those rag-and-bone nails, or to console me, saying, Claudia, I know you, you are just as I am, you are a lonely dandelion, as I am.
A wily waif, a fallen wire, a forgotten fraud, a hoper of dope, a sick one, a sick one, body full of mucous, skin a-shining with seasonal sweat, legs heavy and still, eyes shutshutshut upon the brink of twilight, that horrible hour neither day nor night, horrible hour whatever will happen, horrible hour don't set your shoes upon that chalky broken pavement, don't dare set foot on that broken pavement, or you will die, yes die, stay put, stay put, your eyes shut, eyes shut, your head still, hot and still, try not to shake though your hands are  quaking, try not to stir though your feet are sweating, try not to wake though your chest is heaving, please O please God try not to wake…
The telephone rings, is ringing now, and my lids flutter before my face.
I answer.
‘Yes?’
‘Is that Claudia speakin'?’
It is not Maggie.
The Scottish one it is, the one with the begging voice.
‘Yes.’
'This is Stella, here.
You don't know me.
I'm sure you've heard Crilly mention my name.’
I have.
She used to be Crilly's stealing partner.
She hit Boots, and Marks and Spencer while he had the bag.
She is the crafty one.
The one who never gets caught.
‘Oh, yes.’
‘Can you tell me where I can find him?’
‘He's gone away for a while.’
‘For how long, exactly?’
‘I don't know.’
‘The pigs have got him, haven't they?’
‘I can't talk to you now, Stella.
Please phone back another time.’
I hang up.
I have not met Stella, but I have seen her; a scrawny, gap-toothed, underfed Scot.
In love with Crilly, or so I hear.
She has an Iranian husband who is doing time, and two children in juvenile custody.
The heat of my room is stifling.
I can't breathe.
My bedroom flanks the street, it is on street level.
I keep the windows shut, for fear of burglars and spiteful friends.
I do not dare open the blinds.
There are no tears but I make squeaky sounds with my mouth.
In my groin there are twitchy, random jolts like the shorting of a fuse, as though a spatula has been thrust into me and wrapped around my uterus like a corkscrew.
I lift myself, heaving to the bathroom, where the tile is cold and the eaves are  cob-webbed.
When I lower my head into that seatless bowl there is nothing, nothing.
I run to my bed, recoiling.
From outside, sounds grow louder; young ones shouting, oh godawful sounds — Jo, have you seen that cunt, he's shagging my bird…
O stop please stop and I cover my ears.
I must find Maggie.
Maggie has no phone, but I know where she works.
It's night, it must be night now.
I bathe and dress, and paste my face in gauzy liquid, whiting out the spots and the sweat.
I drive to Highbury.
The Oedipus Bull is a brightly lit pub full of architects and actors, loose linen trousers and girlfriends in off-the-shoulder black jerseys, tight around the bosom, their ears ablaze with silver and hoops, their hair short and bleached, '20s-style envelope-handbags, pencil ties…
I half expect to see Gemma and her friends.
I wouldn't mind, actually.
I wouldn't mind seeing a familiar face or two.
I am waiting for Maggie to notice me.
I wonder how they all can look so well.
If they look well, then, are they well?
Will I ever be well?
Will the knot and sloth of me ever go away, leaving my body like a bad and finished dream?
Maggie sails back and forth behind the counter, wearing a mini-dress, black tights, black pumps.
She looks beautiful; almost placid.
Upon closer inspection, only her eyes give her away, quick with the flicker of paranoia, scanning the room like marbles.
She's looking for Crilly, for news.
When she catches sight of me she smiles and I feel guilty for scorning her.
We agree to talk once the last bell has rung.
I sit for an hour, alone at a table with only one drink of scathing hard whiskey, which does not fall lightly upon my throat, but burns my mouth and neck with the sting of memory.
Dave Brubeck is playing on the jukebox.
I must be okay, I think.
I have called to this pub to see a friend, the tall attractive barmaid in black, the Irish one, my lover's ex, by the way.
Jazz is good.
I don't look so bad.
I'm drinking in Islington, calm as you like, why not?
The doors shut at last and Maggie comes with me to my car.
We sit without moving, gazing out at Upper Street.
‘He's in prison, isn't he?’ she asks.
‘He will be.’
‘I saw Stella.
She told me.’
‘How did she know?’
‘Oh, she just knew.’
The sickness returns at the sound of strange names.
I clutch myself above the steering-wheel.
The night is cold.
‘Are you all right?’ asks Maggie.
‘I don't know.
I think I need something.’
Maggie looks at me strangely.
‘You're not addicted, are you?’ she asks.
She's amused.
I force a laugh.
‘No, I'm upset.
Do you know where we can get a fix?’
Maggie pauses.
‘Drive to Annie's house,’ she says presently, ‘in Camden Road.’
I do as I am told, though I don't know who Annie is.
Maggie tells me to wait in the car.
I wait for fifteen minutes.
Maggie emerges slow and defeated.
I recognise the posture; it is akin to Crilly's, when his luck runs out.
‘No joy.’
We sit silently, the two of us, on the verge of tears.
‘Is there anywhere else we can go?’
I ask.
‘Not tonight.
Annie and Chuck were having a huge row.
They're breaking up.
They weren't too helpful.’
We settle for a bottle of Retsina; nasty cheap wine from the local Greek's.
At the Aegean Sea drunken middle-aged men drink and sing and sputter as packs of walruses do, calling to us in obscene and gravelly voices.
I switch the cocktail-glass on, the pink neon.
I put on a flamenco record and roll a joint.
I'm not very good at it.
The process is painstaking.
The answerphone flickers red from the centre of the carpet; hesitantly I push the button.
A message from Gemma, concerned.
And Stella, the begging Scot.
‘How do you know Stella?’
I ask Maggie.
Maggie opens the Retsina and takes off her jumper.
Her shoulder-blades make sharp ripples in her skin.
She's thin and bare.
‘I've seen her around,’ she says.
‘The silly cow.
She's always trying to tell me things.’
‘What sort of things?’
‘You know, don't you?
You know what that ugly Jock's been saying about Crilly?’
‘No, I don't know.’
‘Well, then I don't know if I should tell you.’
I twitch.
I try to be comfortable; to stretch my legs and think soothing thoughts.
This is my home.
This is my cushion.
My sweet Spanish record.
‘Go on, Maggie, you can't just start something and not finish it.’
Maggie pops the cork and pours cheerfully into water glasses.
She is taking her time.
I sip the wine.
It is ghastly.
‘Well, if you must know, she told us that she was leaving her husband, that scum-thief husband, and running away with Crilly.
She said she was pregnant with his baby.
I'm sure it was all her own pathetic fabrication.
She heard you were pregnant and then told us that she was.
She said to me once, ‘That stupid yank bitch, if it wasn't for her, I could have this baby’.’
‘So she had an abortion?’
‘Well between you and me, she was never really pregnant.
She just says things to get attention.
She's a pathological liar.
But you know, people talk.
They know her; they don't really know you.’
‘Who's ‘they’?’
‘All the Camden lot.
Annie.
Chuck.
Seamus and Marie and Perry…’
‘But I know Seamus and Perry.’
‘But you don't work with them.
Stella's been working for Perry.
She does all his dirty work for him.
I'd say she's in love with him also.
She spun a few yarns on that count, as well.’
‘So Perry must know she's lying.
About Crilly, I mean.’
‘Yeah, I'd say Perry knows.
But the others, I'm not sure.
Stella will do anything for a man.
She'll do the heavy stuff.
Like when she stole with Crilly, she mostly took the risks while he just held the bag.
They have to show their gratitude in some way.’
‘But Crilly can't stand her, outside of work.
He's always saying how she's so mad, so unattractive.’
‘I know.
I call her ‘Dirty Knickers’.’
Maggie leans back in the easy chair.
I am amazed at her ease, why isn't she sick?
I move closer.
I hang on her every word, the words and the way they are spoken.
‘Maggie, you don't think…
‘I trail off.
Maggie, who usually avoids eye contact for too long, keeps her face steady on mine.
‘Claudia, I don't know.
Probably not, but I simply don't know.
There's something you have to understand about junkies.
They're like cavemen.
They don't trust anyone on the outside, anyone who appears to be on the outside.
You're American.
Your friends are straight.
You have money, you like nice things.
When a man as attractive as Crilly makes an attempt to leave the circle, the girls get bothered.
Distressed.
It's like they've lost a bodyguard.’
I close my eyes and swallow a gulp of Retsina.
‘Crilly's a strange one,’ she continues.
‘Annie's been chatting to him quite a lot, lately.
She says they've become close.
He tells her all sorts of things.’
‘What do you mean, ‘close’?’
‘Oh, you know, good friends.
I've a feeling that's why she was fighting with Chuck.
No, I don't think he's fucking Dirty Knickers.
But Annie, well, she's the sort that Crilly might find quite attractive.’
‘But he's always with me, Maggie.
We're together every single night and most of the day.’
‘But that's not always, is it?’
‘But he gave me such a hard time when I was unfaithful.’
‘I know, fidelity means a lot to him.
When we were together, he used to talk about it too.
Maybe he's getting back at you.
I remember when you were unfaithful.
Several times.
He told me about it.’
‘He told you?’
‘Remember, we're still pretty close.’
‘Are you sleeping with Crilly, Maggie?’
‘Me?
God no.
I've learned my lesson.’
‘What lesson?’
‘We had a fuck of a time.
Towards the end, he slept with other women.’
‘Do you know this for certain?’
‘I think I do.’
‘Well, what about you?
Did you both mess around at the end?’ 'Well, it's really very complicated.
I'd rather not get into it.’
I wish to God I could vomit.
But I've eaten nothing.
I've taken nothing strong.
I've only got heartburn.
And Maggie has not finished talking.
‘I'm only telling you these things because I like you, Claudia.
I know you mean a lot to Crilly.
But I wouldn't trust him.
Not after the things that Annie was saying.’
‘Is that why you went into Annie's alone?’
‘No.
I went in alone because they don't know you.
If they had had gear, they wouldn't have served a stranger.’
‘They know who I am.’
‘Barely.
They think they know.’
‘What do you mean?’
‘They don't really know what to make of you.
Annie thinks that you're not worth worrying about.
That you're temporary.’
‘Didn't you correct them, Maggie?
Didn't you see them straight?’
‘No, it wasn't worth it.
I didn't want to make any trouble.’
‘What trouble?’
‘I told you.
They're vicious.
They're like a tribe.
Anyone outside their immediate circle is suspect.’
‘Are you one of them?’
‘God no.
I've broken away from that whole junkie crowd.
I'm doing that computer course in the spring.
Some of the women resent me for it.
And they resent Crilly for living with you.
I know you're good for him.
I've told him so.’
I decide not to speak.
I give her the chance to redeem herself.
She doesn't.
It's late.
I give Maggie sheets and a duvet.
Of course I cannot sleep, and my body is feverish with tremors and the shrieking of women's names.
At four a.m., just when I've drifted beneath the surface layer, the telephone rings.
I jolt upright.
‘Claudia, it's Stella, here.’
‘What do you want?’
‘I'm sorry to bother you, Claudia.
I'm not your enemy.
I just want to know where Crilly is.’
‘Your guess is as good as mine.’
‘Ah, come on, Hen.
You can tell me.
Brixton?’
‘No.’
‘Pentonville.
They've sent him to Pentonville, esn't tha’ right?’
‘Leave me alone, Stella.’
‘I just want to see him.
The poor lad must be dyin'.’
‘So?’
‘So you can tell where he is and I'll bring him something nice.
We don't want him to be sick now.’
‘Stella, leave him be.
He'll get clean and start a new life.’
‘I completely agree.
But it's early now, early detox is dangerous…think of Crilly now, think of Crilly.’
‘I can't seem to stop thinking about him.’
'If I know Crilly, he'll be dyin'…’
I hang up the phone.
I hold my shivering knees and stare at the shadows on the walls.
In the morning, Maggie proposes that we smuggle some gear to Crilly.
She tells me it's dangerous to let him go without.
She tells me his habit is bigger than I know, that at other people's homes, he shoots dope into his arm.
My head congests.
Thankfully, she leaves.
On the third day, I am strong enough to wash and do my laundry.
I sit down at my desk and write a letter of accusations to Crilly.
I sleep easily, rising before ten the following morning, to post my letter.
I shop.
I buy a new dress.
In the evening, I meet friends at the Devonshire for a drink.
I say that I have been sick with flu.
They believe me.
I attend college for the first time in weeks.
Much to my amazement the tutors don't yell.
On Friday, I receive a letter.
Jezebel…
Don't listen to a word they say.
They are scumbags.
All I think about is you.
At night, I hold my excuse for a pillow, and think about your face and your hair and your incredible eyes.
I never look at another.
FOR THE LOVE OF ME AND OF US MY GOD DON'T LISTEN!
I'm clean as a whistle and soon I'm coming home to you.
My cellmate's from Liverpool.
I want you to meet him.
Maybe we can go to Liverpool.
We'll go to Glasgow.
We'll go to Dublin.
Anything to get away.
I'm clean, my love, I'm gonna make a go of it.
I love you more than me own self.
On me mother's life.
We'll go away from them all I can't wait to see you…
In the evening, I call into the Oedipus Bull.
I walk straight over to Maggie.
‘Why did you lie to me?’
I ask her.
‘What do you mean?’
‘You know he hasn't been unfaithful.’
‘Well, I could have made a mistake.’
‘You lied.’
Maggie shrugs, unperturbed.
‘Who knows who's lying?
I was only trying to give you some support, Claudia.’
‘Keep it.’
I go to court on the day that Crilly is released.
He looks wonderful; prison has fattened him and his cheeks are pink and shiny, as though he has been working out of doors.
He looks like a Viking.
We stroll arm in arm to the nearest pub and I buy him a freedom drink and lunch; a pint of stout and a Ploughman's.
It is as though he's been inside for months.
He tells me about the men he met in prison, imitating their varied dialects with great skill.
‘I'm gonna do it this time, Claudia,’ he says, his mouth full of stout and his arm about my shoulder.
‘I'm gonna stay clean.
I don't need those pratts.
I may even get a job.’
Yet when we return home, the flat feels strange; too tidy, almost barren.
I expect Crilly to ravish me, as promised by letters scrawled in lustful, sweeping biro, but he doesn't.
The phone rings.
It is Maggie for Crilly.
While he speaks to her I leave the room, slamming the door behind me.
Presently Crilly joins me.
He holds me close.
‘She invited us both down for a drink.’
‘You go.’
‘She invited us both down.’
‘You go.’
We lie in silence.
‘I won't go,’ he says after a minute.
‘We won't go.’
Newly clean, freshly washed, appetites intact, eyes alert, we are here now, together.
And we can't think of one fucking thing to do.
We decide to see a film.
We take the car.
‘Feels grand to be in the old heap again,’ says Crilly.
I smile at him.
We drive silently down Kentish Town Road.
Crilly's eyes widen at his surroundings: the post office, Woolworth's, Perfect Pizza, Salter Rex Estate Agents, dogs, fruit markets.
They make him anxious.
When we reach the fork at Royal College Street, Crilly points to a block of flats.
‘That's where the McKloskey brothers are livin'.
Maggie says they're servin'.’
I don't reply.
‘She says it's a quick operation,’ he continues.
‘Rubbish.
It's never quick.
It'd take ages.’
‘That's not true,’ he speaks softly.
‘Surely your memory isn't so short.
Sometimes it's quicker than buyin' a pack of fags in the pub.’
I stop the car.
We sit staring ahead.
When I turn to him, his face is streaked with tears.
‘I want to make love to you, Claudia,’ he says, ‘I want to hold you in my arms all night tru’, I want to tell you what it's been like for me without you, just missing you, missing you so bad like one of us had passed on.
I want to be with you, really with you, inside you for hours on end, I'm achin' for it.’
I take his hand.
‘You can,’ I say.
‘You can.’
Crilly kisses my hand and holds it against his mouth.
His tears are hot to the touch.
‘No,’ he says, straining, ‘I don't know how.’
I take him in my arms and hold him.
When I try to move back, he clings.
I pull away.
‘Can't we just try, Crilly?’
I plead, as I am also pleading to myself.
‘Like we said before, all those things we said before?’
Crilly thinks for a moment.
He gazes off to one side.
‘I look at your face, and I look at one eye and then the other and then your nose, but I can't seem to look at your face altogether, all at once, because the sight of your face is causing me pain.’
He is right, this time.
He isn't long.
The light is dim and pink.
We make love until our flesh melts about our thighs, our genitals, the sore bits.
We gaze at one another despite the effort of heavy lids, our nodding heads, until the lull of sleep defeats.
We have, we have, we have, the finest time.
Yet when I awake to the next day and my leaden legs, the flat is dark with disrepair — the light in the fridge has gone out, the milk is off.
I crawl like a rat to that methadone clinic, re-enlist for Kathleen McGuire, the prettier one, the easy one.
I get a note to customs, signed by Geraldine.
I stop at the chemist for that great big bottle, gangbusters green, my ticket home.
While Crilly sleeps, there are calls, arrangements, the sound of my own soapy voice, a sallow sound, a sweaty sound.
As the shallow tent of evening falls upon us, and black taxis queue like hearses at Marble Arch, I lift my knees to the platform, glide down the Westway with my head full of phlegm and board that plane to Los Angeles.
I am flying now, flying home through that murky sky which is neither here nor there, neither day nor night, and in the sponge of my saturated soul, I feel so very little.