

LIVING ROOMS AND HALLS
INTRODUCTION
Every other room in the house — kitchen, bathroom, bedroom, dining room, study — has its own fixed function that to a certain extent dictates the arrangements within it.
The living room is the only one that does not at least partly arrange itself, which makes it, of course, the most taxing on the imagination.
It's the one room that has in some way to accommodate the changing interests of all members of the family; it's also the room that is most on show, the room where your guests stay the longest.
Since a living room is literally the room for general living it often has to serve as a study, playroom and dining room as well and still manage to reflect your tastes and be a comfortable extension of your personality — or personalities.
Everybody, including the family pets, should be able to stake a claim in the living room and feel thoroughly at home there.
So how do you set about decorating it for all its possible different uses?
How do you make it a room that is as pleasant to live in as it is to look at?
Should comfort come first, or practical considerations, or style?
Or can all three be happily reconciled?
Any decorator asked to help design a room for a client would start by asking certain obvious questions.
You must do the same.
Ask yourself: What sort of life do you lead?
Do you entertain much?
What are you going to use the room for — sitting, talking, reading, listening to music, tv, parties, cards, hobbies?
Will there be people of different ages all doing separate things or do you go in for family activities or both?
Do you possess any furniture, furnishings or equipment already that will need taking into consideration?
If so, do they need altering, adapting or re-vamping?
Re-covering perhaps, or re-painting to fit in with their new circumstances?
Are you starting from scratch or just hoping to re-style an existing room?
The answers should help you to keep a realistic grip on your decorating ideas and these should be as flexible as possible.
An idea isn't wonderful if it doesn't work.
If you've set your heart on some specific feature — say, white carpet — and find it's not feasible or practical or that it's too expensive, then look sensibly at the alternatives and find a less impossible compromise.
Furniture should be versatile enough to suit different needs and situations which might well change over the years.
Surfaces — floors, walls, upholstery, table tops — should be practical so that you're not constantly worried about spoiling them.
The arrangement of the room should be as efficient and convenient for several people moving about as for one person sitting reading.
Above all, it should be as physically comfortable and relaxing as it is easy on the eye.
So try not to be too rigid or too carried away; a happy balance will help the general feel and atmosphere of the room in the end.
Any room is easier to plan, decorate and arrange if you imagine it divided into three basic parts: the background — walls, ceiling, floor, windows and lighting; the furniture and furnishings; and the accessories — the personal possessions that will give it personality and character.
The background provides the framework; get this right and the rest will follow.
And take comfort from these two decorating truths, confirmed by much experience: that too perfect rooms are as boring as too perfect people, and that most successful decoration is the result of successful elimination.
BASIC ESSENTIALS
Faced with an empty room what do you do first?
You have a long, hard think about it, because it's a great mistake to simply accept or adapt to whatever space you have, however cramped or awkward it is, without questioning whether it's right for you.
So, long before you rush into the basic decoration and furnishings you must first of all make a proper plan of the room and its needs and then work out how best to spend what money you have.
Think, plan, budget
Obviously there are certain key factors to any sort of reasonable living space: walls and ceiling will have to be decorated along with all the woodwork; windows and floors have to be treated in some way; there must be light both to see by and to enhance the space; there should be something to sit on and probably to eat from and almost certainly somewhere to work at times.
Finally there are the decorative accessories like pictures and ornaments and the entertainment equipment — books, stereo, tv, video, records, tapes — for which there must be storage space.
So the next step is to write down everything that you consider absolutely essential to an individual furnishing/decorating or renovating scheme.
Not the frills; they can come later.
Then cost it all out and work backwards from there seeing what you really can afford — and can afford to be without.
The total sum might give you a shock but will also help you to be more ruthless at the start and put changes into effect.
Work out a budget
A realistic budget will do three things for you: it will sort out the urgent essentials from the details which can wait; make you feel good if you manage any or all of it at a lower price than your original estimate; and inspire you to improvise, to consider if you could achieve an equally good effect and still fit in with what you can comfortably afford.
This way you'll not only get more personality into the room but you'll also go more slowly, giving yourself more time to think around problems.
The process of budgeting will send you out on more research.
If you cannot afford the furniture or floorcovering you want, further trips to shops or markets, or looking at suppliers' catalogues, should give you more inspiration.
Learn to make lists
Once you are sure of your priorities start to make lists.
Write down any repairs that are needed and/or any alterations you think desirable.
Transfer to paper any thoughts or suggestions on how to treat the walls, the floor, the windows.
Think about what sort of lighting you're going to need and how you can achieve it.
If the space is very small and you want to enlarge it, put down all the possibilities.
Can your furniture be made to serve several purposes?
How is the room going to be heated?
How much or how little storage do you need?
Start off with a basic check list along these lines; then you won't leave out anything important.
Fill in details about the present state of the room in the first column; then what you would like or propose to do about it in the second, and finally, in the last column, what it's going to cost you.
Date the list and keep it in a file.
If you have to compromise, change your mind or adapt an idea, make a new list, date it and file it so that you end up with a master check list that is a complete record of the whole procedure.
With everything committed to paper you're less likely to forget details and it will help you tackle the situation in a very organised way.
You'll also see how ideas progressed and developed as well as how much they cost.
When to spend, where to save
Once you have a clear idea of the essentials you can decide where to compromise and where you must make an investment.
Again, take time to come to your decision because you won't get everything right first go off.
Some things are going to have to last you a very long time and withstand a great deal of wear so these must be the best of their kind that you can possibly afford.
Comfortable seating is essential.
You can do without carpet but  you've got to have somewhere to sit and the least you can make do with is one sofa or two good chairs.
If you're young you might think that cushions or even a thick rug will be fine for sitting on but not everybody would be happy — or able — to put up with this and certainly older people would prefer something more comfortable.
You don't have to have curtains; blinds are a good alternative or if the room has a marvellous view you might want to do without any form of window dressing.
Lighting, however, you can't do without for obvious reasons and also because it adds a great deal of extra interest to a room (see Lighting is important, page 35)
You can easily make your own coffee table and improvise on dining and side tables (see improvise with flair, page 70) until you can afford better, but generous storage and some large healthy plants will make all the difference between a comfortable, relaxing room and a stiff, conventional one.
Better to eat off an orange box and get pleasure from a plant than to spend the money on a cheap and nasty table which is going to be an unsatisfactory stopgap Save money and effort right at the start by sorting out priorities — which should include enjoying the room you live in — and try not to stray too far from your original objectives.
COLOUR SCHEMES
Be creative with colour
Colour can transform a room or wreck it.
Just by changing the colour of the walls and soft furnishings you can provide a completely new background that may have a profound effect on the existing furniture, making it look entirely different.
Some people have very firm ideas on colour schemes.
They decide they want a mainly blue or green or apricot room and know just how to set about achieving it.
This sort of assurance is very rare and really only comes with experience.
But because mistakes are expensive and we have to live with them for a long time we tend to play safe and go for rather bland schemes.
This is a mistake in itself because the result is often uninspired and therefore uninviting.
How can we overcome this?
Be confident with colour
Should I put green or purple against that dark blue?
Can I live with all those reds?
Would I find a brown background restful or depressing?
If you are not sure what goes with what or even which colours you feel comfortable with there are several things you can do to improve your confidence.
Start by noticing colour all around you.
Then try to look at it as an artist would look at it, really analysing it.
Look out of the window; which colours look particularly good next to each other?
Those red-tiled roofs against the blue-grey sky; do they please you more than the  slaty-purple ones?
Which shades of green blend best with each other, with pale colours, with vivid colours?
Look no further than your own garden to see the most interesting and often surprising colour combinations.
Train yourself to be conscious of colour wherever you go: in hotels, shops, restaurants, theatres, stately homes.
Which schemes make you feel excited, relaxed, on edge?
Go and look at paintings in art galleries just to see what effect the artist is trying to achieve.
Look at the marvellous build-up of colours in oriental rugs or tapestries and embroidery.
It all helps to get your eye in and is far better than trying to rely on memory.
You'll soon find yourself developing a pretty sure grasp of what colour is all about.
It's a good idea to buy as many magazines and books on interior decoration and home-making as you can afford and study their colour pages carefully.
Pull out the magazine schemes that appeal most to you and stick them in a file; mark the pages you like in books.
Then take time to look at them all together and see what they tell you.
Is there a definite theme running through them all?
Do the illustrations you have chosen have certain colours and styles in common?
Be guided by them because they're obviously the ones you feel most comfortable with and they'll provide a reliable starting point.
The colour wheel
The primary colours are red, yellow and blue.
Equal amounts of these mixed together produce secondary colours eg red + yellow = orange.
All other colours are formed by mixing together various amounts of these colours and by adding black or white to make lighter or darker versions.
The secrets of colour schemes
When you have decided on the main background colour for floor or walls or both, you can set about building up the scheme throughout the room.
A very simple but effective way is to stick to one major colour livened up with accent colours in cushions, rugs, the odd chair, blinds, borders, prints, paintings, books and plants.
A fairly neutral background will make any small splash of colour sing out with particular  vibrancy and significance.
One very exciting and yet subtle way to treat the subject is to keep to one main colour but to introduce it in all its different shades and tones.
Learn how to do this by taking one colour, say yellow, and thinking of all the objects that come within that category.
This should remind of you of the infinite varieties in any one colour and also set you thinking about texture.
It will help you when it comes to choosing upholstery, blinds, curtains, rugs, carpets and general accessories.
Varying the textures within this sort of monochromatic colour scheme can be just as interesting and lively as a scheme full of more obvious contrasts.
At the same time it's worth remembering that at least one contrast colour, even if only a large plant or a mass of flowers or cushions, will help to emphasize the clever harmony of the background colour scheme.
THE FLOOR PLAN
Make a floor plan
Taking time to plan your space to its best advantage is essential when you are starting from scratch.
This way you'll make quite sure that anything you buy in the way of furniture, equipment and accessories will be the right shape, scale and style to suit the room and your lifestyle.
It's perhaps the one time you'll bless starting with a completely clean slate; at least there are no existing possessions that might perhaps prove difficult to accommodate.
So the most helpful thing to do before you start shopping is to draw up a scale plan of the room.
It's quite easy.
All you have to do is measure the length and width of the room and draw it lightly out in pencil on a sheet of graph paper allowing say, 1 cm (¼) represent 5cm (1 ft) in reality.
Now measure and mark in door openings with their clearance, windows, radiators, electrical points, fireplace, alcoves and any fixtures, again making sure that everything is completely accurate; the slightest inaccuracy can ruin the brightest idea.
Correct measurement of doors and windows is particularly important as far as the moving of furniture is concerned.
Many a large sofa, armchair or piano has had to be sent back at unnecessary cost because it wouldn't go through the door Make sure to measure the ceiling height as well because if you multiply this by the wall measurements (see Calculating quantities on page 53) it will give you an idea of the amount of paint or wallpaper you will need.
Take your plan and a tape measure with you whenever you shop and always make sure you measure whatever you are thinking of buying.
Try to avoid making instant decisions; instead, go home and draw the proposed piece to scale on some card.
Cut it out, mark it with ‘armchair’ or whatever and juggle it around on your plan together with any other pieces you're planning to buy until you're sure it fits in.
If quick decisions are needed, say during the sales, then at least work out the approximate size of the spaces you have in mind and look out for pieces of furniture that will best fit into them.
MAKING DO WITH WHAT YOU HAVE
Very few people have the luxury of starting completely from scratch although those who do seldom see it as an advantage.
Most of us have possessions we want, or have to go on using, so the best thing to do is to take a very positive attitude and use them as jumping-off points.
Let a rug or painting suggest or inspire the colour scheme; if you can't revamp old curtains (though beware! re-making can sometimes be just as expensive as starting afresh) turn them into cushions; cut down carpets which no longer fit but are too good to be thrown out, and make them into small rugs.
Existing rooms which need a face-lift or which you would like to have a completely new image are much more of a problem.
Here we have to work around not only a collection of possessions which have become part of our lives, but also carpets or curtains or wall coverings we feel we can't afford to replace.
How can we achieve a new look when some things are going to stay exactly the same?
‘Use it up, wear it out; make it do or do without!’ the old New England maximum goes.
But if we have a conscience about our familiar old things what can we do?
SMALL IMPROVEMENTS
Make the best of it
The best solution is to analyse each item in the room.
If the existing carpet is in reasonable condition but you're sick to death of it you could add rugs to cheer it up.
If it is in very bad condition but you really can't afford to buy new carpet then see what the floor is like underneath.
If there are boards that seem in good shape they could be stripped, sanded and polished.
If they are rather worse for wear you could always just paint and perhaps stencil them.
Replacing an old, dark-coloured carpet with bright, painted boards can transform the character of a room, giving it the visual uplift it needs.
New-look curtains
If there's nothing wrong with your curtains except that you've grown rather bored with them there's quite a lot you can do to give them a new lease of life.
Consider adding a border to the leading edges and making tie-backs to match; or having tie-backs where none existed before.
If your curtains are plain you could stencil them (see page 378).
Another solution would be to keep the curtain tied back and to add  Roman or roller or Austrian blinds underneath.
Or you could make under-curtains in a lighter, toning or contrasting fabric to pull backwards and forwards while the original curtains remain stationary.
Upholstery
If the upholstery is still in too good a condition to change, add plain coloured cushions in one of the colours taken from a patterned fabric or patterned ones if the upholstery is plain.
Either of these could match the new borders or blinds or undercurtains, perhaps bringing out a colour that had not been emphasized before.
Pale plain loose covers could be dyed a different, darker colour and occasional chairs changed round with old ones relegated to another room in the house.
Old close or tight-covered sofas and chairs can be utterly transformed by giving them new loose covers.
Don't make the mistake of thinking that any changes must be major ones, on a smaller scale it's amazing what a few new accessories will achieve — paintings and prints, plants, perhaps a new round table with a floor-length cloth on it, a small but eye-catching rug, some concealed uplights in the corner (see pages 37 and 39).
You'll find that quite often this sort of selective improvement will give a room the new look it needs for far less money than a drastic change-around.
DECORATIVE DETAILS
Details that make a difference
You have only to look through one or two stately homes to see what a great difference the architectural details — the cornices, mouldings, hardware on doors and windows, doors themselves — make to a room.
If your house doesn't possess them already, there's nothing to stop you adding your own.
You can buy one of the many reproduction plaster or fibre-glass cornices by the foot and have it added to your room just under the ceiling or, if you cannot afford this luxury, go for a stylish compromise with a paper border.
There are some good-looking ones on the market.
Choose one that contrasts with the current wall colour or wallpaper and see how it totally changes its character.
If you can't find a pleasing paper border, there are other alternatives: look amongst the fabric borders in soft furnishing departments.
You could even run a contrast border of webbing around the walls just under the ceiling, and around doors, windows and skirting board as well if you like.
Another way to transform walls is to form false panels on them.
Do this by making squares or rectangles (or both, one above the other, depending on ceiling height and proportion) either with the same sort of webbing or with lengths of picture frame edging, or plain wood moulding from DIY stores.
DOING UP DOORS
If your doors have rather ugly or undistinguished knobs and finger plates change them.
Handsome new brass, china, enamelled metal or anodized steel all look very impressive, and if you can afford it you could have matching light and dimmer switches.
Again, for remarkably small outlay, you will have added new interest and improved the quality of the room.
Changing the style and/or structure of the doors will have an immediate effect on the feel of a room.
Unattractive old doors might look better stripped; they are very often a handsome pine underneath.
Really ugly doors can be replaced or left off altogether and the space widened to form an archway, although this will inevitably increase draughts and the demands on your heating system.
Rather ordinary plain hardboard doors can look quite special if they are ‘panelled out’— that is, given false panels with picture framing or beading.
Purpose-made door panelling kits are now produced, ready-cut to size, to make this job even easier than before.
The main thing is to try to reassess all those long familiar features in a room that are taken completely for granted because you are so used to them.
Look at them long and hard with a fresh eye, question their presence and their use; there are very few that don't lend themselves to ingenious transformations.
DEALING WITH PROBLEM SPACES
The treatment of space is what good design is all about but far too many people think that if they cannot afford to change a room structurally nothing else is going to alter the look and feel.
Yet it is quite possible to change the feeling of space cosmetically, that is by the clever use of colour, pattern, texture and arrangement, all of which can make space seem much larger as well as unifying and simplifying it.
It might sound dull to advise using the same pale colour for walls, floors and larger pieces of furniture but this treatment will make the most confined area seem lighter and airier and will make bulky objects like sofas, armchairs and beds recede into the background.
And you can avoid monotony to a quiet remarkable degree by using the same colours in different textures against which any extra added colours like plants, scatter cushions, pictures or books will stand out with dramatic intensity.
Diagonal designs, whether painted on bare floor boards or woven into carpets, will always seem to push space out.
Any wallcovering design that produces a sense of perspective like some geometrics, trellis patterns or inexpensive garden trellis itself fixed on top of walls, will seem to give extra depth.
Shiny and reflective walls, ceilings and floors will also make space seem much bigger because they throw out extra light.
And light itself has a blurring, softening effect on the hard edges of a room, making them seem further away and less constricting.
Make space with mirror
Mirror can work magic on a room.
Cleverly used it will double, treble, even quadruple the size.
Mirror panels are expensive of course and you must ensure that large slabs of it can be got through doors, up stair-wells, and onto lifts or elevators.
There is no way it will bend and it can break en route too easily.
But once safely in position it will be worth its weight in gold for the extra light and space it will create.
You can always save on something else.
If you use a mirror in this way, be careful where you position it.
Putting at the end of a long, narrow room will make it seem even longer and narrower.
So work out just how you want to affect the look of your room.
If you use mirror from floor to ceiling and at right angles to a window or opposite a window it will give you twice the light and twice the view.
If you use it from floor to ceiling in a recess — say the recesses either side of a chimney breast — it will look as if you can walk into a whole extra room next door.
Mirror tiles on a ceiling will gain height for the room and a miraculous sense of spaciousness.
Mirror tiles are also a good substitute for panels and are very much cheaper if you don't mind the obvious break in reflection caused by the lines.
Plastic mirror is another possible substitute and has the advantage that it won't steam over; on the other hand it can crack very easily when it is being fixed into place and it does seem to give a more distorted reflection.
Pre-cut panels of mirrors sold for hanging on wardrobe or cupboard doors are often surprisingly cheap compared to custom-cut pieces and they can be hung side by side or used in certain places to look like slit windows in a wall.
Strips stuck on skirting boards or used instead of a cornice between ceiling and walls can greatly expand the sense of space for very little cost.
GAINING SPACE
More space by arrangement
Built-in furniture-window seats, wall units all down one wall — will always take up less space than free ‘floating’ pieces and if you can manage good storage space under a window seat or built-in seating around a wall so much the better.
All you need do is have a lift-up lid instead of a solid base or shelves added under the actual seat part and you have immediately doubled the usefulness of the piece as well as gained some footage.
If you have a small room use as much transparent and fold-up-and-put-away furniture as possible.
See-through desks and small tables of glass and metal, or plexiglass, or perspex will appear to take up much less space.
Fold-up furniture can either be stacked neatly in one place, hung from a large hook on a wall or stashed away out of sight when it isn't in use.
Cane and wicker will look lighter than wood; white-painted pieces will look less conspicuous and therefore less space-consuming than dark.
The most common advice is to place large pieces of furniture around the sides of a room but there are exceptions.
Two sofas placed back to back in the centre of a space can often define the divisions of space very well.
And in a one-roomed flat or apartment a large bed placed in the middle of the room can be used as an island lounging unit.
By positioning a bolster in the middle of the bed instead of at the end the mattress will look as if it is divided into two separate areas.
SPACE STRETCHERS
STRUCTURAL CHANGES
Some structural solutions
If cosmetic changes are not enough there are some fairly obvious and simple ways of altering the structure of a room to gain extra space.
If you own your house or flat you can take down partition walls, improvise new ones, block up old doors and make new openings in more convenient places to improve on the space.
Compared to the visual and practical differences these sort of changes make, the cost is small.
It pays, first of all, to get hold of a plan of the place (managing agents of blocks of flats should be able to provide one) or draw a rough one up yourself, as described on page 17, and see on paper where more space looks possible.
For example, if you have a large hall or corridor you might be able to slice off bits to add to your living room.
Walls can be cut half-way down or at either side to form dividing slabs rather than solid masses.
Or once the partition walls are down, you can create your own flexible dividers, with bookcases, shelving units, screens or screen-like structures like trellis, or even Murphy beds that let down at night from what looks like a panelled screen.
You could consider making internal windows or openings in a dividing wall to get more light and airiness.
They could be conventionally square or round or in the shape of long slits so that the adjoining room shows through and gives extra perspective.
In a very small studio or one-roomed flat where space is at an absolute premium it would pay to build in multi-purpose furniture that would solve the problems of sleeping/working/eating and sitting all in one area.
EFFECTIVE LIGHT AND HEATING
Lighting is important
Lighting is one of the most important elements to get right in any room, but particularly in the living room with its many different functions, all of which need to be appropriately lit.
It is also the quickest way to change atmosphere and mood, to exaggerate space or diminish faults, to bring out texture, pattern and colour, and to highlight special possessions and achieve particular effects.
Yet when people think of lighting they mostly think of lights or lamps — the actual fittings — rather than of a flexible medium, just like heat, which can be manipulated by the flick of a switch or a turn of a dimmer.
When they buy fittings they buy them mainly for their shape or colour or looks, but neglect to find out what sort of light they will give.
Ideally lighting should be planned and installed before the walls and ceiling are decorated in case any re-wiring is necessary.
All too often, lighting is an afterthought superimposed on the final decoration instead of being planned from the start.
In most housing a centre light fitting, for example, goes unquestioned, although people would find even daylight very harsh and glaring if it poured from the centre of the sky all day.
Plugs or outlets too, are often fitted in a haphazard way around the room, with the result that when a lamp is placed where it seems most needed, it frequently has to trail a dangerous mess of flex or wire with it.
If spots or downlights are bought, they're often used without benefit of a dimmer switch.
Lighting where you need it
So how do you plan an efficient lighting system?
Before you start it helps to understand the differing functions of the various types of fixtures available.
Remember you are aiming for not one lighting effect but several.
All living rooms need a mixture of light: background lighting; local light for working by; and decorative accent lighting.
From firelight to fluorescent
There are basically four main groups of domestic lighting — five if you count candlelight and firelight.
These are:
Conventional pendant and ceiling lights, wall lights, table lamps, floor  lamps and strip lights.
Fluorescent lighting.
Downlights, wall-washers and uplights, spotlights, track lights.
The more ambitious kinds of ‘effect’ lighting, like neon and rotating lenses.
Conventional lights
These come in a huge choice of shapes, colours, materials and prices.
The pendant or hanging variety give good overall light but tend to flatten shadows and do not provide enough light by which to read or work comfortably.
The amount of actual light they throw out depends on the type of shade used and the height at which they are hung.
Ceiling mounted lights also give good general light, but the effect is flat unless used in conjunction with other types of light.
Wall lights are best if they are directional and used to bounce light off a ceiling or floor, or to light a picture or piece of wall.
Table lamps should provide concentrated areas of light.
They will bounce light up or down or spread it horizontally, depending on the type of shade.
Directional desk or table lamps for working by should be adjusted to let light shine down on the work in question.
Floor lamps can give general or directional light depending on the type.
Some are fitted with halogen bulbs for overall punch, or spots to light specific objects or to highlight.
Hooded brass or chrome floor lamps make especially good reading lamps since they can be moved around to various chairs or sofas, and set to shine on books, or they can be directed onto a wall or ceiling.
If you prefer shades, the translucent silk variety are the best light diffusers followed by linen, card or paper.
Incandescent strip lights (as opposed to fluorescent tubes) are good for concealed lighting behind pelmets or baffles, or down the sides of cupboards.
Fluorescent lights
Fluorescent tubes give about three times as much light as a tungsten or incandescent (normal everyday) bulb.
They come in straight or circular shapes and are best concealed behind a baffle of some sort.
They have an average life of 5,000 hours and are, therefore, much more economical to use in places where high levels of light are needed for long hours at a time.
Fluorescent lighting, however, can look cold; the best colour to go for is ‘de luxe warm white’(not just ‘warm white’— which is neither warm nor white) as this is nearest to warmer incandescent light.
The Halogen light
One of the newest and most interesting additions to domestic lighting has been the tungsten-halogen, or quartz-halogen light bulb.
The halogen bulb's unique regenerative cycle means that the filament does not wear out, the glass does not blacken, and the bulb lasts much longer than ordinary bulbs in fact, for between 2000 and 400 hours — all of which makes the halogen bulb an extremely efficient form of lighting.
Its great efficiency means that bulbs can be very small — a 500-watt halogen bulb is only about 7.5 cm (3 in) long, and about the same thickness as a slim pencil or pen.
The light is much stronger and whiter than normal tungsten, but, like normal bulbs, they can be used with a dimmer switch.
Halogen bulbs usually require special sockets and lighting fixtures.
The standard variety is tubular with electrical contacts at either end, though there are now single-ended bulbs on the market which have conventional bayonet or screw ends to fit normal lamp-holders.
Another variety — the low-voltage miniature halogen lamp — is designed for use in  a special fitting complete with a transformer and is excellent used on its own or with a miniature track for lighting objects and paintings, as is the new low-voltage halogen reflector lamp.
Halogen lamps' small size makes them ideal for integrating into sculptural uplights or slim wall fittings.
One 250-watt bulb is capable of giving enough background light for a whole room.
Downlights
These are round or square, natural or painted metal canisters that can be recessed or semi-recessed into a ceiling, or ceiling mounted to cast pools of light on the ground or any other surface below them.
The kind of pool of light depends on whether the bulb fitted inside is a spot, flood or an ordinary bulb.
There are mainly types, but make sure you observe the unit's wattage rating.
A spot will throw a concentrated circle of light and is therefore best directed down on to, say, a bowl of flowers or a plant.
A floodlight will give a wider, less intense, cone-shaped light.
An ordinary bulb will provide soft, all-over light.
Downlights can also be used for wall-washing.
This means literally washing a wall with light.
Several downlights angled close to a wall of paintings (say 60 cm [2 ft]out from the wall and 60 cm [2–3 ft]apart) will give a dramatic effect by splashing light on to various surfaces with contrasting shadows in between.
They won't light individual paintings unless they can be manoeuvred to direct light to a specific place.
Downlights should be, if possible, fitted with some sort of anti-glare device or any unfortunate standing underneath could feel that he or she is in an interrogation chamber.
Uplights
Uplights are simply downlights in reverse and meant to stand on the floor.
Of all lights in the room these make the biggest difference and are a blessing since you can plug them in and put them behind plants, or in corners, or behind large pieces of furniture to give a beautiful, dramatic accent light, creating mood and interest that could never be imagined by day.
A good mixture of uplights and downlights supplemented by spot and reading lights will give a particularly warm and interesting atmosphere to a room.
Spotlights
These are used for accent lighting, to pin-point objects and give a strong punch of light whenever and wherever needed.
They come in a great many varieties and can be mounted straight on to a ceiling, on to walls or on to tracks, and then pointed towards whatever needs special lighting.
Miniature free-standing  spots can be stood amongst objects and collections on a table, or amongst books and ornaments on a shelf.
Some spotlights have a magnetic backplate so that they can be attached to any surface and pointed in any direction or can be set to swivel around inside a container.
Track lights
Track systems make it possible for one electric source to supply a number of separate fittings without extra expensive electrical work and all the making good, or restoration work, afterwards that this entails.
Mount them on or recess them into a ceiling or down the side of a wall.
Arrange them in lines or rectangles and fit them with spots or floods or downlights or a mixture, depending on your needs.
Dimmers
These are absolutely essential for any sort of lighting scheme that involves spot or floorlights.
They save energy, prolong the life of the bulbs and mean that you can control the intensity of your light at will.
Good lighting needs planning
When you are still in the planning stage of a room but with the furnishings decided upon, work out what type of light you want where; should it be direct, indirect, concealed, background, very bright?
Decide too, what style of lighting fixture would be best for each area and whether you're going to need any more electrical outlets, switches or dimmers, and where they should go.
If spots or downlights are to be inset into a very high ceiling, make sure you have the longest-lasting bulbs possible and that they are very easy to change; otherwise you'll be for ever climbing ladders to deal with them.
Are they safe?
Many electrical accidents are caused by ignoring common safety rules; for example, failing to replace old and faulty wiring; by loading too few outlets or points with too many appliances; and with the thoughtless placing of wires or cords leading from outlets to table or floor lamps.
Always check the recommended wattage on any light shade purchased and do not fit bulbs which exceed it.
And never try to do any sort of re-wiring yourself unless you are absolutely sure you know what you're doing; have it done and tested professionally.
Improving what you have
How do you improve the lighting in existing houses, flats or apartments when the electrical lay-out is far from ideal and far from flexible?
You can either add new points or outlets to existing circuits, if they can take the increased load (which is good but expensive) or install lengths of track to the odd ceiling outlets that are there already.
If there are no ceiling outlets, make do with the kind of floor lamps that have adjustable spots or, if there are wall points, get wall-mounted spots.
Buy uplights and put them anywhere you think would make a difference — in corners, behind sofas, on mantelpieces, behind plants, in deep bowls or vases.
The colour of bulbs will change the feeling of room colours.
White bulbs cast a yellowish light; pink ones give a mellow effect.
Plain white walls can be radically changed at night by using coloured filters over downlight, uplight, spot or wall-washer fixtures.
Most reds will be emphasized by artificial light; blues and greens tend to be diminished by it.
LIGHTING EFFECTS
HEATING SYSTEMS
Heating
Central heating is actually fairly easy to sort out right at the beginning provided you are clear about certain facts.
To get some idea of the best system for your particular way of life you should ask yourself the sort of questions a heating contractor would ask:
Who goes out during the day and who stays in?
If you are out all day what time do you get back in the evening?
What sort of temperatures do you prefer?
Do you want different temperatures in the living room and the bedroom?
Does your living room face north or south?
How old is your home?
How big are the rooms and how high?
How compact is your home and how well insulated?
Do you have room to store oil or solid fuel or wood?
Would you prefer a wood-burning stove, conventional radiators, skirting or baseboard heaters, warm air ducts, underfloor or ceiling heating (given a choice in a new house) or, if you can't have a central heating system, storage heaters?
With the uncertainty about oil prices and the expense of both gas and electricity, many people are opting for wood-burning stoves These have long been a favourite in Northern Europe and America, and they can be amazingly efficient in heating most of the house, quite apart from being decorative.
Living room heat
The living room needs to be a warm room.
Generally speaking, people in this room are sitting around relaxing; they aren't bustling about generating their own heat so the atmosphere around them needs to be kept at a comfortable temperature.
The average would seem to be about 7O degrees Fahrenheit/21 degrees Centigrade.
On the other hand, a lot of bodies could make it too hot for comfort, so you need to be able to control the temperature with a room thermostat.
You must also consider where to put heaters and radiators, and whether you still need a fireplace as a focal point in the room.
Many people who took out their fireplaces several years ago now find they want to restore them to have a real open fire or some acceptable substitute like gas logs or a gas coal effect.
You may like to have ‘top-up’ portable heating for very cold weather.
There's quite a lot to choose from: electric fan assisted or convector heaters, free-standing stoves, oil heaters, calor gas fires.
Bear in mind that different types of heat source produce different levels of humidity   Electricity, for example, is a drying heat which produces a slight condensation.
Do check before installation as too dry an atmosphere may affect furniture adversely.
INSULATION
You need insulation
However efficient the method of heating, it will be of no use if the room (and of course, the house) is not well insulated.
It has been calculated that in an average semidetached house only twenty-five per cent of the heat generated actually warms the house: twenty per cent may be lost through unlagged upstairs ceilings and the roof; twenty per cent through windows, doors and flues; twenty-five per cent through external walls and ten per cent through the ground floor.
An atrocious waste.
On the other hand, don't attempt to stop up every opening.
The room will get muggy, the fire won't draw properly, the boiler, if you have one, won't work to its full capacity and the doors may warp.
You need a healthy amount of ventilation.
Walls are generally the greatest source of heat loss and correspondingly expensive to tackle.
If the home has cavity walls, they can be filled with an injected cellular compound.
Dry walls can be covered with polystyrene sheeting and lined, then painted or papered.
Or walls can be battened and covered with another layer of plasterboard with more insulating material.
Damp walls can be given a damp excluding lining as well as being insulated.
If the plaster is in bad shape, get it ripped off, line the walls with corrugated bitumastic building paper and then re-plaster with plaster containing insulating vermiculite.
If the plaster is still in reasonable condition, have the walls lined with  bitumen paper or brush them with a waterproofing liquid, adding battens treated with a preservative, and hang with plasterboard to make a new surface in front of the old one.
Doors with gaps underneath could have a draught-proofing strip fixed.
The best kind is the flexible bronze variety.
Windows can have their heat loss cut down by double glazing and, in the US by storm windows, but it is expensive.
If you have large draughty windows on the east- and north-facing walls, it might be worth the expense for the resulting extra comfort.
A cheaper alternative to glass is to double glaze them yourself with plastic sheeting, but this will obviously affect their appearance.
Otherwise you can only tuck insulating tape in the cracks or fit draught-proofing strips as for doors.
Heat loss through any window can be substantially reduced by using curtains which are lined.
The quality of the lining is irrelevant.
FLOOR AND WALL TREATMENTS
Clearly, the largest surfaces to be covered in any room are the walls and the floor, and there are invariably two schools of thought about which should have preference in the budget.
I usually start at the walls because I find it easier to think up the general colour scheme first, but many people prefer to start with the floor because they automatically think of carpet and presume that this will be the most expensive item.
But flooring need not cost the earth; nor is carpeting the only solution.
In fact, floors are not necessarily improved by having a cover at all.
Old floors
Wood floors in reasonable condition — that is to say, without gaps, splits and frayed or splintered ends — can be made to look like new with some sanding and polishing.
Sanding can be done yourself as long as you wear a medical mask (from chemists or drug stores) and are prepared for a lot of noise.
Look in your area trade directory to see where you can hire a machine with a dustbag attachment, or ask at your local hardware or DIY store.
You will probably find that the sander will not work up to the very edge of the floor, so you will have to hire a smaller unit to finish off the job.
Even so, the end result will be well worth the effort.
When the surface is completely free from all dust you can seal it with clear polyurethane in an egg-shell finish if you want a good gleam, or matt if you prefer.
Apply it with a roller in a thin, even coat and let it dry without disturbing it for a good 24 hours.
After this time, apply a second coat and repeat the drying procedure.
Finally, you should hire an electric floor polisher, rub on two coats of floor wax and buff it all up.
(You may need to sand down and revarnish once every three or four years.)
Another quick improvement can be achieved by dyeing or staining the boards or parquet.
If the floor does not need sanding, at least give it a good scrub and a final wash of white spirits, or a mixture of two parts water to one of ordinary vinegar.
If it does need sanding, get this done and then give the scrub and wash treatment.
This will leave the wood immaculately clean, dry, smooth and receptive to the stain or dye.
You can either use a water-based or an oil-based stain.
The water-based ones are quite easy to apply and dry quickly but they often look patchy afterwards unless  you finish off with a water-based varnish instead of the usual oil-based polyurethane.
A range of oil-based stains in a reasonable choice of shades have recently appeared on the market; these give a more even colour, but they do dry more slowly.
Again, let the surface dry and finish off with two coats of polyurethane and wax as for the straight sanding process.
Bleached boards can look quite spectacular provided the surface has been well prepared.
Sometimes it is enough to scrub with ordinary bleach and rinse off, sealing with polyurethane afterwards as usual.
Or, you could try a stronger chemical bleach, taking good care to follow the instructions on the packet.
More professionally, you can lighten them to that bleached-bone look by staining them with a white stain, thinned down with fifty percent white spirit.
Apply it over the boards with a roller, wait a few seconds, then wipe it up with a clean cloth.
Let the surface dry, then apply another coat of white stain mixed with matt polyurethane on a five per cent stain/ninety-five per cent polyurethane ratio.
Let this dry for 24 hours, then apply a second coat of unadulterated polyurethane.
When dry, rub on two coats of white floor wax and finish off by polishing it well.
If boards are in too bad a condition to be revived by any of the preceding methods they can almost certainly be retrieved by paint topped up with several coats of polyurethane.
Boards can be painted all over in one colour, or individually to form a formal or striped or variegated pattern; they can be stencilled, given a border, or topped with all sorts of imaginative decorative effects (see Paint Finishes, pages 368–79).
You do not need to use expensive gloss or enamel paints, because you have to finish off the surface with polyurethane anyway.
Eggshell paint will be fine — or deck paint, although this often looks rather dense.
The important thing to remember when painting is that boards should first be given a couple of coats of undercoat and left to dry properly.
Tint the undercoat with whatever you are using for the final colour and you will get a good, even finish.
Try bleaching
PAINTED FLOORS
Paint to the rescue
Stencils can be bought from art and craft shops and come complete with instructions for use.
There are also a number of excellent books on specialist painting and decorating techniques which will provide you with inspiration as well as practical help.
New hard floors
If your existing floor is beyond improving and needs a fresh start in life.
there are several solutions.
If it's a concrete floor you could either put down a new wood floor or tile it with some sort of composition tile or sheeting like vinyl or linoleum which is showing quite a revival.
You can cheer up an expanse of plain flooring by setting in borders and designs which can look very handsome, or make two-tone squares: black and white; brown and white; brown and cream; or two shades of the same colour, like two blues or two greens.
CARPETS
Soft floors
If you still decide an carpet for comfort, warmth and quiet, it should be as expensive as you can afford.
It is one item you should never skimp or compromise on, and you should make sure you buy the right quality and the right grade.
Since a much-used living room has to stand up to a lot of traffic, it needs a superior quality, heavy duty carpet of either 100 per cent wool or 80 per cent wool/20 per cent nylon.
They don't come cheap but they do offer the sort of value, wear, sound and heat insulation and dirt-resistance that you're going to expect.
They'll also look very good and have great durability giving you years and years of good wear for your money.
Then too some of the new man-made fibres are improving; they are losing their old harshness of touch and are being produced in a better range of colours.
They're worth considering because they are less expensive and have strong; wearing qualities.
Good carpet needs a good underlay.
Sometimes this is built-in to the carpet in the form of a heavy foam backing which only needs layers of newspaper underneath it.
Otherwise you'll have to buy it separately.
There are many kinds of underlay — felt, foam rubber, pvc, latex.
Some have a secondary woven-type backing to give added strength.
Felts come in various thicknesses, the thicker they are the more they cost and the better protection they'll give your carpet.
Felts are best for ‘bedding-down’ seams and joins.
Rubber or foam backings provide resilience and firmness underfoot but tend to push carpet joins up making them prone to wear.
When choosing either foam or felt remember that the more resilient the underlay the more it will improve and therefore prolong the life of your carpet.
Underlay forms a necessary cushion between carpet and floor which helps to even the wear, absorb sound and cut down on heat loss.
It should be laid with care, preferably by an expert, so that there are no gaps, creases or folds which will cause the carpet to wear quickly in those places as well as making it look unsightly.
Before you make your final purchase, do shop around and check whether or not fitting is included in the price.
Having bought the best you can afford and laid it properly, you should keep it clean.
Vacuum at least once a week and shampoo whenever it starts to look grubby — probably once or twice a year.
If you can afford to have it shampooed professionally it'll need doing less often.
Old dirt is obstinate and also begins to destroy the fibres if left.
Taking care of carpets
Good alternatives
Other cheaper and very hard-wearing forms of floor covering well worth considering are sisal, coir or coconut matting or hair and woolcord.
Although rougher and hairier in texture than wool and man-made carpet and not so soft or luxurious, they come in good colours — the natural shades are particularly attractive — and are tough enough to withstand the most active family on its feet.
You won't sink into this sort of flooring but it has a neat appearance and will pull together a disparate collection of furniture and styles and make a roomful of old things look firmly set in the twentieth century.
Again, it is especially important to keep matting regularly cleaned to avoid a build-up of dirt and stains.
Carpet tiles are marvellously practical because they can be moved around stress areas — under chairs, in front of sofas — and worn ones replaced as necessary.
They are particularly useful for temporary and rented accommodation because they can be so easily taken up and put down.
WALLCOVERINGS
What to put on the wall
There must be countless ways to cover a wall but let's narrow it down to the three basic choices: paint, paper or fabric.
Of these, painting is generally the easiest and least expensive.
Clever painting can disguise faults in a room, lose unsightly features like too many doors, ugly pipes or angles, emphasize good proportions and minimize bad ones.
And these days, it can do more than this: it can introduce all sorts of excitements in design, colour and texture.
Up till recently, ceilings, walls and woodwork were either done in gloss, eggshell or flat paint, with perhaps the odd contrast border or super graphic thrown in as an added bonus.
Now the increasing sophistication in most paint ranges, plus a new interest in the purely decorative aspect, has resulted in the revival of old traditional crafts and techniques such as stippling, rag-rolling, colour-washing, dragging and lacquering which can all be learnt and practised without too much difficulty.
If you've never tackled these techniques before you should experiment off the wall first, using linin– paper.
You can make a ceiling seem much higher by painting it a lighter colour than the walls and keeping the floor a light tone as well.
Lower a too-high ceiling by painting it darker.
Liven up dull-looking spaces with bands or outlines of colour.
Keep a simple, light background and paint skirting or baseboards and mouldings in a contrasting shade.
You could paint two or three bands of different colours in different widths, starting from the baseboard or skirting.
If there isn't a false cornice or cove, form one by painting a stripe or two immediately under the ceiling.
This could be continued down corners to the skirting and around doors.
Draw the stripes lightly in pencil first and take great care to get them precise.
Create impressive graphic designs on your walls; all it takes is courage and a little sleight of hand.
If not graphics, then try free-flowing bands of colour in varying shapes.
Sometimes the shape of a bedhead or a mirror or storage unit can be echoed over the object proper in 1920's or 1930's style and then exaggerated with a contrasting edge of another colour.
Have a little fun with it and let shapes drawn down a wall spill over a dresser or chest of drawers.
Get the feeling of panelling by sticking rectangles of contrasting tape on a plain painted wall; or by drawing rectangular stripes in panel shapes and carefully painting them in contrasting colours.
Disguise eyesores — a confusion of unboxed pipes, off-centre doors or windows, breaks in ceiling levels, awkward angles and unsightly radiators-by painting the area in a dark colour.
This makes everything melt away into the background.
Alternatively– a messy jumble of pipes could actually be picked out to look like an interesting feature in its own right.
Create interesting striped effects with paint and invent your own striped patterns as an inexpensive alternative to striped wallpaper.
First paint a background colour and let it dry.
Next stick strips of low-tack masking tape over the areas of background colour that you want to remain.
You can then paint between the strips of tape with a second colour and remove the tape when the paint is dry.
The result will be neat, accurate stripes, which can be vertical, horizontal, or even diagonal — and in any width or colour you like.
Pick out any interesting mouldings, dado rails or picture rails in different colours to emphasize these features.
Simple tricks with paint
For more ideas, see the section on Paint Finishes, pages 368–379.
Paint is obviously very versatile and adaptable but wall coverings of paper or fabric can cheer up a dull room, obliterate uneven, cracked walls, help to even up proportions and generally soften the look of a room, and needn't cost the earth.
WALLPAPER
Achieving expensive effects
The choice of wallpapers is enormous, with prices to match at every stage up and down the scale, but you don't have to pay the earth to achieve a very luxurious look.
Fairly inexpensive papers can be made to seem — and last — like very expensive versions if you know some of the tricks:
Use a heavy lining paper to hide any defects in the wall.
Hang it horizontally and be careful to stick it precisely edge to edge so that no bulge will show through the paper proper.
Paint over inexpensive non-vinyl paper when it is hung, with a coat or two of either matt or eggshell polyurethane.
Test the varnish out on a small piece of leftover paper first to make sure that the colours don't run.
The varnish will deepen or ‘yellow’ the paper slightly but this generally makes it look richer and more interesting.
It will last longer and you'll also be able to sponge it gently to clean it.
How to afford the best
It's easy to make one very expensive roll of wallpaper stretch all round a room which, if you could ever afford it, would normally take lo or I 2 rolls.
The trick is to paint the walls the colour of the background of the paper, using a matt emulsion paint, then cut the paper into equal rectangles or squares and stick them on the walls in regularly spaced ‘panels’.
If the paper has a border, use it as a finishing edging.
Again, you can make it more durable and cleanable by giving a coat or two of polyurethane.
Test the paper first for colour fastness.
You are better able to afford good wallpaper if you hang it yourself.
The pre-pasted range is a boon to the DIY expert.
Being self-adhesive it only needs wetting and sticking on.
It takes about 20 minutes to adhere — time enough to correct mistakes.
Fabrics look fabulous
Wall fabrics are generally more expensive than papers but can often make the walls look so luxurious that you can get away with minimal furnishings.
They will also completely cover up imperfections, have good sound and heat insulation properties and, if they've been treated with protective spray, will last for years and years — long after paint has become chipped and discoloured, and paper faded.
Some fabric wall coverings — ranging from hessians or burlaps, felts and flannels to suedes, wool, silk and moiré — come with a paper backing which makes it easy to stick them to the walls.
However, if you use the correct adhesive and somebody with the right sort of skill, almost any fabric of reasonable weight and texture can be stuck to walls.
You can then choose from a very wide range indeed, from lengths of artists' or sail canvas (available quite cheaply from art supply stores or marine goods suppliers) to upholstery fabrics and velvets.
It is best to go for fabrics which are stretch- and fade-resistant as well as stain- and mildew-resistant.
WALL FABRIC
Making it stick
When sticking fabric up apply the paste to the walls and not to the fabric.
Cover any frayed edges with braid, or a thin painted beading, or lengths of narrow picture-framing wood, polished, silvered, gilded or lacquered.
(This can often be bought by the foot from the picture framers.)
As well as being practical, the end result will look as if it cost many times as much.
There are special wall-track systems for attaching materials of all weights to the wall.
The fabric stays neat and taut without the need for adhesive.
These track systems are comprised of long plastic strips with ‘jaws’ to hide ragged edges and an adhesive strip to hold the fabric tight.
You simply screw the strips to the walls just under the ceiling and just above the skirting or baseboards to make a kind of frame, and use the special tool provided to push the fabric into the frame and secure it in position.
Although it is obviously more expensive than sticking with applied adhesive, this method means that you can change fabrics if you like to achieve a fresh effect, and also clean the fabric as necessary.
Do check therefore that you use fabric that will not shrink.
This makes it a good bet for rented accommodation as you can take both the material and the wall-track with you when you leave.
Pre-cut fabric can actually be stapled to the wall and any raw edges covered with braid or trim, but you can get a much softer, more professionally upholstered look if you batten the fabric.
This means nailing or stapling (with a proper staple gun) lathes or thin strips of wood (about 5 cm [2 in wide]) horizontally, just below the ceiling or moulding and just above the skirting.
Similar strips of wood are then fixed vertically at 1.8 m (6 ft) intervals.
If paintings or prints are to be hung on the walls it is important to work out beforehand where they are going to go, and to make sure that battens are  fixed in these particular areas.
This applies equally to light switches and electric sockets.
When the fabric is up, these battens can be felt through the fabric, making it easy to fix nails and picture hooks to them.
Fixing fabric
Upholster the wall
When all the strips of wood are fixed, staple lengths of synthetic fibre padding between them.
You are now ready to attach the fabric which should have been cut in panels to fit the wall measurements and seamed where necessary to join the lengths.
Attach the first fabric panel by centring it between the outside edge of the first vertical batten and the middle of the second one.
When the top of the fabric is level with the top horizontal batten, lightly tack it — with thumb tacks-in the middle.
Stretch it to either side, tack it, then staple into position.
You can keep the whole thing very neat by using 5 cm (2 in) wide cardboard strips cut to the height of the walls.
Place the second panel, right side down, on to the edge of the first panel so that their two cut edges line up.
Lay one of the long strips of cardboard over this join and staple through card and fabric on to the batten.
Continue all round the room, remembering that any staple marks and rough edges can be covered with lengths of matching or contrasting braid.
Braid should also be used around the top and bottom of the fabric and around doors and windows.
If you have rented accommodation and can't or don't want to put fabric up permanently- or are not allowed to paint, for that matter-then you can hang fabric instead.
Wall fabrics that hang
Inexpensive cottons can be hung from rods or poles and left to hang free at the bottom, although they should be caught back over doors and windows with tie-backs.
Lightweight inexpensive fabrics like cheesecloth and muslin can be shirred and hung between rods, wires or traverse poles attached below the ceiling and above the skirting or baseboards, and either caught back at doors and windows or fixed around them (with rods or wires attached to the top of the frames).
If you use this method you will need a generous amount of fabric, about three times the width of the wall.
You can then either hem and gather it with shirring tape before it is fixed to the walls; or let it gather itself naturally as you push the rods through the turned-over hems at top and bottom.
Make the casing only just large enough for the rods, so that they fit tightly.
Fabric you can afford
Wall fabric always sounds like the last word in luxury but in fact need not cost much.
For instance:
Cheesecloth muslin
Painters' dust sheets or drop cloths in clear colours and simple patterns such as checks and stripes
Indian cotton quilts
Removers' quilts in plain or printed cotton or satin Artists' canvas Sail canvas
Book-binding cloth
Khaki and navy suiting cloth from Army and Navy surplus stores Reject fabric of any sort
Rolls of embroidery canvas.
To avoid any fire risk, you can treat fabric with a flame retardant spray.
Windows are like eyes: they are looked at as much as they are looked out of.
They also provide light, ventilation, protection and, very often, a focus.
But they usually have to be covered, which means yet another thing to budget for in a room.
For even when the proportions are beautiful and unusual, the view stupendous, the privacy assured, a window covering is still the most practical way of shutting out the depressing sight of rain, avoiding too much heat loss, preventing draughts in winter and the discomforts of too much sun in summer.
The sort of windows that need little or nothing in the way of treatment are usually narrow slits of glass, small ovals, round, arched, stained and etched glass windows that only show a glimpse of the outside and are often unopenable anyway.
In cases like this, a decorative object on the sill, like a plant, a single flower in a vase, a piece of old glass or china, a sculpture, a small lamp or candle, even a beautiful book, is often far better than attempting any sort of curtain.
However, most of us have very ordinary windows and want to know how to treat them well and interestingly for the least possible expense.
The variety of curtains is enormous.
They can be as simple or as elaborate as you like, depending on the fabric, the heading, the pelmet, whether they hang free or are tied back and, of course, on your taste and what suits the room.
Headings range from simple gathers to complicated arrangements of pleats and include the popular French heads — groups of three pleats — single goblet pleats, pinch pleats, pencil pleats, double pleats, gathers and smocks.
If you're making them yourself use the appropriate heading tape.
Swags and tails, done by draping and folding, are another fairly elaborate form of heading and can look enormously impressive.
Pelmets can be hard or soft.
Hard ones are usually of wood in straight or fancy shapes, painted or fabric covered.
Soft pelmets, in the same material as the curtains are lined, gathered or ruched.
If you do not want to use a pelmet, curtain rails and poles can also provide great visual variety.
They come in a wide range of shapes, from simple flat rails that disappear behind the heading, to elaborate wooden and metal poles with ornate finials and decorative brackets.
Many types take pull cords.
Safety factor
WHAT TO DO WITH WINDOWS
Curtains
How long is a curtain?
Short windows don't necessarily have to have short curtains which only really look good in small  cottagy or attic windows.
Short, neat cafe curtains that cover half the window can sometimes be the answer to shut out an ugly view.
If you have short windows and don't want long curtains, use blinds.
Generous, full-length curtains look rich, graceful and generally room-enhancing.
They should either just touch the floor — no gap between hem and floor — or be allowed to fall down to it in folds, Thirties style.
Give long curtains good hems to allow for shrinkage.
Fabric
Whatever you buy, don't skimp on the amount.
Curtains should look full so it's better to have yards and yards of a cheaper material than meagre amounts of an expensive one.
It won't even look expensive if you've been mean about it.
Bound, edged, or bordered curtains, or all three, look sophisticated and beautifully finished off.
Lining is a must except for sheers — and interlining recommended for insulating — both keeping in the heat and keeping out any cold air — cutting down noise and dirt absorption.
Properly lined curtains hang nicely; unlined ones just droop.
Blinds
These have now become as popular as curtains and range from the plain and simple roller fabric blinds or shades to elaborately frilled and ruched varieties.
As well as those you can make yourself, there are the wood and metal blinds, including Venetian and louvred.
See the Blind identikit (page 317) for description of available types.
Good alternatives
If your insulation is reasonable, and heat loss and energy conservation not therefore serious considerations, or if the window is more useful for its light than its view, or the view needs disguising, then see what you can do with the frames.
These can often be very imaginatively treated.
Short windows can be given extra height by fixing wood trim to the frame from floor to ceiling and perpendicular to the wall.
It will also give the window more depth.
Add a blind or shade to drop from the ceiling level as well and you will suddenly have long graceful windows, or what will pass for them very well.
The frames can be painted, papered or covered in with the walls or painted a contrasting colour or white.
Another possibility is to have double-hinged solid wooden shutters or panels made for each side of the window, again from ceiling to floor.
Were you to feel particularly  extravagant you could have the room-facing side mirrored — worth it for the wonderful effect of light and space.
Alternatively, you could make the screens or shutters easily detachable and have one surface painted or covered in fabric so that you could ring the changes when you felt like it or have different ones for summer and winter.
Other good ideas are to fill the window with plants hung from the ceiling; to fit glass shelves for a collection of coloured china or masses of pretty pot plants.
(Always check first that the plants are suited to a position where they will be subjected to extremes of light and heat, like some hardy ivies.)
Or surround the window with shelves for books and interesting collections of objects.
Cheerful improvements
It is quite possible to cheer up existing curtains, blinds or shades that are perfectly adequate but tired and boring.
And what's more, it needn't cost very much.
Long curtains or draperies hanging loose will look better — and different — immediately if you loop them back with tie-backs made from lengths of cord and attached to hooks fixed to the window frame.
Or make your own fabric tie-backs (see instructions on page 20).
Add a border or binding down the leading and bottom edges of curtains for a real interior designer touch.
Choose a colour from the existing design or a contrast colour if the fabric is plain.
Make fabric tiebacks to match.
If you are handy with a needle you could sew in another lining or backing in a contrasting or toning fabric to the existing one.
Add a print lining to a plain material; a small scale design in the same colours to a large scale design; a geometric in the same colours to a mini-flower pattern; an abstract pattern to a more clear-cut one.
If you then loop the curtains back you will get glimpses of the new lining, which will give it fresh interest.
Know your window terms
Here is a brief guide, in alphabetical order, to the names you're most likely to come across once you start thinking about window treatments.
Austrian blind
Arched blind or shade more commonly known as a festoon blind or pull-up curtain.
It has rows of vertical shirring and can be raised and lowered by cords threaded through rings concealed at the back of the blind.
Backing
This is the special material laminated to roller shade fabric to act as a lining, a stiffener and a blocker-out of unwelcome light.
Balloon blind
A shade or blind with deep inverted pleats which create a billowing balloon-like effect.
Blind
A vertical window covering which can be rolled up on a spring-roller attachment, or drawn up by cords threaded through rings.
Café curtain
A short half-curtain hung from a rod going across a window, as in French cafés.
This sort of curtaining is sometimes hung in a double tier, and is a useful treatment for windows that open inwards, or face the street.
The tier system gives both light and privacy.
Casement window
A window that opens on vertical hinges.
Cornice
A wooden frame or pelmet mounted over a window treatment to hide the hardware.
Festoon blind
See Austrian blind.
Finials
The decorative ends of a curtain rod, either wood or brass.
Heading
The top of curtains or drapes.
Different varieties include gathered headings, pencil pleats, pinch pleats, box pleats, scalloped headings and smocked or shirred headings.
Leading edge
The inner edge of a curtain or blind which is often bound or bordered.
Mullions
The vertical, narrow wood members that separate panes of glass.
Muntins
US term for mullion.
Pattern repeat
A design term for one or more motifs repeated either vertically or horizontally on a fabric.
It is useful to quote the size of the repeat when ordering fabric for curtains or blinds so that you do not cut off in the middle of a formalized pattern.
Large repeats in fabric make curtains very expensive
Pelmet:
See cornice and valance.
Pull-up curtain
See Austrian blind.
Ring-shirr tape
Fabric strip with regular rings and two enclosed cords used for shirring blinds like the Austrian or Festoon variety.
Ring tape
Fabric strip with rings used for Roman and Balloon blinds.
Rod pocket
The open-ended casing at the bottom hem of a Roman or Roller blind through which a rod, batten or wooden slat is passed to add extra weight.
Roller blind
A flat blind that is controlled by a spring-mechanism.
Roman blind
A shade or blind that draws up into neat horizontal folds by means of cords threaded through rings attached at regular intervals to the back of the fabric.
You can either use rings alone or, on heavier fabrics, you can attach light battens to keep the folds crisp.
Sash curtains
A flat piece of fabric or curtain panel with rod pockets sewn at top and bottom.
Ordinary brass or tension rods are then threaded through and mounted at top and bottom of the window to stretch the curtain between them.
Shirring
A permanent gathering of fabric achieved by drawing up material along two or more parallel lines of stitching, or over cords or thin rods threaded through casings or rod pockets.
Tie-back
A piece of fabric, cord or chain attached to the window frame and used to loop back curtains.
Valance
Or pelmet.
A decorative horizontal panel of fabric usually attached to the top of the window frame, or just above, to hide rods and provide added interest.
Measuring curtains
Accurate measurement is essential.
Don't guess — looks are deceptive.
Measure every window with a steel tape (fabric ones stretch).
Double check each measurement and write it down immediately, identifying each window if you are measuring several at once.
Once you have measured the window, decide where the hardware — the tracks and screws and so on— is going to go (above the frame; overlapping the sides; tucked neatly inside a recess); buy what you have decided upon and install it before you start calculating the fabric.
If you are going to replace existing hardware, make pencil marks to show the new position.
This is important because hardware measurements will affect your calculations as you will see from the more detailed instructions for measuring curtains which are given on page 63 opposite.
CHOOSING THE RIGHT FURNITURE
People often get very guilty about choosing furniture.
They feel that they should know what they want in a room from the very beginning, and feel incompetent if they cannot make up their minds right away.
But any truly individual room has to evolve slowly; this is half the fun and certainly half the charm.
If you have existing furniture and are merely re-doing a room, you will almost certainly know what you want to keep and what to replace — or re-upholster, re-cover, re-finish or re-paint.
If you are starting from scratch, make a list of all the pieces you think absolutely essential, with a note of what they are likely to cost.
If you get into the habit of always checking the prices of furniture you like in shops, sales or auction rooms, you will soon have a pretty clear idea of most values whether antique, second hand, reproduction or modern.
Make a second list of other pieces you think you would like when you can afford them, say over the next five years or so.
This will be a more flexible list because prices tend to creep upwards (except when you want to sell anything) and your tastes and finances might well change a little or a lot along the way 
Choosing a style
The style of a room is what gives it its own particular character.
Style often becomes as big a bugbear as colour schemes and for the same reason; it means laying what passes for your taste on the table for all to judge.
but I cannot emphasize too strongly that you should only choose furniture and furnishings that make you feel comfortable.
If they don't, they won't make other people feel comfortable either.
Once again it boils down to confidence, and the small test I recommend on page 14 for finding out the colours that make you feel secure, can apply just as well to style.
The most unusual styles to see around today could include what pass for country, city-sophisticated, improvised junk, garden room, Italian modern, French (Louis Le-whatever) uncompromisingly antique or whatever period is chosen (Georgian, Jacobean) industrial (high-tech or creative salvage), art deco and art nouveau.
In addition there are the individual, mixed styles of decoration that contain elements from several sources and are often called ‘eclectic mix’.
They all have a sort of recognisable shorthand: Country, for example, would include delicate flower prints or stencils, comfortable sofas, and stripped pine furniture.
Slate or quarry tiles and faded rugs complete the look.
Junk would pride itself on a collection of re-vamped, painted-up old pieces and found objects.
City would conjure up sophisticated leather and chrome, glass, marble and wall-to-wall carpet.
Modern Italian would be bright, primary coloured, or ‘dolly-mixture’ lacquered furniture, white floor and walls, with perhaps a strong dash of Memphis daring.
‘Memphis’ is the name of the design partnership set up by the Italian designer Ettore Sottsass in 1981 when he exhibited the furniture which has now become pseudonymous with this name at the Italian Furniture Fair.
Antique relates to any room which is consistently furnished in the style of one period, such as Victorian, Georgian, Art Deco.
Art Nouveau would relate to furnishings of the 1890's, typified by the use of images inspired by plants and the sea reflected in sinuous curves in pale and subtle colours.
Art Deco has come to mean brilliant colours, curved upholstery and angular, geometric designs.
Industrial style uses hard-edged black and grey, and furniture originally designed for hospitals or factories.
Garden would be lattice-patterned wallpaper, cane furniture, plants and flowery chintzes.
And the Eclectic mix is what most of us are probably happiest with; a little bit of everything, old and new, treasures, heirlooms and favourite things collected from all over.
SEATING
Sitting comfortably
If you are starting from scratch, or just , decide what has to be bought and what improvised in the way of seating.Whatever you buy, make it the best you can afford.
If comfort is important to you — and if it isn't now, it almost certainly will be at a later date — anchor pieces like sofas and large armchairs should be the best looking and most comfortable you can pay for and find.
Second best is not good enough.
In upholstery you really do get what you pay for and you usually have to take the quality on trust since you cannot see all the underpinnings of frames, filling and springs unless you are shown a sample cross section and have it all explained to you in the shop.
Most good stores display a whole section of upholstered pieces from traditional to modern in a range of different shapes and sizes, but most pieces come in a far greater variety of sizes, covers and colourings than those on show.
So, if you like the shape of something but not the size and colour, do not give up on it.
For instance, you may like the look of a sofa but think it too small; it may  well come in other lengths from 137 cm to 229 cm (54 to 90 in).
Arm and back heights too, can be varied since they have to be built separately in the first place, and there is almost always a large range of covers available for the choosing within the price range.
If you are willing to pay the difference in price there is usually even more choice.
It pays to inquire.
Living-room seating should be as adaptable as your lifestyle demands and able to cope with crowded parties as well as quiet evenings if need be.
Try to plan to seat at least six comfortably, and also have some really occasional chairs that can be stashed away in a cupboard somewhere or brought in from the hall or a bedroom.
If they can fit in with the room's general style, so much the better.
Other furniture
Most other furniture — tables, desks, storage and occasional pieces — will either be made of wood, glass and some sort of metal or perspex or plexiglass or even marble.
Whether you choose antique, modern, reproduction or a mixture of all three is purely a question of personal taste, combined with the sort of style you're aiming at.
Some people are ardent collectors of 20s, 30s and 50s furniture, or even the 40s utility pieces which are now enjoying a new vogue.
If you are far from rich but hanker after earlier furniture, scour the second-hand shops, junk yards, charity shops and sales.
Most good modern furniture is expensive and if you have set your heart on a piece you can't afford it is better to improvise for the moment.
Flexi-furniture
If you plan to eat in the living room, try to buy as generous a table as possible but one which will look quite in keeping with the room when it is not laid for a meal.
Round tables are best for this because when they aren't being used for dining they can be piled with books, magazines and plants, and have the look and feel of a library table.
You can make up round tables from cheap wood and cover them with long cloths and changeable overcloths.
Alternatively, try to find the sort of rectangular table that can also double as a long desk or work table when required.
Chairs should look just as good for occasional seating as for dining.
If you feel more comfortable having at least a visual dividing line between sitting and dining areas you could make a dividing ‘wall’ with a low storage unit.
This could act as a bar and serving area as well.
-Even a large sofa with its back to the table can make an effective divider.
Small space seating
If a room is tiny, don't despair.
Try to work out the best solution to your background problem, then forget altogether about conventional seating (one or two sofas, armchairs, occasional chairs).
Instead, plan on using a set of very comfortable chairs spaced round a low round table.
This will create a seating island which is probably all you need in a confined space.
It will work for most occasions, especially if it is properly lit.
A SENSE OF SCALE
Get the scale right
The size of a piece of furniture can look amazingly different when placed in different surroundings — lost in a vast, tall room, overpowering in a small one.
You can prepare for this by having a scale plan of your room as described on page 17, and drawing your furniture on it to scale too.
There is also the question of height: getting some height into a room can make all the difference between a monotonous and an interesting space.
Most furniture today is fairly low which means that a good deal of the furniture in your room is going to be exactly the same height.
So, if you can get the occasional high point in to vary the scale, the difference will be as important as an interesting flash of colour or pattern.
Even if you can't find or afford tall elegant pieces of furniture much the same effect can be produced with a tall plant or lamp, wall-fixed shelving, mirrors and, of course, pictures.
Improvise with flair
Since most of us have very limited budgets for furnishing it is essential to know when to spend, when to save and how to improvise.
For example, comfortable anchor pieces like large upholstery and capacious storage should, and will, certainly have first call on your money.
This leaves the smaller pieces like coffee tables, ordinary tables, work tables, side tables and occasional chairs and low storage to make demands on your ingenuity and imagination.
Most of them can be put together quite cheaply but without ruining the style or atmosphere of the room; on the contrary it's often these that add most of the character to a room and reflect your personality better than the bought pieces which can look like everyone else's.
Find black tin trunks to act as coffee tables or side tables.
Or use oriental packing cases — or occidental ones come to that, if they are waxed or painted — topped with a rectangle of glass cut to size.
Ready-cut slabs of thick glass on top of painted, lacquered or carpeted wooden cubes make stunning tables and provide storage space.
The same cubes, padded and covered are fine for occasional seating.
Add semi-concealed castors for easy manoeuvrability.
Old flush doors (or new flush doors) set on painted or natural wooden trestles; or on 60 cm × 60 cm (2ft × 2 ft) steel supports, make good-looking desks.
Shabby [not valuable]old oriental rugs can be used to cover large floor cushions.
Forget about conventional sofas and seating.
Build a plywood platform at one end of the room, cover it with a carpet and pile it with floor cushions.
If storage space and seating are both at a premium, try building in boxes around the perimeter of the room.
Give them hinged lids for storage and add soft pads covered with fabric for comfortable seating.
Old kitchen or office chairs — there are always some in secondhand and junk shops — look fine stripped and painted in a variety of colours, some red, some pink or purple, for example, or all white with perhaps a coloured strut or leg, or all black.
Dreary reproduction chairs can be given a thoroughly modern look, smartened up with paint and the seats covered with a strongly textured fabric like tweed or corduroy.
Paint plain wooden chairs a dark or vivid colour and try your hand at painting a scene, birds, flowers, a ship, on the seat.
Old dressers and chests of drawers, if you can still find them, can be stripped and polished or painted and decorated.
Have fun with them — paint each drawer a different colour or do a small ‘mural’, perhaps of clouds or trees, across the front.
Or stencil or lacquer them.
Style on a shoe-string
Once you have got into an improvising state of mind almost any piece of furniture will begin to develop potential.
STORAGE SYSTEMS
Everything in its place
Books, records, compact discs, cassettes, stereo, tv, video, papers, files, stationery, typewriter or word-processor, decorative objects, sewing-machine, sewing things, magazines, directories, drinks, glasses, ice bucket…
The living room has to house some or all of these things and if it's used for eating has to come up with storage for china, glass and cutlery too.
Where do you put it all?
Obviously good, well planned and ample living room storage is a must.
Highly sophisticated storage
A wall of storage units will make provision for most of the paraphernalia you own and might either incorporate a bar and a desk flap to let down, or a permanent table set at right angles to shelves and cupboards for work, games, sewing and hobbies.
There are many versions and permutations to choose from in all price ranges and many finishes, so again it boils down to a question of taste, style and pocket, although here, unlike upholstery, expense does not necessarily indicate worth.
Some of the German, Scandinavian and Italian built-in units are particularly smooth and luxurious with  in-built fridges and mirror-lined bars but cheaper versions can look just as good, if not better, depending on finish and the final arrangement of possessions on shelves.
You can build in your own  bookshelves.
The breakfront version is useful; this has cupboards below and a deep shelf at waist height to hold drink trays, stereo turntable and so on.
The cupboards could be deep enough to hold filing cabinets and a tv set which would be concealed when the doors were shut.
You would then need a separate desk or work table.
You would get a different sort of feel again by installing a big armoire or bureau bookcase if you could afford one or the other.
Both pieces of furniture would be handsome additions to any room and would provide necessary height as well as being very capacious.
A good substitute might be one of those huge Victorian or Edwardian wardrobes which you can often find cheaply in second-hand shops or junk yards, because they are too big for most bedrooms.
These can be stripped, re-polished, painted, lacquered, decorated or mirrored to form decorative and useful pieces.
Or something simple
A little lateral thinking pays dividends here.
Simpler storage items could include a drinks trolley by the side of a sofa to hold glasses, trays, ice buckets and so on.
Industrial or hospital steel trolleys could just as well store stereo, files, tv, video, sewing or hobby equipment.
Even good-looking baskets set side by side on the floor can hold a good  deal of paraphernalia — including bottles or books — with a certain panache.
Look at unusual sources and suppliers when searching for storage systems.
Industrial outlets offer metal shelving systems, office equipment stores yield brightly coloured drawers and trays.
STORAGE ON SHOW
Don't always think in terms of hiding things away.
Some hobbies and interests use equipment or materials that are fascinating or colourful in their own right and these can often lend character to a room if they're left out on display.
Skeins of wool and silk used for tapestry work or embroidery, lace-making pillows and bobbins, can look highly decorative.
Plans and drawings or maps can be stored in neat rolls in large baskets or drums or laid flat in thin drawers set into a wall of storage; these can look interesting in themselves with their severe and narrow horizontal lines.
Today's tv and hi-fi equipment is small and beautiful by design, so display your systems on open shelves or custom units.
Living rooms that also have to act as office or work room by day (and more and more people elect to work at home if they can these days) can still perform both functions with comparative case.
DEVELOPING AN EYE FOR DETAIL
Once people have got the framework of a room together — the walls, floor, ceiling, windows, lighting and furnishings — they often run out of ideas for what to do with smaller objects and any family treasures they possess.
Good arrangements and an eye for detail can only be achieved with practice, so it may help to have a few guidelines to follow in the first place, if only to act as a spring board for producing interesting and unusual ideas of your own.
Whether you are starting to decorate a first home, have just moved into a new place or are redecorating an existing room, the problem is often much the same: not so much how to arrange things as how to fill up big blank walls and table or shelf surfaces when you don't seem to have very much to use and certainly very little to spend.
If it is any consolation, the whole question of arrangement seems just as much a problem for people with enviably rare and valuable collections as it is for those with hardly enough to call a collection of anything.
And the same thing applies to people who have collections of quite valueless things: baskets, keys, hats or whatever.
How do you arrange what you have to its best advantage?
And where is the best place to display these objects?
All kinds of things look good on walls.
It doesn't have to be artwork like paintings, drawings, etchings, prints or even posters.
Consider any of the following: pieces of framed fabric or even beautiful wrapping paper, particularly if they accent the background colours or furnishing themes in the room; framed arrangements of dried flowers or grasses or corn on a dark background; collections of framed cigarette cards (from old cigarette packets still available in many antique markets), or postcards; rugs, of course, and any sort of interesting quilt whether old or new.
Then too, any flat decorative thing — a fragment of embroidery or lace or part of an oriental rug — can be clamped between thin glass and hung up.
You can buy corner pieces or special flat screws at most art shops.
They also supply small metal clips to secure items between picture glass and a sheet of hardboard or thin plywood.
If you decide on hanging fabric from the wall consider what sort of fabric will suit your room best, the choice is large — cotton, silk, felt and many others.
Then work out what sort of design is most appropriate for the fabric and for the room.
With wall hangings you can choose a bold, vivid effect that will be the focal point of the room; or you might prefer a subdued pattern that will tone in with the surroundings.
One of the easiest methods of making your own wall hangings is by cutting dyed fabrics into angular shapes and then stitching the pieces together to form a large, striking abstract design.
This technique has the advantages that you don't have to paint or draw anything; nor is it necessary to tidy up the edges of the wall hanging as this can add to the haphazard effect.
However, you do need a clear eye to pick up recurring patterns and themes in the room.
If you want a more definite pattern or motif the easiest method to achieve this is to use a stencil.
You can either buy a ready-cut type or make your own, tracing the design from a pattern elsewhere in the room, such as the curtains or the carpet.
Another bold idea is to fix long coloured fluorescent tubes to the wall in a pattern of diagonals or V shapes.
Lit up in their various colours against a white wall they can look spectacular; unlit they take on an almost sculptural quality.
Arranging pictures and prints
On the whole, people are divided into those who want to make room for a serious collection and those who want to use wall space to its most decorative advantage.
The first school thinks of a wall as a means to an end, a support, a mere background.
The second thinks of it as a canvas to be made the most of; yet another surface to decorate or ornament.
The big problem with this latter group is to find some sort of unifying factor that will make sense or give a theme to a miscellany of oddments that are less than distinguished.
A collection of nondescript prints, for example, can be given a sense of unity if each is mounted with the same distinctive colour: camel or chrome yellow or red, whichever fits in best with the room, and then edged all in the same way with a thin strip of wood or chrome or brass.
Try not to hang things too close, too high, or too far apart.
Do not fix anything so low over a sofa that people can knock their heads on it when getting up or even leaning back; all the same, try to place everything at a reasonably flexible eye level.
Obviously vertical arrangements will make walls look taller; horizontal will make them  look longer.
Most paintings look good against dark walls but if a wall is strongly patterned, try mounting prints against a deep matt or ground of the same background colour.
In this way, a subject is becalmed in an area of its own and does not get lost in the richness of the surrounding background.
In order to avoid making nasty marks on the wall when you are experimenting with the hanging, it is best to decide on the overall shape of the arrangement first — a square, oblong, diamond or triangle — and on a painted wall mark out the area with light pencil which can easily be rubbed off, or with chalk on a paper wallcovering.
Mark out the same sized area on the floor, then lay out the various items, juggling them around until you are satisfied with the positions.
Draw a rough sketch and then translate them all in a permanent fashion to the wall.
Table-top inspiration
Still-lifes on tables, dresser tops, window sills and mantelpieces can be improvised just as successfully as those on walls.
Old bottles, minerals, stones, shells, tiny baskets filled with dried flowers, old wooden or papiér mâché boxes, miniature bottles in different shapes, pretty dishes containing pot-pourri, an assortment of small vases stuck with single-stem flowers or leaves…
Once you start, all sorts of possibilities will present themselves and you'll find real inspiration in some of the unlikeliest looking things.
ARRANGING COLLECTIONS
Gather and group
Collections of small objects should always be gathered together and arranged in a group rather than being thinly spread around the house.
Very small things like pebbles, marbles, polished beach stones, old buttons and so on, can be put into large glass goblets or jars and displayed on window ledges (against the light) or on shelves.
Slightly larger objects, however different and unrelated, should be grouped so that they have something in common like colour or national origin.
Or if they're placed significantly with larger things, the impact and interest of the contrast will give harmony to the group.
If the arrangement is on a table, add a plant or dried grasses or flowers and perhaps one taller object to give balance.
Since most tables are also used for dumping, leave space so that the arrangements aren't continually being disturbed.
If an arrangement is on a glass table try lighting it from underneath with an uplight.
If it's on a solid surface you could light it from above with a downlight or spot.
Cheerful little odds and ends arranged with flair can often make a room seem far more interesting than much grander collections.
One-room living has come a long way from the old bed-sitter image with its general note of poverty and desperation.
Today, some people actually prefer to live in one room: they even choose to take down partition walls in two- or three-roomed flats or apartments to make one big open-plan space.
OPEN-PLAN AND ONE-ROOM LIVING
But most one-roomed flats or studio apartments are box-like spaces with little to commend them in the way of interesting detail or character.
And generally they are small.
Since they are going to bc not just living room but bedroom, dining room, and very often office as well, this means that every inch of space has to be dual-purpose if not multi-functional, and every activity has to be properly catered for and duly compartmented.
To work efficiently this sort of room needs discipline, neatness and, above all, imagination.
Successful one-room living is more an attitude of mind than anything else.
Everything is something else
The sofa bed or studio couch has made a great difference to one-room living.
Beds that fold down from the wall when they are needed have lost their makeshift image and have been updated to a new smooth efficiency and now come complete with a wall of closets or wardrobes.
Even double beds can be piled and piled with cushions to make an inviting couch for yourself and guests by day.
Tables can be used as desks; end tables can be used for dining; chairs can fold up and be hung from large colourful hooks, or be stacked up into a tiny space; armchairs can become spare single beds; well thought-out storage will take care of clothing, books, files and china.
Manufacturers are now geared to one-room flexible living as never before.
But if the room is not to look a complete jumble you have to try to create distinct areas for relaxing, sleeping, eating and work.
Since you very often cannot physically divide the space, you have to divide the ‘look’ with different lighting or rugs or colour to make separate visual areas.
A successful solution can sometimes be found by making an extra level in the room.
Beds and work areas can often be accommodated in this way, and the effect can be neat, stylish, and space-saving.
It will work best in a high-ceilinged room or a long, narrow one.
Living at different levels
One of the most impressive examples of one-room living that I have ever seen was in a long, narrow space approximately 7.5 m by 3 m (24 ft by 10 ft).
Sleeping, sitting, eating and working areas had been divided into 2.4m (8ft) steps, each 23 cm (9in) higher than the other.
Colours had been kept to a minimal dark grey and white with black and the occasional flash of green in plants and cushions.
Storage was behind flush doors concealed all down one wall.
The table did for working and eating; the mattress (put straight on the floor and covered in black tweed) did for sleeping and lounging; and the steps made extra seating areas as well with the help of large flat black or white cushions which stacked like striped playbricks when not in use.
Transparent fold-up perspex chairs were at the table.
Another successful room had a large floor to ceiling panel about 2.4 m (8 ft) wide set in the centre of the room.
On one side was a desk/ dining area; on the other, a sofa and easy chairs.
At night, part of the panel was let down, revealing a bed with concealed lighting behind.
Cupboards and shelves were built all round the room and concealed behind neat panels of canvas-covered wood, with touch-opening mechanisms so as not to break the continuity of the limited space.
Disguising the bed
Nowadays, it is more a question of fitting in adequate storage as well as a good size sofa bed, than trying to disguise a bedstead.
Almost every shape of sofa can now conceal a full-size mattress, and many ordinary beds can be bought with space-saving drawers underneath and be disguised with fitted covers and back cushions.
One way of fitting in closet and sleeping space together, apart from the fold-up bed idea, is to build wardrobes or shelves around a bed-size area to form a bed alcove.
The back of the recess can then be mirrored to enlarge the sense of space or covered with art or fabric according to taste.
An interesting room I saw in New York made ingenious use of its space.
It measured 4.9m by 4.3m (16 ft by 14 ft), and had full length storage at one end, and low level storage — for files, journals and papers — under a window at the other end.
Floor to ceiling bookshelves and low level cupboards were built about 1.6m (5–6ft) in front of the full-length storage to form a kind of corridor or anteroom, and a large double bed was placed in the middle of the room, tight covered like a sofa.
In the middle of the bed, across its width, two substantial bolsters were set next to each other.
In this way the bed became two back to back sofas by day and reverted to its original function at night.
A round table served for working and dining, and there was still room for various arm chairs, occasional chairs and side tables.
How to decorate it
Much the same ideas about decoration apply to one-room living as to small spaces (see pages 27–33).
Mirrored walls are obviously useful; so is good lighting — particularly uplights in corners — and anything that takes the eye out and along like diagonal patterns, trellis, pale colours, to add a sense of perspective.
HALLS, STAIRS AND LANDINGS
HALLS
It might seem odd to talk about entry halls as a postscript as it were but in practical terms most people put decorating their living rooms first.
It is nevertheless the first part of your home that you and your visitors step into.
and the last part that you leave.
Obviously when you budget you have to allow the most money for the rooms you arc actually going to live in, but once you have decided on what cash is available you must turn considerable thought and care — if not money — to making your hall as warm and welcoming and practical as you can.
It might come last on your list of necessities, but there is no need for it to look the least.
Theoretically, halls should be easy to design, since there is generally little to purchase in the way of furniture and accessories unless you are blessed with the luxury of a wide, spacious and well-lit area.
But whatever its size, you need to plan for convenience as well as impact, wear as well as warmth; a space that fits the feel of your home as well as it fits you.
The necessities
There should be at least one chair and a capacious table to take all the paraphernalia that inevitably collects in this clearing house for the home.
If the hall is too narrow for this and many entrance ways are barely more than a corridor, try to get in a long bench or a very narrow console, or at the very least a stool and a shelf.
If you have any built-in cupboards or closets you are home and dry — literally — as far as storage is concerned; if you have not, and there is really no room at all for any sort of full-length closet, have a hat stand or, failing this, a row of hooks to take not only your own family's coats, but those of visitors.
Mirrors are unfailingly useful in halls so that you can check your own appearance going out while visitors can check theirs coming in.
They are also useful for reflecting too small a space and exaggerating every last bit of light.
The best place to site them is over the table, or shelf, or other handy surface.
Many people install a telephone in the hall.
While this is less common now you can fit phone sockets all around the house, the hall still provides a useful central place for a phone, and if you decide on this option, you will need a chair, table and space for directories.
Suitability
What sort of furniture you have depends very much on the style of your home, your tastes and your pocket.
Obviously if you have an essentially period home it is good to keep at least within the spirit of the place, although conversely, one old piece in a very modern hall can look stunning.
Obviously too, if you have a country hall you will want to keep it as countryish and as relaxed as possible.
Town halls should make an all out effort for interest and warmth to counteract the pervasive greyness outside.
And houses by the sea should be well-prepared for sand and wet.
Durability
Any surface you choose should be as tough and durable as you can afford.
People coming in from outside will bring in dirt and dust and damp as a matter of course so it's advisable to have both an outer and inner door mat.
The most practical idea is to have a slight well let into the floor in front of the door and to fill it with coconut matting.
This way, the mat will not shift, slip or kick-up, will not get frayed around the edges and cannot be by-passed.
The rest of the floor should be easily cleaned whatever material it is.
Country halls look well in quarry tiles or French or Mexican tiles, flagstones, slate, brick or good old fashioned pavements.
If you cannot have any natural material for some reason, keep your bare boards, scraped, sanded and sealed, or painted if the boards are in bad condition or have vinyl or composition tiles.
Carpet is acceptable in town houses or flats but it must be the best quality you can afford because hallways take a lot of through traffic.
Add rugs to hard floors for softness and interest, but make sure they will not slip and cause accidents.
Secure them to carpet with gripper tape or use the sticky weave that is sold especially to keep rugs in place.
This is also good for rugs on wood or hard floors.
Otherwise tack a rug down lightly.
Hallways are at constant risk of getting scratched, marked or chipped, so wall finishes must be highly durable.
Paint and wallpaper could be protected and hardened by a final coat of polyurethane.
Vinyl wallcoverings are always practical in halls since they will withstand all sorts of rough treatment.
IDEAS WITH IMPACT
Decoration
Ideally, walls on halls, corridors and staircases (if any) should be decorated with the same colour or treatment unless they are in quite different parts of the home and cannot be seen, one from another.
Whatever the colour chosen, make sure it leads naturally into the rooms leading off it.
Warm-coloured walls like apricots, yellows, terracottas, deep roses, plums, reds, tawny browns and marmalades all look good in city homes with moderate climates and in country homes too, come to that, but hot climates benefit from the reverse treatment: whites, cool blues and greens, pale yellows and creams.
Quite apart from mirror, the hall, corridor, landing and staircase walls will take any number of pictures, and general memorabilia.
If there is space, you can line walls with bookcases to enormous advantage, and use an alcove for a desk to make an extra-mural study.
Odd corners, window sills, ledges and shelves might take plants, and if you have a wide enough hall, you might well be able to make the hall an extra, if not a permanent, dining place by adding a small table.
Playing with the walls
If you have partition walls and not much space or light you can try playing around with the walls a little.
For example, in a narrow town or terrace house where the front door opens directly into a corridor-like space, you could either take the wall down altogether, or make an arch going into the living room, or take the wall down to seating level, literally making a seating ledge.
This way you will get all the benefit of the extra light and space and still have the suggestion of a division.
STAIR FEATURES
Another possibility, in say, a flat or an apartment where the living room door opens off the hall, is to cut two narrow floor-to-ceiling slits in the wall to give both extra light and interesting glimpses of the room ahead.
Or you can cut out a large square or arched opening instead of a conventional door, and if the wall is big enough, a couple of openings or ‘windows’ either side — again to give different perspectives to the room ahead.
Inset downlights into the top of the openings to light anything that you might care to place in these openings — a plant perhaps, flowers, an interesting object — and you will instantly dramatize the space.
Lighting
Lighting in halls, corridors and staircases should be clear and bright for reasons of safety as well as aesthetics.
Downlights — recessed, semi-recessed, or ceiling-mounted — are good-looking and functional whatever the style of furnishings and collect fewer flies and less dirt than bowl-shaped or pendant fixtures.
If you do not have many outlets, or cannot add extra lights, think of adding track-lighting to the ceiling since you can fix as many spots onto a track, trained to as many angles as you think it will take.
If you have a lot of pictures on the walls this will light them beautifully as well as providing all the light you will need for comfort and safety.
If your telephone is in the hall, a good light is essential for looking up numbers and writing down messages.
It might look particularly inviting to put a lamp on the table, chest or shelf and of course, if you have found room for a desk, it will certainly need a desk lamp.
Very dark halls with little or no natural light will benefit from what the Americans call ‘Plugmold’.
This is a strip fixed with points on to which you can attach any number of bulbs that you like.
The strip is placed behind a pelmet or soffit of some kind — a piece of wood or moulding running all round under the cornice, if there is one, or ceiling angle if there is not — and you then achieve the lighting expert's dream: light without a visible source.
Windows
Look carefully at any windows in hallways, corridors and on stairs to decide whether you should curtain them, blind them, shutter them or leave them alone.
In general, unless you have very long and gracious windows, I think such windows look neater and let in more daylight if they are covered with blinds or shutters or even some sort of grill or trellis work.
Very small windows are usually better just left, and given a plant, vase of flowers or object to cheer up the sill.
KITCHENS & dining ROOMS
INTRODUCTION
If kitchens are the most complicated rooms to plan they are also the most rewarding to get right, the kitchen, after all, is primarily a working room and although good looks are an integral part of its design, easy function should be the prime consideration.
If it is a machine for cooking, as design writers are fond of saying, it must be a well oiled one.
A kitchen tends to fall into one of three categories depending on its physical limitations and your life pattern: it may be designed purely as a work room when all the other family activities go on in other rooms; or it may be a room where the work is done and some or all family meals are taken; or finally it may bc the real centre of the house, where work is done, meals are taken and where the family congregates.
Over the decades since the First World War, with the introduction of new forms of energy, the development of labour saving devices and changes in food and menus, there have been radical changes in kitchen design.
By the 1950s, designers had turned kitchens into streamlined boxes with aseptic, clinical, easily wipeable finishes.
It looked as if all traces of the cluttered, lived-in, homey kitchen, the heart and hearth of the home, had gone for ever.
The appliance manufacturers, the frozen food kings, the canners and food merchants exploited to the hilt the female desire to get out of the kitchen just as quickly as possible.
But that was before the great cooking revolution which has restored the kitchen as a family room, if not the family room: warm, friendly, relaxed and comfortable.
Nevertheless, if it's going to work at all, a well planned kitchen has, first and foremost, to suit the cook.
Given all this, a chapter about kitchens and kitchen decoration would be illogical to say the least, if it failed to take into account the room or area where food is served, which should bc as pleasant a place as possible.
Not only is the one space the inevitable extension of the other, but as often as not these days, the kitchen and dining areas are in the same room anyway.
Today's dining rooms are defined by where you eat, not by the furniture.
How you arrange these cooking/eating functions in your home depends on your life style as well as the space and money available.
Unless you have ample funds to hand, it is of the utmost importance to think ahead when you are planning a kitchen.
You might not be able to afford all the appliances you would like from the start, but if you think you will need them and will be able to afford them later you must leave the space and supply utilities for them.
That is to say, if you want a dishwasher but know you won't be able to afford one for, say, three years, then make sure the plumbing is available and that there is a niche for a new fixture before you install your worktops and units.
If you are planning on a family and intending to stay in your present home, then allow for much more storage space than you need now.
And whatever your current needs, try to get as much worktop or counter space as you possibly can.
You always need far more dumping/preparation areas than you could ever imagine.
Finally, make sure that you have ample power points or outlets.
They are much easier to fit earlier than later; wires can be more easily concealed and circuits worked out at the start of kitchen planning.
Again, you will probably need more than you think at first reckoning, so there is no harm in thinking ambitiously from the start.
KITCHENS
FIRST MAKE YOUR PLANS
If you are in the happy position of being able to plan your kitchen from scratch, rather than attempting to revamp existing layouts and equipment, it is worth giving the matter considerable thought.
It may even happen that you arc able to choose where your kitchen will be, in which case bear in mind the following criteria.
If your dining room is to be separate from your kitchen there should ideally be easy access from one room to the other.
Long passages or stairs between the two make for difficulties in keeping food hot and clearing tables.
Ease of access to the garden, especially if you grow your own herbs, vegetables and fruit, is also important, as is minimising the time you spend answering the front and back doors.
Good natural daylight and attractive views are less important but should certainly be taken into consideration.
Once you have decided where you want your kitchen the next decision to make is what sort of kitchen you want.
This will depend very much on what sort of cook you are.
If you entertain a lot you may well prefer to have your kitchen separate from the dining area, unless you opt for a large and deliberately-for-dining kitchen.
A dedicated cook with a demanding job outside the home will probably need their kitchen to be that much more functional than someone with more leisure to shop — at least in the sense of providing good storage and extra quick cooking facilities, such as microwave oven and a freezer.
A single person, or a couple without children, extremely busy and not overly fond of cooking will almost certainly prefer a functional, working room that looks and is efficient.
Again, facilities for rapid cooking will probably be important, plus easy-to-clean floors, work surfaces and cupboards.
Although a lot of space may not be available, a small area set aside for dining is always useful.
If you really enjoy cooking you will probably want to be able to take at least some meals in the kitchen and to have as much space as possible for herbs, spices, pots and pans, cook books and all the other impedimenta collected by the keen cook, quite apart from generous food storage and good kitchen aids.
If you cook constantly, have a  family and are forced to spend a lot of time in the kitchen, you will probably want to make it much more of a family room where people can sit around and talk, have a drink, do their homework, write notes, lists, letters, pay bills, and do a lot of eating.
Fit your space to your life style
If you are not quite sure of the sort of kitchen that will best suit you, ask yourself the following; questions:
Do you think your present situation will remain static or are you likely to have children and more children (their friends), guests and more guests to feed in the ensuing years?
Do you know what kind of meals you are most likely to cook, for how many, and how often?
(Remember that the kind of cooking you do is very much to the point, for if you only cook simple meals you will need far less preparation area than a more ambitious cook — though here again your aspirations may change with experience.)
Do you work all day, and are you likely to go on doing so?
Do you live far from a good shopping area so that you will need more than the average amount of food storage space and a large deep freeze?
Even if you cannot afford them now, are you likely to acquire extra equipment in the future like a dishwasher, microwave oven, washing machine or freezer?
Will there be more than one of you cooking or working in the kitchen at any one time?
Kitchens that work really well for one, very seldom do for two (or more).
Are you lucky enough to possess space for a utility or washing room?
If so, you can hive off washing machine, dryers, ironing equipment and probably cleaning appliances and accessories, which is a great help when you are short of space.
All these points should be thought about and considered in relation to the space you have to play with (a square room, rectangular room, cramped galley, and so on) as well as any existing appliances, and should certainly give you a clearer idea of the sort of room that will answer your needs.
What do you need?
What can you afford?
Having decided that point, you should next make a list of the kitchen furniture and utensils that you would like, if not now, then later when you can better afford them so that you can plan your kitchen around specific objects.
FURNITURE AND EQUIPMENT
Write down the items you need: basic essentials, then optional extras, then any luxuries.
For the major items, make a note of the makes you would like, the price, and the dimensions, if relevant.
Work out how much storage you will need for smaller pieces of equipment, serving equipment and foodstuffs: will one shelf in a cupboard be enough for tins, or do you need several?
Can you hang saucepans on the wall near the cooker, or do you need cupboards or drawers for them?
Will serving dishes, cutlery, table linen be kept in the kitchen or is there space for them near the dining table?
Does cleaning and washing equipment have to live in the kitchen, or is there a utility room/cupboard under the stairs, or even a large bathroom where they can be stored?
THE WORK TRIANGLE
When you have completed your list, think about the basic services you will need: how many electrical appliances are on the list?
Where will each one be plugged in?
New tracking devices arc coming on to the market to make this stage of planning easier, but most of us still have to plan where we want our socket outlets and lighting long before any kitchen equipment can be installed.
It might sound elementary, but it is only too easy to leave out quite obvious necessities in the trauma of getting everything done and easier still to discount the quite alarming final costs.
This way, you can at least work out the essentials and plan from there 
How to plan your space
The chief rule for any successful kitchen plan is that it should always follow a work diagram based on the sequence of operations.
Because food preparation generally involves a good deal of doubling back to and from the refrigerator, sink, stove and different work surfaces, the walking distance between all the main work areas should not be excessive.
And each work area needs careful thought to ensure that all necessary equipment and ingredients are conveniently to hand.
The three principal work areas — preparation, cooking and washing-up — are centred on the fridge, the cooker and the sink.
Professional kitchen planners use the term ‘work triangle’ to describe the imaginary lines linking the three areas.
While you must allow enough space in each area to work efficiently, they must not be spaced too far apart, or you will be walking backwards and forwards much more than is necessary.
Consider the operation involved in cooking something as simple as frozen peas:
1
Take pan to sink and fill.
2
Take pan to cooker.
Add salt.
Bring to boil.
3
Remove peas from refrigerator.
Open bag with scissors.
Add to pan.
Discard bag.
4
When cooked, take pan to sink.
Use colander to strain.
5
Tip peas into serving dish.
6
Get butter from refrigerator.
Use knife to add a knob of butter.
7
Return butter to fridge.
Put dirty utensils in sink or dishwasher.
8
Take peas to table.
Even a task as simple as this involves two trips to the sink, three trips to the refrigerator, and two trips to the cooker (more if you warmed the serving dish first).
You also need to visit the cupboards and drawers where the pan, salt, scissors, knife and colander are kept, and dispose of the bag in the rubbish bin.
So the distances between the work areas are crucial: each side of the work triangle should be between 1250 and 2150 mm (4–7 ft).
If its perimeter is more than 6.6 m (22 ft) you will be walking around more than necessary.
If it is less than 4 m (13 ft) you won't have enough room to be able to manoeuvre yourself comfortably.
You must organize your storage around the work areas according to what   
FLOOR PLAN
Put it on paper
Obviously, the actual dimensions of your particular work triangle arc going to bc determined by the basic floor plan of your kitchen.
So, following the instructions on pages 18–19, you need to draw up a plan of what you've got already, then you can work out how best to improve it.
This is the procedure to follow, whether you're planning a new kitchen entirely from scratch, or reorganizing an existing one.
The slightest error can be disastrous when you have to fit in appliances and units.
If you have awkward pipes, low windows, a hatch or power points already in position, mark them on the plan, and measure up and draw elevations of the walls as well.
Measure up any items which have to stay in the kitchen, and cut out shapes from graph paper to represent them.
If they can't be moved (for example you may prefer not to call in a plumber to move the sink), stick them down.
Try to be as flexible as possible: it may be well worth moving, say, the cooker as little as 1 metre (3 ft) from its existing position in order to create a better work flow.
Play around with the shapes and don't stick things down on your plan unless you are sure they can't bc moved.
Work out the best way to organize your work triangle, then connect the points of the triangle.
If the triangle does not seem as efficient as professional planners would like, see if you can move the appliances or work surfaces to give a better arrangement.
For example, to increase working and manoeuvring space in an existing work triangle you could set up a second food preparation or cooking area with perhaps a microwave oven outside your main work area.
To lessen the distance between, say, the refrigerator and the sink, you could add an island unit to the centre of the room, or a free-standing butcher-block work surface, or even a mobile work trolley.
Your particular triangle may well be unique, as it results from a combination of your particular space and your particular needs.
But there are some standard arrangements which may give you a few helpful ideas.
Once you have traced out your basic floor plan and work triangle you can develop the rest of the kitchen to include more work space (like a pastry or baking preparation area), more storage, other appliances, an eating area (if there's room), perhaps a desk area, and look into more technical details like electric outlets, and lighting.
Finally, you will be able to add the finishing touches with decoration.
If you cannot do everything at once, or want to start making staged improvements, either concentrate on your first priorities (leaving space for the next stages) or your worst problems-depending on whether you are planning a first-time kitchen or updating an existing one.
If you are starting from scratch, get the basics right — plumbing should be correctly sited and there should be plenty of electrical sockets.
If you are updating, you may have to compromise with expensive changes such as new plumbing.
PROPER LIGHTING
The importance of lighting
The same rules for planning light fittings apply in the kitchen as everywhere else in the home: general light to see by; work light to work by; an accent light to show off anything particularly worth looking at.
The special rule of the kitchen is to make sure that there is light over every work surface so that you never work in your own shadow.
Insert general pendant lighting or inset downlights or wallwashers for the overall light; fix baffled light below cabinets to shine directly onto the worktop, and try to install special lights over stove and sink.
If you are going to eat in the kitchen make sure overall lights arc on a dimmer switch and that there is enough light over the table — use a rise-and-fall light fixture for example— which can, of course , be substituted for or combined with candlelight at night.
Independent switches for each light will make it easier to create the appropriate atmosphere.
Fluorescent tubes are best for under cabinet/worktop lighting.
They last much longer than incandescent tubes, offer more light per watt but need to be carefully chosen in the right colours for the most accurate presentation of food.
That is to say, choose warm white de luxe (not just warm white) or cool white de luxe (not just cool white).
There is no point in dimming fluorescent  light; although it is possible, it is extremely costly and unnecessary.
Mount tubes as close to the front of cabinets as possible and shield them with a baffle or small valance or cornice attached to the bottom of units.
This will subdue any glare.
Sinks will need a minimum of two 100 watt incandescent bulbs or two 75 watt reflector floodlights which will focus light directly onto the bowls and draining boards.
If you have a hood over your hob or stove you should see that bulbs arc enclosed to protect them from spattered grease and heat.
Most manufacturers recommend a 60 watt maximum; or use fluorescent tubes.
Island work areas can be lit by general light, a rise-and-fall fixture or a fluorescent fixture containing at least two 30 or 40 watt tubes.
Alternatively, try recessed or surface-mounted downlights using, say, 75 watt reflector floods.
Good results for considerably less money can be achieved with clamp-on work lights.
ROOM FOR IMPROVEMENT
If you find your kitchen hard to work in, tiring, cramped for space, uninspiring, or shabby, you can at least take comfort in the fact that you are not alone.
The trouble is that the majority of kitchens in the majority of homes were designed years ago with appliances, storage cabinets, work surfaces and lighting that is now either inadequate or unsuitable.
Alternatively it may be that your kitchen actually functions with great efficiency and is relatively modern but simply lacks character.
Whatever the problem, there is always a solution, so long as you are prepared to use your ingenuity, be flexible and remember that rules were made to be broken — or at least bent a little.
Unfortunately some solutions rely on structural changes for effect, but these don't always have to involve vast expense.
For example, if you are short of wall space and have a door off the kitchen leading to a room which can also be approached from another door, block off the kitchen door.
This could either involve removing it altogether and blocking up the space with bricks and mortar, or simply locking it and putting furniture against it on both sides.
Similarly, if your problem is one of poor ventilation leading to a steamy or smoke-filled room in which it is difficult to see anything, the solution is obviously an air extractor.
This could be let into the wall, which would mean taking up valuable wall space and also involve duct work.
You could, however, if there is a window in the room, replace a pane of glass with one heavy enough to resist the weight and pressure of an air extractor.
This will save on time, convenience and expense.
If more drastic action is called for, some alternatives are outlined on page 115.
It may be that all that is required is a little lateral thinking.
For example, if you are short of storage space, a perennial complaint, perhaps you could consider the ceiling.
You would be amazed at what can be stored at this level.
For example, if your wall units don't meet the ceiling, little-used dishes can be rowed up along the tops, or you could build extra cupboards in the gap.
Other storage solutions include hanging objects from hooks attached to the undersides of shelves or wall cupboards; suspending objects from wooden slats on the wall using S-hooks; and using wire baskets beneath shelves to give additional storage capacity.
MAKING CHANGES
Luckily, as most of us have neither the money nor the time to undertake major remodelling, it is quite possible to make significant changes without going to the bank for a loan or calling in a builder.
If you have not really thought how you could improve your space, or can't quite place what is wrong, ask yourself the following questions:
Do you find you are walking around a lot, even to prepare the simplest of meals?
Do you always seem to be shifting things along on your worktops in order to make room to prepare something?
Do you have to keep looking for things?
A particular knife perhaps, or some other essential-at-the-time utensil?
Are you constantly having to move things around in your cabinet in order to find what you need?
Are all your cupboards or closets crammed full?
Can you see items on your shelves or in your cabinets which you have not used for at least a year?
Has the size of your household changed since the last time you bought a kitchen appliance?
Do people tend to stand around in your kitchen when they are eating a snack or drinking the odd cup of coffee because there is no place to sit?
Is your kitchen the sort of place where family and friends congregate for chats as a matter of course.
If not, would you like it to bc?
Would you like to change the whole look but don't think you have the money?
Are you in rented property so feel you just have to put up with what you have?
If you have answered yes to at least three of these questions, some sort of change is certainly due, if not overdue.
Here's how to achieve it.
The answer to the first problem is obviously to try to do something about your domestic traffic problems.
If you do seem to be walking around a lot during meal preparations try to count the number of times you walk to various work areas and even the number of steps you take.
You might well find that another work counter will help a good deal.
If there is no room to add any extra counter space try importing a free-standing butcher-block worktop or a trolley or cart.
Again, if you find you arc always walking back and forth to a larder or pantry, or to shelves at the other end of the kitchen, a storage trolley or cart which you could wheel up when necessary should help.
STORAGE METHODS
Sensible storage
Several more of the problems are clearly to do with your current storage or methods of storage.
People are always complaining that they do not have enough work space/dumping space, but it may well be what they really need is better organized storage.
Look at the work spaces at your disposal.
Are you using them to their best advantage?
Or are they so cluttered up that there isn't any real space to work on?
If clutter is your only problem, be ruthless and get rid of anything hanging around that you have not used for the last six months, and put anything else away in a cupboard, cabinet or closet somewhere.
If there does not seem any room to get rid of storage jars, canisters, cook tools and so on, you might need to add more shelves and hooks.
You can often use the space between the bottom of wall-hung cabinets and the counter top to put up small shelves which will take a variety of objects; this is often a good place to stand your collection of dried herbs in small pots or jars — it keeps them together, clearly visible and to hand.
And if you add cup hooks to the edges you can hang things from them as well.
Another useful extra storage space is behind cabinet doors where again you might fix narrow shelves or hooks.
And don't overlook the exposed sides of end base or wall-hung cabinets.
FINDING EXTRA SPACE
Extra work space
If you are satisfied that you have spirited away all possible clutter and still do not have adequate preparation space you could cover a sink with a portable chopping board, or turn a drawer into an extra work surface by fitting runners to a block of wood the same width as the drawer, so that it will glide in and out of the unit, resting on the top of the drawer when it is pulled out.
Cleaned up cupboards
If your cabinets seem to be constantly overcrowded, open up all the doors and look at the contents with a critical eye.
If there are items around that you hardly ever use, remove them to more remote storage areas away from your work areas.
Seldom used or once-a-year items like ham boiling pans, turkey roasting pans, fish kettles, picnic baskets etc, might well be parted from the day-to-day items.
Or you can hang pot racks from the ceiling; and put up areas of peg boards to hang colanders, sieves, whisks, graters and so on.
If you have not bought any new appliances since you first moved into your home, or if your family has changed in numbers, you might be due for some updated versions.
The sort of choice available is explained on pages 125–131, but a new refrigerator or fridge-freezer, the addition of a microwave oven, or purchase of a portable dishwasher if there is no room for a plumbed-in version, might make all the difference to your own work load.
Another salient question to ask yourself is: are you really using your space to its best advantage.
I am not talking here about your work surfaces, or work triangles or the general space/work efficiency of your kitchen, but rather if you could use your kitchen as more of a family room-the sort of room which friends as well as family tend to migrate to at the first available opportunity.
Obviously this is not relevant if you have a tiny galley kitchen, or a slit of corridor space, but if you can add a chair or two, or at least a couple of stools where there were none before; and some sort of bar, or at least an enlarged counter top if you can't fit in a decent table, then you are well on the way to making your kitchen a more welcoming place.
You might also think of adding a desk top somewhere: against a small wall; across a comer, as an extension of a worktop.
A wooden counter with a couple of filing cabinets underneath, preferably on castors for easy manoeuvrability would be one excellent idea; or just a flip-down panel from a wall would be another.
Try to have some shelves above for files and cook books, add a telephone, writing implements and note books, even a typewriter if you can, and you have a mini office to hand whenever you need it.
Finally, you should remember that it really is not necessary to totally re-vamp the kitchen or call in a decorator in order to give it a face lift.
There are all sorts of comparatively small changes you can make which will transform your kitchen's looks out of all proportion to the time and expense.
Cheer up dull-looking cabinets by painting them in a high gloss or eggshell finish.
Or cut a stencil and re-spray the doors adding a simple motif — which can be repeated around the splashback, or around the top of a plain painted room.
Take off cabinet doors: leave them off altogether for an open shelved look; replace them with new louvred or wooden doors with beading; replace them with glazed doors, or hang curtains in front of shelves instead (PVC fabric curtains won't pick up dirt so easily but cotton is cheaper and easier to wash).
Re-tile the splashback between counter top and wall-hung cupboards.
Plain white tiles are the cheapest: brighten them up with coloured grouting, or mix them with other plain tiles to build up an eye-catching pattern
Paint everything white: walls, ceiling, units, and add new tiles as well.
Even the floor can be painted (see page 379).
The whole place will look amazingly different.
Add colour and interest with brightly coloured or prettily patterned kitchen accessories-tea towels, canisters, cook books.
Cover walls with a vinyl wallpaper (which can be wiped, or even scrubbed), in a pattern to suit your style-an all-over floral pattern for a soft, country look; splashy flowers in cheerful colours for a more lively country mood; a sharp grid or smart stripe for a more clinical style.
If you can't find the pattern you want in a vinyl, you can protect paper wallcoverings with a polyurethane varnish, but it may yellow the pattern slightly.
Change your window treatment: cafe curtains instead of a tired roller blind; glass shelves stretched across the window to display bits of china and glass or a collection of old stone and glass bottles; or paint the wooden surround in a pretty colour to frame a crisp new roller blind.
Either arrange trailing plants in hanging baskets slung from a brass or wooden pole fixed across the window, or intersperse them with herbs and African violets on glass shelves (see above).
Some plants like kitchen windows, especially if they are over a steamy sink, but always check first.
In a window which does not get much light, a single, showy Boston fern will make a focal point.
Do the unexpected.
‘White goods’(fridge, freezer, washing machine) needn't stay white: respray them (in a well-ventilated room) with cans of auto paint — by using masking tape you can easily create simple but eye-catching patterns in bold stripes.
Cover surrounding surfaces for protection from paint ‘drift’.
Change the walls.
Make the room look warm and cheerful by panelling the walls: fix ordinary wooden lathes on the diagonal.
Leave them natural or paint them to suit the rest of the decoration.
Or cover the walls with tongue-and-groove panelling.
Or do away with wallcovering altogether: strip away the plaster to expose the bare brick underneath.
(This solution is only suitable for older properties-investigate the structure of the wall in an unobtrusive corner before setting to work.)
Transform the floor: quarry tile it, or lay new ceramic tiles, Mexican tiles or bricks; put down a well varnished wood block floor; or lay sheet vinyl, linoleum or vinyl tiles.
Sealed cork tiles will create a warm atmosphere.
Check the subfloor (is it solid concrete or suspended wood?) before you make your choice, as not all coverings are suitable for all subfloors.
For a really economical new floor, add a coat of paint.
Lino paint is suitable for virtually any surface, and comes in a range of colours.
Wood, cork and well-laid vinyl tiles can be painted with gloss paint and given extra protection with a few coats of polyurethane or yacht varnish.
Add character and charisma: if the room is quite large but lacks personality, simply change some of the existing pieces of furniture: replace the table with an old pine one and add some old pine chairs (available in most junk shops); swap some units for a pine dresser; paint chairs cheerful colours; replace posters with a cork or fabric-covered  notice-board .
Don't forget details: particularly in rented property, where you can't make substantial alterations, you can still make an enormous difference with carefully chosen accessories: sets of matching storage jars, wooden spice racks, kitchen roll holders, pretty tea towels, bunches of herbs, onions or dried flowers, interesting canisters-old or new; plants; posters; prints; and last, but by no means least, good-looking cookware.
IDEAS FOR IMPROVEMENTS
Changes for the better
ADDING STYLE
I inherited one kitchen which had lemon yellow units with aluminium knobs, lemon yellow walls, a false flagstone vinyl floor and speckly plastic laminate worktops.
I removed the units from one short wall, replaced them with a huge old pine dresser and painted all the walls, the ceiling and the rest of the units white.
I changed the aluminium knobs for some more cheerful brass handles, covered the wall space between worktops and the bottom of cabinets with some blue and white Mexican tiles (which didn't cost the earth), re-topped the counters with butcher-block and changed the vinyl flagstones for quarry tiles.
Result: a total change of character.
For other instant transformations you could jazz up an all-white kitchen say, by adding red and white tiles and red handles, or by just painting a stripe all along between drawers and cupboard doors.
Another white kitchen could be given a totally different look by adding green plastic handles and importing masses of plants and some green painted bamboo blinds.
Equally you could add wood counter tops to an otherwise all-laminate room, together with wooden slatted blinds, or the plain bamboo or matchstick variety, or some red and white or blue and white check gingham curtains or cafe curtains.
Once you really start to think of the components that can be changed in a room without too much ado you can come up with any number of ideas for a change of style, or more important, for adding style where none existed before.
SPACE AND STYLE
When you come to re-vamp your kitchen on a more major scale, your choices are wider.
You probably have a good idea of the atmosphere you want to create in your kitchen, and you will find some simplified pointers to style on the following pages.
First, however, you have to look at how to make the best use of existing space.
Making sense of your space
The great advantage of starting from scratch in a kitchen is that you can, for very little extra cost, make major improvements by repositioning services (gas, plumbing, electricity), doors, windows, even walls.
Since kitchens tend to be positioned at the back of the house, they are often in an ideal situation for extending into the back garden, or knocking through into a corridor or back room to create a more useful space.
If you are planning major changes to your kitchen, it is worth finding out how neighbours with the same layout have solved the problem.
One of the first points to consider when reorganizing is the basic floor plan and convenient work triangle mentioned on page 97.
There are several tried and tested  arrangements of units and appliances which will give an idea of the use you can make of a given shape: The one-wall kitchen, the U-plan kitchen, the L-shaped kitchen and the galley kitchen.
The shape of your room will probably dictate the arrangement, although if you have a generous-sized room, you may be able to change the shape of the actual work area with room dividers.
These can be full-height units giving extra storage space, or counter-style fittings, providing more work surfaces or space for a fitted hob.
When you get down to more detailed planning it is useful to know that in a standard European kitchen, base units are 600 mm (24 in) deep; wall units 300 mm (12 in) deep; most appliances are 600 mm (24 in) wide; Units come in widths of 300, 500, 600, 1000 or 1200 mm (12, 20, 24, 39, or 48 in), counter tops are 900 mm (36in) high, the bases of wall-hung cabinets 405 mm (16 in) above that.
These dimensions have been tested ergonomically, and are designed to fit in with standard appliances, so they provide a useful guide if you are building your own units instead of buying ready-made.
TRIED AND TESTED ARRANGEMENTS
THE FAMILY ROOM
Creating a family room
If you arc prepared to invest a lot of time and money in your new kitchen you might consider making a sort of kitchen/living or family room; a real ‘heart of the home’ area, more casual than a living room, more cosy than a working kitchen.
If you would like to have this sort of feel but don't think your existing space is big enough, or light enough, or for one reason or another, does not seem to lend itself to such treatment, then consider the surrounding spaces.
What sort of room do you have next door?
Is there a scullery for example?
Or a lobby of some sort?
A sun lounge, verandah or covered porch?
A little used dining room or even a corridor or hall?
If the walls separating the two are of the partition rather than supporting variety you could take them down and incorporate the space into one much larger room which will make more family sense.
Sometimes, too, it might make sense to turn most of a ground or basement floor into an open-plan kitchen/living/family room/study.
As long as you consult the professionals, a surprising number of walls can be taken down with ease and the resulting increase in light and space is clearly amazing.
In a case like this, it might be best to keep most of the kitchen part of the room to one wall and hive it off from the rest of the area with a long island unit which could incorporate extra work and storage space and possibly a cook top, sink and refrigerator as well.
A long dividing wall like this would make a good serving unit for every day and a splendid buffet area for a party.
CREATING STYLE
Looking at style
Whatever the shape of your kitchen, it is worth giving some attention to the decoration and accessories to create a distinctive style.
The choices are unlimited, but here are some of the characteristic elements which help to give a kitchen a particular atmosphere.
Mediterranean style would be designed to give a cool, smooth working atmosphere, with long slate or marble worktops, terracotta-style tiled floors, and large, walk-in cupboards with thick walls-lined with marble shelves for food storage or racks for pans and crockery.
Roughly plastered walls, shuttered windows and wall-mounted lighting typify this style, with open storage under the worktop and little wall-hung storage.
Strings of garlic and bunches of herbs hang from the ceiling, and extra preparation space is provided by a solid table with upright, rush seated chairs around it.
Farmhouse style kitchens are typified by stripped pine, bare brick and perhaps a dresser.
Many manufacturers produce pine or pine-effect units, but none will give the easy-on-the-eye, mellow effect that you can get from old pine.
Worktops, where they exist, should be in natural materials-wood or tiles.
But by using old pieces of furniture of odd shapes and sizes you may well sacrifice the conventional work surface to retain character.
A pine or oak refectory table, forming an island unit in the middle of the room, would make up for this.
Quarry  tiles , brick paviour or wooden boards are typical choices for the floor.
For real farmhouse style, you'll need a traditional range (or one of the newer versions).
Back up the cooking facilities of the range with a modern oven, and you'll have all the character with the advantage of modern technology.
Go for pretty floral fabrics, patchwork or fresh ginghams, and dot farmhouse chairs and rockers round the room to encourage-visitors.
The fresh, country look has evolved over the last few years as people have begun to paint wooden units and replace solid doors with glazed doors to create a lighter atmosphere.
Keep to pale colours, even for work surfaces, and choose pale, pretty floral patterns or plain cream for walls and accessories.
Coloured tiles or sheet vinyl are ideal for country flooring, or a wooden floor looks equally at home.
Use the glazed cupboards to display attractive china and to provide storage space for attractively packaged dry goods.
Period look kitchens have warm mahogany units, deep butler sinks and brass taps.
Traditional style ranges can be fitted, or buy a modern oven and hob that have a matt black and brass finish to give a nostalgic feel.
Choose white tiles with black or deep coloured diamond insets for the floor.
The best material for worktops are marble, slate, and natural wood.
Far right City slick style can add life to a dull urban kitchen.
Go for strong colours and simple geometric patterns.
All-white units are cheap, and can be brightened up with coloured tiles and accessories.
Or be bold and use more dramatically coloured cupboards.
Efficiency is essential in the fast food world of city life, so storage has to be well organized and cleverly designed to leave worktops clear and uncluttered.
THE HYBRID KITCHEN
High-tech is characterized by the use of functional glass and metal.
In its extreme form, the domestic Hi-tech kitchen is indistinguishable from a professional kitchen in a good restaurant.
Long runs of built-in stainless steel worktop, with hob, sink, chopping board and pastry board built in.
Separate cooking areas for different types of food a pastry chefs comer, a vegetable preparation area and so on.
Cupboards are replaced by open steel shelves, lined with glass storage jars.
Flooring is usually synthetic but essentially practical — stud rubber tiles for instance.
Of course, it is possible (even desirable to draw the best elements of each of these distinctive styles together, to form a perfect, hybrid kitchen, adapted to your needs.
They are not to be looked at in isolation and followed to the letter, but if you're not sure about style, they will give you some useful ideas.
CHOOSING EQUIPMENT
Very few of us can afford all of the appliances we would like all at the same time.
What we can do, however, is plan for them.
Whether you are designing a kitchen from scratch or updating an old one you must think in terms of priorities, define your most pressing needs, and start from there.
Do remember that, contrary to the cynics' view of built-in obsolescence, most major appliances — refrigerators, stoves, dishwashers and so on— are built to last for years, so, as far as possible, you should keep future changes of circumstances in mind as well as your present needs.
If your household is likely to expand in any way it might be cheaper in the long run to buy a larger model than the more modest affair you had thought of first.
In any case, it is perfectly possible to buy second-hand or reconditioned models at a fraction of the price of new ones as long as you are prepared to accept the risk that they might eventually develop faults which could prove expensive.
Still, they can make good stop-gaps till you can afford new models.
Obviously existing kitchens can be made more efficient with more up-to-date equipment — bigger freezer and/or fridge, a dishwasher, waste disposal unit and so on— but only if the appliances work hard for you, save time and labour and generally make your particular way of life easier and more enjoyable.
A new cooker or whatever can be a tremendous boon and investment but before you go out and spend money ask yourself questions about the way you live: is the pace hectic or leisurely? how many and what sort of meals do you have to provide? are you far from a good supermarket or freezer centre? how much time do you have for shopping? are you out at work all day? do you grow your own vegetables? how often do you entertain? can you spend time on cooking and food preparation or is it always meals in a hurry?
The answers will help you decide whether you need say, one vast freezer, or a large one in the garage and a small one in the kitchen, or a microwave plus freezer.
If space is limited, buying a larger model may not be possible.
But consider other areas of the home.
Is there room for a freezer in the garage or for a washing machine in the bathroom?
Or can you fit in a fridge-freezer or a miniature washing machine?
Gas or electricity?
This is really a matter of personal preference and the sort of facilities available in your building (or area because, of course, nearby gas can be piped in at some cost, or use gas from cylinders if you really prefer gas).
If you have the possibility of both services in a kitchen, you could opt for a gas cook top and an electric oven; or vice versa; or a mixture of both gas and electric plates to hedge bets should anything go wrong with one or other service, or to take advantage of both sorts of energy for different cooking needs (slow simmering; fast boiling etc.)
Stoves and ovens
We've come a long way from the free-standing stove with four burners and an oven with maybe a separate grill or broiler.
Now you can get models to suit every size, shape and style of kitchen from separate hobs and ovens, to catering size free-standing models and makes that can be slid or dropped into your work run or counter top for maximum sleekness.
Ceramic cook tops can give the semblance of an almost unbroken work surface, and so do the new magnetic induction units that look like tiles, but do not heat up because they use magnetic energy to cook food by energising molecules both in the food and the pan.
Both types of cooker top are very smooth in appearance and easy to clean.
Some cook tops combine both gas and electric burners, other have interchangeable parts including a grill, a griddle and a rotisserie.
Some tops have built-in deep fryers, and there are stoves which combine conventional and microwave or high-speed cooking in a single unit.
Some British cooker tops still tend to be niggardly in size and don't make sufficient allowance for four large pans.
Other countries seem to manage this better — British manufacturers please copy.
But there arc plenty of other refinements to look for: self-cleaning ovens, automatic timers, automatic meat thermometers for perfect roasts, capacious drawer space underneath for plate warming and storing pots and pans, and tops with built-in grills and their own surface venting systems.
Many free-standing cookers arc 550–600 mm (22–24 ins) deep and extend slightly beyond most cabinets.
Standard widths are 510–600 mm (20 24 ins).
If you have the space and the cash, you will find that American and some continental cookers are much larger than this.
You will be able to choose between a single or a double oven, with an eye-level grill or a grill at waist level, often set into a small top oven.
New American models often feature a small, eye-level oven.
Check the size
Built-in ovens may be designed to   go under the worktop (built-under), either beneath the hob or away from it, or they may fit into housing units so that the oven(s) are more accessible.
Built-ins are usually just under 600mm (24in) wide, to fit neatly into standard units.
Heights vary from about 500 mm (20 in) to 1000 mm (39 in).
When you select a model, the literature which comes with it will tell you the exact size of opening and amount of ventilation space you need.
Compact hobs are about 550 × 450 mm (21 × 17in) but if you have space, go for a large hob to take awkward-sized pans: you don't have to limit yourself to a simple, square configuration there's no reason why you shouldn't have two or three small hobs in different places.
If you lead a hectically busy life, a microwave oven can be a real life- and time-saver, cooking food in a fraction of the time required by a normal oven.
The snag has often been their lack of browning capacity-pale food doesn't look very appealing.
But now there are special browning versions that take care of this.
And the introduction of a turntable means that food is cooked evenly.
Microwaves may be portable (but bulky) counter top models, wall-mounted, or built-in.
Their measurements are less than those of standard ovens, although built-in models are the same width as built-in conventional ovens.
Refrigerators and Freezers
The model of refrigerator and freezer you choose should depend on the size — or potential size — of your family and your work and cooking habits.
Generally speaking, a 140 litre (5 cubic feet) refrigerator and 140–170 litres (5–6 cubic feet) of freezer space is ample for a couple and you should add another cubic foot per person in your household.
If you can shop only once a week for example, you will need much more deep freeze space than if you can shop every day.
If you cannot have a separate freezer you should look at a refrigerator with maximum freezer space and capacious food storage compartments.
A good many of the latest models have sealed meat and vegetable drawers with adjustable temperature and humidity control to keep food fresher for longer.
Obviously frost-free models which mean you never have to defrost are as useful as self-cleaning ovens, and additional luxuries include iced water and crushed ice dispensers, automatic ice makers and the kind of American model with almost instant (that is to say about an hour) automatic ice cream and sorbet or  sherbet-makers .
Separate deep freezers come in chest or upright models and are ideal for people with large gardens and plenty of produce to store and also for stashing away bulk buys and supermarket bargains.
Dishwashers
Really good dishwashers will clean everything from fine china and glass to encrusted saucepans and casseroles with settings that range from gentle wash to super scrub cycles.
If you are a small family, look for models with the sort of controls that allow you rinse-and-hold cycles — a short cycle which rinses dishes for a short time to get rid of dried-on food and any smells so that they can then wait till you have a full load to put through.
If you are a large family, or cook a lot, you should definitely look for a machine with a scrub cycle so you are not always hand-scouring pots and pans.
Look too, for models with the sort of shelving that allows you to programme the machine to start work hours later and will make the operation a whole lot quieter, and the kinds that have soft food disposal units to prevent blocked drains.
If you do not have space for a build-in model beside or under the sink, there are portables available that sit on the worktop, where they can be connected to the taps and drains for washing.
If you move and have more space, many portables are convertible and can be built-in.
Most models are 60 cm (24 in) wide to fit in with average counter tops.
Slimline built-in types 45 cm (18 in) wide are also available.
Most models are 60 cm (24 in) wide to fit in with average counter top measurements.
Sinks
If you have space (and the money) it is useful to have two and even three sinks: one for soaking dishes, one for preparing vegetables and one smaller one for a waste or garbage disposer.
A waste disposer can, of course, be fitted into a single main sink, but do make sure your building or house has the sort of drainage system that will not be fouled up by liquid refuse in bulk.
Some sinks come complete with extra cutting board surface to fit across the top when necessary and so provide extra work space; others have small spray attachments at the side to aid cleaning.
If you are short of space do not forget the inch-saving corner varieties.
Materials are generally stainless steel, porcelain-covered cast iron, or the new plastic substance which looks like marble and makes a neat and effective all-in-one counter and sink.
The most common choice for taps is a single swing spout with either one or two handles.
Waste disposers and rubbish (trash) compactors
The newest waste disposers can handle up to I litre (2 pints) of waste food at a time very much more quickly than the old bone-chilling (and bone-crunching) models.
Rubbish or trash compactors can squash up cardboard boxes, cartons, tins, cans and bottles to a quarter of their original size.
They may be worth considering if you live in a high-rise flat, or have infrequent refuse collection, but they do take up space.
They can be located anywhere in the kitchen and attached to the same sort of outlet as an electric stove.
Cooker hoods
Although some stoves have built-in self-venting outlets, there is an enormous market for hoods of every description and style with built-in fans for ventilation and to remove cooking smells.
Most units need to be on an outside wall or ducted to vent outdoors but others can be bought which are ventless, recirculating the air through activated charcoal filters which should be changed regularly.
All of them have incorporated light bulbs to give extra light over the work top.
Washing machines and dryers
If there is any possibility of placing washing machines and dryers away from the kitchen you should consider it.
Detergents and dirty clothes don't mix very well with food preparation and in any case the most sensible place to position both appliances is somewhere near the bedroom/bath area.
Standard machines measure 600 mm (23⅝in) deep by 595 mm (23⅜in) wide, to fit between units and can be stacked one  above the other, but , unless you have a separate utility room, that does not leave much space nearby for storing laundry supplies and accessories or setting down the just cleaned laundry.
If there is room for a 1300 mm (5 ft) cupboard or closet just outside the kitchen, bedroom or bathroom, say in a corridor, or lobby, this would be a better solution.
It would give room for a washer and dryer to stand side by side under a convenient counter top.
better still, if there is room, would be a 2500 mm (8 ft) wide louvre-fronted closet which would give you space for washing machine, dryer, clothes hamper and general purpose cabinet with a metre wide (3 ft) double door wall cabinet above and a clothes rod to hang out just dried permanent press clothing.
The units could have a counter top and there would need to be efficient lighting.
If you really cannot find the space anywhere else in the home you will have to try to squeeze space in the kitchen (or go to a launderette).
In this case, you may want to opt for one of the newer washer/dryers that combine both facilities.
Do not forget that most dryers need to be vented to an outside wall.
FITTED UNITS
Kitchen units and cabinets
If you are handy yourself, can employ a good carpenter, or go to a custom cabinet maker, you can make or obtain literally any size or type of unit to fit the most awkward spaces.
Another ploy is to buy unfinished or whitewood cabinets and fit them into your space, finishing them off yourself with paint or stain.
If you are going for a fully fitted kitchen, you will find the units are made up of three elements: the carcass (basic cupboard and shelves), the doors and drawer fronts, and the work surface which runs along the top.
Usually, all can be bought separately.
In some ranges, you can buy decor panels to fit the front of specially designed built-in appliances, making them match the cupboards.
Ready made cabinets come in a huge choice of finishes, colours, and measurements.
Heights for wall cabinets range from 300 mm (12 in) -good for the space over a refrigerator — to 1000mm (39in).
The depth from wall to face is a standard 300 mm (12 in) and widths run from 230 mm (9 in) to 600 mm (24in) for single door cabinets to 1000 mm (39 in) to 1200 mm (48 in) for double door models.
Corner cabinets with a single door and either fixed or revolving shelves can be mounted diagonally across a corner to use every inch of available space.
Base units generally stand 900 mm (36 in) from the floor if you count the worktop as well and widths match the wall hung cabinets, though the depth is generally twice as much.
You can buy them with doors, drawers, or both, and with different depths for different drawers.
Again, there are many refinements to choose from: glide-out vegetable storage equipment, wine racks, slide-out chopping blocks, bottle drawers, silver storage drawers, pot lid holders, tray storage, sliding trays for linens and cutlery racks.
Alternatively, you can buy standard but empty units and fill them with your own choice of such ‘organizers’ from other sources.
Pantry or food storage cabinets are specially made to accommodate cans and dry goods (breakfast cereals, jams, flour and other packaged goods).
Often they are heavily hinged with one can deep shelving from top to bottom of the doors for maximum use of space.
You can buy them in wall, floor or full length sizes.
Utility or broom cupboards are generally 300 mm (12 in) or 600 mm (24 in) deep, 1950 mm (7 ft) tall and from 500mm (22 in) to 600mm (24 in) wide.
They consist of one tall space with an upper shelf for brooms, vacuum cleaners, mops and cleaning supplies.
Similarly-shaped cabinets can be bought as housing units for particular models of wall oven and for refrigerators.
ORGANISING STORAGE
The central fact to acknowledge about any sort of storage is that there is rarely enough of it, and this is certainly true in the kitchen.
Be ruthless
The kitchen is the one room where you should literally use every inch, nook, cranny, piece of ceiling, window, door or side of cabinet; in fact the key to successful and efficient kitchen storage is to use every possible surface, and to assemble equipment and accessories by the places where they are the most needed.
Start your kitchen reorganization with a drastic sort-out and throw-out.
Don't weaken.
If you do not use an object once a day, or at least once a week, it does not deserve prime storage space (that is within easy reach and somewhere between knee and eye level).
Put it instead at the back of a base cabinet or high up on a wall cabinet, or in the space, if there is one, between wall cabinets and ceiling which you can always turn into a second tier of cabinets by adding fronts to match your other units.
Things which are used once or twice a year — turkey roasting pans, huge party casseroles, picnic baskets, should be rigorously stashed right away, if possible out of the kitchen altogether — under the stairs, in an attic, in the basement or garage in a house; in some more remote cupboard in a flat or apartment.
And what about all those gadgets lying loose in drawers?
Would they be tidier and more accessible hung on pegboards?
If you have not used something for literally years the chances are that it won't come in useful for a rainy day (the hoarder's excuse) and that you probably won't ever use it.
So give it away, send it to a jumble sale, sell it if you can, or just throw it away.
Whatever you do, be tough…
Don't keep it.
If you do, it will almost certainly be the beginning of the end and you will never get properly organized.
Perhaps one should keep a picture of hideous confusion pinned to the kitchen door in the same way as slimmers keep a fat photo taped to the fridge as a deterrent to snacking.
Once you have eliminated superfluous items in this way, you can prioritize the rest of your storage so that the most useful items come most readily to hand.
The result — a more efficient and pleasant room.
Be logical
This simply means that instead of bending and scuffling around for saucepans stacked up in a dark base unit, try hanging them from hooks near the sink (where you are going to fill them with water) or near the stove.
Keep herbs and spices on small racks just above or by the cook top.
Store pulses, rice, pasta, sugar, flour and condiments by the worktop or preparation area.
Stash old plastic or paper shopping bags near the rubbish or garbage bin and then you can re-cycle them as bin liners.
Everyday plates can be stored upright in a wooden plate rack above the dishwasher or by the sink.
This is much easier than keeping them in piles in a cupboard or closet.
Similarly, mugs and cups used regularly can be kept on hooks near the stove top, and glasses can be kept in a cabinet near the washing machine.
Store wooden spoons, whisks, colanders, sieves in containers or from hooks by the worktop or cooker top, wherever you need them most, and keep oil, vinegars, condiments, herbs and garlic near salad bowls.
Be ingenious
Once you have thoroughly reorganized your existing storage you can look around for new surfaces to conquer.
Bunches of herbs and pot and saucepan racks can be hung from the ceiling.
You can fix tiny narrow shelves or racks to the inside of cabinet doors; attach spice racks, hooks, more shelves (to take cook books?) to the sides of cabinets; add further shelves just above worktops on the splashback areas, and add shallow shelves 300–450mm (12–18in) above cook tops and sinks with hooks attached to the edges for various bits of equipment such as measuring jugs and ladles.
As usual in most rooms, corners are often a wasted area.
You might be able to build a corner unit across the angle of two worktops for cook books, or more spices and condiments, with more storage space for jars on top.
If there is not room for this you might utilize the space by making slots in the counter top to take your cooking knives, or you could suspend them from a magnetic bar just above out of reach of children.
Think too, about using the underside of your cabinets for kitchen paper holders, more suspended spice racks, or for hooks to hang just about anything.
Spare bits of wall which are too small for conventional cabinets can be used for mounting peg boards for small implements and utensils; or pin-board for recipes, bills, receipts, reminders to the family and to yourself.
Make better use of your base cabinets by fixing slide-out towel racks to the doors, and by installing swivel storage shelves to do away with all that groping around for things at the back.
Shallow alcoves can be used for yet more narrow shelves just the depth of one can or bottle or for mounting a magnetic knife-rack; awkward spaces, say between stove and storage cabinets, can be used for trays.
SUITABLE SURFACES
Only when you have made your plans, decided on your work sequence, bought your appliances and thought about the style of room you would like to create, can you focus on the treatment of the rest: the framework of walls, floor, window and ceiling as well as the sort of tiles, splashback and worktop you would like.
This, of course, is the actual decoration of the room, the process which comes first in most areas, but certainly last in the kitchen planning sequence.
Last, but never least: colours, surfaces and embellishments have their own particular and important role to play in kitchen comfort.
Walls
By the time you have put up an appropriate amount of cabinets and storage there is not usually much wall left to cover.
It is often possible to tile a large proportion of the wall for guaranteed case of maintenance.
Paint, however, should always be washable — do not use emulsion because you will not bc able to wash grease and smoke off easily, but rather use gloss or eggshell finishes.
White or earth colours — tobaccos, umbers, sand, sludgy green, pine green — are particularly appropriate with food, while blue and white, green and white, red or pink and white and a sunny chrome yellow, always look good and fresh.
Try painting walls white and colouring woodwork, or vice versa.
It depends very much on the units you choose.
Obviously, if they arc a colour as opposed to white or wood, you should choose a background that blends with them.
If you decide on a wallpaper, try to use a paper-backed vinyl, a vinyl impregnated fabric paper, or a PVC wallcovering.
Or else paint the surface of ordinary paper with a coat or two of eggshell or gloss polyurethane for a practical protective finish.
Stripped or new brick makes a good kitchen background, so does tongue-and-groove wood panelling or panelling of wide wooden planks.
Bricks should be sealed with a masonry stabiliser, while wood should be waxed, varnished or painted.
If you have a kitchen/dining room and want to make it look particularly warm and comfortable you could make a visual division between working and eating areas by stapling the dining walls with a cheap cotton treated with a protective spray.
Or you could give your   room an interesting old country look by adding a ‘wainscot’ of boarding to a free wall, or at least some moulding at dado level.
Ceilings
Unless you have a particular pretty beamed or coved ceiling it is often a good idea to lower the ceiling area in a kitchen.
This enables you to put in recessed lighting, or to add an acoustic or tongue-and-groove wood finish.
Acoustic tiles are used for ceilings rather than walls and are made to absorb sound.
They have to be suspended from battens and are most often made from pre-finished, slotted insulation board, polystyrene or fibreglass.
Tongue-and-groove pine boarding looks good; it should be sealed with polyurethane to protect the wood and needs hardly any maintenance — just wiping over occasionally.
In America, the virtues of the old pressed metal ceilings have been rediscovered and redeployed.
But if you do not want to add a ceiling covering, simply paint the surface with white, or very pale emulsion to reflect as much light as possible.
Floors
Kitchen floors need to be tough enough to withstand all sorts of spills, grease and damp, comfortable enough to stand on for long periods, and handsome to look at.
The choice of covering in fact, very  much depends on the sort of style you have set yourself.
If you want a rustic kitchen, then quarry, brick or Mexican or French terracotta tiles look very splendid.
Slate is marvellous to look at but at a marvellous price, and there is an enormous choice in ceramic tiles which can be mixed in among the terracottas for an ethnic Mexican or Provencale, Italian, Spanish or Portuguese look.
Terracotta tiles, brick, flagstone, slate, terrazzo and non-slip ceramic are all durable, impressive, good to look at and easy to clean.
They generally come in a range of beautiful colours and pleasing shapes.
Most arc heavy and therefore only suitable for laying at ground-floor level or where floors are exceptionally strong.
All of these treatments arc as hard on the feet as they are easy on the eye-but sometimes, as I have said, good appearances win over practical considerations If both price and hardness bother you, there are acceptable alternatives in   vinyl, and cork coated with vinyl which can look very good too.
Both vinyl — in sheet or tile form — and vinyl-coated cork are easy to maintain.
PRACTICAL FLOORING
Hi-Tech and more sleekly designed kitchens look good with white tiled floors whether ceramic or vinyl, but again you could use cork and vinyl, or composition tiles or even  linoleum which has taken on a new lease of life now that people have realised how well it can look inlaid with other colours.
Wood treated with polyurethane to withstand spills and grease can look very handsome, especially in a dining kitchen, and old floors can be spruced up with paint, various painted finishes and stencilling, protected with extra coats of varnish.
If it appeals to you, the new stain-resistant kitchen carpet, available as tiles or in sheet form, is very warm and quiet, making it particularly suitable for a kitchen-diner.
When choosing flooring for a kitchen/diner, make sure the surface is suitable for both functions, or delineate one area from another by using different types of flooring.
For example, if you have quarry tiles in the kitchen, they may be rather cold on the feet for dinner guests lingering over coffee, as well as being noisy when chairs scrape across them.
You may find that people are encouraged to use the room as a more of a gathering place if the floor of the dining area is covered with colourful rugs, and even with practical vinyl flooring   you can create a change of atmosphere around the table by changing the colour of the floor or simply by adding a rug.
FLOORING FOR EFFECT
WORKTOPS AND WINDOWS
Windows
There is no point at all in elaborate window coverings in the kitchen.
They only get dirty, greasy and in the way.
It is far better to use cafe curtains, short, tied-back curtains, or blinds.
Fabric should be easily washed or cleaned cotton, or vinylised cotton (for roller blinds).
Otherwise use Venetian blinds in plastic or wood which can be easily wiped, or wooden shutters, or no covering at all.
Shelves look good and are practical across a window and can be made of glass, or wood, or metal grid for a Hi-Tech look.
Alternatively, just hang plants from hooks above the window, or stand small pots of plants along the windowsill, making sure that the ones you select are going to be happy with the kind of light, temperature and humidity you are providing.
Used this way, with massed greenery, or collections of glass on glass shelves, the kitchen window becomes a strong focal point.
If your kitchen has a whole wall of window, this needn't be a problem.
Either treat it as a feature in its own right, with a striking blind or shutters; give it as much impact as possible and let the view and the light pour in.
Or, if you think it steals too much potential storage space you could consider sacrificing some of it.
If you're  desperate for storage space it's often possible to build units right around a window so that the window acquires a recessed effect and becomes an essential part of the arrangement.
In this case, the simpler the window treatment the better; plain blinds, cafe curtains or just left bare.
Worktops
Worktops have to be as durable as floors, able to withstand chopping, hot utensils and spills, and still be good to look at.
The plastic laminated top is very popular but you must be careful not to chop directly on to it (use a chopping board) or to put down hot pots and saucepans.
Once ruined it is extremely difficult to put right.
Ceramic tiles-which can be continued up the space between counter top and unit to make a handsome splashback-come in a huge range of colours and designs and can look spectacular, gentle or fresh depending on the effect you want.
However, the grouting can easily get discoloured and dirty-looking, so it might bc better to start off with a dark grouting from the beginning.
Also, you should bc wary of putting down pots and pans straight from the stove; this might cause the ceramic to crack.
Butcher-block and wood counter   tops are sturdy and look good but they are not very practical near the sink surrounds or anywhere where there is water because they can warp and the grain can rise up.
If you are using wood as a continuous work surface, introduce some variety; let in a square of marble or ceramic tile for making pastry; surround your sink with stainless steel, tile or plastic laminate rather than wood, which tends to lift up and warp.
There is a new plastic substance that feels like marble but is immensely more practical.
This material is ideal for countertops and pastry surfaces since it is very durable, resistant to most stains, and does not burn or warp.
It comes in white, cream and a slightly veined beige.
It may be cut and glued to give a virtually seamless surface.
For more ideas on renewing or replacing worktops, see page 108.
Splashbacks
These can be made of plastic laminate, synthetic marble or, the most popular, ceramic tile.
They can be plain, patterned or flowered, bevelled, or a mixture.
Tiles can be laid on the diagonal or in a basket weave design to produce handsome effects.
Cooking and eating go together, so naturally the next step is to decide where and in what sort of style you are going to serve and eat meals.
It really hardly matters if this happens in a room of its own, in the kitchen, the living room, or even the hall.
Dining rooms today are wherever the food is served.
SUITABLE SURFACES/SAFETY
WHERE TO EAT
DINING ROOMS
If you do have a separate dining room, you're lucky.
It need contain no more than a sideboard, table and chairs and can be decorated in its own individual way.
If you do a great deal of formal or business entertaining then this sort of dining room is essential.
But these days, with space at a premium, a room kept solely for dining is rare; the chances are that it has to double as a work room, say for hobbies like model making, or as a quiet place where the family can get on with homework, studying or other paperwork.
And far more likely is the dining room which is no more than a corner of another room.
This, of course, makes it simple to furnish; all you really need are a table and chairs which fit in well with the rest of the room.
A kitchen-dining room is ideal for a family; it's cosy, convenient and economical since it saves heating another room.
In tiny flats and bedsitters it's more often the living room that has to make space for dining, in which case it's a good idea to separate the two functions with either a physical division — like an arch, trellis or shelving — or with visual treatment like different lighting or flooring, or perhaps a change of colour or mood created by wall coverings and soft furnishings.
If you can define the area with a different floor level or use one arm of an L-shaped room, so much the better.
You may still be able to emphasize the division by decorative changes, to give your dining area its own atmosphere, as you would if you were trying to divide a simple rectangular room.
DESIGNING A DINING ROOM
But whatever your dining area consists of, organizing it, giving it character and interest can bc challenging and stimulating.
In fact, the dining room should bc a particularly interesting room to decorate, because, like the bathroom, it is generally used for comparatively short periods of time, and then mostly at night.
As long as its main purpose is borne in mind — that of providing a relaxed, comfortable and enjoyable area for eating which is also an attractive, unobtrusive background for any food served — it can, theoretically, be as inventive, curious, and as experimental as you like.
Before you embark on the decoration, however, you need to have the practical considerations firmly in mind.
Decide exactly what functions the room has to fulfil.
Ask yourself these questions:
How many people will eat in the dining room regularly?
What is the maximum number of diners which will have to be accommodated at a sit-down meal?
How much storage space is necessary for china and cutlery; for dining accessories; for other items not related to eating-books, papers, sewing equipment and so on?
Is the room the only dining space or are family meals usually taken elsewhere?
Will it be used mainly at night, or does it need to look fresh for breakfast, serviceable for lunch and intimate for dinner parties?
Are your needs likely to change over the next few years-will you have children to cope with; are you likely to entertain more often than you do at present?
Consider whether a very bold, outrageous, or dramatic look would be too overwhelming in a dining room which all the family are going to want to use at different times.
I remember an all-black room I saw years ago which has always stuck in my mind: black velvet walls, black carpet, ebony table and chairs, black lacquer side table.
The only relief was in the tablecloth, napkins, china and flowers which varied from spanking white, to black and white, to brilliant yellow or green.
The lighting was subtle: concealed behind pelmets, inset into the ceiling, bounced up from uplights on the floor, flickering from candles.
And the room always looked beautiful, except on a gloomy winter's day, when it was frightful.
Such rooms arc definitely not for breakfast.
Another room I remember for its verve was all shiny dark green lacquered walls, gilded carpet and trompe l'oeil painted walls which looked like real draperies: a theatrical, stunning experience.
But the fact that so few rooms stand out in my memory is not so surprising.
On the whole, dining rooms fall into pretty familiar categories, furnished with pretty familiar types of furniture, colours and accessories, And perhaps that is as it should be.
The serious diner likes to feel comfortable, at ease, to have a sense of wellbeing, but docs not want his attention to be distracted.
Having worked out how your room will be used, you should consider what sort of finishes are going to be suitable.
With food   around, surfaces should bc as practical as possible: choose flooring which will not show crumbs and can be mopped up easily; sideboards should bc provided with protective covers if they are not heatproof; traditional polished tables might look good, but with children around, you may be better off going for a heatproof, scrubbable surface which can be wiped over quickly; upholstery should be washable; wallpaper need not be as tough as the vinyl-coated varieties.
In short what you should aim to create in a dining room is a special atmosphere within a very practical framework, so when you've provided for the basics you can add to the mood with window treatments, interesting lighting and decorative tricks to make the room as comfortable, as functional and as good looking as you can.
EATING IN COMFORT
BACK TO BASICS
When you know where your dining area is going to be and what size table and chairs will fit best into the space, you can start thinking about how you plan to treat the other important elements in the room the walls, floor and windows.
Walls, floors and windows
There are any number of suitable treatments for walls in a dining room: there is not going to bc much wear and tear, and no need for waterproof surfaces, as in kitchens or bathrooms, so you can afford to have some fun.
Paint them deep matt, eggshell or shiny gloss and hang them with pictures or a collection of some sort.
Use one of the attractive paint techniques which are re-gaining popularity: sponging, rag rolling or dragging.
Stencil a border round the ceiling, around the door and windows, and above the skirting boards.
Wallpaper them or cover them with fabric: felt, hessian, sacking, lining fabric or printed cotton.
Panel them with wood, line them with cork, strip the plaster back to the brick; the choice is endless.
Tongue-and-groove panelling will make a complete transformation: stain it, varnish it or paint it.
Or finish with trompe l'oeil painted murals.
If you do a lot of entertaining and want it to look spectacular at night, then mirror tiles will gleam and sparkle and reflect candle-light beautifully.
In fact you can do almost anything with the walls of a dining room.
But remember that above all it is going to be a place where people are meant to enjoy their food.
Have interesting decoration by all means, but avoid anything too demanding on the eye.
You will want people to relax over their meal, especially if you do a lot of entertaining.
If floorboards are in reasonable condition, they could be stripped, sanded and polished.
Or they could be painted, or stencilled or both.
I, personally, do not think it a very good idea to have carpet in the dining room where it only picks up smells and gets dirtier more quickly than in most places since people do, without fail, drop things.
But there is nothing against rugs of any description.
Bricks, old tiles, new tiles, quarry tiles, Mexican, French or Spanish tiles, ceramic tiles, slate and even marble facing all look spectacular — provided, of course, that you are prepared to put up with the clattering noise from chairs being pulled up to the table and pushed back.
Vinyl is  practical, so is vinyl-coated cork, and  linoleum , which now comes in all colours and can be inlaid or arranged in a pattern in various shades with quite spectacular results.
Black and white vinyl tiles can look particularly effective, and hardboard or chipboard, painted or varnished, make cheap cover-ups.
I was always immensely impressed with the vinyl flooring we had in the dining room when my children were small.
It seemed to withstand the onslaught of bicycles, tricycles and roller skates with scarcely a scratch to show.
Windows give you a chance to go to town.
The obvious window treatments in traditional dining rooms are curtains on rods, or under pelmets, or hung from various headings, tied back at the sides, and used with roller, Roman or festoon blinds if you wanted to cut a particular dash.
Blinds on their own can fit any atmosphere, particularly if windows are awkward, small or you did not want to lose too much light.
Vertical or louvred blinds, pinoleum or matchstick blinds or Venetian blinds are more appropriate in modern settings.
Add colour with roller blinds, atmosphere with Austrian blinds, or create an entirely different mood with  cottagy patterned curtains.
Match them with other patterns in the room.
Then there are shutters in natural or white-painted wood: if you have  Victorian shutters, strip them, and hang a pretty lace panel at the window.
Close the shutters over it at night.
Or have no window treatment at all except glass shelves full of plants, or plants hanging from the ceiling or from poles slung across the window.
There are enormous numbers of possibilities when you got over the thought that you must have some sort of fabric at the windows.
LIGHTING EFFECTS
Seeing to eat
Whatever the style of your dining room, traditional, modern or something in between, the same broad principles of lighting apply.
People need to see what they're eating but the light must never be so bright that it kills any atmosphere you're trying to achieve.
Although the fittings can be totally different according to the room itself, the effect should be the same: subtle lighting, capable of creating different moods but in plentiful supply over those places that need it.
Obviously the table and sideboard or carving table need to bc well lit, but whether you use a light right over the table, a chandelier, candelabra or side lights, they really should be used in conj unction with a dimmer switch.
If you do have a hanging light over the table it should not hang more than 85 cm to 90 cm (34 in to 36 in) from the table top.
A rise-and-fall fitting ensures it will bc right.
This could be discreetly boost   ed by concealed uplights in corners, or by strip lights running round the room just below the ceiling and concealed by a pelmet or valance.
There are, of course, all sorts of chandeliers available for traditional rooms in brass, iron, wood, wrought iron and crystal, but again the effect can be enhanced by recessed downlights set in the ceiling to light up the chandelier itself.
This is especially effective with crystal.
To add special accent, use spots round the room to highlight pictures or fireplace, and take any collections you may have into consideration when you are planning lighting: a lit display is always very dramatic.
Wallwashers, downlights or uplighters can be used to highlight areas of the room, or sculptural halogen floor lamps with dimmers can be ready to flood a room with sunshine-like light, or give a wan and cosy glow.
TABLE SETTINGS
Setting the table
The table setting-china, glass, cutlery, linen-is as much a part of dining room decoration as the furniture and framework.
There's no point in getting all the other decorative details perfect if your plates and knives and forks are all wrong.
It doesn't matter whether they are family heirlooms or bargains from the market stall; if they're right for the setting, that's all that counts.
China, cutlery and glass all need to   bc useful as well as decorative.
When you're choosing them think as much about shapes and sizes as about colour and pattern.
Do they come in a wide range to suit all your needs?
Are they going to be your serviceable everyday sets or only used on special occasions?
Will they stand up to family wear and tear or look too sturdy for dinner parties?
Are they all dishwasher/oven/ freezer/microwave proof?
Do they need to look equally at home in kitchen, dining room or living room?
Do you want to be able to add to them over the years or is the manufacturer likely to discontinue that particular pattern?
Good table linen is also essential-to show off the food and add to the atmosphere.
By changing cloths and napkins you can alter the feeling and style of the room quite spectacularly without going to a lot of expense — bright paper  tableware for children's parties, sophisticated damask or fine linen for a formal dinner party or cheerful gingham for casual or family meals.
One of my most favourite dining rooms was in an old country farmhouse with brick floors.
uneven nutmeg brown walls and a huge fireplace where there was almost always a fire.
There was a long elm table, an old chestnut French provincial armoire, a rather well-worn 17th century velvet-covered Spanish chest and thick white cotton Roman blinds, edged with a brown and apricot cotton to match the tablecloth.
The matching or contrasting of tablecloths, napkins and window fabrics is always a pretty thing to do, and by changing them you change the mood effectively at little cost.
DINING IN STYLE
Once you have decided which facts you have to face, and whittled down the possibilities according to space, family and pocket, you can decide much more easily on the feeling you would like to introduce.
Clearly, in a family dining room with several small children to cater for you are not likely to plump for any sort of exotica, or even the favourite splendours of velvet and mahogany.
You are much more likely to go for old pine, or oak, tough lacquer or vinyl — at least for several years, but there is no reason why these cannot work just as well and create a feeling of their own.
You may end up preferring these practical, hard-wearing materials in this well-used room.
Even if you don't have children, there may be other limitations that turn out to be more inhibiting than inspiring.
Here's where it pays to borrow a little inspiration.
Think which public places — restaurants in particular— have made you feel comfortable and at ease.
Do you go for the opulent feel of linen, sparkle of cut glass and rich warm colouring, or do you prefer the more casual look of bare wood and brick?
Do you like a clean-lined, pale wood, Scandinavian feel?
The lightness of glass and wicker and white-painted plaster or brick?
Or the softness of long print tablecloths and fabric-covered walls?
These days you do not have to go for matching suites of furniture in the dining room, any more than you have to go for three piece suites in the living room.
No one will look askance if you have a makeshift wooden table disguised by a floor length tablecloth (with interchangeable overcloths), painted or lacquered ex-kitchen chairs, and an old dresser for a sideboard, or an old Victorian or Edwardian wardrobe for glass and china storage.
Why would they?
What you are achieving with such a happy mix is very much more personal and, therefore, interesting than the blandness of the careful match.
SETTING THE MOOD
Set the mood
Colour is a useful tool to achieving a particular atmosphere: dark colours — shades of rust, deep green, the earth colours, and dark woods — create a warm, inviting atmosphere  and show off food well.
Bright, primary colours make for a cheerful, family room.
Fashionable pastels are fresh and clean for daytime eating and cool and subtle for evening atmosphere.
Whatever the colour scheme, there are certain characteristic styles.
Traditional with polished wood furniture and fine accessories to create a feeling of opulence.
Walls in dark, warm colours, with rich fitted carpets or traditional rugs make for a quietly splendid effect.
Panelled walls enhance the atmosphere.
Farmhouse follows the style of the farmhouse kitchen, and has a pine dresser or armoire as its focal point.
Traditionally, flooring is of flagstones or quarry tiles, softened by rugs or matting.
Old fashioned pine tables are expensive, but you could cover a modern one with a PVC cloth in a rustic pattern for everyday use and a more prettily patterned cotton cloth for special occasions.
Window treatments should be fairly simple: floral or gingham curtains with tie-backs are ideal.
Scandinavian freshness is characterised by modern pine or beech and clean lines.
Colour and design are all important; plants, clear colours (but not strong primary ones) and lots of white (paint, walls, floor or accessories) help to achieve this healthy non-fussy look.
FROM TRAD TO HI-TECH
Eastern fantasy runs riot with fabric decorations in either plain or delicately patterned style.
Tented ceilings, fabric-covered walls, floor-length cloths and extravagant combinations of curtains and blinds at the window give a luxurious exotic feeling.
Use lining fabrics for economy, trimmed with pattern border or edged with braid.
Thirties style cries out for a dining suite.
Although this is generally considered a thing of the past, there has been a revival in the popularity of the solidly built, veneered Thirties suite with its square lines.
You need panache to carry it off, with carefully selected ornaments and crockery from the period fortunately, there's still quite a lot of it around; geometric patterned wallpaper or plain walls with a border pattern in peaches and rusts.
French café is reminiscent of the local bistro.
The French are masters of restaurant cooking and atmosphere, so why not take a leaf from their book?
Bentwood chairs, small circular tables and wall-mounted globe cafe lights are the key.
Walls need to be mellow: dark creams, possibly sponged or rag rolled to give a textured effect.
A dado rail, fixed round the room at the level of chair backs, with painted panelling below it will add more character.
Hi-tech says modern finishes and colours which give a bright, space-age feel.
Go for angular-shaped chairs, softening them with brightly coloured cushions.
Trestle tables of either laminate or glass are far more suitable than wood.
Flooring should be non-committal: plain, functional cord fitted carpet, or rubber stud flooring.
Simple window treatments, such as vertical louvres or slick Venetian blinds are the most appropriate, although you could also use cheaper roller blinds.
But don't be tied by necessity or convention to furnish all in one style.
It is quite acceptable to mix, say, the feeling of the 17th century with the very modern; country pieces with glass and chrome; modem bentwood with early Victorian; a nice Regency side table with a scrubbed pine table.
If you can't afford, or can't find, a good antique table to suit your style, get a secondhand, junk table, cover it with cloths, and invest as much as you can in comfortable chairs.
Then again, you can still get a traditional feeling without having to spend money on a set of antique chairs.
Old deal or pine kitchen chairs can be picked up reasonably in junk shops and painted or stained.
Not particularly nice reproduction chairs can be lacquered in unexpected colours.
And so on 
COLLECTOR'S ITEMS
The collector's room
Because of the nature of the furnishings in a dining room (a large, flat surface, empty walls) and because it is needed to serve its purpose only at regular, specified times during the day (meal times), it is an ideal room to serve as a collector's library.
Collections can be displayed and made into a decorative asset, and if you are a serious collector you can use the room as a quiet retreat to pursue your hobby, cleaning or mending plates, checking hallmarks on silver, valuing new purchases from relevant text books, cataloguing details-whatever might be involved in your particular field.
Use wire plate hangers to hang a collection of plates on the walls, grouped according to colour, size or origin.
Line the walls with shelves to house a library of books or magazines.
Build storage cabinets and shelves to hold a collection of records.
Display a collection of models houses, soldiers, toys, cars-on shelves, carefully lit by strip lights behind baffles.
Frame a collection of samplers or something more unusual like lace collars or handkerchieves (or table napkins), and hang them in groups on the wall.
Collect old kitchen equipment — bread boards, copper pans, jelly moulds — and hang them on the walls.
Put up a pin board and start a collection of cards from restaurants.
Each time you visit a new eating place, pick up a card, write your verdict on the back, and pin it on the board for future reference.
Display your children's art lesson masterpieces round the room — it will encourage and gratify them and will certainly provide talking points.
Certain collections Mickey Mouse ephemera or period memorabilia need a range of different treatments to display them to their best advantage: dot pictures and plaques round the wall, arrange toys and crockery on shelves, lay rugs on the floor.
Even the table setting can be part of the collection.
Collect something that you can actually use: a collection of cruets is both amusing and practical; give each guest a different set to use.
Whatever your collection, display it thoughtfully.
Try to give pride of place to one prized item: maybe the most valuable, or the most spectacular, perhaps the very first of your collection, or the one that was special gift or heirloom.
Position it in the centre of the mantelpiece, stand it on a shelf on its own, shine a spotlight on to it, or hang it on an empty wall where it will attract attention.
Clever lighting can make all the difference to the look of a collection, drawing attention to it and showing it off to its best advantage at the same time.
The kind of fixtures that are best for this sort of accent lighting are the various types of spotlights, wallwashers, pinhole or framing projectors, as well as uplights and candles.
If you are lighting a single object, aim to place your fixture so that there is no distracting reflection.
You need to experiment, lighting from above, or below or straight on, to see which gives the best effect.
Glass shelves are often particularly effective, especially when set in a mirrored alcove, and lit from above or below, or both.
THE ART OF DISPLAY
DUAL-PURPOSE DINING AREAS
I like to think that one can make provision to eat almost anywhere in the home, just as one should be able to move small tables about to different parts of the garden It is obviously nice to be able to eat in the kitchen or in the living room.
But why not the hall for a change?
The bedroom for a breakfast à deux or cosy supper?
All you need is a table and chairs that do not look out of place in whatever room they are put — though, of course, folding varieties of both can be brought out for the occasion.
In any case, in any home where space is at a premium, you have to learn to use that space for all it's worth.
If you do not have the luxury of a dining room used just for dining — and most of us do not, the trick is to make your dining table look as if it is not a dining table most of the time.
And that means that you do not have a table surrounded by chairs — except, of course, when you are actually going to use it for eating.
For example, if you use what was the dining room for a work room/study as well , you should either have a round table which can be piled with books when necessary, a table set off-centre, or a drop-leaf table that can be pulled out and set up in the centre of the room as required.
All of them can then double as a desk, homework table, sewing or drawing table.
Another great aid to any part-time dining area is the trolley or serving cart which makes a valuable link between kitchen and eating area, is useful for transportation of food and dishes, and in addition provides storage and an extra serving surface.
The problem of where to put all those extra chairs is not really so very difficult.
There are several solutions.
For example in a flat or apartment, you could buy chairs that would act as occasional chairs; have them covered in the sort of colour that will go in every room and they can then be distributed throughout the flat and brought together as and when needed.
Alternatively, buy folding chairs that could either be put away in, say, a hall cupboard and taken out when needed, or hung on a wall.
The clear perspex or plexiglass variety take very little visual space since you can look right through them and the brightly coloured wooden varieties are a decoration in themselves.
Dining/guest rooms
Much the same suggestions can apply to a room that also acts as part-time guest room.
Here, of course, you will also need to make provision for a bed and clothes storage.
The bed could either be a sofa bed or a studio couch with, perhaps, extra drawers underneath, or, in a smaller room, an armchair that transforms itself into a bed.
The bed/storage area could be neatly screened off with matchstick blinds.
If at all possible, you should provide a wardrobe either by having a wall of storage with shelves, drawers and cupboards to take both dining accessories and clothes, or by having a separate armoire or old wardrobe (which can also take silver, china, glass etc.).
And there is almost no limit to the ways you can reorganize the space in some of those old Victorian and Edwardian wardrobes that can still be found.
Even with dire shortage of cash and space, hooks fixed on the back of the door will take an overnight clothes hanger or two.
If you wanted to make the room seem more like a bedroom/sitting room than a study/library/dining room that will also accommodate a guest, you could make much more of the sofa bed and have a rectangular or drop-leaf table like a sofa table behind it.
This can then bc pulled out and opened out as the occasion demands.
Living/dining rooms
This is a pretty usual arrangement nowadays, and again the trick is to disguise the dining table when not in use for dining.
Round tables and drop-leafs can be bought to act as library tables and sofa tables as described above, or there are large adjustable coffee and cocktail tables which can be raised to dining or lowered to coffee table height as desired.
Table tops can also be concealed within a storage wall in much the same way as fold-up beds, so that the leaf can be pulled down when wanted and shut up later to look like a piece of smooth wall.
Or, more ingeniously, the underside can be mirrored so that when it is flipped up it will look for all the world like a large looking glass.
Obviously, tables can be a visible part of a storage wall, acting as either a desk or for dining, and some of them have an extendable top so that they can be pulled right out when you have company.
If you have a dining alcove in your living room you could make the division more complete by building a low storage wall of shelves or cupboards with plenty of room inside for all your dining equipment and serving space on top.
Or you could line the walls with bookshelves from waist-level, with cupboards underneath to provide storage and serving space.
Alcoves like this can also be treated like separate small rooms and lined with mirror; or with the curtain or shade fabric; or painted or papered in a colour from the room scheme which is at the same time different from the main walls.
Any cloths used on the table could be made from the same fabric as the main room curtains or upholstery.
If the alcove is very narrow, use an upholstered bench with suspended cushions for back rests on one side of the table and chairs on the other.
If the style of the main room will take it, a dining alcove can sometimes be semi-curtained off as in a box at the theatre or in one of those titillating little areas off famous turn of-the-century Paris restaurants used for discreet entertaining.
When there is no separate alcove or eating area allowed for, a distinct dining place can be made by raising a table on a plywood platform at whatever height is preferred.
Again, it can be separated a little from the mainstream area with a low wall of cupboards and shelves, or, providing the main area is big enough, a high wall of shelves.
If, of course, the room is quite big, all sorts of divider devices can be used to partition off a dining area, from screens of one sort or another to large indoor plants or trees.
Another good solution for dining if the room will take it, is a long old refectory table which, like the library table idea, can be used for piling books and magazines on, for displaying flowers and objects and to provide both work and eating surfaces.
Dining halls
A nice wide hall is a natural for dining, and again, the table should be an object in its own right, in use for   display and general dumping space when not in use for eating.
If you are lucky enough to have full length cupboards in the hallway, they can easily be reorganized to take china, cutlery, glass and linen and maybe even a trolley or serving cart.
DUAL-PURPOSE DINING AREAS
Small tables for two can make very good use of the wasted space at the end of a corridor.
Good lighting, a picture or two or a rug fixed to the end wall will give a whole new lease of life to what could have been a boring dead end.
Dining/kitchens
There is no doubt that eating in the kitchen has an attraction all its own.
It is more informal, warmer somehow (both in fact as well as in atmosphere), and, naturally, there is no feeling of separation from the action or the cook, for whom, of course, it is also more practical.
Many more dishes can be made that go direct from stove to table than could ever be produced for a separate dining room or area.
It's important to have enough space and a well-thought out arrangement that allows both eating and cooking to take place without the one interfering with the other.
The cook needs room to get at the cooker, sink and cupboards without hindrance and to move around the kitchen comfortably.
Lots of worktops and dumping space is essential.
It's more pleasant for the diners too if the cooking paraphernalia-dirty pans and plates-can be kept out of sight 
So if the kitchen is large enough to take any sort of eating surface — even if it is only an extension of a counter top to make a breakfast and supper bar, this is obviously a bonus.
If breakfast is a cut-and-run meal then a bar counter is a good idea and a nice compromise between setting a proper table and snatching a cup of coffee on the wing.
And children enjoy perching on stools.
But you still have to decide whether you want to make a kitchen you can eat    in, or an eating place which is also the kitchen.
There is quite a difference.
Either way, you will probably want to put more emphasis on decoration than you would do normally.
You could, for example, divide the table area off from the working area with a storage/serving wall or the sort of peninsular unit described on pages 107 and 116.
Or install some sort of screen, dividing panel, a blind that lets down from the ceiling, and even a stack of wine racks which would make a substantial and permanent wall in themselves.
You could too, choose rather different wall treatments for the dining part: flame-proofed fabric; wallpaper, a warm, dark paint, and add pictures, prints, objects, favourite collections, bookshelves, anything that emphasises that the space is as much for living as for working in.
Use pretty table cloths and napkins.
Go for well-designed china that delights the eye and sets off the food.
Pay attention to plants and flowers and make sure that you have your lighting on dimmer switches so that you can dim it right down for dining as well as drawing a veil over any kitchen clutter.
In fact, if you always bear in mind that once a table is set for dining, lights lowered, candles lit, that table becomes an oasis, complete in itself, you can make a dining room wherever the table is.