

Chapter 1: Biological Considerations.
INTRODUCTION AND DESCRIPTION OF THE LEVEL OF DETAIL COVERED
It was not the purpose of this project to do biological research as such, and the author is not a biologist.
On the other hand it was necessary to acquire an elementary understanding of the issues involved, examine previous work on measuring the required parameters and in particular learn something about canopy structure so as to assess the extent to which it would need to be taken into consideration.
This chapter will reflect those needs.
First we will give a brief overview of plant growth analysis.
Next some papers on canopy structure will be summarised.
Then, to complete a theoretical framework for the objectives described in the introductory chapter, some of the relevant literature on reflectance and fluorescence measurement will be discussed.
Direct quotes from the literature have been employed where this seemed the best means of extracting the information.
Where relevant we outline the use made of this material in what has actually been done.
PLANT GROWTH ANALYSIS
There are two common approaches to plant growth analysis [PGC]:—
The ‘Classical Approach’: Growth is measured using a series of relatively infrequent, large harvests (with much replication of measurements).
The ‘Functional Approach’: There are fewer though more frequent harvests, with less replication and an attempt is made to fit a function to the data.
The literature of the classical approach is much more numerous.
The two approaches are not mutually exclusive, though efficiency does tend to militate against combinations.
The method used here is the functional one.
Measures of Growth
The biologist often likes to measure plant growth by dry weight.
There are many measures used [PGC], however, some of which refer to leaf area.
The primary measures are plant size (area, length and width, fresh and dry weights), number and form.
Four types of derived quantity can be constructed from these:—
Simple Rates of Change: This refers to the variation of one of the above primary measures with time.
Simple Ratios: The ratio of two primary measures is plotted against time.
The measures can be between like quantities (e.g. dry weight to fresh weight) or unlike quantities (e.g. leaf area to fresh weight).
Compound Rates of Change: A measure is used which contains more than two primary measures, possibly together with time (e.g. the rate of dry weight increase with time; the variation of this measure itself with time can then be plotted).
Integral Durations: An integral mean of a primary measure is computed.
This leads to concepts like leaf area duration.
Note on the Relationship Between Leaf Length and Area
The relationship between the length L and the maximum width W of a Lolium leaf is regular and known.
It is  (from a note supplied by H. Thomas).
See Figure ().
Lolium temulentum plants were grown to the full expansion of Leaf 5 under an 8-hour day-length regime.
The graph is a linear regression of .
The scatter seen on the graph is the normal biological variability of plant material.
The above relation leads to an expression connecting the area A and the length:— where the leaf is assumed to be of triangular shape.
CURVE FITTING
The obvious aim of this is to find a functional description of the growth of a given plant, which is of use in predicting future growth at any point, and particularly in early disease spotting.
Once a well-fitting function has been obtained one can of course use the usual mathematical techniques to derive other indicators such rates of change, means or smoothed curves which suppress small deviations and show a trend.
Sometimes the primary data must be transformed to satisfy certain statistical criteria [PGC].
The Limitations of the Curve Fitting Method
A caution should given: ‘There is a fascination about curve fitting to growth and population data which can all too easily become an addiction’(Williams, 1975 ).
Two clear cases show that a curve fit can mislead.
First, if there is a large random error in the measurements then the fitted curve is unlikely to show the underlying trend realistically.
Second, if the model used is ill-suited to the data then the curve could be disastrously wrong, particularly when used for extrapolation.
For example the growth curve of the leaf area of a plant against time can be roughly described as a flattened ‘S’, lying between the x-axis and a line .
Since this is similar in shape to a cubic curve a cubic model has been popular with some authors.
Unfortunately in its detailed behaviour this model has been found to be insufficiently flexible ([PGC]Sections 4.6 & 5.4.1) It is also worth noting that an n-point data set can be fitted perfectly (i.e. with no error) by an (n-1) degree polynomial.
For the reason given above this might well be totally wrong for large values of time.
However it could also be inaccurate between the data points.
This is an important point -that the best statistical fit need not be the one which best represents the trend.
Furthermore it is possible for a high degree polynomial to be only slightly better than a low degree one (even a straight line fit), whereas the higher degree fit will certainly require much more effort.
[For further details see ([PGC]Sections 3.3, 4.1 & 4.6).
Another point worth stating is that early attempts at curve fitting tended to assume that plant growth was determined by a single autocatalytic chemical reaction, an over-simplification.
This is likely to result in over-simple mathematical descriptions with poor correlations.
Though this danger is now realised, it is possible that the current models are also incomplete and that some errors in the correspondence between the model and the observed data are due to insufficient sophistication in the model.
This is particularly likely when the growth measurement is by a new technique, as here, when the model may fail to include corrections for the response of the device.
Some Successful Models
A model which is generally held to have potential in plant growth analysis is the Richards function  and its limiting case, the Gompertz function, where W = dry weight, T = time.
This has been discussed by Nelder , Causton , Causton & Venus , Causton, Elias & Hadley , Thomas & Potter and others.
The parameters appearing in the Richards functions can be related to biological factors.
The k is related to inhibition of the production of leaf cells by division and of the rate at which the cells expand.
The m is the value of T at the inflexion point of the curve.
Thus the value of m for Leaf  minus that for Leaf n is roughly related to the plastochron index.
A plastochron is the period of time between the initiation of one leaf and the next in the shoot apex.
Plant age in plastochrons means the number of such intervals that have elapsed at any one time.
Also, Causton, Elias and Hadley showed that k/ (d+1) is a weighted mean relative growth rate over the whole period of measurement and  is the corresponding weighted mean absolute growth rate.
In Thomas' and Potter's article it was the leaf length, not the plant weight, which was represented by the Richards functions.
Forage grasses and autumn-sown cereals do not possess a true winter dormancy mechanism and show significant, though reduced, growth in the cold season.
There exists considerable variation within species in this ability to grow at chilling (0-10°C) temperatures.
The aim was to quantify these growth responses.
The authors fitted Richards functions to leaf length measurements for chilled and unchilled plants.
Considerable differences in asymptotic maximal length, duration of leaf growth, and absolute and relative extension rates do of course occur.
Differences can also be observed in the primary data and in the consequent values obtained for the parameters of the Richards functions.
However the quantities derived from these parameters, which relate to biologically meaningful quantities, are very consistent.
SOME INDICATORS OF GROWTH
Some representative indicators of plant growth are listed, together with brief comments.
For further details see [PGC].
As before,W denotes weight, but this time fresh or dry weight as suitable; T denotes time :—
Though simple in concept, this can be a poor indicator of situations such as one in which a 10g plant and a 1g plant each gain 1g in a week.
The G value is the same, but we would usually like to say that the 1g plant is growing faster.
This measure refers to growth over an interval, while G is an instantaneous measure.
It is easier to calculate than G, but open to the same objection as an indicator.
These are corresponding relative measures.
In the above example the 1g plant would be measured as having a significantly higher growth rate.
As plants grow, the amount of purely structural material contained increases, and so the relative growth rates become less accurate as indicators of growth.
The Richards function is based on theories and data about how the relative growth rate should behave.
There are several other measures based on the weight and time alone.
The following measure is concerned with the leaf area.
and similarly there is a mean unit leaf rate.
This measure is an attempt to overcome the deficiency of the relative growth rates discussed above.
The idea is to compare the gain in weight with a fairly consistent performance -the leaf area is less influenced by the presence of structural material than is the gross weight.
Roughly speaking, this represents the ratio of photosynthesising to respiring material in the plant.
Again there is a corresponding mean, as there is with all of these measures.
This is an important index.
The P stands for the land area on which the crop stands.
Thus LAI is a measure of the proportion of the area that is plant.
The idea of this quantity is to take account both of the magnitude of the leaf area and its persistence in time.
Finally we can obtain an estimate of the yield  There are other, similar measures with slightly different definitions, but the aim is still to estimate the same quantities.
Note: The Richards function arises from a particular expression for the relative growth rate of a plant, namely, for some size attribute X, This equation states that the growth rate is initially small, increases to a maximum, and then declines again as the plant approaches full growth.
The k, n and A are fixed parameters, with A corresponding to the maximum actual value of X. The equation is derived from both empirical and biological arguments.
Simply stated, the relative growth rate of an unconstrained plant can be expected to be constant.
However, a real plant will be constrained by the amount of already existing plant material and its needs.
The simplest statement of this constraint is by a linear factor , i.e. , which leads to the so-called logistic function.
The above equation is the next simplest correction, using a non-unit power of the size attribute.
PLANT GROWTH
We describe some relevant findings from papers on plant growth:
Lolium temulentum Growth under an 8-Hour Daylength Regime
Thomas examined the growth of Lolium temulentum plants grown under a ‘short daylength’ regime (8 hours light /16 hours dark) in a controlled-environment chamber.
Plants were grown at 20°C and transferred to 2°C or 5°C at 21, 28 or 35 days after sowing, when leaves 3, 4 and 5, respectively, were at mid- expansion and leaves 4, 5 and 6 were emerging.
Exposure to 2°C caused drastic changes to the growth pattern and even resulted in some leaves failing to emerge.
By contrast the effect of the 5°C temperature was much less marked, though nevertheless the result was a significant slowing of the growth rate.
‘The responses were quantified by fitting Richards functions to measurements of leaf extension and determining, from the parameters of the curves, asymptotic maximal lengths, mean relative and absolute extension rates, inflexion points and durations of growth.
The potential usefulness of Lolium temulentum as a model species for studying the relationship between temperature and growth in the Graminae is discussed.’
The raison d'être of this paper is the influence of low winter temperatures on the growth of northern temperate plants.
It is known that forage grass species can grow, albeit at a reduced rate, at chilling temperatures, and that this ability shows ‘wide ecotypic and genetic variation, which is of potential value in the production of varieties with growth cycles matched to the climate in their area of cultivation’.
Unfortunately the major forage grass species have complex life-cycles which make them unsuitable for some experiments.
The annual grass Lolium temulentum is a close relative of ryegrass and, for reasons of genetic uniformity and simplicity of life-cycle, has been found to be a much more suitable subject for fundamental studies of growth and development (,,).
Lolium temulentum -a Further Study
A further study can be found in :—
(Abstract):
Vegetative plants of Lolium temulentum grown at 20°C with an 8-hour photoperiod were transferred to either 5 or 2°C at fourth leaf maturity.
Measurements of dry weight gain showed a marked decline in relative growth rate below 5°C.
The reduction was not associated with increased mortality and was reversible if plants were returned to 20°C.
Measurements of photosynthetic capacity and of the patterns of accumulation of reserve carbohydrate in plants exposed to different temperatures, suggested that the inhibition of growth is not caused by inability of the plants to fix sufficient carbon.
Some Growth Patterns
Thomas and Stoddart measured the extension of the fourth leaf from a zero time defined as the start of the light period 24 days after sowing, i.e. immediately after the emergence of the fourth leaf.
Performance was compared for
a) plants kept at 20°C;
b) plants transferred to 5°C midway through the first light period after Time 0;
c) plants transferred to 2°C;
d) plants transferred to complete darkness at 20°C.
Estimates of growth indicators were obtained by fitting a Richards function to the data.
The values of the parameters obtained for plants kept at 20°C were
near-linear overall growth for 9–10 days from Time 0 for all temperature regimes;
here is a diurnal rhythm whereby growth varies from 1.9 to 2.3 mm in the light period and 1.3 to 1.7 mm in the dark;
rowth declines by about 22% immediately on transfer to 5°C and to less than 5% at 2°C;
circadian oscillation of period about 27 hours and decreasing amplitude is established on transfer to complete darkness.
CROP PHYSIOLOGY
It was necessary to learn at least a little of the process by which a plant grows.
Determinants of Growth
The following discussion derives from ‘An Introduction to Crop Physiology’ by F.L. Milthorpe and J. Moorby (C.U. Press),.
The main determinants of plant growth are minerals, water, temperature and photosynthesis, and the shortage of one or more of these is termed a stress.
For example, several authors have described the effects of temperature stress.
It is important to understand variations in the growth patterns of plants of the same species.
The cause of such variations can be environmental or ontogenetic .
Plants grown in different environments can be expected to vary and the biologist's job is sometimes to identify the environmental change which has caused an observed effect.
Ontogeny refers to the life story of an individual plant.
An ontogenetic change may be regarded as a change in state, for example the change from the vegetative to the flowering state probably arises from a switch change between sets of genes.
Plant growth is expressed by the division of cells in localised regions and by the expansion and differentiation of these cells.
Almost all the differences in size and general form of an organism arise from differences in the number, activity and persistence of the centres of cell division.
By a meristem is meant the formative tissue of plants, distinguished from permanent tissue by the power of its cells to divide and form new cells.
The meristems located at the root and shoot apices of the embryo recommence activity following sowing of the seed and persist for most of the life of the plant.
Most of the differences in size arise from differences in cell number.
Size can be measured as height, leaf area, volume, fresh weight, dry weight, etc.
Dry weight is usually the biologist's preferred measure as it avoids the effect of short-term fluctuations in water content and gives a good indication of the quantity of energy fixed.
Photosynthesis
Photosynthesis takes place in chloroplasts.
A chloroplast is a membrane-bound structure which contains the essential pigments (the main one being chorophyll) involved in photosynthesis.
About 70–90% of mass of a crop is water; about 85–90% of the dry matter is carbonaceous material derived from photosynthesis, the reduction of carbon dioxide, a process driven by light energy.
There are three sub- processes:—
carbon dioxide diffuses to the chloroplasts;
light is intercepted by various pigments in the chloroplasts, which drives a reaction producing ‘high-energy’ organic phosphates and chemical reducing power;
the products of the second process cause a reduction of carbon dioxide to carbohydrate and other compounds.
The first process depends on the carbon dioxide concentration and the path length from the external air to the chloroplasts, the second depends only on the amount of radiation absorbed, and not on the CO 2 concentration or the temperature.
The third process can proceed in the dark, but depends on the temperature (, pp. 96–7).
The result on the whole process is that at low light intensity the photochemical process is limiting and the rate of photosynthesis depends on the irradiance.
As irradiance increases the carbon dioxide supply becomes more important and eventually limiting.
At the normal atmospheric concentration of CO 2 temperature has little effect on the rate of photosynthesis.
At high irradiance and high concentration temperature becomes limiting.
An approximation to the response curves which is sometimes used is  where Q is the irradiance, P is the actual photosynthesis and a the maximum photosynthesis at irradiance Q. Finally a/b is the initial slope of the curve and hence the efficiency.
The parameters a and b depend on the temperature (, pp. 97–8).
What Happens to the Incident Radiation
The radiation incident on a leaf can be absorbed, reflected or transmitted, and this division of the incident radiation will be further discussed later.
Usually only the absorbed radiation in the range 400–700 nm can be used in photosynthesis.
The amount of radiation absorbed is a function of the concentrations of pigments and their arrangement in the chloroplasts.
About 7% of the visible radiation and 30–40% of the infrared radiation is reflected from leaves.
The result is that about 25% of total radiation is reflected from leaves, compared with 10–20% from bare soil and about 5% from water.
We shall use the term secondary radiation to refer to radiation coming from or absorbed in a plant.
REMOTE SENSING
The term remote sensing is fairly self-explanatory, but it needs to be said that the word ‘remote’ is used advisedly, for it is usually observation from aircraft or even satellites that is in question.
The task of this project is non-intrusive measurement, typically at distances of about one metre.
This is certainly not remote, and much of the literature is concerned with true remote sensing.
However it seems reasonable to use the ideas of remote sensing as a starting point.
The principles described in the following pages and their references should be viewed in this way — they are mainly concerned with a long-distance view of vegetation growing on the Earth's surface with, of course, a soil (or possibly sand or rock) background.
We shall attempt to apply and adapt them to a much shorter viewing distance, under controlled laboratory conditions.
The question of backgrounds is discussed in Chapter 2.
Long and Short-distance Sensing
To emphasise the difference between long-distance and short-distance sensing we coin the term aloof sensing to refer to non-intrusive measurements at laboratory distances.
The term aloof measurement will also be used where appropriate.
The Components of the Secondary Radiation
For any given plant canopy some of the incident radiation will be reflected, some will be absorbed, and some will pass through, i.e. be transmitted.
The corresponding quantities are called the reflectance ,absorptance and transmittance of the canopy.
Knowledge of these can be used to extract information about the identity and health of the plants in it.
A further quantity is the fluorescence.
A small proportion of the absorbed light will sometimes be re-radiated and it is this that we term the fluorescence .
It is related to the ability of the plant to make use of the radiation currently being absorbed in photosynthesis.
The Main Principles of Remote Sensing
In a survey article Paul J. Curran described the main principles of remote sensing.
Most of the discussion in the following sections is taken from this article.
Hemispherical Reflectance
In somewhat more precise terms than above we define the radiant exitance of a surface to be the radiation reflected by the surface in W. Curran consequently derives two dimensionless terms called reflectance:—
hemispherical reflectance,
bidirectional reflectance.
Firstly we have 
where H = hemispherical reflectance, R e = radiant exitance and I = total incident irradiance.
It has been demonstrated (,) that the hemispherical reflectance in the blue and red bands of the spectrum is related to the amount of chlorophyll within the leaf.
The relation is causal and negative.
On the other hand, in the infra red, there is a causal and positive relationship of hemispherical reflectance with the degree of scattering that occurs as a consequence of discontinuities in the refractive indices within the leaf.
It has further been shown that the hemispherical reflectance of an individual leaf is insufficient to describe the remotely-sensed bidirectional reflectance (defined below) of a vegetation canopy (,,).
However simple grass canopies with a high LAI have reflectance properties similar to those of a single leaf, which means a positive relationship between near infra-red bidirectional reflectance and LAI, but a negative relationship in the red region .
These conclusions refer to healthy grass on medium-toned soil and the relationships vary considerably for different soil backgrounds, angles of sun and sensor, canopy geometry, canopy changes, and also in the presence of senescent material.
It is of some interest in the present study to note that senescence does not significantly decrease the leaf reflectance in the infra-red; in the blue and red a rise occurs.
Bidirectional Reflectance
In remote sensing studies the bidirectional reflectance of a non- Lambertian vegetation canopy is measured.
The term ‘non-Lambertian’ is used to refer to a non-ideal surface which does not reflect energy equally in all directions.
The bidirectional reflectance is the ratio of the radiance of a target under specified angular conditions of irradiance and viewing, to the radiance of a Lambertian reflector placed within the scene.
where B = bidirectional reflectance, R a = radiance and R L = radiance of a corresponding Lambertian reflector.
Note that this quantity has no angular dependence.
‘Bidirectional canopy reflectance is primarily related to the area of leaves within the canopy, recorded by the leaf area index (LAI, defined earlier)(,,,) rather than the hemispherical reflectance of the component leaves (Colwell ).
The Effect of the Soil Background
The bidirectional reflectance of the soil has a considerable effect on that of the canopy (,), see Table .
The Effect of Senescent Vegetation
The presence of dead material does not significantly decrease the NIR reflectance (,), but the breakdown of plant pigments causes a rise in blue and red leaf reflectance .
This results in a positive relationship between bidirectional reflectance and LAI at these wavelengths .
Since we shall be concerned only with measurements in the NIR this will not affect us here, but it should be noted that a combination of NIR and red reflectance is usually considered to give better results than in the NIR alone, and in this case the presence of senescent material would need to be considered.
The Effect of Solar and Sensor Look-Angle
Vegetation is not a Lambertian reflector and so the bidirectional reflectance can vary with the angles of illumination and view.
The angle of illumination will determine the area and darkness of shadow (,,).
The angle of view determines the amount of background visible and also the angle at which leaves are viewed.
The effect can be quite marked, but will depend on the actual geometry of the canopy under test.
The customary view in remote sensing is the vertical one.
An argument will be presented in favour of other views for aloof sensing.
The Effect of Solar and Sensor Azimuth
The bidirectional reflectance is usually higher if the view is towards the sun, rather than away from it (,,).
There is a possible problem with specular reflectance when viewing towards the light source.
In most cases with a vertical view the effect of the solar azimuth is greater at low solar angles and when the canopy is rough.
An extreme angle is with the sun low in the sky.
There will clearly be more shadow when the sun is at right angles to a (closely planted) row than when it is shining along it.
(Fortunately the present study can avoid these problems by placing the (artificial) illumination source alongside the sensor).
The Effect of Canopy Geometry
One problem is the amount of shadow, another is the orientation of leaves.
Curran points out that a rough woodland canopy is likely to be more affected by variations in the solar angle than is a smoother grassland canopy.
See (Curran ,,).
The Effect of Episodic Events
Curran gives the example of wilting, taking place against a medium or dark soil background.
This causes a sharp change in leaf orientation from mainly horizontal to mainly vertical.
This results in greater exposure of the background, and hence increased red and decreased infra-red bidirectional reflectance, with no change in the LAI.
The Relationship between Bidirectional Reflectance and LAI
Under a reasonable set of assumptions, viz. that the soil background is neither too light nor too dark, the look-angle vertical, the solar angle constant and the azimuths known, then the expected relationship between a ratio of red and NIR bidirectional reflectance and LAI is curvilinear (see Figure ), reaching an asymptote when the soil is completely covered by vegetation .
However, as the graph indicates, there is a range in which the relationship is roughly linear, which for vegetation growing under natural conditions will depend on the time of year.
Curran points out that the difference between red and NIR bidirectional reflectance gives a better estimate of LAI then either band alone and, within certain limits, is theoretically independent of variations in the solar irradiance and in the type of soil.
It is not independent of varying solar angle and azimuth .
Because of this improved response, several functions incorporating the red (R) and near infra-red (IR) bidirectional reflectance have been devised.
One of the most popular is (IR-R) /(IR+R), the normalised difference .
The Form of the Relationship between Red and NIR Bidirectional Reflectance and Biomass
Correlation between bidirectional reflectance and biomass depends on two relationships, the one between bidirectional reflectance and LAI and the one between LAI and biomass.
We cannot directly relate bidirectional reflectance and biomass except when biomass changes independently of LAI, e.g. leaf thickening at times of high LAI, or, more commonly, when biomass is linearly related to LAI.
This occurs for non-woody monocotyledons of low biomass, where leaves form a constant high proportion of the total biomass .
Typical examples are the grasses, for which the relationship between bidirectional reflectance and LAI has the same form as that between bidirectional reflectance and biomass, see Figure .
Thus a direct relationship can be established between bidirectional reflectance and biomass for the grasses.
For other plants where either the proportion of leaves to total biomass is not constant (e.g. maize) or the leaves are a smaller proportion of the biomass (e.g. shrubs) such a relationship may not exist.
For a review of the subject see (Carpenter ).
The Relationship between Bidirectional Reflectance and Productivity
Rapid growth (high productivity) means ready absorption of red light and so a greater difference between red and NIR bidirectional reflectance than one with slower growth.
Tucker tried to separate the relationships between bidirectional reflectance ratios and firstly, the biomass, secondly, the productivity.
He found a high IR/R ratio (normally indicating high biomass) for a site with low biomass with a rapidly regrowing sward.
That is, high productivity can lead to a misleadingly high ratio.
The importance of productivity had already been noted in an E.E.C.
report .
Techniques for Measuring Biomass:
There are of course various intrusive or destructive methods.
Non-intrusive methods are radiometry, and traditional or electronic photographs.
A simple measure is per cent cover.
Like the LAI it does not record leaf overlaps (Colwell ).
Another survey of remote sensing was given by Horler and Barber .
In long distance remote sensing with solar illumination the atmosphere absorbs energy in certain bands and only the remaining ‘windows’ are available.
These are 0.30–0.75 m (the visible part of the spectrum) and five bands in the NIR region 0.7–2.4 m.
The windows in the NIR are known to be predominantly controlled by water absorption bands, but oxygen and carbon dioxide also have some influence.
The article further discusses the various techniques used in remote sensing, in broad categories photographic and electro-optical.
Traditional photographic systems are cheap, simple, provide an image and have high resolution.
The image is not digital and so not convenient for automatic processing.
Its range is limited and sensitivity is limited by the film used.
Electro-optical systems are almost complementary to photographic ones.
Data is easily digitised and automated, the method is not imaging and not cheap.
High resolution can be achieved, but not easily.
Using interference filters these instruments have been used successfully to measure fluorescence.
In discussing the general picture, Horler and Barber noted the equation 
and added that the proportion of absorbed light that can be re-emitted as fluorescence is about 3%.
The amounts of reflected and transmitted light are virtually equal at all wavelengths, and this common proportion varies with wavelength between nought and nearly 50%.
The spectrum between 0.3 m and 2.5 m divides into three parts:— 0.3–0.7 m is a high absorption region due mainly to chlorophyll, 0.7–1.3 m is characterised by high reflectance and transmittance, and 1.3–2.5 m is dominated by water absorption bands.
This thesis will be concerned mainly with the middle of these bands.
Figure shows the relationship between reflectance, absorptance and transmittance.
The authors also introduced the two main ways in which the propagation of radiation through leaves is modelled, the deterministic models in which the radiation flux is determined by means of differential equations, and the stochastic models which attempt to identify the probabilities of the various events in radiation transfer within the canopy.
Curran and Milton (1980) compared two simple photographic methods proposed for the measurement of relative bidirectional reflectance (Lillesand & Kiefer 1979 , Curran 1980 ).
These two methods were used to calculate the relative bidirectional reflectance of ten contrasting surfaces.
The photographic relative bidirectional reflectance so recorded was then compared with the radiometric bidirectional reflectance for each surface.
Two conclusions were drawn: firstly that relative bidirectional reflectance can be measured using these simple photographic techniques, and secondly that there was no significance difference between the Lillesand & Kiefer and the Curran methods for photographically deriving relative bidirectional reflectance.
CANOPY STRUCTURE
Several authors have attempted to describe mathematically the various types of vegetative plant canopy.
Though this work is not central to the present requirements, there are some lessons to be learnt.
One of the products of this type of theory is a prediction of the reflectance under given conditions, and this can then be compared with the results of experiments.
The following quote gives the flavour of the theory:—
‘The model presented here predicts bidirectional reflectance properties of a canopy traceable to the geometric and spectral properties of identifiable canopy components.
This model of the canopy consists of a number of infinitely extended horizontal canopy layers.
Within each layer, the components of the canopy are considered to be randomly distributed and homogeneously mixed.’
(Suits )
The Effect of View Azimuth
Suits later extended this model to quantify the variation of reflectance with azimuth for low sun angles.
The reflectance is highest when the angle of view is close to that of illumination, which as we shall see is the preferred configuration in this project.
(There will be additional illumination to provide the wavelengths necessary for photosynthesis and this will be at other angles, but the infra-red source will be alongside the sensor).
In a joint paper with Safir, Suits verified his model for mature corn and discussed its application to blight detection.
They comment that the NIR, though a good indicator of moisture stress, is a relatively poor indicator of blight in this crop compared with other wavelengths.
Different Canopy Models
As mentioned above, there are two main types of canopy model.
The first of these attempts to describe the canopy by means of differential equations, and is called the Kubelka-Munk type, after a paper written by P. Kubelka and F. Munk as long ago as 1931 .
The second type uses stochastic techniques.
Smith and Oliver developed a Monte Carlo model evaluated with data collected from Bouteloua gracilis , a prairie shortgrass.
Two subjects were used, canopies with LAI's of 6.5 and 2.0.
The object was to examine the effect of view angle on discrimination between the two subjects at two angles of (solar) illumination.
The result over all wavelengths is that a fairly large view angle 65° (measured from the vertical) gives the best discrimination.
Because of its convenience the horizontal view (90° view angle) has been used in all serious trials in the present project.
Richardson et al .
(1975) combined the two main models to produce a third.
Data from Landsat-1 were used to compare three plant canopy models for extracting plant, soil and shadow reflectance components of cropped fields.
The combined model gave the best correlation between multispectral scanner data and ground truth (i.e. between what is seen by the remote scan and what is really there).
The Relationship between Canopy Structure and Productivity
Rhodes considered the relationship between canopy structure and productivity.
The growth of a young plant is limited by the small amount of leaf area available to intercept light energy.
As it grows, the assimilation per unit area of leaf is reduced by shading, but the absolute amount of light energy intercepted, and hence the growth rate, increases.
At a point called the optimum LAI the maximum crop growth rate is attained.
Beyond that, in some species this growth rate is maintained with further increase in LAI, in others it declines, probably due to the increased respiratory load at the base of the canopy.
Rhodes also identified various characters which control the structure of a vegetative grass canopy:—
Leaf size, particularly leaf length, which determines the potential height of the canopy;
Tiller angle, i.e. the mean angle between the tillers and the soil surface;
Leaf angle, the angle at which the leaf is subtended from the tiller; this varies little among herbage grasses, even when the canopy structure does;
Leaf rigidity or curvature; this is related to the leaf's anatomical structure, but not to the percentage of structural tissue in it;
The number of tillers per plant.
These structural features are related to the growth achieved.
For example it has been found that the more erect the leaves the greater the growth rate.
A Model Incorporating Senescence
Johnson and Thornley devised a complex crop growth model incorporating leaf area expansion and senescence, and they then applied it to grass growth.
In the present study no attempt has been made to account for senescence, because the amount of dead material is small.
A dead leaf will make a smaller contribution to the measured image than a living one but the errors arising from other sources are certainly of much greater magnitude.
The Distribution of Leaf Angles
Goel and Narendra (1984) showed that a two-parameter beta distribution represents well the distribution of leaf angles in a variety of leaf canopies.
Possibly such ideas could be applied to fine tune aloof measurements by distinguishing between different regions of the image and applying weights.
In the present research only a lower level study has been attempted in which the relationship between the aloof measure and the true leaf area obtained after cutting has been plotted.
Agreement is good enough within the tolerance imposed by the measurement method itself, which will be discussed later.
Light Extinction with Depth
Verhagen, Wilson and Britten (1963) wrote a very interesting paper on the extinction of light with depth in a canopy.
Various light- extinction functions are introduced to specify the light received by plants with different patterns of foliage development.
The implications of these extinction functions are discussed and the production associated with each foliage type is studied as a function of LAI.
In fact the paper is not quite relevant to the current study, because the experimental conditions provide all-round illumination and the canopies studied are sparse.
Note that this illumination is provided by warm white lamps and is necessary for growth, as opposed to the single tungsten lamp which provides the infra-red radiation used for measurement here.
Thus there is probably little extinction in the light available for photosynthesis, but possibly the same ideas could be applied to analyse the light reaching the camera.
It will be demonstrated later that the correlation between the true area and the projected area visible to the camera is good enough to make this not a prime consideration.
Methods of Measuring LAI
Daughtry and Hollinger (1984) discussed four methods of measuring LAI, with the object of comparing the cost, accuracy and required time when using each method.
The number of plants required and the relative costs for each method were calculated to detect 10%, 20% and 50% differences in LAI.
The subjects were corn plants, and it is interesting to note that these plants have a natural variability in leaf area of nearly 10%, which can be increased by errors introduced by the measurement technique employed.
Direct measurement with an electronic area meter had lowest coefficient of variance.
The leaf area/weight was as efficient in the sense that it took about the same time to detect comparable differences.
Indirect methods based on length and area measurements required more plants, but were quicker.
MEASUREMENT TECHNIQUES
An important distinction is between intrusive and non-intrusive measuring devices; the former can be sub-divided into destructive and non- destructive devices.
The Milton Radiometer
The Milton multiband radiometer is a non-intrusive device which uses as sensors three silicon photodiodes and one cadmium-sulphide cell.
The input from the four sensors is co-ordinated in the meter unit.
Waveband selection is achieved by means of filters.
This device is suitable for aloof sensing in the field as the title of the paper suggests.
Its suitability of for measuring plant growth in the way required here is discussed in Chapter 2.
A Recent Non-Destructive Device
Very accurate results have been achieved using intrusive, but non-destructive methods.
One such was devised by H. Thomas, J. Rowland and J. Stoddart (1984).
A graticule is attached to the tip of the growing leaf by a small clip connected by a nylon thread to a counterweight.
Growth results in movement of the graticule relative to a fixed grid.
This produces an interference pattern which is converted to a periodic change in voltage by means of a light-emitting diode and a photodetector.
The time resolution is excellent -the growth of maize seedlings over a period of a few minutes can be detected.
A Recent Aloof Measuring Device
Some very impressive aloof measurements were achieved by Jaffe et al.
using a sophisticated system called the DARWIN image processor .
Not only growth, but also leaf bending can be measured.
The time resolution is not stated explicitly but seems to be a small number of minutes.
The scanning interval is 5.5 minutes, slightly longer than the most successful interval used in the current project, which is capable of selecting much shorter intervals, but with greater error.
A most interesting finding of this article is that plant growth is irregular, which could explain some of the apparent errors of the instrument designed here.
Spectrophotometer Measurements
Steven used a two-band spectrophotometer to measure the reflectance from sugar beet in the red and NIR.
A fibre-optic probe is used to split the light input and feed the two parts via filters to silicon diode detectors.
The R/IR ratio is computed and used to predict future rates of growth.
This splitting technique should be added to the instrument designed here, since as discussed earlier, certain ratios of the R and IR reflectances, for example IR/R, provide more sensitive growth measures than either alone.
FLUORESCENCE
When a leaf is exposed to light and absorbs energy it has been observed that after a short delay (on the millisecond scale) up to 3% of the absorbed energy is re-emitted.
This is the fluorescence.
More precisely there are divers kinds of fluorescence, prompt/delayed.
Several authors have described devices for measuring these.
Existing methods are mainly destructive.
Fluorimeter Measurements
Gibbons used a plant productivity fluorimeter to measure the response of fluorescence to chilling.
Several other authors have investigated this response.
Melcarek, Cernohlavek and Brown described a solid-state measuring device consisting of a sensitive photo-diode as sensor, coupled to an operational amplifier.
Melcarek and Brown then used it for a study of the effects of chill stress on both prompt and delayed fluorescence.
Fluorescence Spectrophotometer Measurements
Fork, Ford and Catanzaro used a fluorescence spectrophotometer based on a gallium arsenide photomultiplier.
Malkin, Ford and Fork also used a photomultiplier device.
Chapter 2: Devices, Environments and Early Experiments.
INTRODUCTION
At the start of the project the technique to be used for measuring was an open question.
Devices
Early discussions centred on two possible devices for solving the basic problem of measuring plant growth non-intrusively.
These were already available and would be cheap to duplicate or modify:—
The Milton Multiband Radiometer
This instrument measures light intensity in the Landsat bands 4,5,6,7 using silicon photodiodes as detectors.
For each band a photodiode sends a signal proportional to the intensity of the incoming radiation to a dedicated pre-amplifier whose output is fed to a meter unit.
Band selection is by Wratten filter.
This instrument could conceivably tell us something about the reflectance and fluorescence from the plant.
It is less clear whether it can be used to measure plant area though a possible technique is to redesign its optical system to focus on a small area and then use it to scan a larger area, agreeing that a reading above some pre-determined level is ON, below it is OFF.
Micro-Robotics ‘Snap’ Camera
This uses a dynamic RAM chip as sensor.
The decay rate of each cell in the chip's window is increased according to the light intensity falling on each cell and to the exposure time.
Thus for a given exposure some pixels will be seen and others will not.
Output is fed into an array via control software.
Unlike the radiometer, this device enables a rough image of the subject to be constructed corresponding to a fixed illumination intensity.
One might also attempt to establish a relationship between intensity and exposure at the point at which a pixel is just seen, and use this to obtain intensity readings.
The sensor is sensitive to radiation in the range 300nm to 1100nm.
In the experiments described later it will be used both unfiltered, with this spectral response, and filtered, in which case the response will be in the range 700nm to 1100nm.
While one could make the same use of filters for waveband selection, only Band 7 has been used, since this is the one of greatest interest for the current application.
A simple development would be to present Band 5 and Band 7 filters alternately and obtain a standard indicator from the two readings:—
where IR stands for the Band 7 reading and R (red) for the Band 5 reading.
Some trials were conducted to determine the potential of each device.
Environment
The intended use of the eventual instrument was to be in a standard growth cabinet or growth room.
Use in a field setting would certainly be desirable, but was not felt to be realistic at this stage because of the difficulties posed by the light, wind, rain etc.
These rooms are maintained at a fixed temperature, with set lighting and ventilation regimes.
One experience trial was performed in a temperature-controlled greenhouse (16°).
Backgrounds
The normal background in a growth cabinet would be a combination of the light blue of the luncheon boxes normally used as containers for the plants and the reflecting ‘Mylar’ foil covering the walls.
Thus it was necessary to find a readily available background material which the chosen instrument would perceive as significantly darker than the plants.
At this stage the viewing angle had not been decided and so it was possible that the material would need to cover the box.
EXPERIMENTS
On a once-weekly sowing date plant seeds are germinated on toilet tissue and kept moist by regular sprinkling with tap water.
One week later, on the boxing date they are ‘planted’ by holding them in pieces of sponge in regularly spaced holes in the lid of a box or pot.
The roots are kept in a nutrient solution known as  Hoagland's solution.
From the sowing date onwards the plants remain in a controlled environment, with temperature 20°C, humidity constant and warm-white lighting at an intensity of about 40 Wm -2 for eight hours a day, darkness sixteen hours a day.
Experiment 2.1: A non-rigorous familiarisation exercise
Present on this occasion were a plant biologist, a research officer experienced in remote sensing techniques, the author and his supervisor.
The Milton radiometer was used to obtain readings in two environments.
Growth Cabinet
These measurements were made in a growth cabinet.
Comments:
Although the experiment was not a rigorous one, some conclusions can be drawn:—
The young plants give lower readings than the bare box and the old plants a much lower reading.
This is obviously because the old plants covered more of the background and the plants were perceived as darker than this background.
Thus a careful choice of some dark material as background was clearly going to be necessary.
The readings in the near infra-red (NIR, Band 7) are very low.
This result was regarded as surprising by all concerned, until it was realised that the infra-red content of the light source is very low.
The growth cabinets are normally used only as a place to grow plants in a controlled way, measurements being made in the laboratory.
To obtain readings in this waveband an auxiliary light source would be necessary.
Greenhouse:
These measurements were taken in diffused natural light under glass.
The objectives were to obtain some feeling for this environment, and also to compare the readings at various angles of view.
The readings are of plant subjects except where they are labelled ‘soil’ and each reading is followed by a corresponding reading from a standard grey card, for example 0.22 (0.37).
For the next table (Table ) Landsat band 7 is used.
The angles refer to the polar view angle, i.e. the angle measured from the vertical.
The values in brackets are the corresponding grey card readings.
Conclusions
There is a significant variation of the readings with azimuth in Band 7.
This would pose a problem if natural illumination were used, as it would be in a field setting or greenhouse.
One would have to fix a viewing direction and even then there would be the effect of the variation in the position of the light source, the sun, to consider.
There is a significant variation in the grey card readings, most probably due to variation in the intensity of the illumination.
This will also vary, though much less, under artificial light, owing to voltage fluctuations.
The eventual measuring instrument must either be able to cope with such variations or have its own illumination from a stabilised power supply.
Experiment 2.2
This was a pilot experiment, not done under fully rigorous conditions.
The object was further testing of the radiometer using different illumination levels and cut grass subjects.
Since older samples of growing grass will contain senescent material it was felt to be worthwhile measuring the samples at various times after cutting and even after artificial drying.
Note: A calibration error was discovered after the experiment was performed.
The effect is that all readings are slightly low.
Description of the Experiment:
A black velvet mat was placed on a table in a darkened room and illuminated with a table lamp placed at 40cm from the mat.
Two illumination levels were used, produced by 60W and 100W domestic tungsten lamps -a type of lamp known to produce infra-red radiation.
Samples of natural grass were collected from the author's garden, merely subjected to various conditions and placed on blackened baking trays.
White and grey test cards, and the samples, were viewed vertically from 30cm, though the greater thickness of the grass samples actually reduced this by 3cm.
Some of the samples were viewed more than once, at various times, and these are identified in the tables below by numbers 1,2,…
This table shows several samples labelled as in the above key.
The measurements are first the raw readings, and then these readings as a percentage of the white card reading.
Conclusions:
The radiometer was designed for use on clear sunny days out of doors.
The light levels used here would certainly be much lower than this.
Thus we might expect the instrument not to be sufficiently sensitive for these conditions and so not for a growth room.
Certainly the raw readings are low, and it must be said here that the last significant figure was obtained by estimating a proportion of a division on the scale.
Worse than this, there some puzzling variations in the readings, for example the ‘B’ series readings for Band 7.
The next experiment examines this more closely.
The human eye is very sensitive to green and the visible differences between the samples, small as they are in some cases, corresponded to a smaller difference in the reflected light levels.
The readings are not given here.
Thus the green range will probably not be a useful discriminator.
An instrument of greater sensitivity, and possibly one which can be read more accurately, might be needed.
This will be essential if one is to have any hope of detecting the much lower fluorescence levels.
The reflectances from the black mat (‘H') suggest that this particular background is not ideal.
Some experimentation with backgrounds is indicated.
INVESTIGATION OF POSSIBLE TYPES OF BACKGROUND MATERIAL
Several different types of card and some other materials were illuminated and readings taken.
The desiderata for a good background at this point were that it must be perceived by the measuring instrument as significantly darker than the subject, it must be cheap and readily available, and it must be easy to mould it to the growth boxes, fix it to the wall, etc.
Some Types of Background
In the following Experiment 2.3 various colours were used to test how far the eye can be relied on to judge backgrounds in the circumstances under which the eventual instrument would be used.
This is relevant in possibly saving experimenters some time in setting up experiments.
The conclusion is that the eye cannot be trusted.
The experiment is also relevant to the possibility of mimicking shaded parts of a canopy by using materials of different colours.
In Experiment 2.4 several materials, dark to the eye, were examined, and again the eye cannot judge with sufficient accuracy.
(It is worth emphasising that the question is only one of judging whether the eye can determine the experimental set-up, and has nothing to do with the measurements.)
The best material at this stage was found to be charcoal-grey trouser flannel.
Finally some other materials were obtained and compared with the flannel.
One, black velvet, was outstanding in all ranges, its reflectance being almost zero.
Unfortunately it is not cheap or readily obtainable, bearing in mind that with the radiometer it might be necessary to screen a considerable proportion of a growth room.
Another material, charcoal-grey cartridge paper, was found to be quite dark in all ranges, and it is cheap, readily obtainable and easily cut and shaped for the purposes described above.
Its reflectance did not exceed 7.5% of the white card reading in any trial.
It was decided to adopt it as the standard background, keeping open the possibility of using pieces of velvet in special cases.
Experiment 2.3
The illumination intensity is 60W.
The numbers 4, 5, 6, 7 refer to Landsat bands.
Table (Reflectances from Coloured Cards Related to White as 100%)
Conclusions:
Clearly none of these, including the black mat, is a suitable background.
The eye perceives differences which the radiometer does not, and in some cases fails to spot differences which the instrument does.
It can serve as only a rudimentary guide to the experimental set-up if the eventual instrument is based on the radiometer.
Experiment 2.4
The backgrounds are various colours, mainly dark.
The charcoal-grey cartridge paper had not been introduced at this stage.
The backgrounds are merely identified by a number, and this will suffice, since none of them was adopted.
Not all results are shown; all giving a reading of more than about 30% of the white card reading are omitted.
The numbering is that used in the experiment.
Conclusions:
Backgrounds 15,18,21 and 24 gave very low reflectance readings, but were glossy, and at any angle other than the vertical could give rise to specular reflections.
Of the matt backgrounds Numbers 1, 2 and the charcoal-grey flannel were the best, and indeed the only possible candidates at this stage.
Experiment 2.5
Some further materials were obtained and compared with the charcoal-grey flannel which performed well in the previous experiment.
This experiment was performed in a growth room.
The illumination was the standard battery of warm white fluorescent tubes (giving a very high intensity in Band 4, a fairly high level in Bands 5 and 6, and a very low level in Band 7), plus a 60W tungsten lamp at close range to provide an acceptable level of near-infra-red illumination.
Conclusions:
The velvet cloth is a near perfect black, but more expensive and less readily available than the other materials.
The charcoal-grey cartridge paper is a standard product, widely used, easy to use in the ways described -for example it can be fixed to walls with Blu-Tack -and its performance appears to be adequate.
For example in the NIR it reflects less than 6% of the white card reading.
The cartridge paper will be adopted for the present, but the situation will be reviewed.
Its reflectivity vis-a-vis grass subject matter must be observed.
Different considerations come into play when an imaging device is used (the ‘Snap’ camera), for example it might be possible to make allowance for the background in software.
Experiment 2.6
This was a semi-rigorous trial to examine the performance of the radiometer in measuring water stress in grass, caused in this case by cutting.
A steady decline in readings should occur over time.
It was furthermore an exercise in gaining experience in measurements with grass samples, to assist in spotting unforeseen problems.
Mid autumn grass (partly senescent) again growing naturally in a garden, was cut with shears, shaken to remove excess moisture, and placed firstly between sheets of newspaper and then on seven baking trays.
Some attempt was made to randomise the samples and to remove extraneous material such as tree leaves and necrotic material.
The samples were lightly pressed down using a sheet of newspaper.
Radiometer readings were taken of:—
the background (the charcoal-grey flannel in this experiment);
a white card;
a standard grey card;
the bare trays;(Trays 6 & 7 were slightly larger than the others and proved to be much stronger reflectors.
However the trays were well covered with grass and the readings were only slightly higher for these two trays.)
the grass-covered trays, once an hour from 12.20 p.m. to 22.20 p.m. and on the following day at 09.40 a.m. and 10.40 a.m.
The illumination consisted of:—
Some preliminary tests were carried out to determine the contribution of each light alone, and it was discovered that ‘C’ gave approximately half the incident light.
At Time 11 this light was inadvertently not switched on.
Use can be made of this mistake.
If the normalised (i.e. in ratio to the white card reading) reflectance values for this time are aberrant, then this indicates that the reflectance measurements respond non-linearly to the illumination level, which must then be strictly controlled, or else a correction must be established.
In either event a possible technique for calibrating measurements is to include a light subject of known area in the field of view.
The reader might also care to note a paper by Milton on the possible use of two radiometers to correct for changes in irradiation.
At Time 5 and Time 10 the background intensity was measured as a check:—
*Conclusions:
The attached graph () shows no clear trend in any range.
Unfortunately the choice of subjects was bad, autumn grass is already stressed, and this effect could have overlaid any effect due to the cutting.
Alternatively, the radiometer has insufficient sensitivity.
The results in Table are inconclusive evidence of either the linearity or non-linearity of readings with respect to light intensity.
SOME FURTHER NON-RIGOROUS TRIALS USING BOTH CAMERA AND RADIOMETER
Stressed and unstressed plants of various ages were viewed with a Micro-Robotics ‘Snap’ dynamic RAM camera and a Milton radiometer.
These were the first tests with the camera, and were encouraging; a suitable refinement of the technique should discriminate quite well between different sizes of plant.
The radiometer trials were also quite encouraging, and gave hope that the radiometer might be able to indicate temperature stress and growth.
The illumination consisted of one 500W Mercury lamp vertically overhead, and a tungsten lamp at an angle of about 45°.
Experiment 2.7
Plants grown at temperatures of 5° and 20° were viewed at a distance of 75cm and the readings compared.
The vermiculite base was not fully masked.
The angle of view was not measured accurately, but was estimated to be about 70° i.e. near the optimum viewing angle.
The readings obtained were as follows:—
The table shows radiometer readings in Band 7 at two different growing temperatures.
Conclusion:
The radiometer can detect the difference (very obvious to the eye) in the leaf area of the plants at these temperatures.
Experiment 2.8
Plants sown on six different dates and grown at 20°C were viewed with the Milton radiometer.
The youngest plants had barely emerged.
Again the base was imperfectly masked.
The viewing angle was approximately 70° in one trial and was horizontal in the other.
Conclusions:
There is a fairly clear trend in all bands, apart from the oldest plants.
Probably this is due, more than anything else, to the sheer quantity of plant material and could thus be a measure of area.
EXPERIENCE TRIALS WITH THE CAMERA
The ‘Snap’ camera was used with the supplied software,(not suitable as it stood for the required measuring instrument).
The two programs tested were a basic frequent-update program (EV1), which takes and displays an unending sequence of images, and a rudimentary grey-scaling program (GREY).
The purpose of the first test was to reveal the definition obtainable with this device, the second was to see whether it would be possible to pick out bright spots and define a measure of reflectance by weighting for brightness.
It was already clear how the camera might be used to measure area — by simply counting pixels seen at an ‘appropriate’ illumination level and exposure.
Description of the Trial
Small pots, each containing several one and two-month old Lolium temulentum plants grown at 20°C (i.e. unstressed plants) were viewed at various times and the images compared.
The resulting images were also viewed by a plant biologist.
In this experiment the optimum 60° polar view angle was not used, since suitable support equipment was not available at the time.
Furthermore the vermiculite base was not masked.
The plants were viewed almost horizontally.
The results for unstressed plants are shown in Figure 
One of the unstressed samples was also compared with stressed plants (grown at 5°C) of the same age.
Conclusions:
The images were easily distinguishable by eye and even with the rather crude resolution obtainable with this camera there should be no difficulty in distinguishing them by software.
Thus it should be possible to measure growth rate by this method.
Some snags are discussed in the chapter on validation.
With the stressed plants there was a problem in ‘seeing’ narrow leaves of the sort that tend to occur under stress.
For example stress tends to cause leaves to roll up.
This reduces the perceived surface area.
However, if the total effect of this and other stress effects is to exaggerate the effect of stress then this could be less a problem than an advantage in detecting stress early, although not an exact measurement.
A problem in the other direction was that the greater the leaf cover the greater the amount of reflected light is blocked.
(This can occur with other techniques.)
With the imaging method there is of course the prospect of using pattern-matching to solve the problem, though this might be difficult.
Otherwise one might make a statistical correction or even hope that its effect is small, i.e. discrimination might be good enough even when light is lost due to blocking.
(This was later found to be so).
The best results were obtained with EV1, probably because it permits user control of the intensity.
The GREY program has automatic intensity adjustment and if it were to be useful would need to be modified to provide a user override, at least during development of the measuring technique.
Another Trial
Some tests were carried out to examine the accuracy of definition of the field of view of the radiometer.
Against a dark background pieces of white card were moved in a plane perpendicular to the line of view until ‘seen’.
The change in position of the needle was then found to be progressive, not sudden, and thus the field of view is not well defined.
Similar tests with the camera showed it to have a well-defined and small field of view.
It is provided with two lenses; the narrow-angle lens gives a view field measuring approximately 16cm horizontally by 8cm vertically at a viewing distance of one metre.
SUMMARY OF RADIOMETER EXPERIMENTS
The current instrument has a wide angle of view, with the view field not sharply defined.
The sensitivity and accuracy of the radiometer for the stated purpose has not been proved.
Either it must be redesigned, or the imaging method must be used.
Charcoal-grey cartridge paper should provide a cheap, readily available background, but the situation must be reviewed.
The imaging technique was regarded as the more promising, but the radiometer would have a continuing role to monitor the light intensity.
Chapter 3: The Dynamic RAM Camera and Early Approach to Software.
A BRIEF DISCUSSION OF THE HARDWARE
It was clear almost from the outset that the final instrument would have to be able to compute certain parameters of its measurement function, in order to cope with variations in environment.
Techniques to be investigated for use during measurement, averaging and computing a growth function were grey scaling, picture improvement and even perhaps pattern manipulation.
The amount of processing power likely to be required indicated a sixteen bit processor.
The Motorola 68000 is well supported at Aberystwyth and was therefore chosen.
A supplementary reason for the choice was the presence of a number of M68000 educational TUTOR boards with associated Whitesmiths' software for development work.
The software runs on a VAX750 under UNIX and consists of an M68000 assembler, a Pascal compiler and a linker.
The compiler generates intermediate assembly language files as well as object code, which, with the resident assembler/disassembler on the TUTOR board itself, was to prove useful during development.
Thus development proceeded with the TUTOR board, a BBC microcomputer as terminal, and the UNIX VAX for development.
The ‘Snap camera’ is connected to the board by an eight-wire ribbon connector.
Principle of Operation of the Dynamic RAM Camera
A dynamic RAM needs its contents refreshed after a standard interval.
If one side of the package is replaced by a glass window, so that light can fall on the memory cells, then it is found that the incident light accelerates the decay process in manner proportional both to the intensity and to the duration of the exposure.
There is a one-to-one correspondence between the memory cells and the pixels of the viewing area.
Thus by fixing a suitable exposure, at which some cells contain logic 1 and the others logic 0, it is possible to build up an image of the view area.
A major task of the later software was to arrange that the exposure was chosen automatically according to the current illumination.
A Problem -Description of the Optical RAM
The optical RAM is an IS32 OpticRAM manufactured by Joseph Electronics Ltd. of Solihull.
It consists of a 65,536 element sensor containing two arrays of 32,768 elements arranged in 128 rows by 256 columns.
It is usual to utilise only one of the arrays.
It is a consequence of the manufacture of this optical RAM that there is an optical dead zone between the top and bottom halves of the picture.
Thus a narrow horizontal strip in the middle of the image is not seen.
The effect is as if a central strip were cut out and the remaining top and bottom rectangles rejoined.
It was known from the start that the camera had this problem with the central strip.
What was not known, but emerged from experiment, is that the top and bottom halves of the RAM have different sensitivities -the top ‘sees’ more pixels than the bottom at a given illumination and exposure.
PLANT MEASUREMENTS
As discussed, we are interested in measuring the rate of growth of a plant (and hence its size), the reflectance and the fluorescence.
Measuring Plant Size
An obvious way of computing the area is by adding all the pixels at logic 1, or ON.
This will not be the true area, but the area projected on the plane of the view field.
Even then it is not obvious that this measure will actually yield the projected area.
For example, this will depend on the uniformity of the illumination and the relationship between pixels ON and pixels ‘seen’ in different parts of the view field.
This is discussed in more detail in the chapter on validation [Chapter 5].
It will be convenient to use the term A-measure to distinguish this computed indicator from the true area.
A Possible Technique for Measuring Reflectance
Pictures are taken at several (eight) different exposure levels and each point is weighted according to the number of times that it is seen.
Obviously a point with a higher weight is brighter than one with a lower weight.
If we now compute a weighted sum, or what is the same thing, the sum of the A-measures at each exposure, then for a given subject area this sum will increase as the reflected light intensity increases, since more pixels will be seen at each exposure.
Thus an early objective was to carry out some trials to compare this measure with a radiometer reading.
For the subjects, first white cards of known area and then Lolium temulentum plants were chosen.
The measure was termed the I-measure (where I stands for intensity).
EARLY PROGRAM STRUCTURE
Apart from the supplied software there existed a simple camera control program written in M68000 assembly language for course purposes.
This set a delay and took the photographs corresponding to each half in turn, built up an array in the memory, and finally displayed the image.
A clear policy was to use this, with minor changes, as a low-level module, and build a program both to process the information in the array and to display the image in various ways.
The other modules would be most suitably written in Pascal.
In fact parts of the original program were translated into Pascal as well.
Initial Lines of Investigation
The required options for a full investigation were seen at this stage to be as in the following list:—
Continuously updated image.
User's choice of exposure.
A-measure calculation (pixel count).
Weighted count as putative reflectance measure.
Simple picture improvement.
Comparison of two consecutive pictures.
Display of any picture, e.g. an improved picture.
The purpose of these options was to examine visually the relationship between the subject and the image.
The options are now described in more detail.
Option 1: This option viewed and displayed images continually until a break character was sent.
This was used to determine the limits of the view field by placing a white card at the four sides in turn and moving it until just seen.
Option 2: Used to examine the effect of varying the exposure.
It became apparent that there are lower and upper critical exposures .
Below the lower level the number of pixels seen falls off very rapidly as the exposure is further reduced and, provided that the light intensity is not too high, a complete blackout occurs at some non-zero exposure, which will be called the blackout point.
Above the upper critical exposure the number of pixels seen increases very rapidly until even background pixels are seen.
We shall call this the whiteout point.
Note that the so-called critical exposures here are less easy to define precisely and will not be used.
In fact the lower critical point corresponds fairly closely to the lower exposure bound discussed later.
The upper critical exposure is very roughly the whiteout point.
Option 3: As described, the sum of pixels seen is computed.
The number of pixels in the view field was also output for the purpose of comparison.
Option 4: The sum of pixels seen over a number of successive pictures with different exposures.
At the outset the number was eight, but this resulted in a slow turnover between measurements, and after some early trials the number was reduced to two, with the intention of raising it again for serious measurements if the results were encouraging.
They were not, and this line of investigation was abandoned for the current phase of the project.
Option 5: Simple picture improvement.
The image sometimes shows incomplete leaves, base and tip present with a segment missing, or it picks up isolated points which do not correspond to subject material.
The picture improver attempted to restore or remove some of these points, with the possibility of an improved correlation between true area and A-measure.
The improvement algorithm was of a simple ad hoc type.
Option 6: Three picture arrays were declared.
One held the current picture, one the previous picture, and one the result of a bitwise comparison.
With sub-options this could be done either way, in-NEW-not-in-OLD or in-OLD-not-in-NEW.
The object was to study the effect of small changes in the exposure, illumination etc.
Option 7: With sub-options this could display the latest picture, the previous picture or the bitwise difference obtained from Option 6.
Thus, for example, if the picture improver had been invoked, then the improved picture could be displayed, or the unimproved picture, or the changes made by the improver.
Some Further Comments on the Above Options
For ease of reference the blackout and whiteout points are now presented in a formal definition.
The blackout point (or level) corresponding to a given camera position, background, subject material, waveband filter and illumination is the lowest exposure at which subject material is detected by the camera.
Since most of the parameters here will normally be constant during a given experiment we can speak of the blackout level for a given light intensity.
(There is a minor imprecision in the definition since it does not specify the size and shape of the subject used to measure the blackout point, but the variation is slight, and ‘the’ blackout point is sufficiently accurate as defined.)
The whiteout point under the same conditions is the highest exposure at which the background is not seen, i.e. at any higher exposure at least one background pixel will be seen as ON.
It does not in fact follow that a total whiteout will occur at longer exposures, because of non-uniformity in the sensitivity of the optical RAM.
The Picture Improvement Algorithm
The algorithm originally adopted was that a pixel was to be ON if more than five of the surrounding eight pixels were ON, OFF if fewer than three were ON, and not changed from its existing value if from three to five were ON.
In the case of three to five pixels being ON this was later refined to attempt to restore the continuity of lines through the point, by considering the four pairs of opposite pixels in the same 3 × 3 square surrounding it.
For such a pair the sum of ON's is obviously 0, 1, or 2.
Ignoring the 1's, the centre pixel was then to be ON if the sum of 2's exceeded the number of 0's, OFF if it was less.
In all cases not so far defined the pixel was left at its previous value.
It was found at this stage that the testbed had insufficient memory for more sophisticated processing and, since the simple improver did not significantly better the correlation (though it certainly tidied up the displayed picture), this line of investigation was abandoned.
EXAMPLES OF INFORMATION GAINED FROM EXPERIENCE TESTS
As an example of the use to which these options were put in deciding the future lines of investigation in the project, it quickly became apparent by computing improved pictures over a range of plant ages and displaying the changes, that the measure of the changes was never likely to be large, and that the changes were not all in one direction.
(Note that by combining these options with Option 3 these measures could be calculated.)
More precisely, the errors in measurement possibly eliminated in this way were much smaller than the errors occurring for other reasons.
Hence picture improvement was abandoned.
It was suggested that the subject be viewed with a white background at low intensity, and an area measure defined as the complement of the sum of pixels seen, in the total pixel count.
This is a very reasonable idea, as it should eliminate effects due to different intensity or colour.
Some trials were carried out.
The indication was that the measure obtained would not differ significantly from the A-measure.
It was decided to retain the original definition and possibly conduct further tests at some future time, when the obtainable accuracy and required conditions were better understood.
This remains an option, but no further work has been done.
Experiment
An extended experiment was now conducted to verify the expected behaviour of the A-measure and I-measure.
Experimental Conditions
This experiment was carried out in a dedicated growth room with walls well masked with charcoal-grey cartridge paper.
A variety of white cards of known areas were viewed and the A-measure and I-measure computed.
Simultaneously radiometer measurements were taken and the results compared.
Some tests were also made with the few boxes of plants available at this time.
The camera was placed at 1.0m from a masked wall, and subjects were fixed to this wall in the case of cards, immediately in front of it for plants.
For the I-measure eight exposures were needed.
These were obtained by first establishing approximate blackout and whiteout points by observing a succession of images and then fixing eight equally spaced points in the interval between them.
Experience showed that the extremes were best avoided.
For a later trial lower and upper points were chosen on the ad hoc basis that ‘an approximation to the subject was visible’(though interfered with by black areas at the lower exposure and white areas at the upper end).
A uniform scale was then established within this (smaller) interval.
These will be referred to as Scale 1 and Scale 2 respectively.
At the same time the A-measure was recorded.
For the cards this was expected to correlate with known area.
The card areas were arranged in various ways.
The cards were always rectangular, but of varying sizes and proportions.
Single pieces of card, were used in some trials, in others several were used in a variety of positions relative to one another and to the central strip.
The single cards too were placed variously in the top half, bottom half and crossing the central strip.
This was expected to confirm that subjects would be seen uniformly away from the central strip, but, as described above, revealed the two halves to be of different sensitivity.
The I-measure will of course increase with area and indeed linearly for uniform card subjects and for a given light intensity.
It was also expected to increase with light intensity as measured by the radiometer, though the relationship was not predicted, owing to lack of information about the behaviour of the optical RAM.
It was proposed to establish a relationship empirically.
A problem was that most of the radiometer measurements gave low readings on the instrument's most sensitive scale.
As discussed already a more sensitive radiometer would be useful.
Some readings seemed high, possibly because of imperfect masking of the plant boxes.
It was observed, and this was quite unexpected, that the A-measure also increased with radiometer reading, and indeed at a rate only slightly less than the I-measure.
One possibility is that this measure too responds, at least in part, to the reflectance, rather than merely the area.
To some extent this is true, because it is known that an increase in the intensity of the light falling on each pixel accelerates the decay of the charge.
However the displayed images suggested another effect, which was quite strong enough to explain the experimental results.
This effect will be termed spreading , and will be defined later.
For the present it is sufficient to explain the term as the apparent increase in the size of a subject as the illumination intensity increases.
In other words, whether a pixel is ON is influenced by whether neighbouring pixels are ON.
Experimental Results
Set 1
The illumination used in compiling the data for Table consisted of
one mercury lamp (described earlier);
one 60W tungsten lamp.
The results are shown in Figures –.
Comments:
The half-field measures should be approximately half of the whole- field one.
The inaccuracy is possibly due to choosing too high an exposure, so that some black cells are seen as white.
The cards were fixed with Blu-Tack and so were slightly proud of the wall, which might have caused orientation effects.
Some radiometer readings became corrupted after writing them down and are wholly or partly lost.
Set 2
The illumination used in compiling the data for Table consisted of
eleven 125W warm white fluorescent tubes set in the ceiling at the sides of the room;
mercury lamp (described earlier);
one 60W tungsten lamp.
The results are shown in Figures –.
Comments:
Here the camera measurements are in good agreement with the expected relationships derived from the ratios of the areas, except that the readings for one eighth of the total area are slightly high.
It is unexplained why the radiometer readings in Bands 6 and 7 are lower in the second series, when the illumination is greater, but this was taken as grist to the mill of the idea that the radiometer method would probably be less reliable than the imaging method.
Set 3
The illumination used in compiling the data for Table consisted of
eleven 125W warm white fluorescent tubes set in the ceiling at the sides of the room;
one mercury lamp (described earlier);
one 60W tungsten lamp.
The results are shown in Figures –.
DISCUSSION AND REVISED OBJECTIVES AT THIS STAGE
Concentrate on the A-measure and attempt to establish its relationship with the true area, both for card and plant subjects.
The method will be empirical, using both graphical methods and a statistical regression package, BMDP.
Let us postulate a relation  (area measured in sq.
mms., time in hours) for the growth of true area with time.
This is approximately true over the middle life of Lolium temulentum plants, see for example Figures () and ().
Thus a 1% error in area measurement will correspond to a 1% error in determining the age (and so the area of an ideal plant).
A quarter of an hour is approximately 1% of a 24-hour day.
Allowing 1% error either way, a 1% maximum tolerance in measurement would mean a reliable detection of growth after half an hour.
The measurements so far suggest that this will be far too ambitious.
Later experiments will achieve an accuracy of about 2% for cards and 10% or more for plants, i.e. five-hour detection of growth.
An acceptable detection period would be half a day, which gives a measurement tolerance of 24%.
It must be determined whether this is realistic.
The reflectance and fluorescence measurements will be abandoned for the remainder of this phase of the project.
The fluorescence, as discussed earlier, is a low-magnitude phenomenon, and will not be reliably detected by this method.
The accurate measurement of area by this method must be achieved before it is sensible to talk about reflectance.
Chapter 4: Early Measurements.
SOME EXPERIMENTS
Various experiments were performed to verify that the imaging technique would give consistent results and to understand better the various parameter values (illumination, exposure, the structure of the subjects to be measured) affecting the measurement.
In the following tables the dimensions of the card subjects are in millimetres.
Experiment
Experimental Conditions:
Various card subjects were viewed under a fixed exposure for the A-measure and with a restricted version of the I-measure using only two exposures 12 and 16.
The exposure units are arbitrary.
The requisite delay period is implemented as nested loops and the exposure depends on the unit, i.e. the length of the inner loop.
Nevertheless, the exposure will be mentioned where relevant, to give at least a relative idea of the values used.
The illumination consisted of a total of 150W of tungsten lighting.
At this stage and henceforth a near-infra-red filter was employed, and the use of warm white tubes was not recorded, since their contribution would be small.
In fact they were off for most trials.
The table of measurements is given on the next page [Table ].
The errors in the measures are just under 20%.
However the readings contain some measurements with the card in the top half, some in the bottom half and some where the card crosses the central strip.
Better should be achievable with subjects consistently placed.
Readings which are obviously aberrant on a graph are indicated in the table by ‘?’.
(See Figure ) Repeated readings with the subject in the same position are indicated by ‘rpt’.
A second trial was performed, with a record kept of the position of the subject.
A radiometer reading was also recorded, to monitor the intensity of the light reflected from the card.
The I-measure was not recorded.
The complete set of values obtained is presented only on the following Figure , but some of the raw data are also given [see Table ]in order to show the considerable variation between different positions.
Note that ‘Middle’ means that the card is placed across the central strip.
Experiment
In this experiment Lolium temulentum plants were measured.
The plants are grown as described in , with controlled humidity and temperature (20°C), and an 8-hour daylength.
There was not just one single box as subject.
On any measuring day various boxes were used.
Measurements given in the following tables and graphs for plants of a particular age can refer to plants in different boxes and even different batches.
Thus although the subjects are reasonably uniform they are not identical.
The indicators recorded were 
Some boxes were harvested and the fresh and dry weights also recorded.
These were used later during the validations.
Most of the readings taken were with exposures corresponding to a reasonably representative image as displayed on the monitor screen.
However both low and high values were used in some measurements for the purpose of comparison, and this was instrumental in demonstrating the nature of the spreading and flooding phenomena discussed in Chapter 5.
The experiments described above were performed more than once, with minor variations in the procedure adopted.
For example a variety of light bulbs was obtained in order to produce readings under various different light intensities.
In another trial a systematic attempt was made to investigate the effect of proximity between subjects.
The results and further details are given in Figure .
FUNCTIONAL RELATIONSHIPS
For card subjects there are three independent variables — area, exposure and the radiometer reading — and one dependent variable — the A- measure.
Some time was devoted to determining a functional relationship between them, including a domain over which it would be valid.
The method used was partly theoretical but mainly empirical, and consisted in applying the non-linear regression option of a statistics package, BMDP.
Functional Relationships for Plants
For plants there have been numerous papers on the relationship between growth indicators such as dry weight or leaf area and time.
Since the current project is more concerned with the reliability of the measurement of area by an optical RAM, card measurement data was supplied to BMDP and the growth of plants with time was not considered at this stage.
One would obviously hope for a linear dependence of the A-measure on area.
Between the blackout point and the whiteout point the light intensity should have no effect with a perfect device, which should ‘see’ the whole subject and nothing but the subject.
Note that this refers to card subjects, so the light and shade effects found in a plant canopy will be absent.
In fact the phenomenon discussed later called spreading occurs.
Graphical treatment suggests that this effect is linear over an interval between the blackout and whiteout points, or possibly a curve with a fairly large radius of curvature.
Possible models are a power of the intensity or its exponential, where the radiometer is used to measure the intensity.
The effect is unexpected, and no theoretical basis is known to the author — hence the empirical treatment.
Finally the dependence on the exposure is a property of the optical RAM; the author knows no theoretical basis for that either, and again an empirical treatment has been applied.
The following graphs suggest the same behaviour as for the intensity — roughly linear over an interval, possibly a power or exponential.
Figures to refer to card subjects.
Figure shows how the A-measure per unit area varies with radiometer reading.
Figure shows how the A-measure, normalised with respect to both radiometer and true area, varies with exposure.
Figure shows how the A-measure, normalised with respect to radiometer reading and exposure, behaves with varying true area.
This graph demonstrates that, providing that we are careful to establish safe intervals for the various parameters, we can find a normalised measure which is remarkably linear with respect to true area.
Figure shows the variation of the ratio  with the age of plant subjects.
A Richards function was fitted to the data points using the BMDP package and is shown on the graph.
Finally Figure shows the growth of both dry and fresh weight with time.
A Regression Analysis and Reliability Checking
Various linear, power and exponential models were supplied to the regression package BMDP.
The linear models were quite successful, the others inconclusive.
Hence the relationship 
was regarded as a good model for further investigation.
The reason for the above study was the possibility of including a reliability check in the program, to compare each reading with a predicted value and indeed even make a correction or output a diagnostic message that a given reading should be regarded with suspicion.
Because of the poor theoretical backup and the later results showing quite consistent readings, the idea was abandoned.
However, reliability checks have been included in the latest version of the program.
These are based on various criteria such as:—
the consistency of consecutive measurements of a reference strip of known area;
comparison of the measure of the reference strip with a stored set of values;
checks that the area devoted to the reference strip is not invaded by other material such as the plants under test;
checks that the two halves of the reference strip are actually visible — this monitors extreme illumination conditions such as switch-off.
Chapter 5: Validation, Mainly Using an Inert Subject.
VALIDATION AGAINST ANOTHER PROJECTED AREA
The readings were compared with readings of the same subject obtained from a much more expensive and sophisticated video system described below.
The most usual subject was a green card, the nearest available green to the intended Lolium subjects, as judged by the eye.
Comparison with Results from a Sophisticated Video System
Use was made of a video camera system belonging to the department's robotics group.
The system is known as the Autoview Viking vision system and was marketed by British Robotics Systems Ltd., a company which is no longer trading.
This system is able to process images in various ways, and in particular perform a pixel count of the type used to compute the A- measure.
Plants of various ages were measured using both this system and the optical RAM camera, and the results were compared.
This was done for three different exposures.
Agreement was good.
It must be noted that both of these methods compute a projected area.
Description of Experiment
Different boxes of plants, and the same boxes at different times, were measured simultaneously by the video system and the optical RAM camera.
With the latter, three different exposures were used, since at this stage the existence of exposure cut-offs was known, but the effect had not been fully worked out.
Nevertheless, on the basis of the displayed image the middle value was likely to give the most accurate result (see Figures –.
VALIDATION AGAINST A MEASUREMENT OF THE TRUE AREA
At different times two leaf area machines were used.
This is a destructive method in which leaves are cut and placed on a viewing area.
A similarity is that the measuring technique employs light rays to create an image on a sensor.
The machines used were an older one, the LICOR LI3100 Area Meter (LICOR Inc., Lincoln, Nebraska, U.S.A.) and a later machine which became available during the project, the Delta-T Area Meter System with high resolution camera (Delta-T Devices Ltd., Burwell, Cambridge).
The LICOR machine was used in this experiment and the Delta-T in a later experiment which produced a characteristic of area against age of plant.
Comparison with Areas Found by a Leaf Area Measuring Machine
The leaf area machines give a quite accurate area measurement of cut leaves, of the order of 5% maximum error for the older machine and 2% for the newer one, under the experimental conditions used here.
Description of Experiment
Boxes of plants used as described in the previous experiment were taken and the parts of the plants lying in the viewing area were cut.
The machine works by shining a light on subjects placed on its conveyor belt and the area of the shadow is measured.
The results are quite accurate provided that care is taken to prevent small plant segments adhering to the belt and being carried past the sensor more than once.
Obviously one cannot re-use plants for later measurement by the other two systems and so the graphs obtained have fewer points than the earlier ones.
The results are quite good, but a flaw is that no middle-aged subjects were measured (Figures –).
SENSITIVITY OVER THE FIELD OF VIEW
Visual indications suggested that besides the known horizontal cut-off line there are other irregularities in the performance of the optical RAM.
The earlier experiments show that the top and bottom halves are not equally sensitive.
Apart from that it was observed that the left hand edge appeared not to be very sensitive.
An experiment was performed to examine this effect.
Apart from the cut-off, and the known greater sensitivity of the top half of the RAM no vertical variation in sensitivity has been apparent and no experiment was conducted to measure this more precisely.
Description of Experiment
A narrow card subject, occupying the full height of the field of view was placed in position and measured at various points from left to right, using three different exposures.
A graph (Figure ) of the corresponding readings shows that the sensitivity is greatest in the middle of the view field, and less on the lefthand side than the right.
The software was later changed to exclude the lefthand sixteenth of the viewfield from the measurements.
THE VARIATION OF THE A-measure WITH VARIOUS PARAMETERS
The A-measure can be expected to depend on the exposure, the intensity of the incident light and of course the true area.
This is true for both cards and plants; for plants we have the additional dependence on time (age).
As was discussed in the last chapter variations with exposure and intensity are approximately linear within certain bounds and it would be reasonable to correct for them by division.
However to simplify the apparatus the radiometer will not be used and the light intensity will be assumed approximately constant.
It will be shown that the variation of the measure with slight variations of light intensity is small and a checking mechanism is included in the software so that doubtful measurements are repeated.
The exposure is determined by the software and the exposure period remains constant unless the checking mechanism reveals major inconsistencies.
In this case the expsore is recalculated.
Finally the plant measure is normalised with respect to a corresponding reference measure — the measure of a fixed card of known area.
The Relationship of the A-measure with the True Area
This is shown in the several measurements obtained at various times of card subjects of known area.
For fixed exposure, illumination etc. the agreement is very good.
For plant subjects the only evidence is (a) the above comparison with the true leaf area, obtained from the leaf area machine and (b) the consistency of consecutive readings taken at short time intervals (one to five minutes).
The evidence is quite good, but not conclusive, and there are some puzzling features, to be discussed in the later trials.
Figure shows some consecutive measurements at short time intervals.
The variation over the whole period is fairly large, but between consecutive measurements it is within the tolerance discussed in Chapter Section % Chapter 3 Section 5.
In fact the worst case comes from the low first measurement and is 12.7% variation.
Elsewhere the variation is below 10% and usually well under.
Figure , which uses data obtained after refinements to the program had been implemented, shows the consistency well.
The Response for Varying Exposure
It was already known that there are lower and upper cut-off points, which we have called the blackout and whiteout points.
It was necessary to describe the response more precisely and in particular to examine the change of reading of a fixed subject with increasing exposure between these limits.
It is important to know what this effect is, because if a plant subject is viewed then there will be several levels of intensity due to shading and to the angles at which leaves are presented.
Thus for increasing exposure a rise in the reading could be due either to new material seen or to the phenomenon that we have called spreading , i.e. the effect according to which a subject is seen as larger merely because of a longer exposure.
We need some definitions:—
Spreading: The name given to the effect whereby an increase in exposure causes a subject to be seen as larger.
Flooding: The effect by which at long exposures large background areas are seen as white (spreading affects only the edge of objects).
Eventually the whole viewfield becomes white by this phenomenon.
Probably these two phenomena are not qualitatively different, but flooding is much more drastic than spreading and it is convenient to have separate terms.
For example measurement is possible in the presence of spreading, though a correction might have to be applied, but it is impossible in the flooded state.
The earlier trials suggest a characteristic of the following kind for a uniform (card) subject:— first a region in which all material is imperfectly seen, then a roughly linear region in which spreading takes place, then a gradual transition to flooding, seen as a super-linear increase in visible pixels with exposure and resulting finally in a complete whiteout, unless the illumination is too low.
If this proves to be the true picture then we have two possible strategies for selecting a suitable exposure automatically and then carrying out measurements.
(a) Use any exposure in the spreading region, and make an appropriate correction to the measurement obtained.
It must be borne in mind that a longer exposure will allow more plant material to be ‘seen’ but correction must be made for spreading of material seen at a lower exposure.
(b) Find an exposure near the beginning of the spreading region.
No correction will be necessary, but possibly dimly illuminated material will not be seen.
Description of Experiment to Test the Hypothesis
First a single card subject was viewed over a range of exposures and the results plotted (Figure ).
Then two other subjects of the same area, but of different, darker colours were added.
It was expected that these would be first seen at a higher value of the exposure and that in every case a roughly linear graph segment would follow the point at which the subject was fully seen.
This occurred, the only unexpected result being that two of the cards were seen as being equally bright (Figure ).
Although these cards have different colours they must have approximately the same IR reflectance.
Note: Figure contains a roughly drawn approximating polynomial to illustrate a method described below.
Result:
The result of the experiment was as expected.
There is now a clear strategy for finding lower and upper bounds for a ‘good’ exposure.
The Lower Bound:
For increasing exposure, the gradient of the line joining the origin to the current point on the curve will become positive increasing from the blackout point and will reach a local maximum at some point.
Over the linear (spreading) region this gradient will decrease to a minimum, and will then increase in the flooding region, possibly rising to a new greatest value when complete flooding is achieved.
However, since the whiteout point is where a blank pixel is first seen, this must be in or at the beginning of the flooding region.
Hence a reasonable lower bound is the maximum gradient of the radius vector in the interval blackout point, whiteout point .
In practice a somewhat smaller interval can be used to speed up calculations.
This lower bound is referred to henceforth as the LB-level .
The Upper Bound:
Roughly speaking this is the unique local minimum of the gradient of the graph.
To smooth out irregularities and to ensure that there is a unique local minimum the graph is first approximated to degree 4 by Legendre polynomials.
There will be two local maxima of the approximating curve, possibly outside the actual interval of exposures.
The local minimum can be calculated explicitly.
By inspection this will correspond to a point in the spreading region.
We term this upper bound the UB-level .
The ‘Good’ Exposure:
This can now be chosen in some arbitrary manner as a point between the lower and upper bounds.
Various considerations apply -see Figure .
Too near to the lower bound is not a good choice, since there will clearly still be unseen material.
Too near the upper bound is better, since spreading can be corrected for, but unfortunately earlier trials showed that spreading is increased for subjects close together , a condition which will be common for grass canopies.
On the other hand, if the grass material is dark then a longer exposure is desirable.
Suitable values for empirical trial are the mid point, one third of the interval below the upper bound, and the upper bound itself, depending on the actual conditions.
The Response for Varying Radiometer Reading
As has been described, radiometer readings are not used in the eventual measure, and were only included in some of the trials as a check.
However the relation is of interest, because it says something about how the measure might behave under variations in the illumination intensity.
An attempt to determine the relationship was described in Chapter 4, and it was found that the A-measure varies roughly linearly with the radiometer reading over a wide range of exposures.
See Figure .
The Response for Varying Lighting Voltage
Some puzzling variations in readings were conceivably due to voltage variations and an experiment was performed to test this.
Description of Experiment:
Using a dimmer a range of illumination voltages were used, measured with a voltmeter and readings of a fixed reference card and a fixed card subject compared.
These were then plotted.
Inspection suggests that the response is approximately square law.
This is not quite what was expected.
Bearing in mind that the computed measure is a scaling of the raw pixel count of the subject divided by that of the reference card , one would hope that small variations would cancel out.
However the results give an approximate parabola with a minimum in the range of voltages studied.
Over a smaller range, consistent with the acceptable variation of the mains, the relationship may even be assumed to be linear, with error well within the tolerance attainable for plant measurements with this device.
See Figures –.
It would be possible to make a correction for voltage variations on the basis of these figures.
The errors possibly arising from voltage variations are however clearly much less than variations arising for other, explained and unexplained reasons and it was decided to abandon this idea.
CONSISTENCY OF THE REFERENCE MEASUREMENT
It is clearly important that the measurements of the reference strip, an inert card, be consistent.
Apart from its purely arithmetical use in calculating a measurement it will then be useful as a check on the experimental conditions, for example in making sure that the current illumination is near to that at which the exposure was calculated.
This question was raised in Section ().
Various experiments, not all shown here, agree with the conclusion that the reference measurement is very reliable when measured in isolation.
However, the presence of a plant subject can affect the measurement of the reference card.
When a plant subject is present two things can happen.
The first and obvious one is that a leaf can grow across the reference area.
This is trapped independently.
Secondly, the variation in the reference measurement is greater when a plant is present, but still considerably less than the variation in the plant measurement.
Presumably this effect is due to stray reflections.
THREE DIMENSIONAL RESPONSE — A MINOR MYSTERY
From what has been said about the variation of the measure with area and exposure the form of the three-dimensional map of the relationship  can be predicted.
However the map produced by the SYMAP/ASPEX package contains a puzzling kink at a certain point on the area axis.
See Figure .
Though ASPEX is known sometimes to be unpredictable under changes in parameters, one should be cautious about the region of the (area, exposure) plane in which measurements can be trusted.
Perhaps the method used to choose the exposure should be refined.
SOME TESTS ON PLANTS
In view of the results on spreading it becomes possible to say something about the amount of new material seen as exposure increases.
If (and only if) almost all plant material is seen as soon as the LB-level is reached then increases in readings with increasing exposure will be due to spreading and the graph will be linear for plants in this region, as it is for cards.
Otherwise the graph will have an increasing gradient caused by spreading plus newly detected material.
The following graph (Figure ) suggests that, though neither of these pure cases completely reflects what happens, the first is quite near to it, i.e. very little new material is detected in a normal Lolium temulentum canopy once the LB-level is passed.
Chapter 6 — Program Documentation
Abstract
This program controls an optical RAM camera and computes an indicator of the growth of plants in a growth cupboard.
The indicator is a scaled pixel count adjusted according to the similar count obtained on viewing a reference card of known area.
The user is able to choose an order of averaging.
Before the program can produce measurements a lengthy set-up procedure must be followed.
This procedure allows the user to determine the field of view and check that the reference card is correctly placed.
It computes various parameters used in the measuring process.
USER MANUAL
Purpose of the Program
The program drives a dynamic RAM camera and processes the resulting picture to obtain a measure of the rate of growth of plants grown in boxes or pots.
Environment
The instrument is self-standing and requires only a mains connection.
For development three environments were used:—
VAX 750 running under UNIX
This was used for initial development of the software, including much of the initial testing.
The specific resources used were:—
Whitesmiths' Pascal cross-compiler, cross-assembler, linker and S- record formatter.
UNIX editing and file massaging facilities.
BBC/M68000 educational TUTOR board
The program, in S-record form, is down-loaded from the VAX filestore, or else from a BBC floppy disc or a cassette, into the TUTOR's memory.
Resources are:—
The TUTOR board's debugger.
BBC disc drive or cassette player, if appropriate.
Hewlett-Packard HP64000 software development system
The program source was transferred to the Hewlett-Packard in order to blow the EPROM.
Input and Output Details
All other inputs are via the keypad and are fully described under OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS .
There are two output systems, the actual outputs in each being identical.
Output 1 is to a mini-printer and provides hard copy of all messages and measurements output by the instrument.
The diagnostics and set-up dialogue are described under OPERATING INSTRUCTIONS .
Output 2 is an optional second copy of the output which is available to a BBC and disc drive via an RS232 port.
The measurements are—
‘Reference’ is the measurement of the reference card in square millimetres and ideally should be exactly the same number as the area of the card, entered at set-up time.
In practice the number returned will vary by up to 10%, though usually by more like 3%.
The reason for the higher figure is not clear, but may be due to environmental variations.
This figure is included as a check on the consistency and probable accuracy of the current measurement.
‘Measure’ is the computed average measurement of the subject in square millimetres.
‘Maximum’ is the maximum measurement used in the current average.
‘Minimum’ is the minimum measurement used in the current average.
‘Raw’ is the pixel count of the subject measurement.
This is the same figure used in the calculation of the measure, and is included as an extra check on the current consistency of the measuring process.
What the Program Can Do and its Limitations
The program accomplishes two things —‘blind’ set-up, i.e. without needing to display an image, and control of the measuring process.
Its main limitations are:—
It can only operate in a fairly narrow range of light intensity.
It is sensitive to slight movements of the camera, subject or reference strip and will sometimes trigger spurious diagnostics.
It measures with reasonable accuracy if confined to the same subject throughout the measuring period, but this accuracy is very much reduced if the subject is changed.
If this does need to be done then it is recommended that the run be aborted and restarted at Option 6, but sometimes Option 5 will be necessary.
Operating Instructions
The program comes up with a display of the main menu accompanied by three beeps:—
Option 0 must be chosen immediately following switch-on, i.e. after a cold start.
Answer
0 <CR>
where <CR> as usual means ‘Press the return key’.
If Option 0 is chosen then all following options are automatically either chosen or offered.
All other options are warm starts, to be chosen following a program ABORT or RESET.
They are selected by typing the corresponding integer and RETURN.
Option 1 is most usually chosen if the illumination intensity has been changed, in which case the exposure will need to be recalculated.
If this option is chosen, or automatically following Option 0, the user is required first to provide a dark background — preferably of the same material as will be used as a background to the subject and then a light background (not necessarily white).
The user should respond by pressing any key when prompted to do so by the word Key?
When user action is required a beep is also generated.
The dialogue is:—
where nnn represents three-digit numbers, the whiteout and blackout points respectively.
Option 2 is to obtain an approximate indication of the edges of the rectangular area viewed by the camera.
Selection is followed by the message
Field of view to be found?
(Ans.
Y/N)
For further information see the section on Option 2 below.
For the present it is assumed that the N (No) option is selected.
Option 3 is to enable the user to position the reference card correctly.
Selection is followed by the message
Position calibration strip?
(Ans.
Y/N)
For further information see the section on Option 3 below.
Option 4 recalculates the whiteout and blackout points now that the field of view is known and proceeds to compute a ‘good’ exposure for the measurements.
The user sees a repeat of the Option 1 dialogue and then:— followed by a beep.
No user action is required here.
Option 5 stores reference levels for error checking during the measurement run.
First the user must input the area of the reference card in square millimetres and the required order of averaging.
(For example, if this order is 4 then each reading is an average of four measurements.)
No other user action is required here.
The prompts are  The following now appears:— The percentage information gives the balance between the parts of the reference card seen in the top and bottom halves of the field.
If these are wildly out of balance then probably a diagnostic will be triggered and it is then advisable to change the position of the reference card and restart the run at Option 3.
The successful completion of this part of the set-up is announced by three beeps.
The program now enters Option 6 and starts measuring.
Respond by pressing any key.
The measurements are printed on a new page and will appear at an interval corresponding to the chosen degree of averaging, and also at intervals of approximately one hour and one day.
Further Details on Options 2 and 3
If it is required to determine the field of view under Option 2 then the answer Y will have been selected.
Prior to this (CHECK) the user must hold a light-coloured rectangular test card in such a way as to attempt to cover the top of the field of view but not the bottom.
The object is to determine in which of sixteen horizontal strips the lower edge of the test card lies.
The first prompt to appear gives the North-South limits and is
There is then a pause, followed by one of the following messages:— and possibly one of  if the H strip message has appeared.
The diagnostic is simply a warning.
Possible actions are to ignore it (if previous runs suggest that that light level is about right), or to abort the run and recommence from Option 1.
Go down! /Go up!appear when the test card is held too high or too low, i.e. outside the view field.
The H strip message appears if it is possible to identify the strip in which the lower edge of the test card lies.
If the strip is one of the two top or two bottom ones then the respective Apx message is printed and this is usually enough to determine where the subject must be placed.
Next there is an opportunity to try again:—
Finished?
Answer Y/N — >
with a beep.
If Y is selected then the message
V limits found.
is printed, otherwise the above dialogue is repeated.
Next the left and right boundaries must be found.
The user must bring the test card in from the left and, with similar messages will be told in which of twenty-six vertical strips covering the subject area (not the reference area) the righthand edge of the card lies.
If the answer to the Finished?message is Y after determination of a vertical strip then the Option 2 dialogue terminates with the message:—
H limits found.
If Option 3 is entered by selecting Y then a reminder is given:—
Fix calib strip!
Key!
with a beep.
NOTE : The subject area should be covered by background material, and the reference area should contain only the reference card.
Ideally this card should be about 60mm × 13mm if the viewing distance is 1 metre, and scaled for other distances.
The longer sides should be vertical.
If it is larger then spreading can cause pixels to be seen outside the permitted area, if smaller then accuracy can be lost.
Messages indicate whether the card is correctly placed, or in which of the four principal direction(s) it is out of position.
For example:—
There are also messages corresponding to visible material in the subject area or the absence of material in the reference area (which in either case could be an out-of-position reference card).
If the position is correct then control automatically passes to the next option.
Error Conditions and What Action to Take
There are several diagnostic messages which could appear on the screen.
These can be divided into two classes, as follows:—
Problems due to ill-matched illumination and exposure .
(Both at set-up and in measuring):
The exposures for the field of view calculation and reference strip placement are to some extent arbitrary.
The exposure value computed for the measurements is the result of fairly sophisticated calculations.
In either case, at the borders and with slight variation in the illumination, it is possible that the exposure is slightly higher or lower than the optimum value for the current conditions.
One typical outcome is that the reference strip (which is what is used for the diagnostic) is seen as too big due to spreading and then overflows its allotted area.
Another possibility is that the part of the reference card in the lower half of the view field (the less sensitive part) is not fully seen.
Actions :
(a) If the diagnostic occurs rarely then ignore it and rely on the averaging.
(b) Increase the order of averaging slightly.
(c) Restart at some level, for example 3, 4 or 5.
(During exposure calculation):
Occasionally a diagnostic is triggered by an unexpected result of the calculations of the LB- and UB-levels.
Unfortunately this can occur either if the illumination is too dim or if it is too bright.
(To see this, consider the characteristic of spreading with exposure.)
The user is offered the option of proceeding with the measurements using the best exposure obtainable in the circumstances.
Actions :
(a) Accept the option of proceeding anyway.
The value used for the exposure will be reasonable for the prevailing conditions.
Distrust comparisons with readings obtained when this setting-up problem did not occur.
(b) Adjust the illumination and restart at Option 1 to recalculate the blackout and whiteout points, or Option 4 to retain the previous values and merely recalculate the ‘best’ exposure.
The latter option is perfectly reasonable if the illumination has not been changed too much.
Problems due to real or apparent movement of the equipment .
Each time a measurement is made the program checks that a strip around the reference strip has at most a small number of ON pixels in it.
(It should of course have none, these are permitted spurious pixels due to odd effects, e.g. dust motes.)
If there are too many such pixels then a diagnostic is triggered.
(Experience has shown that the number of such permitted pixels has been set too low, so that the test is probably too sensitive.)
Sometimes a leaf of the plant subject grows across the reference area — the reason for including this diagnostic.
Actions :
(a) Ignore it if the program seems to be producing consistent results.
(b) Restart.
(c) Check that the plant does not infringe the reference area.
If it does then move or remove the leaf.
MAINTENANCE MANUAL
Data Areas
stopCheck: A BOOLEAN, set at compilation time.
Usually it is assumed to be FALSE.
If TRUE then the program runs in debug mode.
A sub-record HalfPicVals is used to store, for each half of the image, a ‘good’ measurement of the half reference card, its maximum and minimum measurements and the current value during the repeated measuring process.
A sub-record LightCnstType is used to store the delay unit used in implementing the exposure and a lower critical level used in the diagnostics.
The main record contains a HalfPicVals for each of the top and bottom, and a LightCnstType, and in addition fields
The advantage of this method of passing information between sub-programs and modules is two-fold:—
(a) Only a single parameter of record type need be passed in most sub- programs, and rarely more than four.
(b) Maintenance is made easier.
To change the amount of data passed between sub-programs it is necessary only to modify some code in the sub-program bodies, not the sub-program specifications, and to modify the declaration of the record itself.
Structure of the Program
A structure diagram is given in Figure 6.1.
A list of the modules and sub-programs now follows.
Except at the lowest level each module contains a single sub-program.
All modules are written in Pascal apart from one module containing some of the low-level camera control and some other manipulations.
Imported Files
Three files are imported into various modules using the include mechanism:—
general.ext — contains the specifications of several sub- programs which are declared as EXTERNAL in various modules.
Modules
In each case the file name is given first and is followed by the module name.
Module Dependency Diagrams
These are shown in Graphs 6-1 and 6-2.
Only the main modules are shown, however the low-level modules are fully described in the text.
Detailed Description of Modules
In the following, only the explicit inputs to a sub-program A are listed under ‘INPUTS’ and ‘OUTPUTS’.
If a field of the data structure savedValues is used by a sub-program B, called by A, but not explicitly by A itself, then it will be listed as an input or output of B but not of A. The notation (A|B) means ‘A or B’.
For example savedValues. (top|btm).
calibMeas
means either savedValues.top.calibMeas or savedValues.btm.calibMeas.
remoteSensing (Main calling program).
Assigns certain constants to do with light levels.
Displays the main menu which allows seven levels at which a program run may commence:—
Cold start, all variables will be initialised.
Starts with finding crude exposure bounds.
Starts by finding the view field.
Starts with the process for fixing the calibration strip.
Starts by finding a good exposure range.
Starts by recalculating the reference measures.
This option is chosen automatically when more than a certain number of measurements fall outside a certain tolerance.
Measurements then continue.
Simply recommences the measuring process.
A choice of options is then entered.
The set-environment routine is then entered at the appropriate point.
Finally the measurement routine is called.
This does not terminate unless there is either a program crash or a user abort.
setEnvironment
Sets up the operating environment.
Level 0 — calls a low-level procedure called setup defined in the M68000 interface module, which assigns certain parameters and also this level initialises the exposure variable.
Level 1 — calls the getBoundaries procedure to compute the blackout and whiteout levels.
Level 2 — allows the field of view to be found, if required.
This means that a suitable value of the exposure is set and the findFieldOfView procedure is called.
Level 3 — allows the calibration/reference card to be placed in position.
This can be a delicate operation since it is desirable that this card fill most of its allotted area.
The procedure called is named fixCalibStrip.
Level 4 — recalculates the blackout and whiteout values by calling getBoundaries, but this time only the reference area is looked at.
A ‘safe’ interval between these values is then defined and the function goodExpsrRange is called in a REPEAT loop until a satisfactory value is delivered.
Level 5 — at this level the user must specify the area of the reference card and the order of averaging.
the procedure refAndWgt is then called to save a set of ‘good’ measurements of the reference card — to be used later to check consistency — and also to compute a weighting between the top and bottom of the image.
This was included because of the different sensitivity of the top and bottom of the optical RAM.
Finally this procedure calculates empirical corrections to be applied later to both the subject and the reference measures and these are saved in the record savedValues.
getBounds — Calculates the blackout and whiteout levels.
This procedure computes the blackout and whiteout levels and stores them in the fields black, white of savedValues.
findFieldOfView
Finds the field of view.
It should be noted that this is done without an image being displayed.
Note that the view field information is imparted by onscreen messages, not by variable assignments.
The procedure works by requiring the user to present the edge of a light card,(the lower edge if the horizontal sides of the view field are being sought, the righthand edge if the vertical sides are required).
The top and bottom are found before the right and left edges.
The procedure simply divides the field into horizontal or vertical strips numbered from the top or bottom and informs the user in which strip the test card's edge lies.
If this is also one of the sides then a message such as‘Apx top!’(i.e. approximate top) is given.
For the righthand side this corresponds to the side of the subject field, that is, it excludes the reference area.
oneAxis — Handles either horizontal or strips.
Each time it is called it snaps a new picture, since the position of the test card is presumed to have changed, and outputs some messages.
stripNumber Computes the number of a horizontal or vertical strip.
The treatment of the inputs is rather clumsy.
For vertical searches (horizontal strips) top equals the number of strips.
For horizontal strips it does not, because of the excluded reference area.
fixCalibStrip — Position the reference strip correctly.
This procedure takes a new snapshot and does pixel counts for various subareas such as a narrow strips at the edge of the region of the reference area which is supposed to contain the reference card.
If any pixel is seen in such a strip then the reference card is adjudged to be out of position.
The subject area and the reference card area are also checked.
goodExposure — Calculate a ‘good’ exposure value.
The function first saves a set of measures by calling the procedure assignFunc.
The main computation is done in a subsidiary function chooseExpsr.
The current function calls this twice to obtain expsrL and expsrH and defines the ‘good’ exposure as a suitable point between them.
It also contains certain diagnostics to deal with unexpected conditions such as too low or too high an illumination level.
assignFunc
Assigns and saves in an array a set of measures corresponding to a set of consecutive integer exposure values.
Apart from its main function of storing a set of measures this procedure contains some diagnostics and also outputs a dot each time a measure is calculated to show the user that the program is running correctly.
chooseExposure — Computes both the LB-level and the UB-level.
For the LB-level the function simply runs through the possible gradients of the radius vector and selects the maximum.
For the UB-level the algorithm is more sophisticated and two subsidiary procedures coefficients and optimum are called.
coefficients
Calculates the coefficients of a Legendre approximation.
The procedure first maps the given interval onto the standard interval [-1,1]and then forms an integrand in discrete form by multiplying the input DiscreteFunc by the Legendre polynomial of the appropriate degree evaluated at the corresponding exposure.
For this degree the coefficient is then the integral of this integrand over the standard interval.
For the integration we use Simpson's Rule.
optimumValue
The optimum value, as discussed elsewhere, is the point where the gradient of the measure versus exposure graph is minimum.
The minimum of the gradient of the Legendre approximation is where its second derivative vanishes.
Since the approximation is of the fourth degree the second derivative is at most a quadratic.
This function returns the appropriate root of that quadratic, if it is a genuine quadratic, and computes an appropriate value if not.
In either case the value is scaled from the standard interval [-1,1]back to the actual interval.
refAndWeights — Saves a set of ‘good’ measures for use as a consistency check on each measurement and computes a weighting between the top and bottom halves of the image.
The procedure assigns the weighting between the top and bottom halves, saves a set of measures to be used for reference and initialises the fields norm, max, min, subjMeas of the sub-records top, btm.
autoMeas — Top level measuring procedure.
The main measurement is done by calling a function avgAreaMeasure in a loop at this level.
Also here are some onscreen messages and a provision for resetting the saved ‘good’ reference values if the number of accumulated bad readings exceeds a predetermined level.
To do this the procedure refAndWgt is called.
Finally the procedure results is called in the loop to print out the computed measurements.
avgArea — Averages a set of measurements.
The main action of this function is a loop in which orderOfAvg calls of a function measure are made and averaged.
There are also diagnostics allowing a recalculation of the ‘good’ reference levels if the number of bad readings exceeds a predetermined level or an output of warning messages if any of the measurements used in computing the average is more than a certain tolerance from the mean.
measure
Weighted sum of the subject and reference measures of the two halves.
The action of this function is fully described above.
halfMeas
Obtains pixel counts for one half of the image, both for the subject and the reference card.
Delivers a ratio of the two.
The action is almost completely described above.
It is only necessary to add that a consistency checking procedure is also called.
checkConsistency — Consistency check and diagnostics.
Apart from the inputs and outputs described above this procedure checks whether each reference measure lies outside a certain percentage tolerance, checks for low-light conditions (failure to see the reference card) and checks on the current number of bad readings.
There are various possible diagnostic messages.
results — Outputs one set of measurements.
Outputs the current set of measurements with appropriate labels.
badSetUp
Checks for spurious material in the reference area.
There should be no light material in a strip running round the edge of the reference card.
This function obtains a pixel count of any such material seen in the strip and sets the return value accordingly.
addBits — Counts the number of bits set in part of a picture.
The inputs specify ‘part’ of a picture,(it could be the whole).
This function adds the number of set bits in this part.
auxil — Some widely-used low-level sub-programs.
Obtains the two halves of an image.
inputRoutines — Two low-level routines allowing the choice of an option and user action to end a wait period by a key press.
Obtains a character from the user following an output prompt.
messageRoutines — Two procedures each allowing the output of a message of fixed length and also a procedure delivering a warning message.
numberRoutines — Numerical I/O.
A sequence of decimal digits input from the keyboard is formed into the corresponding decimal whole number or zero.
Outputs the number specified to the mini-printer or data-collecting device, in the required format.
interface — Routines written in M68000 assembly language.
These routines are written in assembly language but called as procedures or functions from Pascal modules.
The name of the routine in the defining module interface has an underscore prefixed to the name used in the calling module.
This is a requirement of the development system used on the VAX 750.
This procedure sends a byte to the output device.
The reason for writing a purpose-built routine was to simplify the output when the dedicated instrument was constructed.
Used to distinguish between ON and OFF pixels in the stored picture.
This is necessary both for pixel counts and for displaying a picture (done during development).
Used to input a value to select an option, specify a parameter, terminate a pause etc.
Fills one quarter of the picture array (and is thus misnamed).
Algorithm Description
The blackout level is found by viewing an area known to contain light material, the whiteout level by viewing background.
The algorithm is very simple.
Each strip is viewed in turn, starting at the end where the light test card is positioned.
The edge of the test card is where the first strip contains only background.
For lwbNotUpb TRUE a simple scan of values of the gradient of the radius vector is performed and the maximum is chosen.
For FALSE, i.e. the upper bound, see the algorithms for coefficients and optimum .
For each n the coefficient is defined to be the n'th coefficient in the approximation to degree 4 by a series of Legendre polynomials.
This is obtained by translating to the standard interval [-1,1], multiplying the corresponding function by the Legendre polynomial of degree n and integrating over the interval.
Simpson's Rule is used for the integration.
This simply uses the standard solution of a quadratic equation if appropriate, and assigns a suitable value if the equation is essentially linear.
The solution is scaled from the standard interval [-1,1]back to the actual interval.
The weights of the top and bottom halves are computed by obtaining pixel counts of each and then, for example,
This is just a weighted mean of two values, the weights having been computed previously.
One of the checks computes the current reference pixel count as a percentage of a previously saved ‘normal’ value.
If the result differs from 100% by more than an agreed tolerance then a question mark is output to show doubt about the reading and the count of bad readings is incremented.
If this error count exceeds a given value then a further message is output and a new measurement is forced.
This function does pixel counts of the rectangle allotted to the reference card and the smaller rectangle where it is actually supposed to be placed and subtracts them.
If any pixels are seen in the resulting region then (a) the reference card has moved,(b) the subject or other material has moved into the reference region or (c) one or both of the exposure and illumination is too high and spurious pixels are seen by spreading.
In any of these cases the set-up is adjudged to be bad and appropriate action will be taken at a higher level.
A small number of spurious pixels are permitted.
Calls a function testbit written in assembly-language and delivering TRUE or FALSE according to whether a bit is set or not.
Consists of nested loops, the outer of size decayPeriod, the inner of size unit.
Calls a low-level procedure getframe in turn for each half of the image and then waits through a specified decay period, the exposure.
The function contains a loop which picks up one character at a time and classifies it.
Backspace allows correction, carriage return or line feed terminates the process, while a decimal digit character is translated and the decimal number built up using the elementary formula 
All other input characters are simply ignored.
The number is assumed to be of a certain maximum field width and the process also terminates if this field width is reached.
The digits of the number are computed using a loop containing the standard algorithm 
The digits are then output in reverse order from leng down to 1.
Calls DECODE to convert the column-row information into a position in the linear array.
The algorithm is:—
The bit offset in the byte and the byte offset are returned and the full offset can then be calculated by 
Calls GETHALF to obtain a quarter of the picture.
The order of scanning is complicated.
In outline the algorithm is as follows:—
Interfaces
An RS232 interface is provided so that output can be picked up by another device such as a BBC micro with a disc drive.
Possible Improvements
A camera with higher resolution would give various advantages.
The tests which trigger the various diagnostics need investigating.
Some are oversensitive, which leads to annoyance and casts doubt on readings which might not be inaccurate.
More memory would allow the use of a smaller delay unit and hence finer control over exposure.
Also it would permit additions, such as image processing, with a prospect of eliminating spurious subject material in software.
For instance, the intended subjects are boxes of plants which remain in place and do not change rapidly.
Thus some types of change between consecutive pictures are not real and could be eliminated.
Things to Watch for When Making Changes
As remarked under Data Areas, the use of a formal parameter whose type is a comprehensive data structure to pass data between modules makes changing the program a fairly safe operation.
As far as is known there are no side effects — a procedure cannot alter any quantity not represented in the data structure and not appearing as a VAR parameter of the procedure.
One difficulty is caused by Pascal's lack of the facility available in ALGOL68 and Ada whereby a constant can be assigned the value of an expression.
Thus changes to some constants imply changes to other constants.
Such changes are always commented.
Consider for example but this is not permitted in Pascal.
If the constants defining message sizes msgSize ,lMsgSize are changed then the corresponding messages must be changed accordingly and these occur at several points in the program.
With other constants which define array sizes, such as maxExp ,minExp and the various constants related to the number of rows and columns in the picture it is possible that an increase will lead to a memory overflow or long waits for some actions to terminate.
This is particularly true of the set-up operation.
Some constant changes, particularly affecting checkConsistency and diagnostics elsewhere, can result in conditions becoming difficult or impossible to satisfy, so that the program either cannot complete the set-up operation or delivers too many diagnostics and perhaps even fails to deliver measurements.
Of course, changing the logic of the corresponding conditions can have the same effect.
Testing
The main testing has been operational, but it has been carried out under a variety of conditions and the low-level sub-programs in particular have survived essentially unchanged through several changes to the program.
Further details follow.
remoteSensing
All options in the menu have been tried and the program has been run both in debug mode and developed mode.
setEnvironment
Tested several times under different conditions of illumination, ambient lighting, viewing distance, walls of room (plain/reflective).
Only the one chosen background material has been used but it has been presented at various distances and angles.
The exposure values in Options 2 and 3 cause problems under some extreme lighting conditions.
For example spreading can occur, which sometimes makes it difficult to position the reference card.
Similarly, it is not always easy to establish the viewing rectangle.
getBounds
Tested under a variety of different conditions -illuminations, subjects and environments.
It is consistent to within a value of plus or minus one, which is quite acceptable for a rough bound.
The values have been checked by displaying the image.
Allowing for minor environmental changes for pictures taken at, an interval of, say, one minute, these images are correct.
For example, an image taken with exposure equal to the blackout level should be completely black.
In practice it will often show a small number of pixels as ON.
At any greater exposure at least one pixel should be ON, but in practice this will not always happen.
These results are quite acceptable, but a picture at the blackout level should not show whole areas ON, nor should a picture more than two or three above the blackout point be black and neither of these happens.
The precise resolution shown in this behaviour depends on the delay unit.
findField
oneAxis
stripNumber
Tested under various conditions.
This procedure can fail to produce a result under extremes of lighting due to spreading if it is too bright or the exposure cut-off if it is too dim.
Since the field of view must be known before the exposure can reasonably be calculated this procedure is called before the best exposure is known.
Currently an ad hoc value one third of the distance from the blackout point to the whiteout point is used.
No doubt this could be made more sophisticated but it was judged better to oblige the user to adjust the illumination.
When this is done the procedure rarely fails, though the choice of illumination can be delicate in some environments, particularly growth cupboards.
Under some conditions the determination of a strip number is very sensitive to movement of the test card, and it is possible for the announced approximate edge to lie in either of the two edge strips on either side.
This is acceptable — the view area does not need to be entirely precise.
fixCalibStrip
The positioning of the reference card does need to be fairly accurate if it nearly fills the space allotted.
As described elsewhere a region round the edge of the allotted rectangle must be empty of light material.
This procedure has been extensively tested by moving the reference card in all possible directions from the correct position and comparing with the resulting message on screen.
An image was produced for the initial tests as an extra check.
Finally the effect of placing material in the subject area was tried.
There is a rarely occurring minor bug, apparently due to pixels seen on the edge of the reference area under some light conditions.
The effect is that the message
Ref card
alone appears.
This should normally indicate a direction in which the card is out of position, for Ref card: too high
This can be irritating, but is ‘fail safe’, the card is in its allotted area, though possibly near the edge of it.
As with findField the exposure is selected arbitrarily, in this case the mid point between the black- and whiteout points.
Again, in some light conditions this can lead to problems which trigger a diagnostic.
goodExpsrRange
assignFunc
chooseExposure
coefficients
optimumValue
Tested under a variety of conditions.
For the initial tests trace statements were inserted to obtain the pixel counts for each of the range of exposures used to compute the two bounds.
The graphs were drawn and compared with the computed LB- and UB- levels.
Not many problems have been encountered, but if the whiteout point is too high it is possible, though unusual, for the maximum gradient of the radius vector to occur in the flood region and the value delivered for the LB-level can then be higher that the UB-level.
It is not clear why this happens, but it appears to occur under dim illumination.
The program warns the user but can cope by assigning the LB-level, the higher value obtained, as the chosen exposure.
There are no test results for this case since it is not easy to force its occurrence.
The various intermediate values produced in computing these levels have been printed out and examined in some trials.
refAndWeights
Tested in isolation with selected data and also run many times.
autoMeas
Tested in many trials.
The case in which the reference levels are reset has been triggered on numerous occasions, as has the debugging version in which user action is required every measurement.
No problems are known at this level.
avgArea
The forced reference reset can occur at this level, and has done on numerous occasions.
THE MEAN CALCULATION HAS NOT BEEN HAND CHECKED, BUT SEEMS STRAIGHTFORWARD.
The fairly severe test incorporated at the end wherein each measure is compared with the calculated mean, and must lie within a 2% tolerance of that mean, has not been triggered.
This is surprising in view of the fact that over a longer term measurements can vary by much more than this.
The explanation seems to be that consecutive measurements have been found to be very consistent, whatever variation exists manifests itself over a longer period corresponding to several averaged measurements.
measure
This function has been called many times under many conditions, and with a variety of subjects.
The measure is consistent, in the sense that consecutive values obtained from the same subject in the same position agree to within about 2%.
The validation experiments are also relevant here [q.v.].
halfMeas
By means of inserted trace statements the values delivered by halfMeas, i.e. a measure of half of the view area, have been obtained and are found to be consistent.
This has been done (for measure and halfMeas) under various conditions -different illumination (either using sources of different power or one source, varied with a dimmer), a range of exposures, with card subjects of known area, and by human estimation against the subject and a displayed image.
checkConsistency
Tested by each call of halfMeas.
All diagnostics in this procedure have been triggered but some are not easy to force.
One that can easily be forced is the detection of switched off illumination (or merely low light) and this works reliably.
Note that there is a fail-safe principle in the design.
Assuming that the measuring device itself is reliable, if a single measurement corresponds to a variation in the measurement of the reference card then this fact is flagged on the output.
If too many such measurements occur then the current measurement is rejected and the reference levels recalculated.
In other words, some good measurements might be lost, but bad measurements are likely to be picked up because of the requirement that both the subject measurement and the reference measurement must be consistent.
results
Tested in isolation with selected data.
badSetUp
Called every time that checkConsistency is called, and so called under many different conditions.
This function checks that a strip round the reference card contains no light material.
No case has been observed in which this strip contains such material and fails to announce the fact.
On the other hand spurious announcements occur quite often and it is not clear why.
Again, this is fail-safe, but annoying.
addBits
Tested by many calls with concurrent observation of the displayed image.
It is clearly valid and consistent to the extent that a sparse picture matrix always gives a low bit count and a well-filled matrix a high count.
Also the counts for card subjects of known area are very consistent.
Since this function is just nested loops wrapped round a call of ‘testbit’, an M68000 routine, these are perhaps rather tests of that routine.
auxil 
inputRoutines 
messageRoutines 
numberRoutines
inputWholeNumber
All inputs tested — backspace, a whole number (up to seven digits & more than seven digits), linefeed, carriage return, other characters.
Note that ‘other characters’ are ignored.
Thus, for example, -123 will be read as 123.The number delivered is always echoed and has always correct in all tests.
putNumber
Tested by setting various values of the width parameter and various numbers whose type is a subrange of 0…maxint.
Typical numbers are 0, small positive integers, large positive integers, where ‘large’ means either a number of the exact width leng, or of width (leng-1) or finally of greater width and so not capable of being printed correctly by putNumber.
No problems have been found.
interface
send
Tested with many printable and unprintable characters.
testbit/DECODE
Tested together by observation of chosen pixels in a displayed image.
getchar
Tested with many printable and unprintable characters.
setup
The only obvious tests are (a) to examine the registers and (b) to make sure that the ports behave correctly.
No problems have been encountered.
getframe/GETHALF
Tested by examining many displayed images.
A problem whereby a strip at the left hand edge would be blank for quite bright subjects seems to be due to a lack of sensitivity of the device at that edge.
Some evidence for this point of view is given under validation — sensitivity across the field of view.
Otherwise, with the possible exception of isolated pixels, it appears that these routines function correctly.
PROJECT DOCUMENTATION
Some Problems
In the intended environment, a growth room, ventilation is provided by fans.
This has the effect of moving the leaves of the subject and slightly affects the consistency of the measuring process.
It is not a large effect and may be ignored, or alternatively some form of shielding could be provided.
There is a puzzling variation in the measurements.
While the general trend for growing plants is increasing, there is some variation about each current level.
This goes beyond the intrinsic error due to the device (about 2% when measuring an inanimate object) and is not random.
Consecutive measurements usually agree quite well, and furthermore there is usually an upward or downward trend superimposed on the general upward one.
It is possible, but not established, that these variations are due to fluctuations in the mains voltage.
Alternatively they may be due to radiations coming from the plant, possibly reflectance on top of the simple ON/OFF pixel count due to area.
Finally the measurements correspond fairly well with the differences in plant size due to temperature stress.
A plant placed in a 5°C environment will be visibly smaller than one maintained at 20°C.
There are exceptions to this, which have been discussed elsewhere.
Chapter 7: Final Trials and Conclusions.
SOME EXPERIMENTS UNDER GROWTH-ROOM CONDITIONS
The camera was set up in a growth room.
The conditions maintained in these rooms are:—
An eight-hour lighting regime.
The lighting consists of a battery of warm-white striplights with total intensity in the range 40–50 Wm -2 
Constant 20°C temperature.
Controlled humidity (70%) with a forced draught of air.
As mentioned earlier the warm-white lighting contains little infra-red radiation.
An anglepoise lamp with, variously, a 60W, a 75W and a 100W tungsten bulb was used to remedy the defect.
Experimental Set-up
The camera was fixed to the bench at a distance of 0.6m from the plant subjects.
This distance should be within the capabilities of the device, but 0.8m–1.0m is probably better.
Plant subjects in the same lunchboxes that had been used for previous experiments were placed on a stand and viewed.
In later trials pots containing five Lolium temulentum plants were used.
The computer, keyboard and monitor were placed on a table outside the growth room and measurements were recorded regularly.
Problems
The program had been tested quite thoroughly under other conditions as explained in Chapter 6.
However considerable problems were experienced in the first growth-room trial.
Triggering of the various traps in the program occurred with surprising frequency and it was difficult to obtain an exposure value.
When it had been obtained program crashes occurred due to triggering of the consistency check traps.
The problem was solved and reliable set-up and running became possible by minor changes to the program, including relaxation of the consistency checks.
Nevertheless, why this relaxation was either necessary or sufficient remains an unsolved problem, since the average consistency of the reference measurements, and usually even that of the plant measurements is better (has a lower error) than the level now used for the consistency checks (20% error).
The growth cabinet is subject to frequent visits by technicians doing work required by other experiments.
These visits cause some disturbance to the plants and to the paths of light rays.
Possibly the occasional spurious light ray causes a corresponding bad reading whose error is averaged out.
The consistency check looks at each reading.
The just-mentioned occurrence of spurious light rays is likely to be a difficulty.
The growth-room walls are lined with highly reflecting Mylar.
The forced draught and the occasional opening of the door can cause minor flexing of this material.
Here the lack of infra-red in the standard illumination is an advantage, since only light derived from the tungsten lamp can pass the infra-red filter.
Serious interference is probably rare, but there may be minor effects affecting the accuracy.
The forced draught causes another problem — the leaves of the plant are moved by it.
The remedy could be screening, but in the first instance it is reasonable to hope that it will average out.
It could even be of benefit by exposing parts of leaves that would normally be hidden.
The simplest answer to these questions is perhaps an empirical one — to compare the measurements obtained with a profile obtained from corresponding destructive measurements using a leaf area machine.
Experiment 1 — A Short Trial
Some measurements were made using older plants over a short time period, just three hours.
The results are displayed in Figure .
Note that:—
Consistency between measurements near in time is good.
No growth over this period is visible.
It is known that, beyond a certain age, plant growth slows down.
Over a period as short as three hours it is not surprising that no growth is revealed.
Experiment 2 — A Trial over a Long Period
This experiment was conducted over a longer time period (ten days), starting with young plants.
Notes :
Some resets occurred during the measurement period.
A long-term growth pattern is displayed.
Some variation in the reference measurements occurred.
The reference card had an area of 380 m 2 , but some measurements significantly below this and others as high as 420 were recorded.
This is unexplained.
Some trials have shown that the presence of material in the subject area can affect the reference measurements, but in this case the plant subjects were constantly present.
There are also some local variations in the measurements and because of this reliable detection of growth over a period of half a day seems unlikely.
The variations appear to be periodic and might be related to reflectance.
The results are shown on the large scale in Figure and on the small scale the same data is displayed in Figures –.
Experiment 3 — Plants of the Same Age
Five pots of plants of the same age and grown under identical conditions were measured in turn over periods of fifteen to thirty minutes.
Two rounds of measurements were made, three and a half hours apart.
Two pots, labelled A and B, were visibly poor growers compared with the other three.
In every case a noticeable increase in measurement occurred between the first and second measurement of each pot.
However these were of three kinds.
The poor growers A and B showed almost identical increase.
Pots C and E were also similar in behaviour.
Pot D showed a much lower increase than E and C as measured, but this was not noticed (N.B. noticed, as opposed to noticeable) by eye.
See Figure .
Experiment 4 — Detection of Temperature Stress
Some plants which had been transferred to a growth cabinet maintained at 5°C, with a similar regime in all other respects, were measured.
The expected result — markedly reduced area — was not obtained.
Some trials could not be performed due to a routine defrosting and cleanout of the growth cupboard, but even the ones which were done, were unsatisfactory.
A possible reason is the variation in the measurements described above.
The plants were moved to chilling temperatures for a fairly short time, and any resulting decline in growth was probably less than the variation.
EXPERIMENTS NOT CONDUCTED UNDER GROWTH-ROOM CONDITIONS
Some other trials were conducted in an ordinary college room with the daylight excluded by Venetian blinds.
The temperature in such a room is maintained very close to 20°C (the same as the growth cupboards).
The illumination source was either a single tungsten lamp or this plus a conventional warm white striplight as appropriate.
In fact in most of the experiments an infra-red filter was used and in this case only the tungsten source is relevant, as was explained earlier.
In some experiments the filter was not used and the illumination from the striplight then made a contribution.
Previous trials have suggested that the result should be an oscillatory decline.
The trend is suggested by biologists to indicate water stress due to the low humidity of the room.
Note that a decline in the measurement tends to precede visual detection of stress.
In other words this could be used as an early warning.
An Experiment Extending Over Twenty-four Hours
This experiment shows a marked oscillation, about 25%, see Figure .
The trend is a decline, probably due to water stress and when this is removed (Figure ) the roughly periodic variation is clear.
Note that the measurement period commenced after the plants had been in the new environment for a short while, not immediately on removal from the controlled conditions of the growth cupboard.
An Experiment (5) Extending Over a Few Days
Measurements commenced soon after removal from the growth cupboard to the same room as described above.
The results show an initial period of maintained growth and then an oscillatory decline, presumably due to water stress.
These results are demonstrated in Figures and .
The oscillation is surprisingly large, up to 25%, even when the one very large variation is excluded.
Some Trials (Experiment 6) Without the Infra-red Filter
Since the infra-red reflectance is strongly linked to the presence of water it was thought possible that unfiltered readings might not show the same decline — since to the eye at least the area does not decline until the onset of withering, which occurs only at a much later stage.
Noticeably, the oscillation is greater than when the filter is present.
See Figure .
In order to compare the two modes of measurement two sets of readings were taken at the shortest possible interval, 15 seconds, the first set without the filter, the second set with it.
The interval between the two sets was the time needed to set up the instrument for the lower illumination passing through the filter, about twenty minutes.
See Figure .
Comparison of the Measure with the Raw Pixel Count
To examine the possibility that the calculations and checks used to obtain the measure were a waste of effort or even erroneous, graphs were plotted of simultaneously obtained measures and (scaled) pixel counts.
These seem to show that the calculated measure is a slightly better discriminator.
See Figures —.
Using Different Subjects from the Same Batch (Experiment 7)
The idea was to test whether any subject could be chosen from a batch without giving misleading results.
Subjects D and E were chosen from the same batch of plant pots as being roughly the same size when judged by eye alone.
They were measured, E on days 1–4, D on days 5 & 6.
Though the usual variation is present the upward trend is continued.
See Figures –.
THE MEASUREMENT OF CLOVER
Some measurements of clover were made, some in a growth room and some under ordinary conditions, with controlled temperature but not humidity.
Experiment 8 — Initial Tests
Two varieties of clover were measured, large and small-leafed.
Clover growth cannot be described in terms of a simple one-dimensional extension.
Furthermore, its fairly large leaves change their aspect during the growth cycle and even fold up at times.
Nevertheless the readings obtained — under ordinary conditions — were encouraging — an overall growth with a periodic variation, which in this case is predictable as a result of the changes described.
However it is likely that the factor that causes variation in Lolium temulentum measurements is also active here.
See Figures –.
Experiment 9 — Further Trials
Clover variety Siwan was measured over a twenty-four hour period and showed a slight growth trend with a large (over 30%) roughly periodic variation, see Figure .
Clover variety S184 was measured over twelve hours in a water-stressed condition, Figure .
The decline in leaf area presented due to wilting is very clear.
A small-leafed clover was measured over a week under fully controlled conditions and shows a clear upward growth trend, see Figure and also –which show the details.
Finally another clover was also measured under these conditions, see Figure , which shows a similar conclusion to .
HIGHER AVERAGING
As has been said, a decision was made to abandon high-order averaging by the instrument so as to obtain a full record of the variations in measurement.
The author did not understand these and thought them perhaps to be due to changes in reflectance.
However it was then pointed out by a biologist that tiny movements by the plant could explain these variations.
Such movements would cause changes both in the projected area and in the reflected light received by the camera.
A much higher average might well cancel out these small variations and should be done so that a more reliable measurement would be available immediately without waiting for later processing on a mainframe.
A minor modification to the program achieved this and, in addition to the average of chosen order, the program now delivers a measurement averaged over about an hour, and one averaged over about eight hours.
With the eight-hour illumination period this will correspond to about a one-day average.
Figures –show some results obtained from a young plant, but not under fully controlled conditions.
CONCLUSIONS
The instrument is reliably detecting a pattern of plant behaviour.
This pattern is related to the growth in total leaf area over the long term.
Over the short term the instrument detects a roughly periodic variation.
Its cause is not fully understood, but in view of the known connection between infra-red reflectance and water content on the one hand, and the demonstrated correlation between exposure to a low humidity regime and a decline in the measurement on the other, it is possible that this behaviour is related to reflectance.
Superposed on this will be variation due to the continual small movements of the growing plant.
The detection of chill stress has not been reliably demonstrated.
Unfortunately some measurements could not be made at the time of the growth room trials, owing to maintenance work.
Insofar as chilled plants are smaller than normal plants detection should be possible.
When a plant has been placed in a low-humidity environment likely to cause water stress the measurements taken so far have always decreased and so revealed the stress.
This has not yet been measured by a properly controlled experiment.
POSSIBLE FURTHER WORK
If the conclusions of Section are correct then the separate contributions of the area measurement and the reflectance should be disentangled.
It is not proposed to include such software in the current program, but rather to treat this instrument as an intelligent data gatherer and use mainframe facilities to assess the results.
However, it would be quite reasonable to use a higher order of averaging, possibly with a bias towards the current maximum, to provide an early warning of plant stress — the talking plant envisaged in the original project aims.
(Recall that the maximum and minimum are not global but are obtained from the measurements used in computing the current average).
The detection of chill stress should be investigated further.
The detection of water stress should be demonstrated by controlled experiments.