

the galloping night
Eventual destination, Salt Lake City, the Mormon capital by tomorrow.
Still on Highway 15, the only road through Nevada, we cut a swathe to the Mammon City located between us and the High Altar.
The lights of Las Vegas prickle on the horizon.
A million neon signs push the delicacy of the pink twilight into a dull haze.
Immediately above us, though, we can see a sprinkle of stars coming out shyly to pepper the desert skies.
It is just electricity that makes a nonsense of natural design.
Lucker switches on the cabin light and lights a cigarette.
We move along the road fast as if in a dream.
The white road lines weave minutely along, being eaten by car rubber.
The cabin light goes off and I feel some connection again with the dark desert.
We seem to blend better, the less lights we have on.
The window glides down, outside the wind is rising.
With the first blast of air Lucker's cigarette flares up the Bible page paper with double quick speed.
He jumps away from his own mouth, going nowhere.
‘Shut the window!’
He wrenches his cigarette from his mouth, glares at me and grinds it into the ashtray, disconcerted by the firecracker element.
I laugh.
A sign flashes: ‘Welcome to Las Vegas’.
Other signs too, many of them, everywhere.
Vegas, Vegas, Vegas.
It's getting dark, wet and windy.
Those bead dresses on the gamblers' promenade must be blowing tonight.
I wonder what kind of trouble a wig gives on a night like this.
This is a town of wig-wearers and toupee-tricksters.
It is bizarre that we should happen on the ultimate non-stop gamblers bar brawl after such hours of seamless desert desolation.
We decide to carry on past this bawdy nightmarish jewel.
We shoot past, on the desert road, and get swallowed again by womb-warm quiet nothingness.
Another sign swings into view, taking a panel-beating.
‘The only way outta here…
Las Vegas Airport.’
As we pass under the junction bridge a severe blast of wind hits the car like a punch in the ribs.
The car swerves, almost wounded.
Lucker looks ahead as if he expects to see something solid in front of us.
A last few cars still bleed in from the next town.
Mesquite lies on the other side of miles and miles of rising desert temper.
We estimate an hour or so will see us there.
Behind us, Vegas burns like a garden bonfire at night.
Sweeping gales go in search of things to flatten and disrupt.
Above in the night sky, seen through a greasy window cut with the smeared flare of car lights, a plane blinks.
We slow down to watch.
Its engines scream in decline.
In planetary terms, it certainly would be ‘the only way outta here’ for this airborne bucket.
It is a metallic work-horse, miraculous, but laboured, straining at the shoulders to land in one piece.
But it could also flip over, folding like a wooden deckchair at the mercy of sea gales.
People fizzing like wood lice in a burning  log pile.
And, imagine all that loose change brought in for the gambling machines bouncing high like metal sparks.
The clouds whip past like a speeding film.
The plane works its way in sideways.
Its lumbering hulk drops down over our heads to land a good mile away.
It's travelling low, just to cover itself.
We see every nut and bolt and even the faces at the windows.
They stare out like helpless dolls.
We see it down for luck.
If the air traffic controllers want to save a lot of anguish then they should close for the night.
Half an hour later, the sand still spitefully needling the paintwork.
Ubiquitous, hare-brained, tumbleweed skitters across the road, sticking underneath the car until friction dissolves it away to nothing.
Lucker has difficulty holding the road.
We look out into the darkness wondering why we elected to go nearly a hundred miles in this.
It seems a foolish decision now.
The clouds are so black, they make the sky look bone-white.
And sometimes it is the other way around.
The moon appears for fleeting seconds, the night speeds up frantically, the clouds bowl along and vulnerability replaces control.
Out of the galloping night one light multiplies into more.
A couple of Mesquite's outskirt casino complexes come into view.
Seesaw signs sprout…
Swimming-pools and bed sizes.
King, Queen, Jack, Goliath, Joker and Absolute Pig.
These multi-purpose, leisure-park hotels look under siege like huge ocean liners in trouble at sea.
Normally serene palms toss their woolly mop heads like distraught grieving women who cannot take any more suffering.
Tennis courts lit pointlessly except to inform the driver of the sheer dimension of the leisure complex burst into life.
The overhead lights swoop and dive over the white lines, completely out of control.
Car parks, stuffed with cars, seem to billow up in places like  fabric, as the wind catches them underneath.
How we are still tooling along unaffected is slightly beyond my imagination.
The Mesquite main strip aspires to being Las Vegas without anything like the money or the reputation.
First, we pass a couple of wooden family motels, complete with front porch parked up with juggernauts.
The tarpaulins snap bitterly, all tied up with nowhere to go.
Then the bright lights, the big gambling parlour hotels where you can ‘Try ‘till you Die, or Lose ‘till you Snooze’.
About ten or so blaze to the empty night.
The road is rutted mud, with potholes like emptied boils.
This place tastes of cowboy.
The desire for a hefty structure on a night like this, leads us to an enormous flashy hotel.
The Palm Pool Gamblers Inn is covered with snaking bulbs, choreographed to frisk along the red brick outside angles with frenetic pulsating fervour.
It has 228 rooms, 6 pools, 4 restaurants and 500 slot machines.
Another plastic montage enthuses more poetically: ‘Towering palms, cascading waterfalls, and lush verdant foliage creates a  wonderous paradise out of nothing, especially for you.’
As we drive onto the hotel forecourt, wind-blown spray is creamed off one of the cascading waterfalls.
Within seconds the car is drenched.
Doormen in red coats, royal blue silk lining flapping an appearance, peel off the foyer glass doors, and forge forward to park the car and muster bags.
I get out of the car.
The wind picks me up and pushes me in front of it like an irate mother with a naughty child.
My legs bang uselessly together.
Six pillars decorate the foyer area.
I grab one.
Looking back, I can see one of the porters grappling with the car door.
His friend helps him close it.
Lucker seems to have ground his feet into the earth, and trudges with resolve towards me.
My hood flicks up, and pins itself against my  face.
Lucker pulls it away, and kisses me.
We walk together to the main entrance like drunk soldiers in from war.
Once inside the Grand Palace we sizzle under a grill of designer electricity.
Stalks of giant flowers with huge bulbs for petals form a garish jungle.
Hideous colours melt together to overwhelm the eye.
A glutinous substance farts out fatty bubbles and burbles its way lazily up highlighted stem tubes.
These electric sweetmeats are lurid bouquets in a garden of watts.
All I can hear in my head is ‘Lucy in the Sky with Diamonds’.
Who needs drugs with this going on?
Above us, a massive chandelier in sugar-doll pink cascades down in frilly waves.
Similar fantastic champagne-showers in ‘lurvely’ lilac, pistachio-green, and orange sorbet grace the other corners.
We steer our fazed brains incredulously towards where food must be according to our knowledge of standard lay-out.
Music pipes up with familiar tones that are difficult to place.
Waitresses do a scuttling trot around, with smiles on their faces as if they have a bent coat-hanger wedged into their mouths to hold the shape.
I have a cruel desire to stand in front of one, step to the left, then to the right, then again to the left once more, just to confuse them.
That would take the smile off their faces all right and give them a few seconds relief.
Knowing my luck they'd probably go all the way and burst into tears.
I may be unkind, but I'm not unfeeling.
This need to convey fun at all times, this unbearable, forced enthusiasm must be killing them.
They probably need a good cry.
It certainly gives me, an innocent bystander, instant indigestion, killing my appetite with the knockout effect of a catapulted stone on a small bird's breast.
We sit underneath the floral light display and look at the menu.
Food pictures in showroom lighting.
Salads with studio umbrella lights reflected in the waterdrops on the  crisp leaves.
The waitresses look like missionaries in drag.
Puffy ankles with tired brains from too much good work.
One of them turns her tired beam on us.
Her eyes are like pale blue bathroom tiles.
Put up to see nothing.
‘To order?’
We point to the pictures like children.
Another waitress hailed from afar drives jerkily forward like a radio car, on the go until the batteries drop out.
She wheels around off a wall and disappears into the mirage maze of lights.
Our food arrives.
Enormous helpings to kill you with kindness.
Formality snags in the waitress's throat.
‘Enjoy.’
Families pass by, holding onto each other in mindlessly uncertain connected clumps.
They grasp at each other with numbed fingers for the comfort of touch.
This decor is truly representative of a major LSD trip.
I can understand the apparent stupefaction of all parties.
Perhaps in this jungle, people need security.
Maybe that is why they dress like teddy-bears, harmless and fluffy in their baby-pink track suits.
Overalls for a lap around the play-pen.
By comparison, we look like members of a Russian rock'n'roll group.
We are wearing dark clothing, giving us near-terrorist status, here in the land of safe pastel fluffiness.
Apart from the odd person coming in who might be dampening down a collar of their leisurewear, looking a touch harassed, you'd never know we were in the eye of a storm.
Talking of eyes, my optics are almost burnt through.
I should go whilst I can still see properly.
The vast restaurant area allows us a complicated exit choice of at least fifty yards of glass door frontage.
A doorman waves the room keys in front of our faces.
‘You forgot to collect.
Your bags are already in your room  sir…madam.
Your car is ready for you, outside, for your convenience.
You can drive it around to your room.
I hope you enjoyed your meal.
Thank you and Have a Nice Day!’
Firstly it is night, and secondly it patently isn't nice.
Still most people would be the first to say it's the thought that counts.
Lucker holds my hand with the kind of grasp that men at sea learn as a last resort.
With feet of lead he pitches us into the high winds with the wisdom of a professional.
The porter holds the car door as if restraining a very strong, young Galapagos tortoise from doing what it pleases.
We dive into the seat, piling onto each other.
It slams shut with a desire to amputate.
We see a flash of the porter's face, and can tell he is fearful, and apologetic for the near accident.
The wind takes him away like a curtain snatch on a bad act.
Our room is on the first floor.
As we head up the stairs, spray blown off the top of the melting ice chunks in the ice machine feels like cold cologne on the face.
The credit card key slithers into a crack built into the door mantle.
Locks shoot back like informed guards stepping aside out of obedience, not willingness.
Our room is vast with two mega-double beds in it.
There are no single beds in America.
These are for fat people, and there are enough of them about.
A large screen TV vegetates on a room-length dressing-table.
Our large cases sit on a small side table at knee-level.
Around the interior of the room at picture-rail level, a stream of soft pearlised light bulbs dress the wall like the surround of a vast show business dressing-room mirror.
Like blood vessels, the energy throbs continuously around and around the bedroom perimeters.
The two king-size beds are covered with a floral patterned fabric, the kind worked over and over in consumer tests to  lead to the choice of the one that consistently causes the least offence.
The only time this fabric would offend is if you want some guts from your environment.
Everything is pitched right in middle ground, for the softest underbelly of taste, except for the lights which are high camp.
‘I want a swim.’
Lucker looks up, surprised.
I pull on my swimming costume, leaving shoes behind, picking up a towel.
Lucker sits on the bed.
‘I'm coming to protect you, Tiffany.’
With a grand gesture of deliberately deflated gallantry, Lucker pulls on his damp swimming costume which he has had breeding in a sour plastic bag since his last swim a few days before.
It sucks to the plastic and smells like the bottom of a busy restaurant slop bin.
The gallantry becomes for real as he pulls them over his recoiling legs.
‘Far be it for me to be lofty about such things, but some of us dry our clothing.’
Lucker shudders with revulsion.
As he ties his cord up, his stomach shrinks away back towards the spine.
‘No wonder your suitcase is so bloody heavy, Lucker.’
I'm standing on one hip, propped up like a nonchalant horse on a summer's day, making heavy work of waiting for him.
He glowers at me with humour hidden there somewhere.
He needs it because he really makes life difficult for himself.
We leave the room to face the high winds and certain excitement.
Holding onto the balcony as if we were in rough seas, we shout only to have our words whipped away.
I jab a finger forward and Lucker nods in big up and down sweeps.
Broad beaming smiles keep the unity.
Beyond us is an open space, landscaped with little lawns, with twee Snow White stone pathways winding through  shrub-beds.
Waterfalls cascade down plastic boulders which look like baked potatoes.
Straight out of Star Trek.
The tumbling waters fan out into a small and shallow lake of coated stagnant water.
The air is full of the stench of trapped slime.
‘Ppfwooorr, get that!’
With the pool perimeter fence in sight we crouch into the wind offering the least resistance.
The swimming-pool is the size of a tennis court with the elegance of a 1930s Lido.
The water is the deepest hue of aquamarine and whipped up into meringue peaks.
A round sun-table tipped earlier by the wind rolls around and around, grinding on the poolside tiles, hobbled by its concrete base.
Long steps across the width of the pool invite a grinning entrance into the waters.
The mad moon flares from behind the racing clouds.
We tie our towels to the railings, any spare snarls hard around the metal.
I sink into the water to lose the stinging sensation of the desert sand on my skin.
The water swirls around me like cool, thick cream.
Sometimes, but only very rarely do I touch a piece of bliss when I grope in the dark.
This is it.
Diving below the dusky water's surface I see twenty chairs or so strewn about on the pool floor.
There is an eerie stamp of disaster about this wind-thrown entanglement in the murky half-light of night water.
I am initially startled by another chair hitting the jellied surface of the pool and descending dreamily downwards to bounce gently onto others in the watery grave.
The white chair looks soluble, as if it might crumble, collapsing into a pile of infinitesimal white flakes.
Air bubbles stream out of the hollowed legs and file back up to their own kind.
My lungs suddenly come sharply through from behind my engaged brain, reminding me that I am not a fish.
I remember  my near-drowning.
Panic engages its poisonous seed.
I burst out of the water to inhale the smell of the warm buried desert careering across the surface of the pool.
‘I wondered where you'd got to.’
Lucker smiles and comes over to smooth my body with his hand.
I pull away to do seal impressions, rolling over and over.
I still get a childish kick out of pretending that I am a wide-eyed seal who thinks only to play.
The gate swings open behind me.
Turning to see an intruder in our paradise, sharp disappointment falls into place.
I see an overweight middle-aged man struggling to close it again whilst trying to hold his towel around his middle.
Lucker and I glance across the nipped and tucked waves, no longer King and Queen in a divine state.
He runs into the water with the wind behind him.
Crash goes his belly and his arms flap up like a corkscrew lever.
I ignore him and dive down to my furniture underworld to etch the bizarre scene on my mind once more.
At least down there I am on my own.
We all prowl around the pool in a fabrication of isolation, none of us speaking.
I pop up near him by mistake.
He shouts something but the wind wrenches it away.
He comes closer.
Lucker moves in too.
We have no choice but to meet.
‘Hi!
I saw you from my truck.
Just got here.
Couldn't believe it!
You're crazy!
Hope you don't mind me coming in?’
‘No, not at all.’
We lie.
A strand of hair which normally covers his bald patch has fallen away to rest in seaweedy strings on his padded shoulder, drying as we speak.
‘Lucker.
How do you do?
This is Tiffany.’
Lucker subtly forces me to say hello.
With my mouth still submerged in water, I resemble a surly alligator.
‘Sure.
Duwayne.
Truck driver.’
That seems to explain enough for the moment.
Duwayne ploughs stolidly up and down the length of the pool several times like a great slab of walrus.
He comes back to us, his eyes shining with excitement.
‘Man, this is great!
No-one swims in this weather!
British?
You're a long way from home here, right?
I stop by here regular, I never met any British people yet.
What are you doing here?’
Lucker tells him about the band commitment.
All the big cities.
'…
Salt Lake City, Denver, Kansas City, Minneapolis, Milwaukee and Chicago.
That's it, then we cut our own rug.’
A moan rises from the wind, as if it had a spirit.
My hairs stand on end.
‘Chicago?
Big place.
I'm in and outta there.
Do what I have to do, and get out fast.
Don't go too far south, that's my advice.’
I submerge to re-wet my hair and stamp it down in place to stop it shredding my eyeballs.
So does Lucker, and then Duwayne.
We come up gleaming like otters.
‘It's easy to take the wrong turn, believe me.
I did.’
‘Something happen?’
I squirt water between my teeth.
‘Yeah, as a matter of fact it did.
I stopped at some lights on the East side.
Four kids jumped in the cab, and held me at gun point for three whole hours.’
‘Shit.’
My mouth is empty now, and open.
‘What did they want?’
‘Well, I don't think I ever really knew that.
I'm not sure they did either.
They asked for chocolate, mind you.
I was thinking, I know I have some somewhere.
I mean I got to thinking if I can't find any I'm dead.
Get that, CHOCOLATE!’
His voice shaky with the memory, undermines his smile.
‘How old were these kids?’
He laughs.
‘Thirteen, thereabouts.
This country stinks.
Kids with guns?
I ask you.’
The whole idea is ridiculously frightening.
I stare at him.
‘That's it.
First, I find them some chocolate.
Thank God I'm addicted to the stuff.
I'm fat, see?
Chocolate.
There was one fourteen-year-old.
He was the nastiest, really dangerous because he felt he had to go that extra distance.
Then they wanted cigarettes.
I don't smoke, for my health.
Get that.
They took my Pink Panther off the mirror.
It's bendy, you can make it into any shape, you know the one?
Used to be everywhere.’
‘Mmm.’
‘Well, they took that.
I'd had that years, it really bugged me.
My cassettes.
All my cassettes.
Told me my taste was shit.
Took them anyhow.
Country and Western.
They want hip-hop and rap.
Do I look hip-hop?
Money, too, forty-five dollars or so.
I figure I better just keep it coming, anything I could think of.
Like with my own kids.
Entertain them.’
We squat in silence.
Coloured lights strung between low pylons bounce about amongst the palm trees.
Our minds wander to an empty place that does not compare to this natural extravaganza.
‘You know when they say TV doesn't influence kids?
That is doo-doo.
It sure does.
It did in my time and believe me, nothing changes.
The fourteen-year-old stuck the gun up my nostril to see if it would fit.
He said things straight out of TV shows.
I recognised all the cliches.
Sure, I did.’
‘How did it end?’
‘How?
Well, hey I'm alive.
I didn't know if I would be.
I  don't even think they really knew what it was all about.
It was like normal.
Then, they just took off.
No reason.’
Presently the conversation turns to subjects with less impact.
His plastic sandals are swept out onto the waves and float jauntily on the surface of the pool.
‘Hey, I put those through a chair leg.
How in…?’
These prove elusive.
We chase them with him as they catch the wind like paper balls.
Eventually, once he has them firmly under his rounded arm, he wishes us farewell.
He steps slowly up the shallow Hollywood stretch-steps dripping like a teddy-bear out of a rinse cycle.
With a last backward glance, he flounders off, waving cheerily.
We stay in the pool until we're ‘all pruned-up’.
That was one of Duwayne's sayings.
The way home is warm bliss, drying off naturally.
Indoors, we kiss.
We follow paths shyly.
A romp to loosen the mind and body.
Twist it into places and things it doesn't do in daylight hours.
The light from the bathroom leaves a rectangle of sense on the floor, but we like being in shadow.
Lucker is more afraid of sex than me.
He tells me that sometimes my desire verges on cannibalism, and that he cannot give me what I want.
I am feeling that I must hold back.
Don't speak until you're spoken to.
It feels strange to me.
He reaches for Groucho Marx, and fixes all the separate parts on my face tenderly.
The plastic moustache clips onto my nose with a snappy bite.
The eyebrows fit over my own to disfigure me.
He pecks at my face to tell me it is all right.
I start muttering.
I don't fully understand why he does so much to distance me.
He is too absurd for his own good.
But I laugh, because there is really nothing to take away.
I just wish that I could give more.
I wish we could actually understand each other.
We close our eyes to lose ourselves.
Washed clean from the workings of water, and shaken to relaxation, we sleep like babies under the all-night bulb vigil.
At three in the morning I wake up with a start and think I am in a funeral parlour.
Groucho Marx is dead, isn't he?
favour for a friend?
Outside Salt Lake City, ski mentality reigns among the rolling valleys.
This is squeaky clean youth countryside.
Year-round tans and sunbleached hair as smooth as syrup deck out the snow surfers.
The stadium perches on the hill, twinkling like a tiara as dusk settles under the mountains.
I go into Park City Canyon Conference Centre and check in.
A local ski boy with a skull like a hammerhead shark exacerbated by a yew-clipped crew cut, helps me with my bags.
The only reason why strangers are in town this week leads to his enquiry.
‘You with the band?’
This clearly elevates me to some sort of status in his mind, although I personally couldn't give a shit.
‘A lot of stuff you got here.
I can't make it up there tonight.
I'm on security.’
In reception a stunning blonde girl who should either be a White House secretary or in Hollywood dishes out the keys.
Surprisingly the Canyon Conference Centre is enough for her.
Hammerhead wheels the sluggish trolley through a maze of badly water-stained, beige carpeted corridors.
The drip, drip of winter skis propped up outside rooms have left their  their sallow mark.
Accompanied by the squeak of the trolley and the hum of the ubiquitous Coke dispenser, we pass reams of shit-brown doors to get to Room 135.
He snatches my two dollar tip like a starving dog, and tucks it deep into his pocket.
‘It's not like the end of the world.
I saw Relief on their last tour in Salt Lake City.
Good, but automatic ya know.
Make music live, that's what I say.
Ya well, see ya.’
With that he leaves.
I flick the alarm, good boy, and sleep until eleven.
I will not be there for the gig.
Exhaustion grips with feverish talons.
Driving long distances has taken a vicious toll.
Waking up is unpleasant.
I have a sickly feeling in my stomach.
The flinty little synthetic poop poop music runs around in my head from last time.
Out of the window I can see the glow coming off the musical, stomping beargarden.
Lucker is up there.
I stand up, take the car keys off the night-table and go out the door.
The sleek cold car door shuts crisply like a safe with spiteful bent.
It welcomes starting and purrs luxuriously as all things American should.
The eyelid headlights slide open for the road.
Driving to the venue sees a small town ringing with activity and excitement.
Kids who never made it to the gig are cruising aggressively around in a heady charged way.
All eyes and ears for greener grass.
None to be had.
One car cuts across my lane.
Its passengers swing around like boxed chickens in the back of a livestock lorry on a mountain pass.
The driver launches forward for a narrow escape.
And he's gone.
Every burger joint seems to be full of leisure-wear parents waiting for their delinquents to come off the hill and be escorted home.
Business is good, the lights are full on fast and muffled conversations between wolfish bites on cotton-wool hamburgers.
On the roadside out of town police mark every  few hundred yards.
A trail of slow-moving headlights slides away and down from the arena like oozing lava snaking away from Mother.
‘Move on, honey.
Move ON!’
Event officials bearing lit staffs wave me up a grit track towards this almighty swim.
I feel as futile as salmon arriving a day late for spawning, just as everyone is leaving satiated.
The road has been divided by cones, the avenue downwards two abreast with traffic, forcing me into a ditch.
Hoards of young fans descend in files through the traffic, their legs scissoring the dusty car beams into shafts of ever-changing swirls of marbled light.
For all this, I can't see two inches in front of me.
I wrench the steering-wheel back from uncertainty and thrash on up the hill.
I have an irrational fear that Lucker will blank me.
I can see him from the car park, his back to a large glass window.
He is laughing.
My face and laminate is checked by dayglo security folk.
I step beyond them into a pool of light of my own.
At that point he turns.
His laughter simmers to a welcoming smile.
I could cry with relief.
Lucker puts his hand on my arm.
‘Glad to see you.
But, I just have to catch a few of these fawning fans on film.
See you later.’
Lucker dives off to be photographer.
Turning, with my back to the hillside for a minute, I watch the red dragon of tail-lights slithering tightly down the valley.
Twenty thousand Ski Americans going back to their valley farms, after an evening infected with urban sleaze.
Siege fever.
There is a log-jam party on the cards upstairs.
Relief normally like to sweep out through the crowds, as an orchestrated extension to their dramatic final stage exit.
Tonight, they  accept their lot, and sign autographs and chat with fans with uncharacteristic generosity.
I step it up to the bar just so it looks like I've got some goal in life.
Dry ice curls from beneath the door.
I enter the sci-fi disco den.
Even roadies are drinking in here.
Band girlfriends drift open-endedly between strangers, mindlessly bored and remote.
The band remain in the foyer and don't show.
On-lookers and fans creak with desperate sincerity on the periphery of anyone related to the tour.
To lend naive party cheer, the young American DJ whacks up the dry ice machine which spurts more of its obnoxious fumes into the heart of the room.
Suddenly I can't breathe.
My throat tightens.
I catch a glimpse of the DJ.
He is smiling because behind the machine he is not taking the brunt of it, and because he is an earnest yokel who doesn't realise what he is doing to people.
I turn for where I remember the door to be and see others pitching forward, slamming drinks down to cover their faces with their hands.
One girl screams.
The dry ice still pumps.
You can taste it.
Like a gas chamber, it overwhelms.
It sticks in the eyes, the hair, and still keeps on coming.
Within a few frightening minutes, almost the entire room spills outside choking, swearing and spluttering.
Two girls sit on the steps and begin to cry.
No sign of the DJ.
He probably thinks everyone is still having a good time out there somewhere in the fog.
Or he could be dead.
It rolls down the stairs to the floor below.
Security come running over as they see us all bowled along miserably before it.
Party definitely over.
I drive back to the hotel with Lucker swigging at a litre bottle of vodka beside me.
One of the band gave it to him earlier.
He wipes his mouth carelessly.
‘That was very generous of them.’
I note.
‘Mmm, it was.
I pull briskly into our room parking space.
The hotel neon sign lights up our faces.
Lucker pulls his bags through the two front seats.
A crisp sports bag with the tour dates and band logo printed all over it catches my eye.
It is hot fuchsia pink and brand spanking new.
‘Smart!
Did they give you that too?’
‘Mmm.
Sort of.’
Lucker fondles the bag for a second, running his finger over the embossed dates and destinations with the attention to detail of a Braille reader.
My hand is on the door handle.
‘What do you mean sort of?
Do they want it back at the end of the tour, or something?’
‘No, it's just a bag they want me to take to Denver.’
‘Denver?
Don't get it.
Why?’
Lucker doesn't answer.
Unease slides through my brain like an oily knife blade.
He answers very slowly, almost sadly.
‘It's just some cocaine.’
I split with rage, opening my mouth to spit seeds of anger across the car.
‘Are you FUCKING CRAZY?’
I shock Lucker.
Dulled by vodka and dope, he is visibly taken aback.
He recoils from me, frightened.
He didn't expect this savage hiss of reaction.
To tell you the truth I even surprise myself.
His hands are gently folded over it as if it were just a bag of laundry on his lap.
I wrench it fiercely from his weak grasp.
‘Gimme that!
You agreed to carry?
You?
No-one puts a small amount in a bag that they ask some one to carry.
Do you know how much is in here?’
‘No, I didn't look.’
Lucker answers almost in a whisper.
‘You didn't look?
Do you think ignorance is some sort of fucking protection?
Well fuck you, if I'm travelling in this car there is no way I'm taking this.
Let them do their own dirty work.’
I rake roughly through the bag, depositing various items of loose clothing onto Lucker's lap.
‘Here, hold those.
Here it is!’
I lift a tobacco tin out.
It is about as big as a fist, and bound securely with black gaffer tape.
It feels densely packed in there.
Definitely a jail term.
‘Look.
Do you know what would happen to us if we got caught with this stuff?
YEARS!
YEARS!’
I rummage more.
At the bottom, five sealed envelopes with smaller quantities of cocaine inside come to light.
I hold them up to look through the paper.
To leave it loose in there means wastage, so whoever did this folded it away in neat toxic razor-blade size packages.
I feel nervous.
Someone comes to the hotel lobby entrance, looks around the car park and disappears back in.
It has started to rain lightly.
They don't appear to see us.
‘What do you think will happen if we get stopped with this?
Tell me that, Lucker.
Mmmm?’
‘We tell them we don't know anything about it.’
‘Terr-rific.
A classic.
How many times do you think they've heard that one?
The bail cheque is in the post.
Yeah, sure.
And I'm Minnie Mouse.
Every dope dealer in town pulls that crap.
You know, if we were in Malaysia, we'd be hanging from the light fittings for this.’
Lucker is annoyed.
He snatches the bag back.
‘Well, we're not in Malaysia, are we?
So it's not fucking relevant is it?’
Absolute silence.
‘I was a bit drunk.
They gave me a line of coke, and asked me to do it for them.
They said their last guy got slung in jail last night.’
‘So the job comes recommended?’
Lucker visibly bites his lip, disappointed at having allowed a cheap crack like that to be set up.
‘We are not here to be dumped on, Lucker.
They snort, they carry.
Too famous to be caught, are they?
Users.’
‘I don't know.
I just was being…helpful.’
‘Don't help people like that.
Or in that way.
Jesus.
They wouldn't help us if we were caught.
As far as they're concerned we could rot in jail.
One line of coke, was it?
Dear me.’
‘So what do we do?’
Lucker asks this question for himself as much as for me.
He looks tired all of a sudden.
He opens the car door onto a sleeting night rain.
The car park sparkles, but there isn't much beauty to be found in its bleak perimeter.
‘I'll take it back, say I can't do it.’
‘How?
How will you say that?’
‘I don't know.
I'll think of something.
I don't know the exact words.
Failing that, handing it back says it all.’
Immediately the tension, the rage, the fear of sorts I felt, start slipping away.
I lean forward onto the steering-wheel.
‘What's wrong, Tiffany?’
He grabs my wrist as if I was being arrested for shoplifting.
‘I happen to think that you are frighteningly stupid, and if you ever do that to me again, you will never see me again.
Guaranteed.’
Slowly and sadly Lucker lets my wrist drop.
He stands upright in the misery rain, slams the door hard and is gone in  a second.
I sit there thinking.
One thing I'm pretty damn sure of, if I hadn't asked, he wouldn't have told me.
That is scary.
When I return to the hotel room Lucker is checking the room numbers of the band.
Once he finds the right ones he throws the bag over his shoulder like Santa and strides purposefully towards the door.
A loud determined knock draws him up sharply.
We look at each other nervously.
We passed a couple of bozos in the hallway maze, decked out like Toytown security guards, guaranteed rednecks with a deep dislike of anything rock'n'roll-related.
Could this be them?
Jasper, the Tour something, can't remember what, stands there without a trace of sheepiness.
He automatically steps into the room, casting a melodramatic look over his shoulder.
Friendly, but then we are about to do him a big favour.
‘Hi, guys.
Got a little something here.’
He extends two more envelopes, one large manilla, and one hotel issue.
We have acquired a reputation as the dumping ground with lightning speed.
I can't help laughing, so I duck behind the door and bury my knuckles in my mouth to catch the drips.
Lucker murmurs something to Jasper and leads him away closing the door on me.
I help myself to a drink and stare entranced at the bald patch in the shag-pile over by the door.
A gentle knock on the door disturbs my thoughts.
I sling it open, off my guard thinking it's Lucker.
Yeb stands there smiling.
‘Lucker here?’
‘No.
Um…he's er, looking for you.’
Yeb grips his brow in mockery of Rodin's ‘The Thinker’.
He clicks his fingers.
Decisions, decisions.
‘OK love, can I leave this with you?’
Outside, to the right, the Coke machine switches up a gear, back on for a big freeze.
We can't have a conversation in  the hallway, I walk him in backwards.
He then marches straight past me into the middle of the room where he strides around in imperious circles.
The five foot nine emperor.
He is oblivious to my unsmiling reserve.
He seizes in his stomach, showing clearly how much of it is to spare, and thrusts his hand straight down the front of his trousers.
I watch incredulously.
‘So bloody sordid.’
He tuts in self-mockery.
Too right.
He shakes his head without sincerity, liking the way his black curls toss.
He puts some small packages on the table.
‘Sorry, you're going to have to put those away again.
We can't take them for you.’
He doesn't stop, he just slows down.
‘Those…’
I point at the dressing table with a finger like a ruler.
’…don't go with us.’
‘Waa?’
‘Well, because we have to make up time to Denver, and we can't do that with stuff like that in the car.
We regularly go over the speed limit just to get to these places on time, and we can't afford to take the risk.
You fly.
Sorry.’
He looks aghast and humiliated.
Tough shit really, but I soften it for the sake of the delicacies of future interaction.
I lie.
‘Yeah well, I got busted for dope once.
I don't want that kind of hassle again, ya know?’
This goes down a lot better.
His face peels into sympathetic relief and he nods repeatedly in embarrassed agreement.
This enigmatic fictitious episode hangs in the air, whilst he gathers the packages up again.
He hastily shovels them back into his shorts.
He holds one up in his hand.
‘Want a line now?’
Oh God, I am not sure what to say.
I don't like to offend, alienate myself completely from everyone.
I'm on the way.
Hypocrite.
We still have some distance to cover.
Hypocrite.
Perhaps I should interact?
Show some willing?
I hesitate.
I accept.
‘I don't often, but yeah, thanks.’
‘It is pure stuff from the heart of the South American jungle.’
I look at it.
I wouldn't know if it was from the heart of Palmolive's Flakes Department or Mrs Beaton's Home Cooking Department.
He lines it up on the shiny sideboard.
I notice he hasn't dropped the blinds.
The hotel swimmingpool is getting wet in the rain.
The surface pimples endlessly.
He rolls up a dollar bill, and stares at it as if deliberately recalling something.
Nothing materialises.
I bend down to the coke.
I run out of courage halfway through, and leave some.
He is clearly surprised that I don't want all of it.
He bends down and licks the surface of the sideboard with long thorough flat sweeps of his wide rude tongue for every last scrap.
On the way up he flaps it wickedly at me.
Devil tongue.
‘Does the sideboard taste of hairspray?’
‘No, why should it?’
‘Oh you know, um…
American women like their hairspray.
It's all over everything.
Even the headboard, there in the middle.
My hair sticks to it when I sit up in bed.
Chemicals everywhere.’
I'm rambling.
He no longer wants to linger.
Not listening.
‘Are you sure you can't take it then?’
Just seeing if the bribe worked.
‘Positive.
Bye.’
‘Yeah, bye.’
I've closed the door on his disinterest.
The cocaine makes my mouth numb.
Beautifully numb, I'll say.
The bloody door goes again.
It's Yeb.
‘Look, sorry, I really am.’
He goes off having a certain amount of difficulty walking, the sharp little packets no doubt cutting into the delicate peachstone flesh of his testicles.
He turns around to smile bravely.
I wave a fluttery wave of inconsequential cheerfulness and close the door, having reached new heights of cynical disinterest.
Suddenly I remember that Lucker has no knowledge of my busted story.
I still demand integrity, even when I lie.
I don't want us both to be telling a set of different lies, and coming up the idiots after all.
I brew a mean mood again, thinking of how unnecessary this whole farce is.
I fly to the door.
Yeb has gone.
The hotel corridor is bare.
I can't feel my face anymore, and my mind is walking.
I'm left with eerie tunnels, empty and misleading.
I'm getting higher by the minute on the fruits of the jungle.
Ten minutes deeper into the beige-carpeted maze brings me to nothing.
Every way I look I see only more empty corridor.
Putting my head to the wall, I ooze tears of fury.
Somewhere to my left, I hear a door close.
When I get there, there is no one to be seen.
Only a drawing of a small chubby hand with a rigid finger riding the words ‘Reception’.
I follow it to start all over again.
‘Band room numbers please?’
I mumble, heavy-tongued.
Behind, two redneck rock'n'roll haters with attached security tags sit broadly on the hotel hospitality sofas.
I feel their gaze on my neck.
A piece of paper comes over the pine counter with five numbers on it.
All the band's room numbers.
Instead of instant clarity, I return to similar confusion.
The hotel numbering is turning on me, in my increasing paranoia.
With a heart fit to burst through tension, at last, a noise.
A girl screams and screams.
My first impression is that a few pissed roadies are raping a girl.
A cheap blonde in Middle America who is begging for it, gets it, and changes her mind.
So what?
But I want to save her.
I wander like a dreamer towards the noise.
As soon as the girl's lungs fill, she screams again.
Yet all around there is no-one listening, or more to the point reacting.
I can hear the bouncing bed, moans, the gasps.
I expect nothing short of a bloodbath.
I draw parallel with the door and crane forward to see into the room.
Expecting to see some animals queuing up holding their pricks like bottles in their hands.
There is only a dressing-table with some bedclothes piled onto it.
I walk into the room.
Three teenage girls sit upright on the bed.
One by one they are screaming at the top of their voices, like naughty adolescent vixens.
‘Hello.’
I splutter.
The last yelp emits from the mouth of one.
She looks like she'd involuntarily belched.
She puts her hand to her mouth in a form of apology.
The others laugh and they all roll together like puppies.
‘I'm sorry, I thought this was the band's room.’
They dissolve.
It is quite obvious that they wished to their little beating hearts' total desire that it was.
‘Oh gee, no, those guys are over the hall, in Room 146.’
A bubble-gum pink nail points out of the room.
The matching mouth follows in a sulky pout.
‘But they're not listening!’
I look at these girls.
Sensibly avoided, a sex session with them would probably lead to repentant tears and an under-age  sex charge.
They look like jittery, hysterical little birds crowded together on a power line.
They lean slightly away from me.
‘Do you know the band?’
‘Yes.’
‘Are they nice?’
‘They are OK.’
‘Just OK?’
They ask disbelievingly.
‘Yup.’
There won't be any more screaming.
They look tired and young.
All screamed out, and surprised with a new thought, like babies.
‘Have you seen a tall guy with dark hair carrying a bag?’
Frosted fingernails go up like rifles.
‘He went thatta way.
Sometime ago.
This guy wasn't tall, though.
He didn't have any bag either.’
‘Thanks girls.’
For nothing much.
Faced again with silent tunnels, I decide to wear my nerves gently.
I report back to the hotel room, defeated.
Lucker comes through the door instantly.
‘Where were you?’
Said bitterly.
I feel exhausted.
Lucker sits down so heavily, the mattress buckles.
‘I was about to ask you exactly the same question.
I've already been back once.’
‘How'd it go?’
‘It's gone.
Look, no hands.
They took it back, didn't say very much, but they didn't like it.
One roadie said I should have thought about it before I accepted in the first place.’
‘What did you say to that?’
‘I said he was probably right.
That shut him up.’
‘I don't think anyone will ever speak to us again, do you?’ 'Don't know.
It's not going to be wonderful, is it?’
snakechasing
The next morning I wake up feeling like I've been kicked around the room.
Tension tightened my muscles all night.
Morning light squeezes through a small split in the curtain.
It is still raining.
I stir lethargically.
Lucker drops out of nowhere having been for a pee.
He climbs back into bed, grabs my breast and nuzzles me in the crook of my neck.
‘What time is it, Julie?’
My eyes open wide.
I don't know what time it is and my name is Tiffany.
‘Oh well, they say all tits feel the same lying down, don't they, Lucker?’
I can hear Lucker's breathing constrict in my ear.
‘Oh shit, I called you Julie.’
‘Oh shit, you did.’
He holds me tighter, much tighter.
But I am holding in a dead zone.
Today, another day may have been ruined before my feet even touched the floor.
Revenge stockpiles in the backroom of my heart.
It is not in my nature to accept this kind of diddly-shit which Lucker hands out without a thought.
He's got a runny careless mind.
Mmmmm.
Oh, time passes you know.
When you are really fed up you can always play into the soothing hands of time.
It will at least carry you downstream.
It rains all day.
We cut clean wheel tracks down quiet, wet  roads, running through small, cold towns.
There isn't much to say.
Only the scenery and radio music fill the emptiness.
We wonder slightly if there is any point in all of this.
We are unable to make Denver in one go.
After a hard day of gruelling silence over long distance we both mumble bleak consent to stop for the night.
We check into a motel in Craig, a small bleak town on Highway 40, halfway between Salt Lake City and Denver.
The surrounding countryside is windswept and rocky, moss-bedecked flints sticking out of the ground like primitive blades.
The rain turns into hail pellets.
We make a dive into the motel office, two travelling strangers.
It doubles as a shop.
I buy some glow-in-the-dark bubble-gum.
I plan to watch myself chew it in the mirror in the dark later.
Something to do.
The motel owner has a baby grafted onto her hip.
Aged about ten months, he sports a poorly, red button of a nose, barnacled with encrusted snot.
Everything she reaches for, is simultaneously lunged at by him.
He is constantly swept away from objects he desires, to his irritation.
She has an air of sour pragmatism, and there is no generosity left over for us.
An older kid comes barging into the shop.
He is about nine years old, and has a fierce frown etched on his otherwise unsullied face.
‘Whady'a want Mom?
I was watching The Comfortables.’
‘Laverne, do ya wanna bring your bicycle in from the rain, or do ya wannit to rust to the spot like everything else round here?’
‘OK, OK, OK, Mom.’
Laverne disappears.
‘Here are the keys to your room.
I have to cook the kids’ dinner, so I'm shutting the shop now.
Ring the door bell if you need anything.’
We tramp glumly under the walkway awning fringed with rain.
Once indoors I want a shower.
Prevailing sadness requires washing away.
Or perhaps it is all that rain which makes me want more water.
As I emerge from the shower, the sun comes out.
Birds start singing.
The day tingles with new hope.
I want to run through to Lucker and say ‘Look!
Look at the sun!’
But residual anger grunts quickly from behind the spontaneity, and I dress in silence.
I pass through the room and out into the sunshine.
Lucker with his booted feet on the bed, and walled in by a screening newspaper, makes no gesture of acknowledgement.
I face the lonely and exposed landscape, softened in this dying hour of the day by a late sprinkling of sun.
I walk along the side of the motel scratching myself on the pebble dash, for carelessness.
As I reach the corner of the building, a head pops out, unsmiling.
‘Shit!’
‘We have snakes here ya know.’
I meet the challenging gaze of Laverne T. J. Jr.
who divulges his information seriously.
‘Loadsa times I nearly trod one into the ground.
Especially when the sun is up all day, they get real lazy.
Mom says it thickens their blood like gravy on the heat.’
The branches of a nearby tree glitter like cut-glass chandeliers.
Laverne pauses to look in awe.
‘Wanna see a snake hole?’
He bolts off, down the wet lawn, without a backward glance.
I follow obediently.
He points at the official entrance to a snake's residence.
A small well-worn discreet hole in the lawn.
‘There!
Ma brother sticks his hand down in there!’
‘The little one?’
‘Yeah.
He's stupid.’
‘Well, he doesn't know any better.
He's small.’
‘Na, he's stupid.
He doesn't know anything.
We go snakechasing, my friends and me!’
‘Isn't that a bit crazy?
What if they don't want to be chased?’
‘Well they always run, see?
We count on that.
It only didn't happen that way once to a friend of mine.
This snake stopped, and said ‘What's happening here?’
And it got its head trod in.
My friend couldn't help himself.
We looked at it for ages when it was dead.
Its belly was yellow where the sun didn't reach.’
He looks to the horizon like a macho cowboy.
Then, his body slumps to kiddy pose, and he looks wistful and bored.
‘Say, London, wanna find a snake?’
‘That my name?’
‘Uh huh, that is what my mom wrote.’
‘Yes, as a matter of fact, I think I jolly well do…’
With my best caricature British accent I reduce him to a fit of stifled giggles.
I think we could play this game all day.
We go AWOL.
Snakechasing.
I glance down.
My footwear is an impressive snake shield of thick leather.
Any snake deciding to bury its teeth in this leather would get a free ride to New York.
‘Laa…verne!
Laa…verne!’
His mother's voice carols from reception.
jointly, we drop out of sight behind the building.
A look passes between us.
Lucker and Laverne's mum ideally should wait together and keep each other company because we're not going back.
Laverne shakes his head mumbling away his worries.
Not easy being naughty.
We break away from the house for the wilderness, darting across gravel quickly.
Relieved to have  grass underfoot silencing his blithe escape, Laverne glances back with all the charm of a lowly jackal.
He breaks into a trot.
We dip down a bank and soon our heads are covered by the mound of earth behind us.
Only the roof of the motel is to be seen.
Laverne snatches at a blade of grass.
It doesn't give way, and his hand is instantly a fresh and vibrant blood scarlet.
I'm glad I didn't fall for that hazardous country gesture of spontaneity, as glib as whistling.
I wipe his hand.
Laverne looks over my shoulder at the clouds, because it is easier than confronting his own oozing paint.
Soon it subsides and he seems to come back to life.
‘We gotta go towards that lake, it's about half a mile.
We probably won't make it that far.
We'll go to the pond first.
Will you go there with me?’
‘Why ever not?’
He seems to think this is a serious question that needs an answer and looks puzzled.
However, as I start walking in the direction of the lake he merely steps into stride.
We trudge through thick grass, bright green matted fur in its soaked richness.
The ground is soft, almost swampy underfoot.
It begins to gurgle and pull on the foot more noticeably.
The motel ridge, made of fortress rock, sits pretty on the edge of the mire.
A frog breaks its invisible stillness, and staggers across the grass.
Like a drunk, it doesn't get anywhere very fast.
It has in fact a complete absence of energy.
It looked far better standing still, which it finally does again.
‘He's wore right out.
He's been screwin' too much for his own good.
Shit, if a snake happened up on him now he'd be dead, for sure!
Which means there aren't no snakes here right now.’
He taps the flat little dough ball with his foot.
Its croak sounds like a smoker's cough.
‘Cain't even cross a road in less than half an hour in this state.
Dead meat.’
Looking around I feel like I am present at the fall of the Roman Empire, witnessing a last jaded orgy.
There are a large number of empty frog vessels dotted around.
I also wonder in passing if Laverne is supposed to say ‘screwin'.
Beyond us a large shallow pond expands its tepid shores onto the field.
The grass simply evolves into underwater grass and seems to exist equally comfortably waving dreamily around, endlessly drowning.
A heron looks over at us.
Initially startled, it calms, and seems to say ‘Oh, what the hell, it's only Laverne’.
It then continues to squint at the water, weaving slightly with endearing cross-eyed concentration.
Bulrushes emerge tall and proud from the middle of the pond, their brown moleskin ‘corn on the cobs’ flawless in isolation from harm.
Birds' nests woven onto their stalks at the base look like Vietnamese villages.
Fish plop lazily around out of reach of the heron, who looks across intently at the water flurries.
It does not seem hungry enough to move.
I glance around.
Bad natural drainage and heavy rain created this pond.
But, how did the fish get here?
How do fish start up in a new pond anywhere?
Birds fly, frogs struggle, snakes slither.
But how do fish do it?
I ask Laverne, and he fakes truly mystified.
I gaze at the pond in awe.
Laverne laughs.
‘We put them in, me an’ my friends, brought them down from the lake.
Except for the jumping ones.
We din' put that variety in there.
We've never figured that.’
‘Ever heard of fish falls?’
But Laverne isn't listening.
‘My mom is gonna be real mad at me fer leavin'.’
Recognising guilt bigger than Laverne, I ask him if he just wants to go back now.
‘Nope.
I do it all the time.
I have to.
My dad went off with a Rodeo Groupie, that's what Mom says.
Mom always stays near the house nowadays, and she wants me around.
She says sometimes she is scared.
But I get tired indoors.
I sleep and git bored.
I'm only nine.
I need to be outdoors.
I wanna dog.’
A bird wings its way across the sky.
Laverne's pale face follows its path exactly.
‘We have a gun.
If anyone comes to the house, I'm supposed to shoot them.’
He sighs.
I feel sorry for Laverne and sorry for his mother.
The standard of accommodation isn't that great, the reception fractious, and the price high.
Defensive, hurt women charge a lot.
We are probably paying for that Rodeo Groupie.
As we walk away from the pond, the cicadas slowly begin to pick up their instruments and rehearse in fragmented chords.
We climb through a hole in a hedge that looks like grounded tumbleweed.
The light is ebbing away.
A fingernail moon hints at night, sharing the sky with a late sun.
The other side of the hedge gives onto the road.
A car glistens in the distance.
‘Down!
It could be a friend of our family.’
I drop, my knee cracking like a pistol shot, from somewhere deep inside.
Laverne smiles with bemused unfamiliarity.
Oh, to be nine.
‘Yep, it was.’
Laverne is right.
Mind you, in a small place like this, everyone must be a friend of the family.
‘Snake Country.’
Laverne points down the bank on the other side of the road.
‘Follow me.’
I do, to the beat.
Every now and again Laverne freezes, breaks into a smile, and says ‘Only kidding’.
‘Laverne?’
‘Mmm?’
‘Don't do that.
Don't joke.’
‘Ssshhh.’
He points to a spot in the grass about ten yards away.
Rustling clearly indicates something making its way steadily through the grass.
No doubt, a snake searching quietly for its evening meal.
Without warning, Laverne raises his hands in the air, yells at the top of his voice, and bears down on the snake.
It looks around, seems to say ‘Holy Shit’, gathers up its skirts and flees.
I can see it snaking this way and that through Laverne's flapping fringe.
At one point it rises off the ground like a periscope, looking around itself, for a fraction of a second casting a backward eye at us.
I don't think it is going as fast as it can.
Perhaps the snakes too are now familiar with Laverne and he is nothing more than an accepted local nuisance.
Its body is sheer muscle, it could double as the severest whip.
Its quivering grace when manoeuvring past obstacles is liquid.
Chasing it for chasing's sake is crass.
Sport for sport's sake though is undeniably fun.
It disappears out of sight very suddenly.
We come to an abrupt halt.
Laverne trots back and forth like a dog that won't give up, outside an entrance the size of a tea-cup.
‘Well, she's gone now.’
‘How do you know she is a ‘she’?’
‘She was brand new clean, jus’ finished sloughing.
Females  do that, dump their dead skin every few months and start again.’
I know that feeling.
A fortunate grounding and optimistic cleansing which a cycle of this sort provides.
Mine is of my interior lining and hers is a reptilian version of a regular carwash.
‘Yeah well…
’ Laverne passes his hand through his hair with a weariness of responsibility well beyond his years.
‘Listen, Laverne, it's no problem, it's just one of those things.’
I step back, prepared to leave, unwilling to dwell on any disappointment.
Underfoot, a soggy tiger-trap of a burrow roof gives in like brown sugar.
I fall.
The peaty ground compacts water with an unflattering splat beneath my backside.
Laverne's face peels open with shocked amusement.
My heart leaps.
On my left, three stringy adolescent snakes emerge in unison from a small opening like ground mice.
My intrusive collapse has rendered them homeless.
They all bolt towards Laverne for security of cover.
He scrambles up the bank, heading for home.
I leap up, another unhealthy rifle crack emitting from the same knee.
Laverne zips across the empty road, the airborne snakes skim along after him.
They desperately need somewhere to hide, and pursue Laverne with a gut craving.
The seeds of hilarity spring from within me.
I run after this close-knit panic, laughing.
Laverne slides and scrambles down the bank on the other side.
I pitch through the hedge in tow.
The teenage snakes tumble, somersault and skid down after him like over-zealous baby ducks in ardent pursuit of a mother figure.
‘Laaa…!’
I can't speak for laughing.
‘Laaaa…!’
Laverne's arms whirl around like a kid's mimicking a helicopter on a summer's day.
He is instinctively keeping balance like a monkey in flight.
Just at this moment I love Laverne.
He has my sympathy and goodwill, on top of my guilt at laughing, and my emotions run to excess.
One of the snakes topples head over heels, inadvertently banging up against Laverne's calf muscle.
Surprising for a snake.
Somebody yelps with fright.
The funniest thing is that they are all as frightened as one another, but nobody can break the chain.
Laverne runs out of bank, hits the flat, cleans out of space and heads straight for the middle of the pond.
I am praying to the God of Laughter for unconditional mercy.
The installed heron is already banking away on invisible air forces, away from the mayhem.
Laverne is launched into the still treacle of pond water which reluctantly draws itself up like sluggish curtains to receive this intrusion.
Frogs that were lying around like drunk pop stars on lilos, are jettisoned through the air like bomb debris.
Nest-bound birds pedal frantically away leaving their entire existence to the destiny of fate.
One or two nests hit by a tidal wave sink instantly in a fizz of bubbles like soluble aspirin.
Nothing to come home to for some.
Weakened by laughter, I make my way down the bank.
The covering of pond weed determined to settle back to its previous comfortable limits, pushes at Laverne's legs.
He sways around helplessly.
Grabbing fruitlessly at bulrush stalks, which snap like chicken bones, he crashes face down into the mud.
This, the final cherry on the snake-chasing cake concludes my hysteria with a warm flow of urine down my leg.
Slowly at first then a loose rush.
I am soaked with tepid piss to my sock toes.
The snakes have gone now and Laverne stands up again with difficulty.
I walk into the water  smiling at him through tears.
I squat in front of him and let the water ride up to my armpits.
Laverne stares at me incredulously.
‘Whad'ya doin' that fer?’
Asks Laverne, subjecting the pond life he picks off himself to tight scrutiny.
‘I…er, I pissed myself, laughing at you.’
Laverne's eyebrows shoot to the back of his brain.
Then his wipe-clean expression comes to pure joy.
‘You did?
Because of me?’
‘WOW!’
It is like a Christmas present.
No older girl has ever pissed herself on account of Laverne before.
Muddy bliss, both completely filthy, yet completely purged.
On the way back Laverne stops and wrenches a leech off my neck.
‘We're gonna have to check and see if there are more back at the house.
The best way of gittin' them off is with dental floss.
You take it right under their butt, and whip 'em clean away.’
‘Ugh!
Shit!
Leeeeches?
Does that mean I'm covered in them?’
‘Probably.
I know I am.’
Panic comes easily.
I think Laverne is exaggerating but I don't chance a feel.
These aren't things you get off in a hurry, so I try and remain calm, although suddenly I'm pretty certain I've got one on my chest.
Sucking away.
Suck, suck, suck…
‘Laverne, we're going to have to get back quickly or I'll be sick.’
As we march up the grass towards the motel building I put my arm around Laverne, who knows he's in for it.
I start  laughing again with the memory.
Laverne's mother emerges from the office with the child on her hip as ever.
She shades her eyes to see better two people clutching each other in evident close camaraderie who to the best of her knowledge had never even met.
Lucker emerges from his room, and stands with his hands deep in his pockets.
‘Laverne, where have ya bin, in God's name?’
The baby's hard little eyes buried in a pudgy, blotchy allergic face stare out, echoing his mother's disapproval.
Then he starts joggling around excitedly, sensing the tension.
He breaks into a wide smile, and a dried bogie snowflakes from his nose down to the ground.
His mother growls.
‘Laverne, answer me!’
‘We fell in the pond.’
‘I can see that fer m'self.
You're covered in mud.
You were out snakechasing I'll bet.’
I step forward on Laverne's behalf.
‘If you are worried about me, don't be.
I had the best time ever.’
‘You don't look like you had the best time ever!’
She snaps.
‘If all my guests end up in the swamp, where is that gonna get me.
I lie, with my usual breathtaking skill, and assume a fake mantle.
‘I'm a naturalist.
I'm very comfortable like this.
I spend most of my professional life in similar environments.
Laverne did me a great service of showing me a few of the local species.’
She looks very disbelieving, and who can blame her?
I want to see Laverne home and dry, yet I don't want to carry on feeding passenger leeches a minute longer.
‘If the blame is to be laid at anyone's door, it was simply my over-zealous attempts to get closer to the wildlife.
Laverne is very much the innocent party.’
Laverne nods earnestly.
She glares at him.
‘Laverne is rarely the innocent party.’
‘No, really, the wildlife is superb here.’
‘Wildlife?
Ever'thing down there is a damn pest as far as I'm concerned.
I'd prefer it if Laverne watched TV.’
Laverne is unable to keep silent for a moment longer.
He giggles.
‘But we had a great time!
It was so funny, Mom!’
His mother bites her lip, trying to nip some involuntary humour rising in the bud.
‘I owe Laverne a great deal.
I saw one or two very unusual types of birds down there.’
‘All those birds are as common as dirt around here, but I guess if they could be of some use to you, that's great.’
‘Yes indeed, well if you will excuse me…’
‘Oh yeah, sure, come on Laverne…’
She walks around to the office, talking as she goes.
’…
Laverne, I just want you to know that business could be seriously affected if my guests end up in a mess, dammit.
And another thing, I don't remember letting you outta the house.
All I can say is you are very lucky that lady was a naturalist lover.
You sure are dirty.
Oh, you cut yourself?
We'll clean that up.
Are you hungry, honey?
Shower first, then eat, huh?
Why are you laughin'?
Did you two have fun, then?
Really honey?’
In the bathroom I find two leeches on my body.
I manoeuvre the dental floss into place in front of an aghast Lucker, and whip them away, as Laverne instructed.
Lucker stands by with a lit cigarette, just in case it doesn't work.
I'm  covered in a fine glossy sheen of drying mud so maybe they never got a good grip in the first place.
We don't mention Lucker's gaff with calling me Julie.
The pattern seems to be, and fast changing circumstances dictate this more than anything, not to dwell on problems.
For now Lucker seems to have missed me.
He revels in my dirty appearance and asks me all the details of the chase.
He wishes he had been there, and I realise that I am pleased that he was excluded.
Once I have the pink polish of a hot wash, Lucker wants to make love.
He gets into the shower with me.
This time I make sure he gets the taps.
within or without?
We drive into Denver ten minutes late for the beginning of the show.
The band flies and we drive.
It is always a crazy losing race against time.
Red Rocks stadium throbs to the sound of the first support band.
Security is tight.
Lucker has lost his back-stage pass.
It was his ID, passport, press pass and ticket.
We strip the car, but it is gone.
Can't believe we're doing this again.
Visibly frustrated, I make it worse by trying equally visibly not to appear so.
Relief watch us from their tour bus.
Yeb eventually emerges with a radio-controlled toy car in his arms.
It has large biting wheels.
He puts it down carefully like a pet dog.
It has a daunting and sinister turn of speed.
He sends it over to us.
It parks, waits and taunts our plight.
It speaks volumes.
Just as I feel like stamping on it, Yeb  pulls it back in and smiles.
I only manage to squint a civil wince in return.
Lucker reluctantly admits defeat.
He tries in vain to blag my laminate off me.
It is in my name and therefore useless to him.
He's trying everything, in the face of having to ask Yeb a big favour.
He has no choice if he is to cover the gig.
Electing to leave him to his own devices, I wave through the windscreen but he is still fumbling through his camera bag and doesn't say goodbye.
I drive away, feeling disconnected.
The hotel is more paid-up luxury.
Our room is twenty-two flights up.
The window is welded shut which is just as well.
The compellingly simple design of six foot square of sheer glass frightens me.
I have to fight a desire to jump right through it.
Heights do that to me.
Moods also do that to me, and I am fighting a dark one.
Once again I have stayed away, not sure of my place in all of this.
A sense of alienation hangs around me like smoke.
I take a cocktail and some assorted nuts in the bar to re-civilise myself.
Some severe orange and purple lilies that look like toucans keep a fixed eye on me, as I sit, anchored, killing time.
I have to collect Lucker.
I forgot to ask him to take a cab.
Lucker is in bad shape when I get there.
He is a miserable drunk, sunk into the dressing-room sofa.
When he sees me he pointedly turns away and tries to talk to someone else.
He looks blunted.
His hands fall into his lap when he attempts light gestures.
His head wobbles with sincerity as he flounders in unsatisfactory conversation.
It is at this point that I don't know if I can help, or if I have somehow wounded him too badly.
I can't feel sorry though.
I no longer feel anything at all.
I remain on the outskirts of the main group, with a bottle of beer for company.
I am not lassoing Lucker.
He has to  come of his own free will.
But his tenacity has to be admired.
Eventually I put my third drink down, tell Yeb to tell Lucker to cab it, and leave.
I don't care to play out my silly games before the assembled company.
I am frustrated to the point of tears.
As I shut the car door, Lucker is there pulling on the handle.
He clambers into the car, falling heavily into the seat without saying a word.
He looks ahead, expressionless with drink.
We drive home along miles of empty freeway.
The roadlights pull shadows across the windscreen, as regular as a dripping tap.
The car tyres bruise along the tarmac and the cabin is full of unspoken hurt.
The radio blurts out songs about being tortured by love for the wrong person.
We listen for answers, but it's just somebody else asking questions.
He undoubtedly wants to know where we are going, but is too proud to speak.
I could drive him around Denver for hours just to break him.
The configuration of lights speed up, broaden, and throw different shadows into the car as I pull up a freeway ramp.
I can now look at Lucker if I want to.
Glancing carefully over with minimum head tilt, I find myself able to linger in sad secrecy on his closed eyes.
He appears asleep.
I feel like I have a corpse in the passenger seat.
Lucker has not been taking corners well.
We arrive at the hotel.
Parking is on the fourth floor above a shopping mall.
The ticket machine pokes its paper tongue out at me.
The tyres squeal like piglets around endless upward spirals.
I park right next to the elevator.
Lucker wakes from his half-sleep, looking ruffled and resentful.
I want to be drunk too, so I don't feel so sober and hated.
Silently we pass possessions amongst each other so that we are democratically loaded.
Waiting for the elevator has all the alienation of waiting with strangers who need to focus  the brain on something, anything.
We step into the metal box and watch the floors go by as if they were years.
We are delivered onto the twenty-second floor with an incessant warning pong-pong-pong sound which is supposed to inform you the door has opened.
Well really.
The night view from our room is as spectacular and lethal as ever.
The vision of suicide has now subsided, because I can no longer see my broken body clearly on the dark pavement below.
Lucker drops his cases from his hand with no attempt to meet the ground halfway.
They clatter onto the floor loudly.
He lights a cigarette and flicks ash onto the carpet.
He knows he has done it, but he is a rebel tonight.
He watches for me to say something, but I won't do what is expected of me.
He also hates doing what is expected from him.
That is what this is all about.
He finishes the cigarette, drops the butt onto the floor and mashes it into the carpet slowly.
I'd like to punch him in the face for his insolence.
‘Wheres'sh beer?’
He knows that I won't be joining him.
‘Wissh one's ssh…it in?’
He drags a case towards him.
‘Dunno…’
I take off my dress with meticulous care.
His sprawl makes me seem like a silent, precise insect.
We have never been further apart, me in my forced hand of prissiness and him in his soup of isolation.
I climb into bed gingerly.
Lucker opens a case with brute force, sending unprocessed film rolling everywhere.
He finds two beers and opens them both.
He takes a swig, keeping a belligerent, tormented eye on me.
Unknown to him, it leaves a foam moustache.
He looks like a bolshy milk-fed calf, frothy and fired-up on his mother's milk.
‘What's wrong, Lucker?’
‘You.
You're wrong.’
He doesn't elaborate.
‘Why?’
‘Who do you think you are?
Eh?
Why have I always got to come up to your standards?’
‘You don't.
I never said that.
But, do I have to come down to yours…to be with you.’
He leans forward looking fierce.
I don't feel very safe.
Men, their muscle and nothing else, silences women.
Respect is not a factor here.
But I will not be held hostage by Lucker's desire to glow and simmer into the night.
‘Do I have to get drunk every night just to keep you company?
Do I have to carry drugs?
Is that what it's all about?’
I roll away, completely fearless in my disillusionment.
I hear a scraping of a beer bottle base across a wooden surface.
It gathers speed, and suddenly hits the wall by the foot of the bed.
The glass showers out like a firework.
The beer fizzes like acid on the wallpaper.
‘Don't ever mention THAT again!’
I sit back up.
‘I didn't want to.
I really didn't.
But you ask too much.
I can't sacrifice my sense of self-preservation for you.
I can't afford that.
You are not worth it.
Nobody is.
That's all.’
‘Well pisssh off then.’
He wobbles like a baby with wind.
‘Tiffany, I got this far without you, OK?
I haven't lost any film, I'm doing my job.
Sho what if I fuck up?
Sho bloody what?’
It is impossible to sleep with him in the room.
I know I'm in for a long night.
Lucker stares at me or rather at a spot on the wall to the left of my head.
It is disconcerting but I ignore it.
We stew for some time.
Me, wrestling with the right articulation, and Lucker with his blunted anger.
At last I find what I want to say.
‘Look.
Look.
It's like this, Lucker.
You're careless with what you say, you are careless with your possessions, and you are careless with your…no, no, about your best interests.
Are you going to be careless with me?
You worry me.’
A light seems to go on in Lucker's head.
His expression is the closest to any recognition of truth I've seen all night.
He allows it to slip away equally quickly.
But some of the sting is gone.
I sink a little lower in the bed hoping for some sleep.
‘I don't shink I love you.
Thassh all.’
I don't think Lucker loves anyone but himself.
He couches everything in his own narrow terms of insecurity.
He embraces failure and chaos with the zest of someone with a mission from Hell.
But then, I don't really care any more.
I'm in America with someone that I like, you know, sort of, but if it doesn't work out, that's too bad.
A bit sad maybe.
‘That, I can handle.
Let's just finish this trip together as best as we can, OK?’
I lie down flat.
I can't remain locked into this bullish row all night.
My eyes are folding up.
Silence ensues for some time.
I begin to drift off.
Lucker twitches his foot like a troubled cat.
I return to consciousness to hear it switching back and forth.
‘You are a bitch.’
‘You are a piss artist.’
‘You are a stuck-up, self-righteous Miss Perfect.’
‘You are a disorganised, destructive waster.’
‘You're obsessive.’
‘You're depressive.’
‘Well tha'sh all right then, isn't it?’
‘Yep, suppose it is.
Let's get some sleep shall we?’
Two hours worth of emotional ping-pong, delivers a heavy and resentful Lucker to my bed, to a despondent and jaded me.
With or without love?
Or just a case of survival?
nostalgia creek
I have these dreams of sunlight.
Such a flare coming off the earth that it actually hurts my retina.
So consequently I can never look to see what is in front of me for long.
Then, of course, as they are dreams, that sense that nothing exists directly behind you either is omnipresent.
Somehow, America seems like that.
We drive on, unravelling our adventure.
It seems strange that we are still together.
Kansas.
Huge rolling skies that freeze time blow gently across an ocean of grass.
Home too, of the legendary drifting tornadoes which pass across this uninterrupted flatness with the casual offhandedness of a juvenile hustler.
The pressing reality behind this beauty is another spectre of stadium rock flogging the car on towards Kansas City.
My head lolls on the window glass.
I watch chalky earth plains give way to natural forest and fear for their future.
But there is a sparkle of gentle morning sun, and slowly my optimism unfurls.
Lucker, boy racer, bowls through the forest like a modern missile.
We even wrench a poster off a tree in our sour tail wind.
It spirals across the road behind us.
‘Vote for Sheriff Cunningham,’ it said.
‘Stop!
Stop!’
‘What?
What is it?’
He pulls up sharply by a bridge with a sporty flamboyant skid.
‘I need to get out.
Rush.
Rush.
Rush.
Let's just take a break for a minute.
UGH!’
A dead deer lies there only feet from the verge.
Black sunken eyes like dried figs.
A gunman just practising his aim.
He didn't even want it for eating.
But for the table of nature, plenty.
It seethes with a metropolis of feasting insects.
I always stop to look at death.
After all, I will go there one day, although it is hard to equate all my trivial daily preoccupations with such blanket decomposition.
Lucker watches me intently but doesn't speak.
Conversation is sparse this morning as mild mutual curiosities are not taken up.
‘I need a shit.’
With that I leave the door hanging open and disappear fast down a deceptively steep gradient, masked by oily green creeper with wide leaves like Southern fans.
I catch my breath.
Before me a small busy creek bubbles in private mirth.
Dappled sunlight glints through the trees into the water, illuminating the river bed.
I have my shit, bury and cover it over like a cat, with earth and leaves, trying to ensure a faster conversion back to nature.
I glance up and see Lucker standing there on the bridge.
I peel off my clothes, and put them over a low branch.
‘You're not seriously thinking of swimming, are you?’
I don't answer.
I wade into the crystal cool water.
‘OOoooooooooooOOOHH!’
The slabs of rock have been worn smooth like well-used soap.
My feet skitter their way across the surfaces with a  detailed sensation normally reserved for my fingers.
I lower myself into a contained eddy of water and lean back against a seat of rounded stone.
Clean bright bubbles form a frilly ruff around my neck.
Birds dart from tree to tree chattering busily.
A row of tiny feeding fish hug the rock surface like hunched-over telephonists.
Their tails wiggle furiously like suckling piglets in their effort to hold against a current many times bigger than them.
The brush of heavy foliage from lush, mature trees is heady and inspirational.
Lucker still stands silhouetted on the bridge.
I close my eyes.
No cars pass this way.
Hearing the car door slam, I half expect him to drive away.
I wish he would.
Ever since my father repeatedly threatened to let me out of the car as a child, I have made satisfactory provisions for such an adventure.
Lucker comes down to the water's edge.
He looks uncertain.
He wants to come in, but a glance up to the bridge tells me he expects a vast crowd to appear out of nowhere, the minute he strips naked.
‘Join me Lucker.
Please?’
I want peace; the uncertainty of his continuing predicament is too painful.
He undresses slowly.
Due mainly to the lack of spontaneity, his body appears like unwrapped cheese, all pale and virginal to the rigours of bright sunlight.
He hesitates at the prospect of total nudity.
‘Och, come on Laddie, let's have yer blimming troosers off!’
His trousers come off showing a fluffy, defensive little cluster of genitalia, cowering at the prospect of a dip in the spangly waters.
After an ungainly dash across the rocks he comes to rest at my side with an almighty splash.
He eventually settles apologetically with a grand smile on his face.
This is a divine and rare state.
I want our impact here to be the minimum.
Kansas deserves to be left alone.
We have stupidly cluttered our lives to the point of frenzy, cramming our culture down our own throats until we choke on it.
The reason Kansas is a beautiful place is not many people live here.
Consequently the animals are doing better than average.
I really love animals, someone's got to, the poor bastards.
You can see the panic in their eyes these days, right down to the ants.
All running out of space fast.
The only animal that can afford to relax is the cockroach because it knows it will survive the Nuclear War, and there will be plenty of space after that.
Physically they are amazing, you can jump up and down on a cockroach, and they still get up and walk away.
Mentally, they are a hundred times stronger.
Most animals remain largely shy.
Increasingly so by the day.
That is the way they stay alive.
Working the roads, we don't see much of nature except the suddenly arrested kind.
Firstly in a country full of guns it doesn't do to stand there asking to become target practice.
If an animal moves a millimetre out of the state park zones, it's dead.
The deer by the creek had the misfortune to come to the roadside for an ill-judged second.
Poor deer.
Rumour has it they've been perfecting the belly crawl and crawling down rabbit holes to hide.
Rabbits don't come out much any more because recently there have been a lot of deer in the way.
Another way to have a death wish associated with the road; crossing it.
Two animals with serious traffic problems are armadillos and racoons.
The night before last we saw a racoon swaying mindlessly around at the side of the road under the influence of headlights.
Hitching a ride, or attempting to.
Couldn't believe my eyes.
Again, according to rumour they step out to hitch rides to Paradise.
‘Take me to a place where there are no roads.’
They plead, once they are comfortably sitting in the passenger seat.
It is then the truck drivers push them out of the moving cab.
They don't want to hear of a land without roads.
This means no jobs.
So the poor discarded animals are bounced down the road only to fall under a passing car.
Sad isn't it?
Mmmm…after the first fifty carcasses it becomes a joke.
Dried and flattened armadillo husks flip over like worn-out old heels in the wake of passing trucks, bowling down the road like lost hubcaps.
Freshly-hit racoons look like grounded planes, arms outstretched and tail sticking up with rigor mortis like a fin.
Every animal is sent on its way by a sympathetic sigh.
‘Oh, another one…oh no, and another.’
‘OOoooch.’
‘That one could have got away…’
‘Oh no, that was a baby…’
Just once I waste my breath in armadillo country.
The road yaws out in front of us, and it is clear that yet another armadillo has been chucked overboard.
As we speed nearer and nearer, I hunch up closer to the windscreen to see every poignant detail of its last few seconds.
We pass, heads to the side, in deep grief for a piece of shredded lorry tyre.
Lucker lurches forward with enough force to knock out his teeth, what there is left of them.
He doesn't stop laughing for two miles.
I sit there quietly revising my priorities as far as expending grief goes.
After that my response seems mechanical.
The last thing I remember seeing before I fall asleep is an eagle carrying a snake in its deathly grasp high above the road.
It is  being borne away to feed the eagle's babies.
The snake is still finding enough strength to thrash around as much as a flying snake might dare.
But its fate is sealed.
The snake has enemies more lethal than Laverne's memorable mild teasing.
Lucker tells me I slept with a smile on my face.
alcoholic brink
Kansas City is a far cry from Kansas country, looming up in glass shafts reflecting the golden sun of late afternoon.
The executives’ daggers have done them proud.
To me though this is much more a landscape of alienation, and I miss my creek which now seems only to be a nostalgic dream.
Same old story.
We're late, and the crowd is baying for famous flesh.
As we pass through, people beat on the car windows.
All I can see is hands and the hard bulk of bodies pressed against the glass.
They think we are someone.
It feels like passing through a political demonstration.
Tonight I want to get into the crowd and Lucker wants space.
He's got it.
I am a bit tired of the rarefied backstage air.
I'll brave it out, and meet new people.
Plus, I've still got to write something witty to drag home, if I'm to go back to employment that is.
Pinning the laminate onto my dress, I launch myself into the throng.
I buy a drink and talk to anyone who will listen.
With a laminate there appears to be many who will.
I tell young fans all about England.
At one point I mention that English police don't wear guns.
The idea  of keeping control without them brings a bunch of rather drunk young dudes and dudettes to their knees with tears of laughter.
One of them kisses me as if I had won a prize for the most amusing and far-fetched story of the evening.
I feel very foreign.
All in all I begin to enjoy myself.
I am about to lose my way.
Later on, backstage, I am greeted with enthusiasm, as if I were a long-lost friend or something.
This attitude is bewildering.
Expecting ongoing punishment for the drugs episode, I forget that other people have different timetables for both acceptance and forgiveness.
Or, maybe for the first time I am standing there looking vulnerable.
Whatever, Yeb walks past grabbing my arm and tells me we're going to have a good time.
He winks over his shoulder at someone, but I don't see who.
For a second, I think it could be Lucker, but he is nowhere to be seen.
‘Tiff, do you know what our manager calls you?
A bit of posh.
But the name?
Tiffany?
Whose idea was that?’
‘My mum liked Audrey Hepburn in Breakfast at Tiffany ‘s.’
‘Really?
Gorgeous bird.
But, why didn't she call you Audrey?’
‘Perhaps she didn't want me called a ‘bird’.’
Yeb decides to laugh this off, partly distracted by someone else calling out to him.
I am relieved.
He doesn't detach his arm.
He takes me into the hospitality room and pours me a drink.
One of many.
By the time we are all set to go to a club I am teetering on the brink.
I am not alone.
It is one of those nights when everyone mysteriously decides to unfurl and enjoy.
Chauffeurs peel themselves off the walls, put down their fifth or sixth freebie rock'n'roll drink, and take us all in  convoy to a club somewhere in Kansas City.
I would not be able to find it again.
At the Sphere Club I am struck by how aggressive everyone looks.
I have my mother's cocktail dress on, whilst most people are dressed in leather and studs.
With shaved skulls the fashion norm, I don't know if everyone is a human being any more.
I've lost my code.
Some guys look as if they could be nice, but they could just as easily swing a baseball bat into someone's face.
Yeb goes for a walk.
If it is a cocaine run to the toilet, and I'll bet it is, then he wouldn't dream of telling me about it.
I feel like the fairy on top of the Christmas tree.
Some crew slide onto the seat beside me, hemming me in.
They start talking about ‘trampolining’ which is the art of bouncing through a girl's tights until you hit home.
A new one on me.
There are jokes about criss-cross patterns on the end of your dick, not to mention nylon rashes.
I laugh a lot, throwing my head back with vicarious pleasure at many of these stories.
Deep down, I don't think it's that funny.
It is just bravado stuff from a bunch of tarts.
They are not in the least bit discerning and I'm glad to be hearing about it second-hand.
I see only a good case of thrush, minimum.
Men like this never stop talking about ‘stunt sex’ and new kinks.
I can only see myself as a conversation piece, worth more as gossip than a fuck.
No mystery, nothing there for me.
Like pubescent first-timer thirteen-year-olds, they are to be avoided if you want more from life than cheap betrayals.
One of them puts my fallen dress strap back up onto my shoulder.
They can't fuck me, so they protect me.
However, I'm never totally off the menu.
I feel vulnerable, even sad, and I excuse myself whilst I'm still genuinely smiling.
On the way to the toilet, flashy black guys, who keep their  hands permanently on their balls as if they might drop off onto the floor, stand directly in my way to get noticed.
I mouth ‘You'll fuck anything’, sound-cushioned by house music vibrations.
They squeeze their balls a little tighter, and smile because they think I'm saying ‘Hello, I love you’.
To tell you the truth, I hate everyone.
I wish they would all just leave me alone.
The toilet sign shows a lady with an A-line skirt carrying an umbrella and a handbag.
She also has a bow in her hair like a Pekinese.
I push the door open and join the girls in front of the mirror.
It's a steam bath in there.
Whilst other girls arrest their make-up in mid-slither down their faces, I stare into the foggy mirror.
I hardly wear any because I'm too lazy with maintenance.
My bladder sings a searing boozy aria, and my brain thinks of nothing but that release catch.
Somebody bursts out of the toilet and crashes out into the noise.
There is no toilet paper and piss all over the seat.
The door won't shut, and so I position my foot against it and horse-piss down into the bowl.
No rinky-dink polite trickle for the benefit of others.
Discarded sodden matches and joint stubs jostle around in the pan and urine seeps into the sole of my shoe.
I feel dreadful and lurch forward to headbutt the door.
It compacts my spine, and yellow spots dance before my eyes.
I need to get out of this place.
I wonder where Lucker is.
He is not there to be my friend.
At the sink I wash my face with cold water, but I don't feel any better.
I recognise a face in the mirror.
A spotty, pretty blonde, linked with the band in some way, stands there pouting her lips forcibly into her lipstick.
They come up blood red.
Her breasts are pushed forward as conspicuous offerings.
‘Hello Tiffany, are you OK?’
‘No, not really.’
She knows my name.
I don't know hers, although I remember her face.
We hide behind our men, peeping at each other in a curious and suspicious fashion.
But tonight is a bit different.
This time I need help.
Every pore in my body cries out a message of underlying wretchedness.
I turn around to ask her if she knows how I can get home.
Then nothing.
Blank.
Jenny tells me the rest of the story the next day.
At first it seemed as if it had happened to someone else, and entertaining on that merit alone.
‘You just collapsed like a chimney stack.
You know?
You see it on telly, it goes down in sections and crumples in a huge cloud of dust.
You were just like that.
Knees first.
And you fell on your face.’
I am embarrassed.
How stupid to fall on your face.
For God's sake, anywhere but the face.
I swallow hard.
‘Then what happened?’
I half-expect to hear that I was mocked or stepped over, or raped and left to die.
‘Well I opened the door and called someone to help.
This Heavy came over, called Morris, a big guy or what?
He keeps on asking me if you've done drugs.
‘What drugs?
What drugs?’
I can't stop laughing, sorry, but I can't.
I don't know you, do I?
I didn't know what to say.
Morris thought you were going to die, for sure.
He carried you through the club, and took you into a staff room.
Still, he's asking what has she taken?
Then I saw the colour of your face, and I stopped laughing.
You were green.
I thought you might not make it then, and I really felt sad for you.
I did, you know.
Were you doing drugs?
I didn't know.
Morris kept on saying things to you, to reach  you.
He was rubbing your hands to warm you up.
He said if you got any colder you'd die.
He was really worried.’
I remember a sensation of being above myself, certainly not in my body anyway.
I remember Morris willing me on through a mist of deep deep unconsciousness.
‘I tried to find your boyfriend.
Lucky someone?
But he wasn't around.’
‘No?’
‘They wanted to call an ambulance, but I said I'd take you to hospital in a cab.
Ambulances cost big money.
In fact it's almost worth being dead if you want to travel in an ambulance.
A lot of people do it that way.’
‘Very kind of you.’
She smiles with concern.
‘And then you came round.’
I remember feeling Morris dealing with my dead-weight, as he folded and shovelled me into the back of the cab.
I didn't want to be a lump.
Mentally I reached out to be light and alive again.
He left me there.
Still not fully in my body, I am observing, feeling from afar.
And then suddenly I pop back to life, clamber across Jenny's lap and open the window.
I pick up his name from someone, or was it in my mind anyway?
‘Where is Morris?
Which one is Morris?
You?
You?
Are you him?’
Several people stand there looking at me.
A man comes forward and grabs my hand.
‘You've come back!
You were out, out, OUT, Man!’
‘Yeah, yeah, I know.
Morris?
He saved me.
Thank him.’
‘We will, honey, we will.’
The man still holds my hand tightly.
He won't let go.
I'm touched in a puzzled way.
The cab driver revs up, and Jenny moves her thigh from under my weight.
I realise I have been pinching her skin all this time.
I sit back down.
The cab driver looks at Jenny's legs like she was a whore or something.
He has a weasel face and subjects me to piercing scrutiny.
‘She smashed or what?’
‘Devastated.’
I reply, without much strength.
In his eyes I amount to nothing, much, much less than the sum total of him.
His contempt is blatant.
‘So where we going?’
‘Lexington Hospital.’
‘No!
No!
Not hospital, back to the hotel please.’
‘But you're ill!’
Protests Jenny.
‘I'm better now.
I just want to go home.’
‘OK, I guess it is the Ritz-Carlton then.’
The hotel is just around the corner, maybe a few corners, but almost no distance.
The weasel charges us fifteen dollars for a five dollar trip.
Making money out of a crisis.
I weave as I stand.
Jenny holds me up with one arm and shouts at him.
‘You miserable bastard.’
But she hands over the money because this is not the right time to fight him.
He knows it, and drives off into the night licking his dollar lips.
‘Jenny?’
‘Mmmm?’
‘Thank you…and you know, I think someone might have slipped something in my drink.’
‘Why would you think that?’
‘Maybe someone thought I needed some fizz, you know?
They think I'm blimming Mary Poppins, that lot.’
‘Nah.
You are being paranoid.
Maybe you just got pissed.’
‘But, I don't normally fall over like that.’
'Well yeah, maybe, maybe.
Nothing would surprise me.’
Sweet unsurprised Jenny.
throwing it all away
I get woken by Lucker the following morning.
He stands above me on his knuckles like a gorilla, and peers at me curiously.
I keep the duvet over my nose.
‘I heard you got smashed.’
He doesn't get an answer.
I don't find the whole situation as rich in humour as he does.
I bow over the toilet to retch but reverse away fast as last night's urine smells like cat shit this morning.
We check out.
I feel ill and weak, civility managed as a chore.
My brain feels like a loose stone in a dried leather pouch.
I have the same new-worldliness of someone who emerges to sunlight after a long illness in a darkened room.
Remembering my hunch that my drink was spiked leaves me confused.
Without proof I should really lay the idea to rest.
It's bad enough being paranoid, let alone telling everyone about it.
I mull it over silently for much of the morning.
We stop for fuel somewhere in Iowa.
Lucker fills up and checks the car, whilst I buy some food, zap it through the microwave, and bring it out steaming to the car.
Things begin to feel normal again.
My stomach curls its tongue around the food and smiles.
We belt along the freeway, clearing a good  fifty miles, when suddenly Lucker slams a hard fist down on the dashboard.
‘Oh, shit!’
‘What happened?
What?
Where?’
‘I left my wallet on the roof of the car.’
I thought I was supposed to be the victim this morning.
He swerves deep into the hard shoulder.
He feels for it on the roof.
After all this distance, wishing it still up there is pure fantasy-time.
He wrenches the seat-belt free of his body to have a better look.
‘How much was in it?’
The roof reflects only the sun in the hot red paint.
He sits back down heavily.
‘It's not there.
Two hundred and fifty dollars.
I think we should go back and look for it.
Look, there is another junction in front of us, so all we do is turn around.’
‘And we're there.’
I can't help my sarcastic side-swipe.
The fifty or so miles unravel slowly, and I can't help feeling, pointlessly.
On the way Lucker scans miles of road surface for a bulging wallet, along with the rest of the world.
It sure beats armadillo spotting.
He adopts a false cheeriness about the whole thing as self-protection.
We eventually pull into the garage forecourt.
‘The man says he hasn't seen a wallet.’
I stare ahead knowing I will be subsidising this cash loss.
Before, it has been with blind faith only.
Two hundred and fifty dollars is serious.
Only eight nights in an average motel fluttered away in the wind.
His mind is like cotton-wool.
It's doing my head in.
I want to bang my skull repeatedly on the road surface until it hurts.
Why?
Because I want to kill him, That's why.
It's the dope, it's the booze, he's a jerk…he's a loser.
It's carved in stone, it's written in the sky.
How did I get into this?
I take the wheel.
Half an hour later, I see a blue flashing light, and matching stripes in the rear view mirror.
I pull in, down from seventy-seven miles per hour, through fifty-five, then to an obedient halt.
I was speeding through the rage barrier.
I get out, my head to the side in foolish frustration.
I feel like hitting out.
An officer of the law steps up to me.
He is about fifty and still has a full head of jet black slicked-back hair, Elvis-style.
His face isn't cruel, and I'm relieved to find no attitude there that I might find myself kicking against.
‘See here m'am, you were doing well over the fifty-five mandatory.
Seventy-nine is not what I expect to see.’
‘I know you don't, I'm sorry.
Today has not been a good day.
We just lost two hundred and fifty dollars.’
I shrug my shoulders.
‘Lost?’
‘My boyfriend left his wallet on the roof of the car.’
For a flinty second I see a smile in his eyes, he obviously sees my frame of mind clearly.
I look around the countryside wanting to get the dirt dished quickly so I can get on with my life.
‘Well, now there m'am, see you're gonna lose even more in fines unless you obey the laws of this country.
We like to make America a safe place to be.’
I glance at the gun on his hip.
A safe place?
‘But there again m'am, I figure you've lost enough, so I am gonna write you out a speed-check warning and you're gonna pay good heed now.
Next time you get stopped it will come right up on the computer.
You won't get a second chance.
Have a better day.’
He sticks me with a pink slip and walks back to his car.
I am grateful to him for gentle handling.
He pulls away, past me, like a shark impatient to get back into the swim of things.
We drive on in subdued silence.
The heavens start grumbling with distant thunder and a gentle flicker of lightning flits behind the clouds.
The sky becomes gun-metal blue, overwhelming even my mood in its brooding rage.
Angry thunder cracks open like a oak splitting down the middle, to take over the horizon, cannoning from one side to another.
Heavy ripe droplets of rain splatter ominously onto the windscreen, regular and damning.
Then as if the whole world had hunched over to block out the sun, the sky becomes as black as coal.
Rain suddenly engulfs the car.
The windscreen wipers trudge sluggishly and ineffectively through the water, bringing visibility down to a few feet.
The headlights pick out a wall of water nails.
I slow to about twenty miles per hour.
Then the sky lights up with a devil lightning prong that turns the whole countryside into a photo negative.
Wooden smallholdings crouch under the electric temper looking like damp matchboxes.
One hour later the storm still rages with no sign of abatement.
The radio is useless static, visibility zero, and the road is awash with water on the move.
The ditches are filled and the fields beaten flat.
Then, slowly, in spasms, the skies dilute like saturated watercolours and bleed away to let a pale frail lemon sun shine through.
With it goes the heat of another drama, seeping into the soil like the rain.
ship of rats
In a Minneapolis hotel room we find each other again.
We make love unhurriedly.
Lucker plays lazy games.
He enters easily, and pulls out nonchalantly.
He keeps me asking and distant.
I have to appeal to him to think of me.
He walks around the room with an erection tugging to keep itself up.
Gets a cigarette out and lights it.
I watch the erection sentimentally, lest it fade, as he blatantly tempts fate.
He cups his balls in his hand as he sucks hard on damp humid cigarettes.
Then he kneels near the bed, the cigarette smoke filtering up into his eyes.
Even hardened smokers don't seem to be able to take this direct onslaught from the pungent and reaching fingers of smoke.
He closes his eyes.
To spare him and me, I remove it and mash it dead.
He pulls his foreskin back from the great bruised rose.
It reminds me of what a decorative caterer can do with a carrot.
The penis stirs close to me, and I give it a wet nose.
Lucker pulls back again very slowly, and with the simplest ease, fills me up with his flesh and blood.
The Minneapolis gig nearly doesn't go ahead.
It transpires that Ram got on a plane in Kansas City, looked out the window and got straight back off again.
‘I don't fly propeller.
Man, propeller doesn't even fly propeller!
Get me technology.
I wanna Jet!
This is a pile of shit.’
And that was it.
There was nothing more from Ram, except head-shaking and folded arms.
Another plane was found in due course.
By that time no-one was talking to Ram and Ram wasn't talking back.
The set is late and Ram seems cruel, intent on provocation and antagonism.
He snarls at the audience, who are bemused en masse.
It doesn't catch alight as on some nights.
Inaudible backstage mutterings are the sum total of rebellion to the little dictator who cannot be deposed, but is often despised.
Minneapolis was the penultimate gig for us.
Chicago is our last.
After tonight, we're on our own.
Freedom.
The tour still has eight dates to complete without us.
Baz Johnson grumbles loudly about us taking a holiday at his expense.
He complains that he has never seen Lucker actually taking pictures.
Perhaps Lucker has not made himself visible enough to justify the cost.
This criticism doesn't appear to worry him, and he says that the proof is in the pudding, patting his film case.
Baz seems reassured by this, but still mutters about the rest of the tour needing covering.
Lucker points out that his contract comes to a close in Chicago and he is not being paid for anything he isn't doing, and he is not doing anything he isn't paid for.
This shuts Baz up, who breaks into a smile.
‘At least you lucky bastards are getting off this ship of rats.
So, are you all-expenses-paid-honeymooners coming to the big Halfway Party tonight?
We need a bit of posh to tart the place up a bit.’
He winks at me.
He is a grisly old dog, but I like him, despite his shakes, nervous tics and watery eye.
He says that everything has been laid on tonight, no expense spared.
Two  stretch-limousines have been booked in for the party.
They pour into the backstage car park like expensive treacle and come to a halt at the crack of a whip.
Their well-groomed coats gleam like a couple of sleek self-conscious thoroughbreds.
Aerials sprout up like weeds on the roof.
Double sets of wheels pull together like centipede rolling stock.
They are a cross between a coffin and a barracuda.
Awesomely decadent.
Patrolling dogs and walkers hug the perimeter fence.
Fans clutch at the wire like prisoners until snarled off by these four-legged automatons.
Limos mean rock stars.
Their desperate devotion is unbelievable.
I am not made of fan material, and find it hard to understand.
Even harder, knowing Ram, and the others.
Two big Chicago House DJs are rumoured to be rolling up later to take us into town.
The band's room is filled with a curious mixture of people, waiting for something to happen.
The bands are just beginning to drift through, but Relief is still on stage.
There is no attempt to hide drugs.
Tonight it is out for all to see.
Getting some is another matter.
Two chauffeurs linger in the corner, one white with blond hair, the other a good-looking black guy.
They loosen their ties and slouch against the wall with hands in pockets in manufactured nonchalance.
Suddenly they look like they should be in a porno film called The Chauffeurs.
One scratches his hairy chest and leans back, positively smouldering.
This other guy I've seen hanging around since Denver comes over to talk with me.
He is well-dressed, superficially well-mannered, but reminds me of a flirtatious married host at a barbecue.
He sticks like glue, and thinks he is masking his intentions.
He came out of nowhere and now he travels with the band.
No doubt Mr Cocaine.
I think I saw his face on an FBI Wanted poster in a post office in mid-country.
Ex-motorcycle gang member with murder, kidnap and serious drug offences going on longer than I've been alive.
That's what a nice guy he could be.
He asks me what I'm doing and who I am, and I mumble that I'm just me and that is that.
I can't believe how trite my answer is, but I don't want him anywhere near me.
In the doorway there are four punky groupies with skirts right up to their twats, with red nylon panties pouching down full of well-visited promise.
They laugh, pointing their tongues out like flirty little snakes, flashing the whites of their eyes through dense make-up.
They chatter together like fiesty and excited skunks, and look constantly for the opportunity to move in.
I move out.
There is a funfair next door and the big wheels can be clearly seen from the dressing-room window.
I pass into the fairground to get something to eat.
I go wholesale American with a large hot dog, a hot whistling tube of rubberised meat product in a fluffy paper tissue bun.
The mustard goes on like acrylic paint, and the world is not my oyster.
I would prefer oysters.
Oyster Burgers perhaps?
But with everything taken out?
A huge cheer goes up.
Relief finish for the night.
I take up a rifle and being that I am a crack shot, I win something to hang on a car mirror.
The man checks my gun as if I'd had the time and opportunity to fix the outcome, and then rather begrudgingly hands over a very full pair of red fake fur lips.
He refuses to let me have another go which I think is outrageous and tell him so.
He growls.
‘Gettoutahere!’
Someone touches me on the arm.
It's Yeb.
He is sweaty and sparkling.
‘Hi, Tiff.
Wanna have fun?’
Still thinking that my drink was spiked in Kansas doesn't make me very trusting.
I'm confused, but it isn't fair to harbour groundless suspicions towards Yeb.
I try to be friendly.
‘You must have dived away quickly.
Did you actually play bass tonight?’
He looks at me for a second.
‘Huh?
Er…yeah, and I feel like shit.’
He shakes his head and wipes sweat off his face with his T-shirt arm.
‘I can't do my job.
Ram's star trip is driving everyone fuckin' nuts.
Fancy a ride?’
Embracing the ambiguous nature of that question with a dirty grin, he points to a big wheel.
The one I'd considered earlier, but they refuse single people because they would rattle around on their own.
Consisting of smaller cages that fly around independently within a big circle, it needed a pair.
We go up to the wheel base and Yeb is instantly recognised.
Playing up to it, he gives an autograph and we board for free.
The restraining bar is bolted across our laps and the cage door is locked firmly in place.
The ride is satisfyingly unpleasant, and we get our thrill.
At last the wheel stops and we swing and sway like a pendulum above the seething fairground.
Gradually we are brought down to ground level, but not released.
The grinning face of the fairground boy leers in through the wire.
He lets the other revellers off.
He waves us on and up.
I shout a protest through the busy noisy night.
The machine cranks into gear, and the spin is on once more.
Yeb whispers a hoarse sorry in my ear.
He is not unaware that he brought this on.
Another twenty minutes of this reduces me to a disorientated wreck, near to tears and vomiting.
Yeb isn't faring much  better.
We crumple together.
The experience comes very close to being mistakenly caught up in a lawnmower.
Yeb's big hand closes around mine, and we wait in strangled silence to be delivered.
Just as I am close to blacking out, it stops.
We are eased down.
When the boy releases the catch, we don't get out immediately, because we can't stand up.
He watches after us with evident satisfaction, as we teeter back to the stadium much the worse for the experience.
So much for star treatment.
The hospitality room is crammed with more new faces.
Only the bands sit like kings on the available sofas, confident that they are the main reason for the party.
Noses trawl along the formica sideboards hoovering up powder.
Others stand nearby, waiting for the invitation that will never come totally unconditionally.
The two DJs arrive, showing their determination not to go unnoticed.
Sherman Dwight Mower and Buzzie B. St James are two hulks of sea lion with curtain-pull gold chains supporting yankee dollar medallions.
Their big fat wallets tell many stories, not all of them for children.
A stretch-limousine call goes around.
The chauffeurs don hats and quaff their drinks in one.
We file out into the car park area.
Sherman and Buzzie B. climb into a totally white BMW which looks more like a modern bathroom cabinet than a car.
The back light panel spans the width of the car like a glowing log.
Beneath it, in a bumper like a whale's bottom lip, a nestling licence plate states ‘DON'T GIVE A SHIT’.
But they give a very big shit indeed.
I'd like to suggest they call it ‘PUSSYMOBILE’ to cut the crap, so to speak.
100 per cent stereotype.
Everyone wants a ride in a stretch-limo, but this is impossible.
Two smaller bridesmaid versions in tow which are  standard glamour for every gig, now seem mundane by comparison.
Funny how goalposts shift so fast.
Like school team selection time, there are winners and losers by decree.
Baz beckons me over.
Mr Cocaine Smoothie appears out of nowhere, and hugs my side.
He is in for the ride, so he must be on the payroll.
He pulls on his ponytail and settles it like a pet comfortably along the collar.
‘Like your dress, kid.’
Turning the limousines around is a time-consuming elaborate star-shaped manoeuvre.
Once facing the road, Baz throws open one of the car doors and snaps his fingers.
Like Southfork Ranch, the seating is in crusty burgundy leatherette button-down style.
The library theme is continued with the presence of a couple of fearsomely bad American dynastic oil paintings and a mock bookcase drinks cabinet, complete with a cut-glass decanter set lurking stiffly behind the wooden lattice work.
A gold-plated naked woman cigarette lighter looks like the Oscar with mandatory tits.
It stands permanently upright, with the aid of a magnet base.
The roadies don't get invited.
They are clearing the stage in demolition mood.
Amplifiers shoot down the ramps like runaway trains, as they throw resentful glances over at the cars.
There are two options, inside, or out on the open deck.
I opt for the outside seat which in some models is adapted into a mini-swimming-pool.
Two unknown companions squeeze in with me to face the elements.
At least Mr Cocaine Smoothie isn't one of them.
With twenty-one passengers per super-limo, the convoy pulls away leaving many behind.
Dust curls as the limos kick and buck up the track towards the freeway.
Lucker is in the other one, taking photographs.
I see the flash-gun flaring out from behind smoked glass windows.
Sherman Dwight Mower and Buzzie B. take up a showy fast lead, and the race is on.
We hit about a hundred miles per hour minimum within seconds and hold it.
The convoy cuts through the traffic with patent disregard for everyone and everything.
The wind is bitter.
On deck I feel a perfect target for any sniping moron.
It would be easy, even tempting, to take a pot shot at us.
It is also clear if we had an accident we'd be the first to die.
Once off the freeway, the stretch-limos are quick to show their limitations.
We arrive at the club only after a series of sluggish and difficult turns around compact city streets.
Fleets of sunglasses and smiles greet us.
Cash smiles because we've got the wheels.
Full of expectations, the travelling is more fun than getting there.
The club is flat, and going nowhere.
I buy drinks out of boredom.
It's the most obvious thing to do.
Hug the bar.
Dennis the keyboard player in Relief comes over and talks incoherent rubbish to no-one in particular.
Everyone looks at each other with the blank expression reserved especially for when someone who is off their trolley comes into the near vicinity.
Nothing to do with me.
Nor me.
Nor me.
He carries on with his illogical druggy spew, obviously telling a tragic story by the look on his face.
His brain is completely scrambled tonight.
I move away as I would prefer to talk with someone from the same planet.
Zero party.
A group of us evolve towards the door.
A drive in a limousine is passed by silent vote.
Not the one Stiff has passed out in.
Baz nods to the porno blond chauffeur who when paying for drinks elects for pineapple juice.
It is as thick as baby food and leaves a soft sediment on his top lip.
He catches me watching him and smiles a naughty smile which thrills me to the core.
Hard core.
Some members of Red, Yeb, Baz, Jasper, girlies and an assorted selection of strangers and their managers take their seats and we pull dreamily away from the pavement.
The drinks come out of the ‘Library’ and chintzy glasses brim with gently swaying honeyed liquid.
Jasper tries to look up my skirt whilst handing me a drink.
He has the brazen attitude of a male dog shoving his nose between your legs to smell you.
I catch his head on the tilt, and he rights it without shame, showing only a flicker of annoyance at not catching a snippet of a sight.
He hasn't properly spoken to me since our refusal to carry drugs.
The rest of the tour have just about managed to laugh about it by now, but not Jasper.
The sky has a pink hint of morning.
About forty helium balloons that materialised from nowhere with this American girl have been wound hard up into the window, and judder maniacally together in the wind.
One eventually struggles free, and a memorable red balloon soars away against the backdrop of dawning Chicago.
One loosened, the rest follow in a steady stream, wrestling bitterly for freedom.
The sky is now spotted with a scattered selection of bright dots like children's vitamin pills.
I spill some drink on my leg, and someone licks it off.
All laugh at my unguarded response of surprised pleasure.
I get drunk with airy delicacy.
The conversation is made up of unrelated anecdotes, people laughing, half-listening, half-not.
The sun twinkles off the money temples, the acres of glass echoing endless self-reflections.
The ultimate hall of mirrors.
We toast the Sears Tower, the tallest building in the world.
Here in America everything is the biggest, tallest, greatest, the most expensive.
We are sitting in it, looking at it.
There is a well-known breakfast bar in town.
The spaced-out  patrol has greeted the morning, and now we will sink some eggs and coffee.
We behave like arseholes.
After such a spoilt dreamy flight it is hard not to trample carelessly over the end of the night shift.
We are disjointed in ordering, and we laugh not in meant mockery, but nevertheless irritatingly.
The waitress looks at her pen, as if willing it to write of its own accord.
Someone spills the maple syrup, and tries to mop it up with another table's tablecloth.
Finally the food arrives, and because the original order was not an entirely coherent affair, a lot of consumer dissatisfaction and misunderstanding hangs in the air.
The waitress, feeling like she has done her best, storms off with tears brimming to talk to the manager.
The whole thing sobers us up a bit, but unfortunately not much.
‘What's wrong with her?’
Jasper has missed the point completely.
He is the kind of person who might even kill you without noticing it.
The manager comes out and looks at us, decides not to rock the boat on such a big order.
Money is everything, plus we could be armed.
The waitress returns, now indignant with her boss for his bought-and-paid-for apathy.
From here on in she holds up her chin, flares her nostrils and treats us unreservedly with the sheer contempt that we deserve.
We pay the bill and tumble out into a street which shows signs of working city life.
I feel like a dying night bird.
The restaurant door slams behind us.
The waitress counts her tip as if reasonably expecting a million dollars for all the aggravation caused.
The limousine door catches to like a well-oiled necklace clasp.
I curl up and look out of the window.
‘It's been a good one.’
Praise from Baz is praise indeed.
Someone laughs.
The American girl has her head clamped  down on her chest trying to stop this sound technician from Dublin from getting his hands down her front.
I heard later that they fell in love.
Arkwright myers and his life companion
When I get back Lucker wonders where I have been all night.
We have a last few hours in a freebie hotel.
I reach for Lucker and all I seem to do is annoy him.
He moves away.
I don't know what I have done.
We don't take up opportunities to make love as we should.
Lucker is beautiful, but as remote as ever.
I simply can't understand it.
Most men I know would be ripping my clothes off by now.
It's frightening, not having any effect on someone.
I parade before him naked, but all he does is tinker with the television buttons.
I sulk, I ask him why, but he simply ignores me.
Thinking about it, he only makes love when he wants to, and that isn't very often.
Beside myself with frustration, I eventually masturbate, dreaming of old lovers who wore themselves out on me.
Deep inside, I hurt dreadfully.
Oh, for a sense of purpose.
For the first time we don't have to scramble out of the hotel in a bad-tempered flurry of unwilling activity, whilst those boys hit the airport in their own good time.
It is strange losing direction and purpose  overnight.
We flounder for a while.
Endless discussions over the map decide us on the Deep South.
The State of Illinois, south of Chicago, is an endless dump.
There is no identity to the countryside.
It is made redundant by the enormity of the city.
Mattresses have been driven out and dumped in fields, sticks of broken furniture poke out of ditches and broken-backed fences contain nothing.
This nowhere land has neither the benefit of distance from Chicago to either become agricultural or the proximity to be wholly relevant.
It is a haunted nowhere land.
We stop for the night in the middle of this scar tissue that will never heal.
The Red Pepper Motel looms out of the dusk.
Arkwright Myers, a fifty-year-old fitness freak, introduces himself as the owner.
He has no wife, and the motel suffers from it.
The aspirations of the sun lounge, the pictures on the wall, the world flags, stuffed marlin, all speak of dreams of somewhere else.
Light aircraft fly into the nearby airport full of commuters who make sophisticated value judgements on the place.
Arkwright's willingness to please seems based on insecurity rather than genuine hospitality.
He shows us around with evident pride.
He lives in a solo world where clearly he is able to build uninterrupted fantasies.
There is no-one to round him off, hold him back and help him to lessen the inevitable path to the eccentricity.
He has a gym in the basement.
Well-thumbed magazine pictures of body-builders cling to the wall.
The steam of hard sweat has affected the paper.
Plastic men and women with python biceps and forced smiles give the photographer soft coy poses full of knotted muscle.
Arkwright has plenty of muscles of his own, and looks like an ex-marine with right-wing political notions.
He could be a disciple of Gordon E. Liddy with his macho bolted-down  reserve.
Yet, in this room dedicated to personal power, it also reeks of stale death.
His omnipresent friend is a Great Dane with the worst case of eczema a dog could have.
Life is one long scratch for this poor individual.
In ponies this condition is called ‘Sweet Itch’ which is the worst misnomer I've ever heard.
He claws and shreds endlessly at his scabby skin on one long continuous cyclical motion.
‘He has always had this trouble, it's OK.’
Arkwright moves out into the sunlight with the dog behind him.
The dog's leathery pads come to a sharp butt stop, it sighs, throws a long ham bone of a leg in the air and takes another flake of fresh skin out of play.
What a wretched life.
‘That dog has got severe problems.
I've never seen such a miserable dog.
I think it could be pollution from Chicago.’
Lucker looks over his shoulder to check that Arkwright is indeed out of earshot.
‘Chicago pollution?
What are you on about?
Perhaps it has just got eczema, for crying out loud.’
‘Nope, nothing is ever quite that simple.’
‘Well, let's pretend it is just this once all right?
Don't say anything about the dog, OK?
Arkwright has got some serious muscles there.’
Our room is empty, bar a bed, table and television.
The television is tuned into a non-stop porno channel.
I watch it for hours, as people demonstrate their own pleasure with consumate skill, whilst at all times considering the camera angle.
Just when the pleasure seems greatest, an organ is conscientiously lifted aloft to provide a medical close-up.
Lucker falls asleep after commenting that he doesn't want to see how mini-cab drivers supplement their incomes.
I watch  for precisely that reason.
Nothing could be more mesmerising.
At about midnight, Lucker wakes up and wants a drink.
As sad as I am at being wrenched away from the telly, I am led to the bar.
The Red Pepper bar is full of a lot of rowdy helicopter pilots who work for much richer men who own the helicopters they pilot.
Peaked caps sit on the bar along with foamy beer.
The men wear corporate uniforms, company stripes and multinational emblems.
Chauffeurs of the sky.
Arkwright is in his element.
All night he parades up and down the bar like a brawny old cockerel.
He throws gregarious comments at will into his customers' conversations, in between serving drinks.
They accept his habitual interruptions with good grace.
The dog wanders through the cigarette smoke like a wan ghost, stopping bitterly every now and again to scratch like activated hell.
We are relieved to leave Arkwright to his strangely tainted existence.
diversion
Destination south, as south as we can go.
But again, with no whip cracking, lunch lasts too long, and the beer tastes unrushed.
We only make it a hundred miles or so before evening falls.
It is July the Fourth, Independence Day and it is worth installing ourselves early.
Hence, Shelbyville on Eagle Creek.
We check into a very fine motel.
A cool breeze off the creek rattles the leaves of  the locust tree and flutters through the room.
I am tired and I fall asleep.
When I awake, I find a note beside me.
‘Gone bar-crawling for the locals.
Try a few on Main Street or see you later.
Lucker.’
Deciding on a walk, I close the mosquito netting door firmly.
It is dark outside and I button my jacket.
The beginning of the main strip in Shelbyville is a squeaky clean residential area.
Lawns edge up to the roadside, porches glow in the night, people laugh behind screen doors, kids stay up late and cars cruise with open windows and jutting elbows.
Music plays, flags flap, all agreeably patriotic.
I am a glaring exception to this normality simply by walking.
In fact I cause a car accident by obstructing someone's driveway.
A large black Cadillac stops in the road to let me cross before pulling in.
A pick-up truck on cruise automatic, and unused to any hinderance, slides into the back of the Cadillac with a satisfying biting crunch.
All parties jump free of their cars and start blaming each other.
I scuttle off, to be swallowed up by the wavering shadows of mulberry trees.
I can't stop laughing all the way up the street.
A young man stops his pick-up and calls me over, laughing all the while.
He is all armpit hair, muscle, vest top and big beaming smile.
‘You wanna lift somewhere?
Shelbyville doesn't need pedestrians.
We can't deal with it.’
He laughs.
‘That was classic.
You are obviously not American.’
‘No, I am not.
I left my car at the motel.
I just wanted to stroll around the place, and take in the night air.’
‘Oh, OK, well we don't do those things here.’
I move back a pace.
‘But I could show you a nicer place to stroll, show you the town.
You wanna do that?’
Half of Shelbyville is piling onto him, resenting his obstruction, which forces my hand a bit.
He doesn't look like an axe killer, but then they never do.
Instinct tells me he is a nice guy without mental problems.
Anyway, I have witnesses to spare.
Fuck it, thinking this way kills adventure stone dead.
I climb aboard.
‘Fine.
Thanks.
Let's go.’
I get into the truck.
It smells sweet and loggy.
On the floor, rolls of bark curl like cigar shells.
He pulls away.
‘My name is Evan.
Yours?’
‘Tiffany.
I think my mum thought she was being quite unusual at the time.’
‘Right, we have a load of Tiffanys in this country.’
‘I know.’
I add ruefully.
‘I really don't like my name very much.’
‘Oh it's fine.
A name is a name.’
‘Yeah, but Tiffany is too frilly.
I'm not frilly.’
Evan laughs.
He can't get the accident off his mind.
He is good-looking with floppy black hair, brown eyes and a lean muscular body.
He turns off the main drag.
I keep an eye out for Lucker without much joy.
We drive past a large, sprawling, gracious red brick building with primrose yellow paintwork on the doors and windows.
A sloped lawn in front is spotlit and the numbers ‘1954’ have been planted in orange marigolds for all to see.
I burst with ghost visions of crew cuts, lemon chiffon dresses, girls and boys of the wholesome hygiene-obsessed educational era.
‘This is my school.’
‘You still at school?’
I don't mask my surprise that well.
He looks over school age.
‘I'm this far from getting outta there.’
He gestures a small space between his finger and thumb.
‘It's very nice.
So kitsch, frozen in time.
I didn't know places like this existed off film sets.’
He looks unimpressed.
‘So what's this?’
I shuffle my feet against the bark shavings.
‘We were fencing a new corral today.
We peel it off so that the nails go into the wood itself.
My dad owns horses, and I work for him whenever possible.’
The sweet smell comes to me and I recognise it as horse sweat.
‘Tell me about your horses.’
‘You know about horses then?’
‘I ride when I can.’
‘I break them in for my Dad.’
‘Is that rodeo?’
‘No, no, just for everyday.
Anyhow, we prefer our horses to like us at the end of it.’
‘Aah, that's nice.’
‘Nice?
No, it's not nice.
It just makes more sense.
We could beat them into submission, but if you spend time with them, and you are real gentle with them, find out what they like scratched maybe, then it's a cinch.
Then they wanna please you.
The first time I get on, it is often after spending a few hours with them, and I kinda transfer over from the stable door to their backs.’
‘No pain, no tears?’
‘No pain ever.
Well hardly ever.
You can do it so naturally they don't even realise it.
It's like hypnosis.
Sometimes they don't like it very much, but they can't remember how you got there, so they just accept it.’
We turn back to the main strip.
Through town towards  the site of the Fourth of July celebrations.
I still don't see Lucker but then I don't want to any more because I feel guilty.
Down on Eagle Creek a hundred or so lit craft bob decoratively like candles in a Japanese water bowl.
Fireworks burst up into the dark sky, then fizz to nothing.
The sheer numbers of them make it spectacular although there are no huge centrepiece fireworks.
We watch in silence.
I feel his hand land gently on my knee.
‘It's the same every year.
Barbecues, boats and rain.
Geez I wish I could get more satisfaction out of this place.
Wanna come and see the horses?’
He takes his hand off as if nothing has happened, waits for my answer and drives into the night on my bidding.
This is the young man who makes all the seams invisible, who can ‘transfer’ across from the stable door without you noticing.
We drive along a train track in the middle of maize fields in clear luminous darkness.
The track is evidently still in use.
The headlights pick up the shiny worn sleepers.
The pick-up straddles the regular planks with brute rubberised confidence.
Either side the maize looks like a vast waving crowd.
Cicadas screech unseen from within.
Banks sheer away to crop, that no vehicle could handle.
‘It's OK.
Trains due only on Tuesday and Thursday afternoons.’
The windscreen flecks with rain.
It begins to blur the clarity of the night.
‘It's the same every year.
Why can't they make July Fourth, July Fifteenth?
It never rains then.
This afternoon it poured for two hours solid.
For a while I hoped the whole thing would be cancelled.
What's wrong with me?’
Eventually we drop down onto a steaming red earth track which cleaves a disappearing seam through dark green  ribbons of corn.
Suddenly a white gate looms up in front.
Evan switches the roof spots on full beam.
Two sleepy-looking horses blink feebly.
Others wander slowly into the ring of light with a little more awareness.
A mother's swollen teats catch my eye, like two inflatable bananas between her hind legs.
Beside her, a fluffy foal stares stridently at us.
‘That baby there kicked out at me the other day.
I caught his hoof in my hand, right up here.
I really surprised him.
If I could catch them all that young I'd cure 'em before they got any ideas.’
With hooves like horn paper cups it seems unlikely that it could harm anyone.
The young innocent buckles his lip at the rain exposing little lime green tablets of teeth.
‘He's been trying grass again today.
He'll wean soon.
That's my baby.
If he doesn't, we'll do it for him, so I like to see them trying out grass for themselves.
Some of them would suckle forever if they could.’
We both smile in the darkness of the cab.
The rain stops as suddenly as it came.
The ground twitches, gurgles and bubbles as the insect minutiae adapts to sudden flooding.
The wet engine creaks, pops and blisters.
We talk about London, but it isn't relevant in a situation like this and we both know it.
It is just a dirty city, miles and miles away and better off for that.
The horses lose interest and sashay off into the night.
Evan switches the spots off, leaving only the headlights on.
‘Can I kiss you?’
The question cuts a breathless swathe through the silence.
I could really do with this.
It's not going to end there if I say yes either.
The excitement is already affecting my breathing.
After a minute of thought, I nod.
His mouth is soft and tugging.
He feels for my breasts and sucks them like an  earnest kitten.
His penis tip is moist.
I squeeze it.
He laughs a low laugh of relief.
I toy competently.
I kiss it.
He stops me.
‘Don't, I can't hold it.’
His penis has a saliva shine to it.
It dries flaky in the cool air of the cab.
The erection remains as piercing as ever.
New-pencil sharp.
‘I've never done this before, never come this close to…’
A virgin.
How very nice to find one in these dark days.
I believe him because I feel it.
He pulls off all his clothes and slides over towards me.
His penis and testicles are as fresh and as hard as a spring bulb.
When he enters he makes a muted sound of surprise.
He comes quickly, cramming bitterly hard, pulsating wide and distinctly inside me.
I feel a sharp trill of sperm inject high.
I orgasm around what I waited for.
He whimpers with pleasure and dries a tear of nerves on my shoulder.
I hold him with me for as long as I can before my leg goes dead.
A great sense of relief and understanding permeates the air.
We watch the insects in the headlights zinging back and forth without apparent logic.
We make love again.
This time it lasts longer.
I smile at his tremulous respect mixed with greediness.
Passing through humid cornfields back to town brings the mind around to separation.
His hand rests near my leg on the seat.
I don't take it up.
We don't talk of tomorrow, but are both thinking of it.
He knows about Lucker, and that I'll be leaving.
He drops me off downwind of the motel.
It is just short of midnight although it feels more like four in the morning.
He doesn't kiss me, because I ask him not to.
He squeezes my hand tightly, much the same way as he might wring my heart.
I wish him luck knowing it has a life span of  maybe seventy years to run.
I will not pass this way again to see if it did him any good.
Fuck, that was wonderful.
Physically I feel loose, but mentally I am feeling my way with great trepidation.
As I walk back to the motel I am relieved to see that there is no light on in the room.
Lucker has obviously come back for me once, as there is a fresh note on the bed.
He is thankfully still celebrating July Fourth with his friendthe bottle.
I shower and lie on the bed in the dark.
I am not sure why that happened with Evan.
Suffice to say that the opportunity is always there if I want it.
I have been wanting it badly.
I took a chance for once, encouraged by his small town virginity.
My mind hums with questions.
The ruthless convenience of the pure science of lust?
The acupuncture technique of applied desire?
Here, straight up into the heart of me.
Could it be revenge?
Lucker, who isolates himself and drowns himself out, who doesn't take care with me.
For once he has been left behind for a singularly devastating moment of pleasure.
He almost deserves it.
I am fresh and soft from the event.
I still can't get a clear definition on the true meaning of it all.
I do though, suspect all of those reasons and more.
Fidelity is a funny thing.
How many people go back home and say I had an affair?
Favourite things are smashed, the car is driven into the wall, the kids are snatched and a complete nervous breakdown later, you confess that it wasn't serious anyway.
By that time nobody trusts you.
Confess all?
No.
Most just scurry home, keep a low obedient profile, are guilt-ridden for weeks, and swear to never do it again.
Pretty soon you're licking your lips and saying ‘that was nice, perhaps I might just, once more’.
All the while you are praying that you won't be thrown off the  top of some emotional Empire State Building, by having very similar news broken to you.
What dizzy heights we trampoline at.
I feel no guilt, when I probably should do.
My unfaithfulness will be eased gently out along the process of life, dispensing with small fragments of guilt as I go.
It's like throwing sandbags over the side to gain height again.
Infidelity has ‘box office’ appeal.
It runs and runs.
Sex becomes more exciting as the demands on you step up.
Like a tourist spot you are visited more than once, by different people.
Although all parties may be completely ignorant of the reasons, they nevertheless stand in the queue.
It must be the smell which spirals you into double, triple, quadruple activity.
When you're ripe you're ripe.
Lucker returns from town, having made a whole tribe of redneck friends who for once put away their normal prejudices for the sake of broadening their knowledge.
He rejoices at the fact that they started off with small-town views, and began thinking globally.
His pocketed stash of newspaper clippings apparently fuelled vivid conversations.
He is happy and drunk.
He suspects nothing.
He enters into my softness without knowing why he is compelled to.
I open wide and accept with ease because sometimes there is much joy to be had in multiple matings in a short space of time.
I have complete absence of remorse in this saturation of pleasure.
I'm not frightened by this, but I am faintly guilty about not feeling guilty.
Up with the lark and wanting to get out of town, I have to keep the lid on my impatience.
I cannot afford for Evan to come by, see and be seen.
I feel very sad about leaving Evan, but harsh though it may be, I don't want an adolescent tomcat to cloud what relationship I still have with Lucker.
Offering to buy him breakfast out of town is the device I use to hasten the leaving process.
It does.
Lucker has a hangover to nourish.
We head straight into the morning sun.
Steam rises off the ground, drying the fields as the morning sun tackles the night's cold dew.
It drifts back up to join the clouds and sweetness comes back to the day.
A full breakfast for Lucker.
Anything he wants, he gets.
Pleasantly surprised, and encouraged, he stares out of the window, his huge cheeks full of food, rotating like machinery.
His hazy blue gaze is one of quiet absence.
A face comes through the glass door, and all of the reflections make me see Evan.
I excuse myself to go to the toilet and throw up.
I doze for the rest of the day, like a cat.
In a world of delicious luxury, I see only a tangle of bodies, no longer knowing whose are whose.
willie and jerry
Buzzing down through dapper Kentucky, misty Tennessee, flat as hell and getting steamier all the time.
By the time we turn down to Mississippi the forests are beginning to hiss.
Spanish moss drapes over trees like mourning shrouds.
Animals call out  loudy , even the frogs here shout for attention.
An echo, after all, can be deeply satisfying.
People occasionally emerge out of invisible tracks in the woods.
Very few vehicles pass, but when they do they bear down from  nowhere full of gun-toting unsmiling men in the American uniform of checked shirts, peaked caps and bullet-proof, puffa-waistcoats.
They disappear again just as quickly back into the curtained forest.
We touch on Louisiana.
‘Hi.’
I said it first, because he was the kind of man you said ‘hello’ to first.
He stands there amongst the dusty old vases, interiors barnacled with crusty water stains, exteriors greasy with fly shit.
His arms are muscle gone to flab, a mean and lazy middle-aged fighter, now just angry in his head.
He stands with his legs slightly apart.
Light bores down through cracks in the roof settling on rubbish lying in musty shadows.
Knives slowly dissolve into their trays, lying strewn amongst a paprika of rust.
It eats steadily into the cutlery that never moves, and is never likely to.
Toilet seats are propped up against the wall, in the unlikely event that someone might want to buy them in a country where hygiene is pathological.
It said ‘Junk Shop’ outside but I hardly expected the sign to be this literal.
‘You lookin' fer anythin' particular?’
‘No thanks, just looking.’
Annoyance flickers across his face as I pass along the long trestle tables finding nothing to my satisfaction.
At last I see a surrealist vase in slime green with two necks.
I make my purchase which proves expensive.
Think of it as a subsidy for all that pure crap, I tell myself.
‘Who are your customers?’
‘People off the road, blacks mainly.’
‘Mainly blacks off the road?’
‘Blacks mainly.
People off the road, sometimes.’
He cocks his head just so on the side.
His eyes are dull with  the sustained effort of anger.
He has reached the point where he thinks he is so right that he has in fact ceased to develop.
He oozes prejudice.
‘Do a lot of people live around here?’
Here are the fringes of the Southern swamps.
He scratches at the spots on his arm, pulling soiled nails hard across the red blemishes.
‘Some white folk.
Too many black for my liking.’
‘I take it then, that you don't like black people?’
No point in beating about the bush.
He raises an eyebrow.
Whilst certain with the question, there is a concern there about being so obvious.
‘Well, Miss, er…
Black people don't like white people neither.
One shot my friend.
If I ever get a chance to git even, I wouldn't think twice now.
My whole life, if it takes that long, I'll wait.’
A loathing dependent.
I can't agree with him even though he nods at me continuously, urging me to do so.
He sweats hatred like an angry boar.
He is looking for any ambiguous opportunity to take his gun and do the worst.
I see why business grows stale.
We step backwards towards the car.
I am pleased that whilst we have the ability to talk to most people, we don't have to spend time with all of them.
He seems eager to talk right up until we finally bid him goodbye through the moving car window.
The densely hooded vegetation is soothing and disorientating at the same time.
Here, the hours seep away like draining rain.
The whole effect is mesmerising.
Suddenly the leafy green tunnel gives way to a clearing gouged out of the hooded wood.
A ramshackle hut lists in the middle of red earth.
This is the first inhabited home we have seen for miles.
We have  passed other wooden houses, but they all appeared to be shut up and abandoned.
A friendly palm flashes up from the shadows, like a pink glove.
A spilt second of warmth.
Sheer friendliness halts the car.
‘Shall we?’
‘I don't know.
Shall we?’
‘They waved.’
‘Seemed friendly.’
‘Let's see then.’
We stop on the verge beyond the clearing, the car is murmuring for a decision.
Grinding into the compact red soil, Lucker does a clean swooping turn.
We pull up in front of the shack.
Friend or foe?
From under the dark, dried porch roof, we are watched with unease by two old black men.
After all, half-an-hour away in any direction there is a trigger-happy racist waiting for his big day.
Every now and then, everyone knows, folk flip their lid and take their holiday anyway.
Paranoia crawls along on its belly in this forest.
Maybe that wave is a cheery form of self-protection.
‘Hi, can you tell us where the nearest gas station is?’
‘Gas station?
Oh…right…um…
Gas.
Go up about two miles, hit a junction, ‘Abeline's Diner’, you'll see it right in front of you, small place, nothing fancy.
Do a left, on the left.’
The two elderly black gentlemen gleam from the shadows glowing with a fine sweat.
They smile, radiating patience.
A radio burbles quietly from the interior.
Lucker leans against the porch pillar.
It creaks.
A gentle moment of comedy.
There is an old joke about the termites holding hands to keep a building up.
We're there.
‘You live around here?’
Lucker and I start with surprise.
‘Us?
No.
Wish we did.’
‘Do you always wave to passers-by?’
I have to ask.
‘Yeh.
Every time.’
‘Most times, most times.’
The other contradicts.
I laugh.
‘You wanna sit down?’
One of the old men indicates a seat for me.
I lower myself into a firewood chair, placing the legs carefully on solid planks of floorboard.
Between them, I see through large holes to moist saffron earth a few feet below.
This all-engrossing manoeuvre amuses them, perhaps embarrassment at the ramshackle unkempt porch, or simply the oldest most reliable joke on any guest.
‘I am Willie, and this is, fo’ ma sins, my brother Jerry.
He is the ‘black sheep’ of the family!’
Willie guffaws with belly-turning amusement.
He seems the more open of the two.
Jerry takes his joke status on the chin, and nods with resignation.
They are about sixty or seventy years old, and frail by appearance.
Only physically though, a wiry vigour comes through this surface deception.
‘Lucker and Tiffany.’
‘You two married?’
Willie tips forward with curiosity.
‘Nope.’
‘Well you should be.
That's the truth.
You belong together, I can see that.’
We catch our breaths with embarrassment at such unfashionable directness.
I blush in light of the many times we have floundered recently, not to mention my straying.
My cheeks pink and burn.
I hide my face, laughing into my hands.
They all think I am charming, the blushing bride, full of doubt.
‘We'd recommend it.
Though me an’ Jerry cain't cut this  marriage business ourselves, well, we definitely recommend it.’
‘How can you if you haven't?’
Willie nods and plays with his lip.
‘I guess we cain't.’
‘Sure we can.
We bin as miserable as dirt 'cos we ain't never been married.
We know because we never had none, so we know by absence.
It's gotta be a good thing if you miss it bad enough.
Missed that boat, bin’ drowin' ever since.’
Jerry has a natural edge to him, a wit which darts behind his eyes, and more distrust too, than Willie.
He asks again, pushing through our evasiveness.
‘So you gonna git married?’
Lucker and I look at each other.
Taboo question, the silence hovers on humming wings.
I mentally pale, and the newness of our relationship is clearly exposed, along with the fragility.
Jerry laughs, his mind grasping the uncomfortable resonance of the question with relish.
Lucker changes the subject.
‘Anyone for a beer?’
Willie raises a heavenbound finger like a Sunday school teacher.
‘Don't drink.
You can be happy without it.
Nobody needs to.
‘I need to.’
Jerry refuses with zest; he has obviously been springing to his own defence for many a long year.
Lucker walks off to the car across the yard, pitted and dotted from a recent smatter of rain.
I like these two old men.
We have charmed each other with our weaknesses.
They sit here day after day, gazing out into the middle distance, letting their problems stockpile to  nothing more complicated than yet another sunny day on the porch of a listing old house.
Nothing needs doing, it is all allowed to undo itself.
Many people would say that this is abstract poverty, but there's a beauty in it.
We watch Lucker rooting around in the car.
‘Do believe you got more in dat car dan we do in this whole house.’
The Le Baron is stuffed to the gunnels, with camera equipment, clothes and bags.
Items of clothing dry, hanging up from the central light fitting on the ceiling.
We are still drying them out from a recent visit to the laundry.
Lucker emerges from this domestic jumble sale debris sporting a four-pack.
Jerry's eyes stay with the sway of the beer, like a starving dog.
Lucker pulls the ring pull and extends it to him.
Licking his lips, he reaches out reverentially for the can.
He probably cannot afford to get his fill.
He is feeling his poverty.
Willie watches his brother close his eyes on the tawny liquid going down his throat, showing a strangely poignant mixture of contempt and envy.
I don't drink much of my beer, partly due to a disapproving glance from Willie, and partly because I want to leave it under my chair for Jerry to have later.
I ask instead to look around.
I head for the sound of the radio.
Peering into the dark dry shadows of the hut, reveals to my surprise, although God knows why, a spruce colour television running a soap to an empty room.
The colour screen sits amongst the crippled, dust-flecked furniture like a rhinestone bauble.
Willie tells me they have a Saddle Back pig called Breakfast.
He beckons me to follow.
He makes slow progress through the afternoon sunshine, leaning on a gnarled stick that seems to blend invisibly into his arthritic banana-curved fingers.
Behind the hut, a small fenced-in yard contains a vast  barrel of a creature lost in fierce and dedicated soil exploration.
‘Breakfast!’
It looks at Willie and shunts over towards us in disinterested stages.
It must stay out of goodwill, misguided certainly, but the fence is a deeply flawed hotchpotch of domestic appliances knitted together with rusting barbed wire.
A bedstead and a long-broken twin tub washing machine, hang together in this contorted web.
It passes by without stooping to a formal greeting.
Breakfast is not friendly.
We return to the porch where Lucker and Jerry are talking about beer.
Jerry's eyelids are at half-mast.
Willie pulls himself up the stairs reminding me of an elderly praying mantis.
‘Now our working days are over we jus’ doze.
Life is one long doze.’
I laugh and push him up the last step.
‘Jerry here will snore his afternoon beer-snore, so I am jus’ gonna have to put a pillow over my head and pray to God the roof stays on for another winter.’
‘I don't snore.’
‘Boy, you snore.’
‘Hardly never, hardly never.’
‘But when you do, Breakfast jus wanna make babies.
Remember when he came up the steps?
I reckon that was you.’
Jerry splutters mild protestations.
He clumsily lights a cigarette which Lucker presents him.
‘Reckon everybody needs a bit of excitement.
Even Breakfast.’
Out of the silent forest roars a huge motorbike.
A biting blue and chrome machine comes into view.
It rolls towards  the bottom of the porch steps.
A young black man, about twenty years old gets off it, frowning with disapproval.
‘Yo, who ‘dese people?’
He is not happy about us.
‘Dis is my nephew, Calvin.
Our sister, she married OK.’
‘Yo, answer my question.
Who ‘dese people?’
‘It is rude to ask like that, Calvin.
These folks is from Inglind, and ‘dey stopped by fo’ a chat.
Dey nice people, man.
Very friendly.’
Jerry points at us airily with his cigarette.
The beer is loosening him up.
‘Yeah, Calvin, everything is fine.
jus’ fine.’
Calvin takes a look at Jerry, mumbles something inaudible and sits down heavily on the step with his back to all of us.
Willie bangs his stick on the floor.
‘Calvin, don't turn your back on the guests.
They didn't do nothing to you.’
Calvin turns a little way around but he does not speak or make eye contact.
In due course, a little sooner than we might have ordinarily, we contemplate leaving.
It is hard to carry on our pleasant banter in the face of Calvin's unexplained hostility.
The last unopened beer is handed to Jerry, plus a few cigarettes.
Willie reaches out and takes two for himself.
‘Normally I don't, but jus’ in case, I better keep a couple.’
Jerry looks quite cheated for a brief second.
‘Say, you don't smoke.
Gimme dem.’
Willie waves Jerry's extended hand away.
I think he just wants to have something to keep.
We all embrace touchingly and say our farewells.
I ask if they want a card from England, but they dismiss the suggestion with confidence.
‘Nah, we NEVER get any post.
Hell, we don't exist.’
They laugh.
We step past Calvin who doodles with a twig in the dust, and make our way towards the car.
Driving away is hard to do.
They wave long and hard from the porch.
I miss them already.
We disappear back into the forest.
It closes over us.
spend a night, not a fortune
A large neon sign ‘McCruders Superdeli’ towers above the foliage.
At last the end of the day is in sight.
We need provisions.
Late-night shopping is swinging.
The townsfolk glide around on recently mopped floors with a strange light in their eyes.
Everywhere you stand, you can see for miles in straight food lines.
Like a modern coniferous forest, you're always in a centre of a star of diagonals.
The whole place is always going bad, marching relentlessly towards the sell-by date.
But, irradiation or chemical freezing could mean the whole place is standing still.
Mexican workers catch rolling tomatoes, a hundred firm red balls piled high in a mound of Aztec proportions.
They never stand still.
If they did, they would be fired.
Fatigue makes us bad shoppers, you need stamina for a place like this.
Incredibly we leave empty-handed.
At the till, worried parents are putting through the week's shopping.
Whilst they are not obscenely fat, yet, they are well on their way to hippo status.
Even their baby is bloated, and wanting more.
The well-known supermarket teaser is to put all the  sweeties up by the till, so you have to buy when you queue.
If you have kids, you don't get out alive.
Pig-Pig junior is pressing his marshmallow body against the trolley wire in a desperate attempt to acquire chocolate bars.
This last bid snatch and grab of clammy little hands is sharply rebuked by his parents.
They get out the plastic to pay for the double-decker load of food.
A few items are rumbled as a worried glance at the mounting monitor reminds Mommy and Poppy that they are not in Heaven yet.
The till girl drops a few non-essential items, like initialled and scented toilet paper into a reject box.
Whilst the parents watch the grocery bill sear through their bank account, Pig-Pig junior's face buckles.
His mouth develops into a tortured ‘O’, his tonsils vibrate like a road drill, and his fists clench to white.
As his voice carries through the vast auditorium, the piped music cowers against such formidable odds.
His parents sign to transfer their money over.
The till girl mouths her request for identity.
The child stops, judders violently, fills his lungs with air, ready for more.
He is a professional.
His parents reach obediently across for a packet of sweets, fumble in their pockets, and follow up the plastic purchase apologetically with a spray of change.
As the till opens, the cameras swivel.
Not much cash in there, it encourages armed robbery.
The kid keeps his eyes closed to concentrate on screaming well.
His mother presses the sweets into his hand like someone handing blood plasma over in a war zone.
He fights off a last few body spasms, sighs like a siren winding down, and opens slitty eyes to see his Victory Bar.
He is borne away by obedient parents, like an Emperor on a shopping trolley.
We assess the motels.
The range is the Econo Lodge, Best Western, The Sleep Exchange, the standard run of big  names, and other Tupperware boxes.
Driving out of town leaves us with nothing, except everything behind us.
The windows are open, with layer upon layer of sound coming out of the forest.
We pull into a roadside clearing.
The cicadas seem to stop chirruping in our immediate vicinity.
It is as if they are worried.
Or perhaps we just crunched over them.
Oh dear, more unwitting genocide.
We're not crazy about this town.
It doesn't feel good.
My God, I wish I could learn to read those early prophetic signals.
We choose Econo Lodge.
‘Spend a night, not a fortune’ is the company line.
The charges seem pretty standard to me.
We take it not because it was what we wanted, but because it is there.
Tell that to the PR men for an honest rewrite.
It is suddenly twenty past eleven.
An Indian lady from India sits in reception looking at an Indian film magazine and listening to Indian music.
I can't go into the glass office as she has locked herself inside, so I press the intercom like the sign tells me to.
She looks at her watch.
‘What do you want?’
What do people sitting in a motel office think I want?
To buy a new dress?
‘I want a room for two, please.’
From the look on her face you'd think that I had confessed to a desire to murder her family and steal all her money.
The lock clicks back and I am allowed into the inner sanctum.
‘Double?
Twin?
King?
Queen?
Office closes at midnight.
Pay in advance.
Sign here.
Sign there.
Take that.
Take this.
Take these.
That way.’
‘Thanks.
By the way, any chance of room service?’
‘Food?
Now?
You're kidding.’
She sits down hard.
This country is running scared.
And  we're running on empty.
The key opens onto a beige carpet that looks like a water poodle with burns and saddle sores.
I've become carpet-obsessed.
The room is completely immaculate otherwise.
The mirror reveals a tired young woman with big round lemur eyes.
I look wired and unrelaxed.
Breaknecking it has finally caught up with me.
Oh, it has been stressful.
Lucker rummages in the bags for a floating bottle of vodka.
Pepper vodka, lemon vodka, kidney vodka.
Perhaps that is what I should do.
Ram a couple of kidneys into a perfectly good bottle of vodka, and give it to him.
Words would not be necessary.
I turn away, spent.
I can't drink anything, smoke anything, I'm through.
Deep sleep clasps me tightly.
I am nowhere, suspended in a hideaway.
Until I awake and stir.
It must be the heart of the night.
Lucker has opened the window to all the mosquitoes.
I scratch my face to feel a bloodless mound.
The dappled night shadows, the inky blue trees sway lightly in the breeze.
I look at the luminous hands of the clock.
Three in the morning, all is still.
Then I hear a muffled cry of alarm, but a rush of wind breaks up the information to my ears.
I prop myself on my elbows.
My senses creep.
Now I wish the window wasn't open.
I look out into the darkness, but my eyes don't focus at first, as they are so fresh from sleep.
I don't hear that sound again immediately.
I can see a dark figure, a barely visible silhouette against the backdrop of trees over on the grassy knoll beyond the car park.
He is fucking, that much is clear in his knee jerk movements.
Is this all right, I ask myself?
People take to nature the whole time.
I hear that sound again, a pathetic whimper of overwhelmed fear, and I know it is wrong.
A rape is going on.
I blind with anger.
My head heats up to a screaming pitch.
Poor girl.
Violated, soul-destroyed and possibly murdered.
Now and in the next few seconds.
Over my fucking dead body.
I bolt across the sheets legs first like a tarantula on the run.
No lights.
I grope in the darkness for the phone.
I nearly tip over a bucket of water, in which Lucker's vodka is tucked up.
I dial, shivering violently.
I try reception, and drop it two rings in.
No idiots needed.
I dial the emergency police number, direct out.
‘Hi, how can I help you?’
A woman answers from a quiet office where society is not breaking out of its bounds.
I breathe heavily because I am scared.
I talk in a rasping whisper.
‘Someone needs help!’
‘Calm down, honey.’
‘A…girl is being raped…
NOW!’
‘OK.
I'll connect you.’
A man, a police officer comes on.
‘Girl, being raped.’
I've simplified it as information to save time.
‘Where?’
‘Econo Lodge, Durbin Heights Road.’
‘You English?’
‘WHAT?’
‘Your name?’
‘Look…it doesn't matter.
Room 206.’
Lucker is awake and looking bewildered.
I reach over to him and press down on his arms.
‘No light.
No light.
The police could arrive any second and catch him.’
‘What is happening?’
‘A rape.
Unfuckingbelievable!’
He goes to move the curtains.
I wrench his hand away, almost breaking his fingers.
I do a  beserk dog-crawl to the door.
It is double-locked.
‘Keys?
Keys?
KEYS?’
Lucker gets out of bed.
I scramble back across the sheets getting snarled up in them.
I peer out.
‘What can you see?’
‘Keep quiet.’
I hiss back at him.
Because of the changing moon I can now see that she is completely naked.
I feel that cold dewy grass on my own flesh.
Lucker puts his boots on.
I throw one to the back of the room.
‘Boots?
Boots?
What are you doing?
We have to save her.
KEYS!’
I grab a dress and tear my way into it.
Lucker gropes around on the floor.
It is quite clear he doesn't have a clue about the keys.
‘I can't find them.
I was a bit drunk when I came to bed.’
I punch my own stomach with frustration.
Lucker feels harder and faster.
I want the bricks of this motel to release me and her from this timed Hell.
I claw at the wallpaper.
Filings of biscuity paper wedge under my fingernails causing me real pain.
I moan, I rage, but I don't cry.
I can't cry.
Lucker holds up the keys.
I open the door and burst into the warm night air.
It is all over.
He has gone.
She stands there all torn and tattered.
She has pulled on her clothes.
I wonder how she found the time.
To be raped is one thing, but to blunder around disorientated is another.
I run across the car park.
Barefoot over the grassy knoll to catch dog shit in my toes.
She is crying with her back to me.
I go around to her front and hold her arms to her side.
‘You OK?’
A stupid question, yet the only one I can ask.
She has blood on her face.
She rests her head on my shoulders for a  second her body shaking with sobs.
I steer her back towards the motel building, frog-marching her into Room 206.
I don't know if I am doing the right thing, but I want to make her feel safe.
She sits on the only chair in the room, by the night table.
Her shirt is open, and her breasts are on view.
They are red-raw and bruised from grabbing.
I point to her buttons, she closes them with shaking hands.
The left side of her face is caked with bloodied mud.
Her lip is peeled open, and her eye is closing up fast.
The lip reminds me of a sun-split tomato.
I hold her hand.
After a while she pulls it free.
‘No don't please…’
I let her go, having presumed too much.
She cannot be touched by any more strangers.
Looking at her is enough to break your heart.
Lucker makes her a cup of coffee from the construction kit which comes with the kettle.
‘The police will be here soon.’
More news that may or may not comfort.
‘Bastard.’
Small bubbles of saliva fleck the veneered hotel table.
‘He fucking raped me!’
She almost crunches through her teeth when she says that.
‘Did he?
Inside you?’
She shakes her head from side to side, her loose lip-flesh wobbling.
‘Couldn't get it up me.
He tried hard enough.
He shoved my shirt in my mouth first, so I wouldn't make a noise.’
She bangs her fist down on the table, and pitches forward and cries.
Her body racks with convulsions akin to vomiting.
Lucker puts the coffee on the table.
He looks pale and shocked.
I thank him with a glance and push it a little closer to her.
She uncurls slowly to drink it.
‘There is no sugar in here.
I don't drink coffee without sugar.’
I am surprised and slightly reassured by this thread of normality.
Lucker prods around and comes up with a sachet of sugar.
He stops short of handing it over himself, but gives it to me to give to her.
‘He took my house keys, and my driving licence.
He said he would get my family if I told the police.
He might go straight there.
My mother is with my son.
I'm scared for them.’
‘We'll tell the police the minute they get here.
I don't think he will go there, he'll be too busy running.
He knows it's the first place they'll look.’
‘What if he takes them hostage?’
I can't answer that.
She looks at me tearfully.
‘They will be here in seconds.
Don't worry.
Tell me what happened?’
I want to know, and I want her to talk to me.
‘He hit me.’
‘Mmmm, I can see.’
‘My car broke down on Durbin Heights Road.
The office was closed.
I wanted to use the phone.
He punched me in the head first, from the side.’
She gingerly fingers her purple marbled temple, blood swilling around under the skin.
‘Did you try and fight?’
‘No, my brain went numb.’
I was given a beating too once.
It's true that your head actually sings a high-pitched ringing.
Another story.
‘Did you manage to scratch him?’
‘I tried.’
For the first time she looks straight at me.
‘If I could have in any way, I would have killed him.’
She bows her head, disappointed that she hadn't been able to do more for herself.
‘I think perhaps I did scratch him.’
‘Good, the police can get samples for forensic from your nails.
You can't wash, you know that don't you?’
She looks at her hands and looks visibly disgusted.
‘When I do wash, there won't be any stopping me.’
‘So, what did he do then?’
Her face puckers.
She glances at me.
‘He…he came in my mouth.’
She closes her eyes squeezing back the tears.
She jabs at the back of her throat, opening her mouth wide.
Congealed black blood stains in the corner cracks make her look like a baby bird on a diet of blackberries.
‘Shit.
I wish I'd known.’
So far, so good.
I thought I was helping, but I just want to throw the coffee out of the window.
Forensic evidence blown, a mouthful of sperm washed down by third-rate coffee.
She starts crying when she sees my expression.
‘It couldn't be helped.
Don't worry.’
‘Will they get him?
Will they get him?
I haven't blown it, have I ?’
‘Not at all.
He raped you, and they will get him for that.
Don't worry.’
It dawns on me that if he had not succeeded in entering her then it is not legally rape.
It is attempted rape.
However, the intention was there.
We hear police sirens across the silence, bouncing off the shrouded Louisiana forests.
They echo eerily.
Within seconds they are outside.
The wailing scythes to a bleary stop.
The first police officer in the door bristles with radio static.
Then suddenly three different voices enquire as to his whereabouts.
‘State Trooper McNamara.
I'm in the hotel bedroom.
Number 206.
With the victim.
Over.’
‘Proceed.
Ambulance on standby.
Over.’
She waves her hand.
Too expensive.
‘Police surgeon only.
Cancel ambulance.
Over.’
McNamara reports back and turns the volume away to nothing.
‘This lady says the rapist has her address and house keys and he said he'd go there.
Can you send someone round?’
McNamara sends a police car off straight away.
The girl sobs with relief, folding her arms in a fleshy nest on the table top to cry into.
A questioning officer joins us from outside.
Mid-forties and creaking with crime-fatigue and cynicism, his backside hits the bed hard.
It gives way and almost unseats him.
He looks annoyed, but then on seeing that the victim has the only chair, he curbs his irritation.
He places his clipboard on his knee.
‘Your name please?’
‘Shelley Koehler.’
‘You have been raped.
Correct?’
‘Yes.’
The questioning officer writes hard, his pen scraping across the paper.
‘OK.
Description?’
‘Black.’
‘Black.’
The cynic hits a hard ‘K’ on the end of the word.
‘Uh huh.
How black?
Dark black?
Medium black?
Pale black?’
‘Medium black.
Regular black, jus’ regular black.’
‘Like regular fries?’
The cynic nods.
‘Sure?’
‘It was difficult to see, I…think so.’
‘They disappear in the dark, don't they?’
She picks up a cigarette, and lights it.
Her fingers tremble.
Where there is normally a lipstick stain on the filter tip, there is now blood.
It sticks to her open lip and she junks it bitterly into the hotel ashtray.
‘Too fuckin' right.’
‘Young?’
‘Yeah, young.’
‘Twenties?
Thirties?
Teens?’
‘Twenty-two.
Twenty-three, maybe.’
‘Anything else you can remember?’
‘He had a fluffy top lip.
Like he'd never shaved.
It was that kind of first hair.’
‘He kissed you?’
‘He tried.’
‘Where?’
‘All over.’
‘Where, all over?’
‘My face, neck…breasts.’
She remembers the formal words for him.
‘Your legs?’
He doesn't mean her legs, he means between her legs.
I get an uncomfortable sensation of intrusion.
‘No…he didn't.
I'd have kicked his fucking teeth out if he'd tried.’
She rages again, always aware that in fact she did nothing to prevent it.
His notes blanket the sheet of paper.
He turns the page to a fresh sheet.
‘What else did he do to you?’
‘He couldn't get it up me, so he did it in my mouth.’
The officer winces.
He then looks grimly into the coffee cup.
I stand forward.
‘I know, I'm sorry.
I had no idea until it was too late.’
He looks at me for the first time.
I stand there for a second, before stepping back.
It is obvious to him I am annoyed with myself.
‘No problem.
Forensic will get something up off the grass.’
He looks concerned.
He looks at the front of her clothing and makes a note.
‘He ejaculated into your mouth?
Correct?’
Numbed by the official tone and phrasing, she nods without emotion.
‘We will need to keep your clothing.
Can we arrange for you to get some fresh from home?
OK?
Any other information about him…?’
‘Yeah, he had hair like pop stars, those little bobbles on his head.’
A glance passes between officers.
One which clearly indicates they have a local suspect.
‘How long?’
‘An inch or so.’
The questioning officer nods.
‘The face?’
‘I don't know.
They all look the same to me.’
‘I understand completely.’
She is tiring of questions.
Beyond this point there will be no further development.
He closes his file.
Over his shoulder, through the window I can see the dog handlers have arrived.
The dogs get a scent fast and rush away dragging their owners behind them into the night.
I go to the door.
The car park is flooded with different coloured flashing lights.
To my amazement, although the motel is full judging by the amount of cars, there are no residents on view.
Even healthy curiosity has failed to rouse anyone.
No-one saves  each other any more.
It's just not worth it.
What if a gunman catches you curtain-twitching?
Shelley asks if she can ring her mother to see if they are all right.
State Trooper McNamara reassures her that she has nothing to worry about because there are police there already.
She gives him a filthy look.
The questioning officer hands the phone to her.
‘Here, call your mom.
Listen, when we get him, he will go away forever.
If he ever gets out, no problem.
By that time you will be in retirement in Florida.’
Shelley calls her mother and tells her plight in faltering tones.
Wailing comes through the mouthpiece in response.
Her brother is despatched to accompany her to the police headquarters.
There are still many formalities to go through.
The dog hunt is in full swing on a fresh scent.
Baying echoes around the forest.
They are mopping up in a southerly direction.
Shelley's brother arrives.
She sobs loudly in his arms, relieved of the company of strangers for the first time.
Before she gets into the car, she turns around and thanks me with a squeeze of her hand.
Away to the police surgeon to be probed for invisible cells hidden about her person.
State Trooper McNamara sits in her chair.
‘Could you identify the man if you saw him again?’
‘No.
It was too dark.’
‘Nothing at all?’
I feel squeezed.
‘I am not a reliable witness.
No.’
‘OK.
No problem.
We think this guy has raped three times in the area.
We have better sightings, anyway.’
‘So you won't need me?’
‘No, you can leave in the morning if you want.
I'm sorry that this happened for you.
You did great though.
I admired  your er…presence of mind.
If you have any problems you can always call me on this number.’
With that he leaves.
He made it sound like bad TV entertainment.
‘I'm sorry this happened for you.’
Strange.
I watch the horrible dream drive away and disappear in a dribble of tail-lights.
I feel exhausted.
Lucker looks tired too.
I wonder for a second if he could ever rape anyone.
No, he is too lazy.
The clock says it is ten to five in the morning.
Lucker closes the door, the window and seals the curtains meticulously.
He hands me a vodka.
His liver is like his confessional, mine can take less strain.
I take it, but don't drink.
My stomach is hurting from hunger.
We eventually kill the lights.
Lying down does not bring on sleep, only a sense of enormous rage.
I look out of the window.
The spot has been cordoned off with orange tape.
Apart from that, it is almost like it never happened.
The man from Forensic arrives, his steel heel-caps pinging across the tarmac.
He must have parked around the front of the motel.
It is strange seeing an American without a car.
He sits on a low wall and waits.
After a while he opens his case, takes out a glass vial and holds it up to the light.
He replaces it in his mini-laboratory.
He waits a long time, checking his watch often.
Eventually he is joined by a profusely apologetic colleague.
Together they descend on the area with a daunting array of technology and meticulously start to gather samples of hair, sperm, skin and saliva by torchlight from a chosen patch of grass.
I fall asleep hours later to the sound of their engrossed murmuring on the night air.
The following morning, I tell the woman in reception what happened.
She seems a much happier person by daylight.
‘You're kidding.
Raped here?
No, no, not possible.’
I'm telling you it happened.
Didn't you hear the police sirens last night?’
‘I don't know, not particularly.
You hear them so often.’
She shrugs her shoulders.
‘You will find some orange tape marking off the area, if you care to look behind the motel.’
‘So it is true?’
‘What?
Why would I lie?’
I glare at her.
‘I'll look later, yeah?
Did you enjoy your stay with us?’
‘No, I didn't.’
I stare at her, stunned by her stupidity.
I think she might believe me now, but I'm not sure.
I don't bother looking back to check.
grand isle
The rape leaves a nasty, nasty taste.
It feels like a lot has suddenly gone wrong.
We have to right it again.
We have to stop the crazy driving.
Craziness begets craziness.
We aim for the Gulf of Mexico.
Although you'd never believe it.
Mexican by name, thoroughly patronised by America.
My finger traces a path down to the peninsula of Grand Isle.
I want to be out on a limb with my back to the water so that I can see what the rest of the world is doing.
Grand Isle is a precarious headland, little more than a sandy breakwater, a mile across and less in some places.
One  long straight road runs like a main vein down the arm of Grand Isle.
A hundred or so houses sit on log stilts.
Telegraph poles push up into the living quarters protecting folk from the fickle rising seas.
Cars lurk beneath in the shade.
Blue skies are criss-crossed with a network of overhead wires.
Tarred poles are laden with electrical wires looped out and pinned back like huge bunches of charred bananas.
Anything underground might easily drown in floods.
In theory, the whole island could be live and extremely dangerous.
We arrive after midday just as the sun is climbing high.
Open windows receive the sea breeze rolling off the glistening sea.
I feel like jumping out and running down to the sea's edge with bucket and spade.
The sensation is close to the magic of childhood memories.
‘Can we stop?’
‘Wait for a minute.’
‘Stop and I'll race you.’
Lucker is having none of my gung-ho enthusiasm and drives on regardless to the end of the peninsula.
I feel thwarted.
The end of Grand Isle hosts the coast guard headquarters.
A radar rolls lazily around, ominous in the continuous certainty of its task.
We turn the car around slowly on the car park's broken sea shell covering.
Crunch satisfaction.
Apart from the coast guards and a flourishing marina the entire place is owned lock, stock and oil barrel by one of the world's major petroleum companies.
In a large fenced-off security zone, drums pile up to the level of a two storey house.
All round there are No Smoking signs strung up on the fences.
From inside strong-armed unsmiling men with oily tans and dirt-smeared faces look out at us without expression.
Modern  cowboys.
Everyone has work to do here and the effect is unsettling.
We drive slowly back along the road.
Away from industry, areas stacked up with chemicals, the Isle is raw and for the taking.
Birds dart across the road, shoulders hunched into the sea wind.
Higher in the sky, seagulls hover opportunistically with patronising casualness.
Cringing cats desperately hug buildings for cover, dealing with their inherited  agrophobia in the best way they can.
Dogs lie in the sun, their wet noses breadcrumbed with sand.
Lucker lights a cigarette now there is less chance of blowing the Isle up, and pulls on it like a pair of bellows.
‘I like it, yes I really do.’
‘Oh good.
So pleased.’
I can't wait to get out into the sunshine.
We drift around looking the place over for accommodation, eventually selecting a wooden building called Sand Dune Apartments.
I run up the open wooden steps to the office to ask the price of a self-catering suite.
After a brief second to get accustomed to the gloom, I see a man seated in a high-backed Captain Kirk-style chair.
His arms seem bolted to each arm rest and he is staring straight ahead at a television computer game.
Every few seconds a vicious whip-flick of the wrist confirms there is life here.
I knock on the door frame.
Two fiesty little Yorkshire terriers leap off his lap and hurl their combined body weight of two grapefruits against my legs.
I stamp my foot as I don't want claw scrape-marks on my flesh and they convulse into defensive irate yodelling.
The man reluctantly freezes the picture, gets up and approaches me.
He is about forty-five, stocky, hairy with a jutting eyebrow ridge and other neanderthal features.
He wears sunglasses that have a fading in-built, pinky-orange  tint which seem to soften the wrinkles around the eyes.
He has pock-marked skin which has tempered its savagery with time and sun.
He is a good four inches shorter than me.
Of all the species of dog in the world I cannot place him with ownership of a Yorkie.
It baffles me.
‘Excuse me?
Do you have any apartments free?’
Often men will look to see if they fancy you, keeping you waiting whilst they assess how they will do business with you.
I wait patiently whilst he gives me the once-over.
It takes as long as it does for a dog to douse a tree trunk.
‘Well?’
Being totally familiar with this stuff, I hurry him along.
He puffs out his chest like a wood pigeon.
‘As it happens I do.’
‘How much?’
‘To you?’
‘To anyone.
How much is your cheapest for two?’
‘For two?’
‘My boyfriend is in the car.’
The light in his eyes dims fractionally.
I see it go, almost flickering out like a candle in a draught.
‘That would be fifty dollars a night.’
‘Fifty?’
My voice goes up sharply with surprise.
One of the Yorkshire terriers responds with a gritty little bronchial bark and then looks surprised.
‘Oh, well we can't afford that, so I'll have to leave it.’
I step back.
He steps forward.
‘How much can you afford?’
‘Thirty a night.
That is the limit we set ourselves.
We have to, you know, when we're travelling.’
‘How long do you want it for?’
‘Three nights.’
‘You can have it for three nights for ninety then.’
‘And…if we wanted to stay longer?’
‘You can't, not here, I've got a load o’ people coming in after that.’
‘OK, well never mind.
We'll take it.
I'll get the cash and tell Lucker.’
‘Who?’
‘Lucker.’
He looks me up and down rather ruefully.
‘Sure is.’
I run back up the stairs with the cash.
He sits down and writes me a receipt in the shadow of a sign which says ‘You don't have to be crazy here but it helps’.
Crazy ‘wannabees’, fighting mundaneness.
‘There we go.
Over there.
It's open.
The name is Teddy.’
Lucker piles into the room with another armful of travelling paraphernalia.
We haven't used or worn half of what we have brought.
He throws it on the bed.
‘Fucking stuff.’
With that, he crashes onto the bed beside me.
We loll around sweating profusely, sluglike, to fall asleep in a hot embrace.
When I emerge from the cabin, Teddy is sitting in a sunchair on the opposite balcony giving me a knowing look.
The two Yorkshire Puddings sit on his lap looking at the world through angel hair matted with dried spit.
Having gone conspicuously quiet for over an hour, disappearing before we had even finished unpacking the car, there is nothing more to be deduced than the obvious.
I feel under scrutiny.
Lucker and I get a few beach items together and set off across the dunes towards the shimmering shore.
Wearing a  pair of men's underpants and a scarf across my breasts, I have that unprepared look that Americans can abhor culturally and admire individually.
As we pass a couple of girl guests clad in complete colour-coordinated beachwear outfits, they whisper about us.
We do look, by comparison very…very random.
The sea is a dream.
Sand-covered wooden steps hug a large man-made sand dune buffer, delivering us onto a vast expanse of pale beach.
Grass tufts spring in angry clumps.
Each blade ends in a brown spike like Siamese cats' tips.
Apart from these, the landscape is a picture of serenity.
A moaning wind frisks down the coast, kicking up a roaming layer of top-sand in its wake.
Lucker kisses me.
His mouth is as hot as curry.
We enter rolling yards of bright and frilly salt water.
The coolness seeps into the ankle flesh.
Then, full tilt into the pounding waves.
Unable to force our legs through the sheer weight of the waves any more, we collapse.
The authority of the whole sea closes over our heads.
Sky, clouds, then down into the closed world of water sound distortion.
Lucker and I grasp onto each other like slippery newly-born twins.
Heaven is here on earth, but only as a taster.
The afternoon stretches on and on, defying the logic of watch time.
Beachcombing soaks up the hours, punctuated with crisp swims during which my scarf unknots itself from my breasts and drifts out to sea like a directionless jelly fish.
It is exquisite to swim without clothes.
A sharp spark of light, a match struck, catches my eye.
Someone is watching with binoculars from a balcony of Sand Dune Apartments, a good quarter-mile away.
It has to be Teddy.
I lie on my back and look up at the eternal sweep of marble skies.
If Teddy is watching I don't care, because he is an intruder and more pitiful for that.
I think of the rape.
Lucker and I spoke very  little about it this morning, and it has remained that way.
It was an awful dream that belonged in a different landscape.
If we were still in the veiled forests then I would be remembering more, but we drove hard to get into the open, and banish the memory.
We head back to the apartment only when the day folds in around us for good.
‘I saw you guys splashing around in the surf.
You look like you had a good time.’
He knows we did, he spent long enough watching us.
I'm not sure whether I respect him more or less for his admissions.
I smile weakly.
The phone rings and he retires to the office to attend to it.
Lucker and myself lie together idly exploring each other 's bodies with the curiosity of two baby elephants who are too young to take advantage of what they have found.
Our fingers ramble, then stagger to a stop.
The next time I open my eyes it is the following day.
Lucker finds his fishing rod, and flexes it like a whip.
He props it up against the wall, and starts threading on lures.
‘Hey!
Tiffany, over here!’
I look up.
Teddy is there again, across from our room on his balcony with one of the Yorkies held gingerly under his arm.
‘Yeah?’
‘You wanna fishing rod of your own?’
‘Yeah.’
‘Well come and get it, dammit!’
He hands it over when I run down one flight of stairs and straight up another to arrive obediently at his side.
‘Some geek dropped it in salt water.
I oiled it up just for you.
It goes.’
‘Thanks.’
I go bouncing over to our room with my loan held aloft.
Lucker raises his eyebrows.
‘Likes you, doesn't he?’
‘Thought you'd never notice.
Let's go and get dinner!’
We join the row of fishermen out in the surf.
The sun is low in the sky and the mood of the afternoon is sleepy and unfixed.
Cicadas churn strenuously in the grasses, fighting the wind for supremacy of the airwaves.
The water comes up to our stomachs.
Lines of men in sunglasses, peaked caps, harnessed up with sundry sport trappings and white sun cream smeared down their noses give cover to at least two miles of coast.
We cast out.
I am the only female fishing.
As usual the camps have divided into their predictable formulas.
Men and sport.
Women, sandwiches and babies.
If I had a kid, I'd maroon it for the afternoon, on a lilo anchored several feet away with waterproof crayons and wax paper to draw on.
Instead, grounded women shade their eyes and look resentfully out to sea.
It is almost feeding hour for the fish.
They nibble hungrily at my legs because I have less hair to protect my skin.
I squeak my resistance and yank that particular limb away from the offending direction hoping that they won't do it again.
The water is not azure blue.
It is dark and murky sea.
The Mississippi opens onto the Gulf only a few miles away.
I can see nothing but I certainly feel it.
My expression sets a little grim.
Lucker is impervious to this peril.
Wearing aviator sunglasses and a wet T-shirt, he is smoking a dry cigarette.
God knows how he managed to get that out here.
Fifty feet ahead, dolphins cut a stealthy path through oily waters.
They are in to feed.
About now the sea suddenly boils with fish.
Approximately three hundred red mullet surface, their glassy eyes and mouths apparent on the water's surface.
They look like Santa's reindeer.
The water is so alive as to be slightly horrific.
We close up and stare aghast.
We are no longer so much nibbled as jostled.
But, casting into this bubbling cauldron of opportunity makes no difference.
They won't touch the fabricated sparkle bug bait.
It comes trailing in across the seething crowd of heads without a single bite.
Water, water everywhere…
I cast out into the calmer seas beyond, whilst they continue their provocative tramp around us.
Dolphins swivel and thrash through the water, in a feverish chase.
They move in systematically.
They are now only twenty feet away.
Panic spreads.
The mullet pick up speed and head in towards land cleverly putting us between them and the dolphins.
Trout leap about wildly in the air like trampolining acrobats.
With dolphins on the rampage it seems a good idea to spend as much time as possible out of the water.
The scene is quite incredible.
As there will be no catch in this chaos we simply reel in and watch the merry-go-round.
Slowly the dolphins move on.
We cast out again, now that there is no danger of snagging them.
Lucker feels a tug, and reels in a beautiful sea trout, a bullet of solid silver muscle.
I drag Lucker's swimming trunks' cord roughly through the gills and mouth, roping it on like a horse outside a saloon bar.
It flounders to its eventual decline.
We catch five in all, three to him, two to me.
Not needing any more we turn back to the shore.
There is a shower and sink provided for washing humans and fish respectively.
A large American with rubber-tyre, love-handle hips bestrides a chair and carves through a huge mountain of fresh fish with an electric knife.
He cuts small fillets of lean meat the size of quails' breasts.
The rest is  discarded.
Much good meat is wasted in the face of such excessive numbers.
I sling a few carcasses to prowling cats, and I get told off for it.
‘Don't do that!
It encourages them.’
‘So what?’
I retort with indignation.
‘You can't waste this!
This is good meat!’
He looks at me as if I am crazy, and watches a grateful cat dragging the carcass to a safe distance with disapproval.
He also watches through lowered eyebrows as I keep the heads on my fish.
For him, fish with heads are like women with underarm hair.
Unacceptable.
I pull the guts free with one callous tug.
Lucker has elected not to do this as he tells me he would probably pass out.
Instead he sings lightly from the shower and emerges as my perfumed tart, all luscious and freshly steamed ready for my eventual use.
He swans off to the room whilst I wrestle with yards of umbilical elastic intestine, and hard cyst-like sacs which remain as elusive as end snippets of soap.
The American with the hips watches Lucker go, and shakes his head.
I can only presume that Lucker has failed in the macho stakes.
Sea trout for supper.
Lucker cooks whilst I drink, becoming all misty-eyed and in love with life.
I chatter with enthusiasm whilst knobs of butter slide off the fishes' backs and sizzle to blister bubbles.
We come to the conclusion that we would like to live here forever, knowing that nothing will stop us being on the plane home.
By the time we finish eating, I am quite drunk and feeling sad.
We pull on our coats with bleary yanks as the alcohol works its universal spell, and bump out the door.
Down to the beach to see the oil rigs at sea.
You cannot feel alone with a horizon drenched with technology.
The final pull of day is seduced away to another gathering.
The clouds suck together in one last inhalation, then it is  night.
Something in front of us shifts sideways.
I shine my pocket torch onto hundreds of crabs skittering into the sea.
With their eyes erect and fear in their speed they run for the safety of the waves.
They disappear beneath the shallow waves, no doubt seeing a distorted light source peering at them.
It must be like looking back through primitive blown glass.
They walk on into their water kingdom with grounded certainty and are quickly obscured by the dark and bitty sea.
Lucker and I return silently hand in hand to the apartment.
Teddy's television enthuses behind his curtains and keeps him busy.
And so to bed.
Teddy leaves on business the following morning.
Dressed for the city, he kisses the Yorkies on the head and climbs into a jeep with heavy tread tyres.
I wanted to ask him about the room, if anyone has cancelled.
I bite my lip and worry about this coming to an end.
Janice is left in charge.
Teddy's girlfriend, in-house chambermaid, she is about four foot ten, with a face like a petite fox.
In fact the more I look at her the more convinced I am that she resembles one of the Yorkies.
She cleans the rooms with efficient savagery, yet stops in a flash to engage in vigorous conversation, leaning on her mop handle, eyes to the ceiling.
Janice is a divorcee.
‘Yeah, sure it was painful.
Marriage was worse.
My husband must have been unhappy, that's the best I can say for him.’
‘That good, eh, Janice?’
‘Good?
Good?’
She looks at me incredulous that I can be so stupid.
She doesn't spot the sarcasm.
‘Nah.
He never gave his family a break.
We all got sick of him.
He had to go.’
I imagine her husband chucked into the damp backyard like an old redundant sofa.
Just when he thought he was there to stay.
‘You think it funny?
I'm telling you it's…not.’
And so it isn't.
It was a smile at a catalogue of misunderstanding and her eventual act of bravery.
It took a long time coming.
Too long, she says.
She tells me that she is not naturally brave or independent.
That is bravery I tell her, but she looks uncertain.
She stays over with Teddy now.
She tells me with a peculiar girlie sham.
She carries on mowing with the vacuum cleaner.
It seems strange to see a vacuum cleaner so near the beach.
Swirls of dust spiral into the sunshine like milk joining coffee.
‘Once the kids got old enough to see for themselves what he was like, they packed their bags and left.
I followed because they seemed to be doing all right.’
‘And Teddy?’
‘Aw, he is terrific.’
Janice is timid and fierce all at once.
As Teddy will be back at six, she takes the other rooms by storm.
At about eight-thirty, headlights scallop out the darkness and the brakes squeak to a tired and worked stop.
Janice went home earlier because of Teddy's time-keeping and the office sits in darkness.
After half an hour or so, spent scratching mosquito bites, I head over to see him.
Teddy is still in his suit and looks weird.
He is drinking soda pop out of a can the same shrill dayglo orange colour as emergency road markings.
The dogs break into a tirade of insubstantial clatter.
Teddy throws a cushion at one, missing it by a mile deliberately.
The dog screams with the  manufactured hysteria of an amateur opera singer and disappears under a chair.
‘Hi, Tiffany, come in.
Wanna drink?’
‘Do you have a beer?’
‘I don't really drink myself, but I keep it for guests.
Help yourself.
In the fridge.’
The frigidaire is stuffed to bursting with food.
‘Say, you and Lucker, you guys are pretty relaxed, aren't you?’
A very loaded question.
I keep silent and simply apply myself to the task of closing the fridge door.
‘Yes, we are having a very nice time, thank you.’
Teddy throws back his head and laughs.
I am uncomfortably bemused, so I come to the point of my visit.
‘We love it here.
I was wondering if there was any way we could stay on?’
‘You like it that much, huh?’
Teddy laughs again.
His private joke is annoying me.
He must read me because he stops and becomes serious.
‘I like it here too.
I used to work in construction in Chicago, but a few of us got blown off the skyscrapers.
It was real windy up there and if you missed your footing you didn't get a second chance.
I quit.’
‘And came here?’
‘Yes.
I had a friend who worked for the oil people, and I decided to stay after a visit to this place.
Why don't you stay?’
‘Oh no, I couldn't do that.’
I sound more scared than I want to.
‘Well now, I guess you're right.
I still have that room booked out to other folk like I told you.’
‘What a pity.’
‘But you want to stay on for a couple more days?
Well, you  could stay in the spare room over with me, out in the bedroom in the back there, for thirty dollars a night?’
‘With you in this house?’
‘Yeah.
With me.
Is there a problem?
I mean we are only talking about a few yards difference.
Here, there.
There, here.’
‘Yes, but this is your home.’
‘So what?
You think I want privacy?
From you?
You're very easy-going.
It will be a pleasure to have you around.
The choice is yours.
Come with me, I'll show you.’
I walk through the flat after him.
Lots of half-chewed Yorkie plastic distractions are strewn across the floor.
The ‘bedroom in the back’ leads out to a delightful wooden balcony mined with Yorkie shit.
All this space and they get to shit on a perfectly good balcony?
What is wrong with people?
They wouldn't allow human beings to shit on a balcony, so why dogs?
I look visibly disgusted.
‘Such a beautiful evening.’
Says Teddy, encouraging me to look up, to distract from the mess, not a good idea considering.
‘I know a bit about stars, er…there is a…um.’
He never completes the sentence.
The sky is alive with a million diamante stars.
I stand against the railings and remain in one place to avoid the crap, and look upwards.
My head is naively up there with incredible facts like the speed of light, the concept of millions of light years away, and so on, when Teddy traces his finger down my hip bone.
I double up, spilling my beer.
‘You're a sexy woman, Tiffany.’
I almost laugh.
‘Cut it out, Teddy.
I just want a room.’
‘With Lucker?’
‘Of course, with Lucker!’
‘Well, I can't let you have the room then.’
‘Why not?
It was fine a few minutes ago.’
‘Someone might come in and offer me more money.
It is worth fifty dollars a night, and you guys probably want it for thirty, right?’
‘Yes, well you just said I could have it for thirty.
Oh look, in fact you'd better just take whatever you can get.’
‘You could have it…discount, and we could have some
Silence.
‘I really want you.
I watch you all day and I feel dry inside.’
‘Are you seriously asking me to do something for twenty dollars difference a night.
Forty dollars?
Good grief.’
I laugh.
I should leave, but it is entertainment of sorts, and hugely funny.
I wear an amazed smile on my face.
This encourages him to continue unwinding his thread.
I decide with impunity to hear him out.
Oh dear, out comes the erection, unsheathed like a family dog in the middle of the carpet, during supper.
‘Teddy, you are not serious!
I've seen it all before.
And how.’
‘All you need to do is touch it.
Touch it, Tiffany!’
I splutter a laugh.
He turns away to face the sea.
His hand moves with efficient speed.
I hear something fall onto the leaves below.
I finish my drink and leave, picking my way through moonlit Yorkie turds.
Is the world one long penis opportunity to take up, I wonder?
Lucker has fallen asleep, but stirs as I walk through the door.
‘How did it go?’
‘It went…he came, and I went.’
‘He said I could have discount if I did the business.’
Lucker opens one eye.
‘Did you?’
‘Is that a serious question?’
I tell him all about Teddy and we laugh about it.
The fact that it has happened before, or even that the opportunity is always there is something I don't mention.
I go to sleep wondering what will happen in the morning.
We wake to a knock on the door.
Janice stands there.
My heart slips.
I expect her to shout at me, having heard an alternative story from Teddy.
Devil woman ripped all my clothes off me, sort of thing.
She steps into the room, smiling.
Her friendly manner suggests she knows nothing.
‘You're not leaving, are you?’
Janice looks at our cases.
Surprised, I turn to Lucker.
‘Well, yes, we were.’
‘I think you should speak to Teddy first.
He has an arrangement to propose as you guys wanted to stay here longer.’
Teddy comes out of his office on cue like a moray eel coming out from behind a rock.
I look over at him.
He smiles.
If ever ambiguity was king, then it is now.
‘I know about that arrangement.
He put it to me last night.’
‘He did?
Well, Tiffany, why don't you stay here?
You love the place, I can tell.
We have a room with a bathroom for you, for thirty dollars a night.’
‘He said fifty.’
‘Stupid man, I told him thirty.
You guys can't afford more.
He knows that.’
I defer to Lucker in case his ego can't take it.
He shrugs and  lies back on the bed.
I wish he would show some indignance, express some opinion, but there is nothing forthcoming.
I look out across the twinkling expanse of ocean, and decide to go and see Teddy.
‘Want a coffee?’
The kettle throws its own switch.
‘No thanks.’
‘You guys like it here, you can have it for twenty-five dollars.’
‘No frills?’
‘No frills.
Use the kitchen too.
If you catch fish you can cook them, no problem.’
He looks as innocent as a lamb standing before me.
It is strange to be confronted by a man who seems to want us around at any price.
‘You won't find a free room on the Isle tonight, I can tell you.
I rang around to see.
Go check it out.
The whole Isle is booked out for weekend fishing.’
I start to walk out.
I feel taken over, sewn in.
‘By the way, you're invited to dinner tonight.
Janice is cooking a Cajun speciality for you.’
I look at him with about the dirtiest look I can muster.
‘OK, OK, Teddy, I'll ask Lucker.
He might just prefer to leave.’
‘You told him about last night?’
‘Yes.’
Teddy shows no expression, he simply walks across the room and makes himself an instant coffee.
He keeps his back to me but he doesn't cancel his offer.
I slip away.
Lucker is not thrilled with the turn of events.
‘Twenty-five dollars!
Does he have access to our bedroom?
Does he get to watch us screw for that?’
‘Fat chance of that, Lucker!’
‘What's that supposed to mean?’
‘Oh, fuck it, nothing.
So what shall we do?’
After a huddled chat we decide to take it.
Grand Isle is worth it.
We move into the spare room.
Lucker checks under the bed for a bugging device.
He seems unable to relax.
I feel a creeping sense of hilarity in this absurd situation.
Everyone, perhaps bar Janice, knows what happened and no-one walked out on principle, as we all have ulterior motives.
At lunchtime we fish.
We slap our catch in the frying pan in Teddy's kitchen and eat it.
He is thankfully absent.
The fish is fresh, half-an-hour alive for us, rather than half-an-hour dead for it.
It tastes delicious and I pick it to the bone like a meticulous cat.
We clear out of the flat before Teddy and Janice pile in to cook the evening meal.
I lie swollen — bellied under the afternoon sun and fade away.
After being in the sun for some time, my skin feels like tissue.
I shower and go through to the kitchen with Lucker.
Teddy is barking orders at Janice.
She is cook, he is chef.
Janice offers Lucker a glass of wine.
His eyes narrow at first taste.
Lucker musters his etiquette and swallows it down in a loud cartoon gulp.
It is the sweet version, similar to lemonade, and low in alcohol.
We have managed to avoid it thus far.
‘Teddy taught me a thing or two about wine.
We find this is by far the best.’
All we can do is accept with deceitful grace.
Teddy slams his glass down on the table and waves his wooden spoon around as if it was a sabre.
It is all showmanship tonight.
I bought some broccoli earlier as an offering.
It is steamed and served with the rest of the meal.
Janice pushes it around on her plate for ages with her fork.
‘I don't eat trees.’
She cannot bring herself to eat it.
‘Sorry Tiffany, I've seen this stuff in the shops, but we're burger people, you know.’
Teddy disassociates himself from her and eats lots of broccoli almost with his mouth open, just to show how broad-minded he is.
Janice is suitably impressed.
She puts her glass under Teddy's nose for a refill, drinks her wine, and after audibly gulping down a big mouthful, she raises her glass.
‘No offence to broccoli!’
We all raise our glasses and toast together loudly.
‘No offence to broccoli!’
A knock at the door.
A bearlike man comes in.
‘Hi, I'm not interrupting anything, am I ?’
In truth this is the high point of the evening.
Otherwise it has been a strange one, with Janice trying hard to be ‘cultured’, Teddy achieving it in Janice's eyes and Lucker remaining slightly detached.
All mixed in with the echoes of last night.
‘Hi Grant, no problem.
We're just toasting.
Take a seat.
Wanna drink?’
Grant casts his eyes around at the casualties of a drink-based evening albeit mainly non-alcoholic, and demurs, seeing that mild hysteria has set in.
Janice starts hiccuping.
It sounds like a gerbil sneezing.
‘Thank you, no.’
It transpires that Grant is a Texan oilman with a boat moored at Grand Isle Marina who is a regular at Sand Dune Apartments.
He has rooms in the front facing the beach.
‘Say Teddy, real sorry to disturb your socialising, but radio contact was pretty bad today.
Any ideas on the forecast for tomorrow?’
Teddy rolls his tongue around the inside of his mouth and looks self-important.
‘Yeah, the morning will be sunny, the afternoon will be coming up a storm.
You may be doing a run-in later on.’
Grant scratches his head, holding the silence naturally.
‘A storm huh?
Maybe I should see myself back for midday then?’
‘Reckon.
How's the boat?’
‘Good.
Good.
Definitely worth selling the wife and kids for.’
‘And the fishin'?’
‘One tarpon today.
Swordfish broke the line, took it with him.
One small barracuda.
Not so good.
Gotta do better than that.
Got some friends up for the ride.
Gotta impress ‘em.
Promise 'em something, give 'em nothing.
Pretty embarrassing actually.
You fish?’
Grant addresses Lucker with the question.
‘Yes, we caught eleven so far.’
‘Eleven?’
‘Surf fishing,’ elaborates Lucker enthusiastically.
Grant is visibly unimpressed and smiles politely.
Eleven does not begin to rate in the surf numbers game.
And that is all it is, a numbers game.
Ever since it was revealed that Grant has a boat I have been playing mind games to get him to invite us.
I sit there repeating a wish in my head like a child.
‘Please ask us on your boat.
Oh God, Grant please ask us on your boat.
Please God, ask us on your boat…’
We talk about London and Grand Isle, and all the while I am praying that he will ask us on his boat.
I smile conspicuously sweetly at him.
‘Say, you guys ever been deep sea fishing?’
I have and Lucker hasn't.
I don't trust myself to speak.
He answers.
‘No.’ 'Then why don't you come down to the marina at five tomorrow morning.
I can't guarantee anything, but you are welcome to come down.’
Lucker smiles.
‘Delighted.’
'Thank you, Grant.’
I add, stopping the head rant dead.
‘Five o'clock, mind you.’
'Five it is.’
oily fish
I switch the TV on, and Lucker switches it off again.
‘It is four in the morning.
No.
OK?’
Fish in the fridge and nothing else.
No breakfast.
The air is sticky with a varnish of sea mist.
No one in Grand Isle moves from beneath the blanket of quiet across the peninsula.
We leave footsteps clearly visible on the crystalline covering of the wooden slatted steps.
The windscreen wipers give us two neat fan shapes to view the world through.
The marina is brand spanking new.
Faceless New Yorkers have developed this site for banking outsiders and oil insiders.
One building stands as a lone design example in the middle of a prepared expensive living area.
There will be many others, states a small podium standing in the middle of the flattened land.
An artist's impression of the entire finished product is on show.
There is nothing undesirable to be seen in the plush frame.
Across from us, the coast guard station is quiet.
Large boats are roped up to the quayside.
Rows of cannabis leaves are painted onto the prow.
Notches in their guns.
These are large hauls hijacked at sea.
It is a waste of money if that is all they do.
I look hard for cocaine emblems, but as the paintwork is white I am not sure how it could be illustrated.
There appear to be no other triumphs to proclaim.
Five, he promised.
Five it isn't.
Lucker rolls a joint which is a big mistake as far as I am concerned.
I get head spin, and end up lolling out of the car, dribbling through my nose onto the tarmac just to get the vile bitter taste of nicotine out of my mouth.
Welcome to a new day.
Fresh air, that's what I need.
I go the edge of the marina's still petroleum waters.
Oil stains float like lily pads.
Between these, a hundred jellyfish as delicate and as translucent as rose petals pulsate like butterflies.
They murmur along in the water driven by gentle contractions.
Shaped like straw mushrooms, they are completely clear except for a gossamer veil which makes up their body.
Inside this gelatine umbrella, a stamen lurks, an apple core of a motor.
Down the outer muslin (similar to a Victorian boned underskirt), a sparkling network of phosphorescent trammelled water sifts along.
This ghostly caravan wafts nowhere in particular, without a care in the world.
Will Grant ever come?
Seven thirty it is.
‘Hi, sorry I'm late.
Caught a little extra sleep.’
Lucky him.
We smile nicely as he is our host for the day.
I have a cringing suspicion that I would have waited until ten o'clock if necessary.
The boat is designed like a heavily-stitched designer Courrèges suit.
Robust white zips bite tightly pulling together  taut panels of see-through plastic.
Daisy ring-pulls dangle from button-down white sun panels.
Water patterns bounce off polished chrome, the fibreglass shell is honed to a waxy sheen of pearl.
Immaculate.
Every now and again rust pimples up, metallic lichen destined only to be beaten back by the lavish care and attention administered by Grant.
His hand wanders constantly over it as if it were a fine thoroughbred thin-skinned horse.
Fingers subconsciously searching out damage beneath the glossy surface, while he otherwise engages in conversation.
Two men pull up in a jeep.
Bill and Doug.
Baseball caps, medium moustaches, lardy stomachs, wide gold wedding bands, chunky sports watches, flowery shorts, no real smiles.
Nod, nod, nod, nod, all round.
No talk this early.
They drop weightily into the boat.
It gives like a horse under the stirrup.
Grant starts the motor and makes soup of the jellyfish.
Thrown up to the surface, diced as if by an ace Chinese chef ready for stir fry.
The engine growls throatily into the water, churning like a plough in mud.
Bill and Doug sit behind mirrored sunglasses, and stare out like zombies.
Grant sets the information for our voyage into the computer.
Runs a check on the phone, the Coke dispenser, the computer, and the coffee machine.
Whacks a tape into the cassette recorder.
Fuels up at the boat garage, putting it on plastic.
We leave town.
We round a couple of buoys beaded with cats' eyes; sea traffic islands.
Grant looks this way and that, as if at a junction.
He has the settled attitude of the Sunday driver.
We head for the open horizon.
A sea of molten lead bubbles beneath.
The ashen flat morning sky reflects pewter.
Testy waves slice at the boat.
Shafts of piercing sunlight slowly push their curious fingers  through the dusty waters as far down as they will go.
Beyond seven feet or so, nothing except mind-numbing depth.
Three stingrays glide past like abandoned white pocket handkerchiefs.
Country and Western music plays out from a pair of white speakers, perfectly complementing the queasy swell of the boat.
‘If we are going to go to pieces, then let's go to pieces together’ invites a whingeing love-struck cowboy of the Nineties.
Then ‘I've got you under my skin just as you're getting me outta your system’.
Sounds contagious and nasty.
‘I'VE GOT YOU…underrr my skin, just as you're getting…me…um, outta your system.’
Farmer's Soul on the high seas.
Singing along isn't a big success.
These heavy square faces don't smile much.
Except for the fact that they have the boat, they don't seem to be obvious candidates for a really good time.
I fall silent, bowing to the status quo.
We wade into the oil fields.
Before us a spectre of technology dominates the skyline.
Iron monsters emerging from the water every mile or so.
There is no rest for the eye in the comfort of nothing.
Within twenty minutes we pass the base of one of these vast monsters.
We are dwarfed.
Huge rusting cannon-barrel legs disappear to frightening depths.
Waves slap maliciously at the armoured barnacle clusters, attempting to wrench the resident seaweed back to a deeper grave.
Small fish swing around in the currents, head-butting molluscs, to get at food.
Helicopter pads and accommodation quarters sit abandoned on the platform.
No one seems to be on board and all machinery lies mummified in preserving fat.
A few drill pieces swathed in blubbery grease protrude precariously over the side.
These pitiful forgotten dinosaurs are tethered to the  spot to die.
The earth beneath is now devoid of black gold so another rig is built further out, and another, and another.
‘Grant what will happen to these?’
Mr Laid-Back answers.
‘We wait a while and they just go away.
In South-east Asia, it's common practice to leave them.
They rust down.’
Gnarled teeth of decaying iron lurking beneath the surface waiting like in all good nautical nightmares, to take your craft down in one final vengeful snap.
‘So what happens, does a leg snap first and then it just crumbles?’
‘Kind of.’
Grant just doesn't seem interested.
The cost involved in taking these cybernetics down is too high.
Industrial sea litter on a vast scale.
But, as it is not a professional worry, why should it be a personal one?
Silence broken, suddenly everyone seems motivated to have a snack.
A lunch box is opened, and a cluster of plastic and aluminium jewels gleam from inside.
Potato chips, fizzy drinks and chocolate bars are circulated.
Bill takes a Coke, rips the ring pull cleanly off like painful bandaging and drinks it down in one, like it was a glass of water.
For someone in the early stages of mastering Coke throat-burn like myself, this is impressive.
He chucks it into the sea.
The red trademark bobs around on curves of salty foam until it takes in water and spirals towards the centre of the earth.
If you can leave an oil rig behind, a Coke can is nothing.
I ask for water instead.
Grant points into the cabin.
‘The blue tank.
Press the button.’
I press the button.
Water comes out stinking of bad eggs.
Too many hot cabin days.
‘Ugh!’
Grant laughs upstairs.
I take a sip.
It doesn't taste as bad as it smells.
Unfortunately though, my nose will not let me off the hook and I am forced to leave it.
Grant points to the cooler box.
The Coke has gone which is just as well, because it tastes like silver foil.
I settle for nothing.
Bill and Doug chew gum and sit with their arms folded.
Doug reaches intermittently into his crisp packet and feeds them into his mouth where they blend into a rubbery combination of mixed mash.
Lucker finishes a roll-up.
‘Grant, what are you hoping for today?’
‘I don't know.
If we are lucky we'll catch a swordfish, marlin, wapu, or maybe a barracuda.
If we are unlucky we will get a tarpon.
Worth the fight, and nothin' else.’
Bill and Doug nod and smile with a new level of response.
Maybe now their sugar levels are up to the right level for chitter-chatter.
‘Why?
What's wrong with tarpon?’
‘Oily fish.
I don't eat it.
Some people do.
They come big, mind.
If it is a real big son, great, we stuff it and put it in the front room.
Right up where you can't miss it.
Show all your friends.’
Everyone laughs freely.
‘Tarpon can weigh in as big as small dolphins.
Damn near kills you.
Some guys died in the chair bringing them in.’
‘That very chair?’
Grant is patient with Lucker's boggle-eyed gruesomeness.
He stares at the hydraulic dentist's chair, angled up to an empty sky and an open sea.
‘No.
Others like it.
I only take on fit guys that don't heart-attack on me and get their family and friends down  here sueing.
Not to mention the company.
Notice, I still gotta job?’
Everyone laughs gloomily, aware that such a thing would bankrupt  somone for life.
Money is a serious game and uncomfortable humour.
Grant looks down into the dark waters.
‘The fish aren't playing today.
They're waiting for the storm too, you know.
We're going out to seventy miles.
It's deep.
Those guys won't know what the weather's doing out there.’
Grant yanks the engine up into top brew, and makes a phone call.
Blooop…bloooop…blooop.
He dials out.
‘Hi, Penny?
Did Virgil come, pick up his stuff?
OK, Uhhuh.
OK.
Anything else?
No?
Know where I am.
Baa now.’
Blooop.
The phone sits back in its soap dish base.
Grant looks preoccupied, and chews his lip.
‘Say, Doug, did you know Virgil?
Young, smart.
From Houston?’
‘Sounds familiar…good-looking right?’
‘Yeah, well maybe.
Whad'ever.
I had to fire him yesterday.’
‘You did?’
‘Came up positive on cocaine.
Stupid.
Good.
But stupid.’
Grant shakes his head.
‘He just cleared out his locker.
Shit.
Other companies are gonna ask why'd you get fired?
What's he gonna say?
What's gonna happen now?
He knew the rules.
And we trace it every time.’
Grant swings the conversation around point blank at us.
‘If you guys have got any drugs on you, I suggest you dump them overboard now.
The coast guard impound boats if they find anything.
Save me a lotta trouble.’
We do have a rolled joint in a pocket of a jacket but  neither Lucker or I acknowledge it.
Take two seconds for a joint to break up in that swell.
I don't want to get Grant into trouble, but until then it doesn't go to the fishes.
There is nothing official on the horizon for the moment, except the junked rigs, blocked with chortling seagulls.
Seventy miles offshore.
The navigation computer pings like a ready microwave.
Grant cuts the engine right back to idle.
Lines, bait and poles are taken out of storage boxes.
Iced sardines are trodden underfoot to soften them up.
I suggest wiring them up and trailing them overboard to thaw.
This idea is taken up but not given thanks for.
Fishing is a man's thing right down to the ideas.
Doug prefers expensive Trojan silver fish, segmented to twist and swivel realistically.
I pick one up carefully to look at it.
Doug waggles a finger at me.
‘Hey you, be careful, those fish cost forty dollars.
I don't wanna catch you!’
I put it down obediently although a childish urge in me wants to play with it as long as I like, just to prove that it doesn't necessarily end up with me stupidly spearing myself.
But, what's the point?
‘Forty dollars?
Do you ever lose any?’
‘Tell me about it.
They bite them off like corn chips.’
The others, busy with their preparations, snort with understanding chuckles.
Bill pipes in.
‘When we get poor we use real fish.’
Lucker looks at the pile of deceitful options lying on the floor.
‘Which artificial aid works best?’
Doug holds up a jointed metallic blue tuna-lookalike.
‘Cost me eighty-five dollars.
Worth the money.’
Bill has less of the symptoms of the expensive-toy syndrome.
‘Mind you, sometimes they'll take anything, a sparkly bit of Coke can, fabric, this expensive shit, anything at all…if they're in the mood.’
Doug stays with his eighty-five dollar winner.
The other two take a sinewy cut off the side of an iced swordfish caught last week.
The skin is as fine as gold leaf and the flesh, pure muscle.
Lucker is provided for, without question.
He attaches a sardine to his line.
I can't help laughing at him.
He smiles back cheerfully.
I am not even asked if I want a line.
That's nice, isn't it?
Obviously as it is not my equipment I cannot help myself.
Four lines cut and skip through the waves as Grant pulls away steadily for the drag.
Still, I need some fun, and so I make my way to the front, along a narrow arm out onto the sun-baked prow tip.
I sit with my arms wrapped around the chrome railing and my bare heels gripping the sides.
It is like riding a bucking bronco.
The boat lunges forward and yet almost by the same token lunges back again.
It dips deeply, soaking my legs to the knee.
The sun has been out for a while after straining hard through moody skies and my skin is warming.
The shock of cold water makes me cry out with surprise.
Grant calls out to me, and waves me back to safety as he sees it.
I give him the thumbs-up sign and pointedly ignore him turning once more to the vigorous bucking of the waves.
Grant climbs up the aluminium ladder into the crow's nest and surveys the horizon with binoculars.
Far away a rumbling sound of thunder is heard.
But the horizon no longer has any black skies, and it looks more forgiving than it has at any point until now.
‘Nothing!’
He comes pounding down the ladder, and grabs the wheel  and stampedes back into the waves.
I am plunged back into robust adventures with my sturdy sea-horse.
‘We'll go for ninety.’
We duck into a gulley and the waves curl around the boat.
Water snatches at my thighs.
The weather might be superficially good, but there is an almighty swell.
Suddenly, I feel an internal jolt, a direct hit to the core of the boat.
I turn to look back through stiff weathered plastic tarpaulin.
I can see Doug's fishing line bent like a hurricane palm.
I make my way to the back holding on carefully.
The boat slews sideways.
I don't drop down into the deck well, overcrowded as it is, but remain on the edge, with arms woven around the chrome railings for safety.
Doug's rod is fastened to his wrist with a leather strap like a Manilan wallet.
No-one moves as he wrestles with it.
He staggers like a drunk.
He cannot sustain this fight, despite his fierce mutterings.
Grant and Bill step forward.
They grab him in a bearhug from behind.
An expression on Grant's face shows amazement.
He feels the power of the fish.
Doug is dragged backwards into the chair.
‘Bill, the pole!
Get the pole in a holster!’
Bill forces the bent rod into the empty holster socket between Doug's legs and rams it in deeply.
They clip it into a safety harness, attaching it to Doug.
He looks like a toddler ready for ‘walkies’.
Despite having a solid base, the rod is still contorted wildly beyond belief.
Grant holds the leader line steady with a gloved hand.
Legs up on the side, Doug looks like he is in childbirth.
As the boat is reversing steadily, Grant gives it full throttle forward.
They want to tire the fish in the drag.
The boat lunges clumsily with deadened power.
Country and Western music adds to the general din of the three Texan opinions.
Speculation at the top of their voices as to what fish it might  be seems to me a waste of energy, but it contributes to the atmosphere.
Doug winds this invisible gladiator in by bitter degrees, inches rather than feet at a time.
The monster of the deep remains the unseen focus of attention.
Grant shouts at his boat, banging an angry palm onto the wheel.
‘COME ON!
You cost the earth!
MOVE!
GEEZ…
US!’
Doug is flagging.
The line weaves back and forth in the water, in sinister sway.
He has met his match, and probably better.
I am beginning to have a very nasty feeling about this one.
Lucker is taking photographs, the camera settled snugly into the eye socket, a fag in his mouth, and a foot up on the side.
He is typical of his profession in as much as he can show complete and stunning disassociation from his surroundings by virtue of simply having an appliance in front of his face.
The line is wrenched away by the locked jaw of the sea dog below.
All progress made has been lost.
Aggression gives way to awe, even concern.
Whatever it is beneath the sunny waves, it is not giving up easily.
Bill goes behind Doug to help but suddenly the line slackens, and flutters in the wind.
It is all over.
They look at each other, disappointment tinged with undisguised relief.
Doug is still breathing hard.
The line tightens up slowly.
The fish must have come forward to give the line some slack.
It has been swimming with us.
The rod bends.
Then, it goes slack again.
Grant cuts the engine to listen for clues.
Distant rolls of thunder belch ominously.
I feel cold with the uncertainty.
‘I reckon we leave this one, huh?’
Grant voices everyone's hopes.
As he speaks, the line suddenly comes to life again, and flashes over to the starboard side, and then cuts in front of the boat.
Doug has  taken off his glasses and has his head in a dry towel.
The line whips over his head, caught by the wind.
He emerges from his towel and peers around myopically.
The fish then returns to the rear of the boat and snares him.
The nylon line drops out of nowhere and cuts through the flesh of his upper arm like a cheese wire.
It tightens.
Doug cries out with pain.
Grant dives for a knife.
The boat is pulled sideways.
Doug loses his seat and hits the floor.
He seems powerless to move, except for his legs that thrash wildly with pain and protestation.
At this speed and with the invisible thread doing the damage it is almost impossible to see anything.
It is difficult to pinpoint the injury.
But, suddenly there is blood everywhere.
Lucker drops his camera and holds out another knife.
Bill cuts through the line after grabbing at thin air and landing it in an arbitrary process.
The fish snatches the free end and disappears back to the deep.
I wonder if it is badly wounded.
Grant drags Doug up and whips the line out of his back, chest and arms.
‘Get the first-aid box!
Downstairs!’
I leap off my spot and down into the cabin where it sits in a predominant place.
When I emerge Bill is looking over the side, around the boat, with a mixture of rage and disbelief.
Doug is in the seat again, trembling with cold and shock.
Despite the gravity of the situation I can see Grant wondering if the blood will stain the seat's white plastic.
I fetch some towels to put over Doug's shoulders.
They are pulled away impatiently by Bill, so I sit back on the side lines.
Blood flows like water and soon the gulleys are full of crimson juice.
As the boat rolls from side to side, so does the blood.
I feel sick.
Doug's teeth begin to chatter.
He asks for his glasses, I hand them to him.
He is then able to see clearly the extent and depth of his wounds.
It makes him feel worse.
Grant sweeps around at full speed and heads for land.
We are still seventy plus miles out.
It may take as long as an hour to return to port.
The first-aid box contains two dinky bandages, some muslin, and some cotton wool and these are not enough.
They soon turn carnation pink.
I rip up an old T-shirt of mine and offer it.
Grant suggests a tourniquet, but it is hard to do as the worst cut is so close to the armpit.
I rummage furiously for a freebie hotel mini-shampoo bottle with a screw-on lid the size of a marble.
I produce it for the mainstay of the tourniquet.
I am now enlisted to help and between us we put a temporary stop on the blood loss.
Doug drops his head on his chest like a wounded bird.
It is suggested that he moves downstairs but he doesn't want to.
I think he wants to keep watching for land.
It gives him encouragement.
I am now allowed to put the towels around him to keep him warm.
But he is already very cold.
We drag everything out to cover him including blankets.
I tuck everything away, his toes, his fingers all swaddled against the wind.
Grant calls in to get a weather update.
The sun has been snatched behind a curtain of black cloud.
Blue grey droplets of water splash down like giant trees.
Shrouds of silver rain shuffle across the sea in front of us.
As we pass through them, it feels as if the boat will drown.
We help Doug below deck despite his protestations.
He sits on a bed, in the gloom, looking more wretched than ever.
We grumble home between the grim rigs.
I know they will come back to haunt me in my dreams.
The wind begins to moan ghoulishly between their blistered tubular legs.
The gusts are becoming malevolent, snapping the heads off the waves like daisies.
Behind us much further out, a thin tall wisp of a stinging tail mushrooms out into a horizon full of anger.
Mama Tornado.
‘That twister out there will come to nothing.
It's due south from here.’
Grant assumes a mantle of confidence he doesn't fully believe in.
Doug chatters with cold like a little monkey, and Bill looks darkly to the horizon.
He folds his arms.
‘Don't be so sure.
Our luck hasn't been that hot so far.
That fish wasn't scheduled to beat the shit out of Doug.
No way.’
‘I'll cross-check it.’
‘What is there to cross-check?
I can see it with my eyes, Grant.’
Grant looks at Bill, and shakes his head.
‘Keep cool, I wanna find out which direction it is going in.
As for fish, they can take everything you've got, but that's the sport.’
‘No kidding.’
Ten miles from home.
Doug is still alive.
Grant engages in some lightweight banter with the radio controller, Mickey, who doubles as the Cutter Boat Club barman.
Grant orders his drinks now, and orders Pimms especially for the ‘Britishers’ on board.
I don't know why but I feel guilty for being here.
Behind us the ghostly apparition of Sister Twister is disappearing down south like a lonely wispy drunk.
I feel a considerable amount of relief.
I think about a fish with an eighty-five dollar executive toy in its mouth, and wonder what chance it has.
It fought a terrifying battle, only perhaps to drown on the sea floor.
I can't really imagine it shedding that solid silver butcher's hook, but who knows?
On the last stretch, I sit on the prow again to feel the raw elements.
Seaweed floats loosely around in a sea churned up by the stormy waters.
Land is sighted.
As we approach the quay we can see a small crowd waiting for our arrival.
Everybody loves a hero, regardless of competence.
As we pull alongside, I see Teddy and Janice in the crowd.
Teddy rolls his eyes like it is all my fault or something.
Janice looks ashen with worry, and doesn't see me although she appears to be looking hardest of all.
Doug emerges from the cabin looking blue with cold.
He smiles weakly at everyone.
Although he clearly wants to walk off the boat, the ambulance crew scramble on board and clamp him onto a stretcher, so firmly that I wonder if they think he might punch them.
They put a temporary dressing on his cut nose and his wife puts a bobble hat on his head.
He looks utterly ridiculous.
He is then slid into the back of the ambulance as if it was an oven.
The smoked window doors slam shut and he is removed to gnome hospital.
We make our way up to the bar and find a double of our poison for our pains, courtesy of Mickey.
The bar is full of people dusting off all their fishing horror stories.
Grant looks drawn and tired.
‘It's bad news having accidents.
It puts people off fishing and it puts people off me.’
He really feels that he is offering a service, making inroads in the company hierarchy by offering fishing weekends, ones that run smoothly, that is.
‘So what was it, Grant?
The monster of the deep?’
Mickey leans into Grant for his confidence.
‘Honestly?
Dunno, I never saw it.
But I think it could have been a White-tipped shark, because nothing else has the  aggression to come forward and attack the boat.
Or the body weight.
Whatever, it was a big one.’
He shrugs.
‘That's what I think.
A White-tipped shark.’
Despite everything, we are still very grateful to him.
We offer to help clean the boat down, but he doesn't accept.
He wants to be alone.
We thank him profusely, and manage to bring a smile to his face.
We make our way to the car.
Lucker sighs deeply.
‘What's wrong?’ 'Nothing,’he says, ‘I just got some a — mazing photographs.’