

1
Past and Present
In the preface of his book The Elizabethan World Picture , E.M.W.
Tillyard stated his book's intention as being:
to extract and expound the most ordinary beliefs about the constitution of the world as pictured in the Elizabethan age and through this exposition to help the ordinary reader to understand and to enjoy the great writers of the age.
The dominant ruling idea of Renaissance England Tillyard found was the belief in a cosmic order which governed both human institutions and natural phenomena.
The Elizabethan World Picture appeared in 1943 during a period when many feared for the collapse of western civilisation.
The values and ideals believed to underlie Anglo-Saxon institutions appeared threatened and unstable.
A rallying point was needed and, for Tillyard, one was found in the golden age of the Elizabethan world.
Here was a period when a universally accepted order could be discovered with a resulting social and political stability.
Tillyard suggested the principle of order was so taken for granted by the age that it was rarely directly articulated —‘the utter commonplaces too familiar for the poets to make detailed use of except in explicitly didactic passages, but essential as basic assumptions and invaluable at moments of high passion’.
By recalling the strength of these beliefs and the cultural, especially literary, achievements this order produced, the Anglo-Saxon world could see more clearly the common need to defend those essential characteristics of its civilisation against the barbarous foe.
Similarly, Sir Laurence Olivier's wartime film of Shakespeare's Henry V (1944), where the King rallies the hopelessly outnumbered English army on the night before Agincourt with the rhetoric of religious-nationalism, was  clearly Olivier speaking for England in a moment of wartime crisis.
The film was prominently dedicated to the paratroop and airborne divisions.
The Elizabethan world provided the model and supplied the language for a present national need.
The film opens with a bird's-eye view of an ideally represented, prosperous, clean London.
The camera then descends to an idyllically landscaped south bank and presents a Globe Theatre where all classes (both women and men) happily gather to hear the play.
Certainly, these are different physical circumstances than would have confronted the Renaissance theatre-goer, but more notably the film's scenic panorama provokes a staggeringly glaring comparison with the perspectives offered by a blitzed London outside the cinema.
The production itself carefully suppresses those aspects of Shakespeare's play which suggest that Henry's endeavours are not somehow the shared desires of the nation — most notably it cuts out any mention of the English traitors in Act II.
In the context of the early 1940s (Olivier's film was conceived in 1941 before America had formally joined in the war) this creation of an idealised Elizabethan past was particularly convenient for Britain trying to persuade America to participate wholeheartedly in the war effort for the preservation of civilisation against barbarism.
Elizabethan England could be portrayed as a period before emigration to the American colonies began, before the ruptures between a British and American way of life existed.
Ignoring the complex racial and national make-up of Americans, the attempt was to offer Elizabethan England as a time before Americans had ‘left’ their home culture.
It was as much their world as it was ours, and the recollection of other less co-fraternal moments such as 1776 or 1812 were displaced by these representations of shared origins.
I do not mean to suggest that Tillyard or Olivier simply undertook their tasks as part of some officially orchestrated propaganda.
They conceived that what they represented was accurate:Henry V as a play genuinely celebrating the national character, the Elizabethans were imagined as believing in a stable world order.
What we can see, though, is that critical enterprises or cultural reproductions are not undertaken by disinterested participants removed from the concerns of their own historic moment.
Tillyard engages  with the mid-twentieth century as he does with the sixteenth and early seventeenth centuries.
As is apparent with the Henry V film's cuts and remodelling of the Shakespeare play, however, desires within the twentieth century mean that aspects of the Renaissance which do not conform with current needs are rendered silent.
Critical attention on the Renaissance during the 1980s and now the 1990s is no more disinterested than during the 1940s or at any other period.
Criticism cannot see its role as ‘putting right’ previous errors as though academic study was part of a stream of emendation aimed at achieving some final truth about texts.
Certainly, I do not pretend any scholarly disinterest with this book.
Like many, I am uneasy about many current directions of our civilisation.
I would not for a moment propose we face the same immediate peril confronting the world in the early 1940s.
My concerns are much more involved with the dangers I perceive that many valued institutions are having to confront within current political climates.
Those involved with the study of English are acutely aware of the attacks on institutions of higher education in Britain, in the rest of Europe, and in America during the past decade which have caused activities within the humanities to come under threat.
One prominent German academic proposed recently that, in reorganising higher education after German unification, former East Germans should ‘forget about the arts’.
The state's increasing insistence, for example, that what people study and how they study it are of government concern and to be directed at ends which a government finds acceptable is part of the character of our critical environment.
This environment provokes the type of inquiries we make of the past.
What is immediately striking is how most current studies of Renaissance culture have found the reverse of Tillyard.
Where he found order, many now find disorder, or anxiety about order.
Where he projected an agreed consensus among Elizabethans as to what the world picture consisted of, we now discover contention and subversion.
Where he imagined a basic critical agreement among Renaissance specialists as to what the ‘relevant commonplaces’ of the  period were, we now perceive no such agreement.
Indeed, a mistrust about historical periods possessing commonplaces other than those selected and organised by critical inquiry undertaken for specific, if frequently unconscious, ideological ends is now the familiar assumption.
This reversal of Tillyard's contentions reflects the unease which our present critical environment reveals about the world, past and present, that it engages with.
Our experience of the way modern states exert control, restrict expression, manipulate language, has prompted us to search the past to see what similarities and differences existed from our own experience.
This is not an exercise in self-indulgence.
Since our experience of institutions is frequently other than the idealistic way they strive to represent themselves, the solidity of values apparently inherited from the past are called into question.
It is appropriate to try to discover if such institutions were ever actually the way they had been previously presented by a scholarship interested (even if it did not declare its interest) in constructing its own version of the past to answer its own preoccupations.
It is not surprising to find topics such as censorship, subversion, the conditions of patronage, power and authority, and the nature of individual identity at the centre of much recent critical enquiry into the Renaissance.
It is important to perceive that our interest in the past will be dictated by our involvement in the present.
The notion of a superior disinterested scholarship intent upon objectivity is mythic.
The pursuit of objectivity curiously results in a far more ideologically partial and subjective critical representation.
Self-examination of critical motivation can actually allow some of the more tempting ideological distortions we may feel inclined to pursue as ‘truths’ to be given a more accurate focus, to reveal their partiality to the reader.
But we should certainly not mistrust or feel the need to apologise for pursuing the past because of the present.
Tillyard's belief that Elizabethan literature could provide an encouragement in countering a threat to civilisation may now seem naive and intellectually misplaced, but within the context of its origins it is not something we should immediately deride.
Nor should a partiality in our present preoccupations with the English Renaissance be objected to.
Our current cultural experience has revealed  that the premise of a grand historical narrative presenting a unified cultural progression centred on interests that are male and European, and only dealing with activities engaged in by the minority in social and political control, can no longer compel our assent.
We have become aware of other contending histories previously rendered largely invisible, such as women's history and the ‘history from below’ of groups socially disenfranchised by reason of class, colour, religion.
One of the critical directions supported by recent work on the Renaissance is to render these other histories more visible and to examine the means by which they were hidden.
Literary texts are not some static crystalline structure in which we may glimpse a captured immobile past.
The critic is not some simple custodian of these museum texts whose task it is to keep the displays polished so their readers can see them in clear unreflected light.
Our relation with literary texts is formed through a complex intersection of past and present, moments of reception as well as moments of production are of equal importance.
Criticism reworks the relations of past and present, and at its best it does so dynamically, intervening in the past and the present to offer changed perspectives.
The result should be an activity, an exchange between past text, critical representation, and reader's response.
One of the features which noticeably emerged in the 1980s was a struggle for control of the past, a confrontation primarily between those who perceive contemporary western civilisation as a triumph and those who question such a perspective.
On one side is a reiteration of the Whiggish, teleological view of history which dominated the nineteenth century, demonstrating present western culture as the result of a continuous enlightenment and development of civilisation from the beginnings of the early modern period until the present.
In opposition to this perspective are those sceptical of models which project the past as a type of organic whole, a unified continuity which is subject to a continuous explanatory narrative.
In dealing with English Renaissance writing we find, on the one hand, a neo-conservative critical agenda which has appropriated the Tillyardian perspective, projecting a stable agreed world order occasionally buffeted but never  disrupted by alien forces.
A world which produces a literature that, at its best, celebrates essential and transcendent human qualities.
This presentation of the past is designed to demonstrate that, now as then, those who desire fundamental change are seeking instability, threatening western values anchored in the supposedly natural evolution of social and political order.
On the other hand are those who offer a more radical agenda to our study of the past.
These critics perceive the Elizabethan golden age as a mythic construction of later ages and, in actuality, to have been a fragmented, ruptured world, contending issues of gender, politics, religion, and cultural value without any consensus.
They present a critical agenda involved in a current cultural confrontation — questioning the ideological partiality of a neo-conservative critical perspective, which apparently refuses to confront the terms on which it asserts its authenticity and which limits the range of cultural artefacts it will admit as civilised discourse.
To participate, therefore, in a critical confrontation with the Renaissance is to participate in current ideological and political struggles.
Students reading for an essay topic are forming a view of the past which will mould their view of how the future can be constructed.
To undertake a critical reading which is unconcerned with how it is intervening in the present is a denial of intellectual responsibility.
How may we examine Milton's or Marvell's poetry in relation to the events of the mid-seventeenth century?
On the surface, the question seems to be one open to an answer, if we allow that literary texts do circulate in history.
But the question raises a host of subsequent questions, each of which will help determine the structure and focus of our answer.
What, to begin with, do we call the events of the mid-seventeenth century, for convenience the period 1640–60?
There are many titles currently in use, each betraying an ideological disposition towards the period's events: the Interregnum, the Great Rebellion, the English Revolution, the Civil War.
The first two reveal an essentially conservative, royalist agenda.
The period is seen as  an hiatus in an otherwise consistent historical development, built around a gradual political and social evolution, centred on the monarchy.
The Great Rebellion at least acknowledges that there were other rebellions, though not as consequential, but rebellion is an extraordinarily loaded term — implying unlawful, morally improper and ultimately unwarranted action against legitimate authority.
The term's application to this period originates in the Earl of Clarendon's History of the Rebellion and Civil Wars in England produced by a Royalist during the Restoration to celebrate those who ‘opposed and resisted that torrent’— rebellion being unqualifiedly equated with disorderly, uncontrolled catastrophe.
In modern appellation both terms, Interregnum and rebellion, are employed to contain the period's effect, to suggest it was an aberration, rectified with the restoration of the monarchy in 1660 when the ‘normal’ pattern of English historical evolution was also restored.
In contrast, English Revolution proposes a very different set of assumptions, perceiving the events of the period as a definite rupture in the structure of history, a breakdown of the old order and the emergence of a new one.
Many advocates of the title ‘revolution’ see the period achieving a positive result, liberating groups of people who had previously been kept ‘voiceless’by political disenfranchisement.
A further difference arising from naming is indicated by entitling the mid-seventeenth century the Civil War period.
This might appear on the surface the most neutral formulation — there were unarguably three distinct times of battles in 1642–6, 1648, and 1650–1 — but it also elides the establishment of parliamentary authority and later Cromwell's Protectorate.
It was not a twenty-year period of formal civil conflict.
Further, the term suggests its user is indicating a type of political neutrality towards the events, an indefinable right and wrong existing on both sides of the conflict.
Again, the term implies an essential uniqueness to the period, a time of conflict marked out as distinct from other periods of social, political and religious fracture.
Many writing on the mid-seventeenth century at present would legitimately claim that I have marked out these positions too exclusively.
There are those who feel, for instance, that a revolution did take place but not one which achieved positive effects; or others who dispute the existence of an English revolution but who do not adhere to a neo-conservative interpretation of English history.
What I wish to indicate here is the complex issues involved in establishing what to call historical events.
The idea that there is somehow an easy ‘historical background’ to the study of culture is obviously absurd.
In practical terms, we see that in studying a literary text we cannot go off and find some singular historical textbook which offers a straightforward, impartial presentation of ‘what happened’.
With Milton and Marvell, both of whom supported Parliament and were employed by the state during the Commonwealth and Protectorate, we have instances of writers with direct political involvement in their times.
How we colour that time will have a huge bearing on how we see their works in relation to the period.
Take the example of Marvell's ‘An Horatian Ode upon Cromwell's Return from Ireland’.
Traditionally, literary criticism — which generally has supported the conservative idea of the period as a time of disruption and rebellion has made out a case for the poem's balanced quality in praising both Cromwell and Charles I. Marvell may have later been an employee of Cromwell's Latin Secretariat, but his poem shows an independent impartiality which avoids political commitment.
The poet Marvell can thus be somehow separated from the political Marvell working to maintain the Interregnum's government.
But under the impact of historians who stress the period's revolutionary quality, readings of Marvell's poem as a political document celebrating the success of Cromwell in a positive frame have gained momentum.
The recognition that Marvell can be seen responding idealistically to the new age, and  partisanly aligning his poetry with Commonwealth and Protectorate aspirations is a consequence of admitting the enthusiasm many during the mid-seventeenth century felt for revolutionary events which would, they believed, bring a new order.
One consequence of recent trends, therefore, is that literary critics have been forced to recognise that they have had to become involved in issues of history formerly the preserve of historians, and can no longer take history for granted.
History is not some unmediated story of events.
It is a construct, often a narrative, of interested parties who seek to prove a thesis of how events have been shaped.
In the case of the mid-seventeenth century we find groups of current historians who share social and frequently explicit political assumptions identifying themselves with right and left, and often implicitly acknowledging that their own political agendas dictate not only their naming of the past but their unhappiness with opposing critical orientations.
A notable example is J. C. Davis's Fear, Myth, and History: The Ranters and the Historians .
The Ranters were a group of extreme religious libertarians who believed that God dwelt inside them as an inner light.
As a result any act was justifiable as long as it was performed with the working of the spirit.
In practice this meant that Ranters were identified with activities outside socially accepted boundaries, for example indulging in sexual licence, blasphemy and swearing.
They had a brief existence from 1649 until 1651 and were constantly attacked by government.
Davis argues, though, that there was no coherent Ranter movement.
Rather he sees them as an embodiment of the fears of seventeenth-century conservatives worried about the extreme forms radical religious movements were taking.
For Davis, the Ranters, as a group, are largely constructed by twentieth-century Marxist historians, notably Christopher Hill, intent on finding groups who can justify their thesis of a revolution.
For the historians of the left, Davis concluded, the Ranters are an example of a necessary  group, freed by the breakdown of social and political institutions and dynamically prepared to break with tradition.
The necessity of discovering such groups causes historians of the left to invent what never was.
Davis's claims have met with many objections.
Christopher Hill had always acknowledged that it was doubtful that there had been a Ranter organisation and difficult to define what ‘the Ranters’ as a group believed as opposed to individuals whose views came to be labelled as Ranters.
Nigel Smith in the introduction to his A Collection of Ranter Writings from the 17th Century — a book offering good evidence of highly individualistic writings which nevertheless share a number of common characteristics — emphasises that the term Ranter was one coined to refer to all those deemed to have extreme opinions.
But, as Smith's collection testifies, there is substantial evidence of radical millennial and egalitarian solutions circulating during the period.
The debate about Ranters is an instance of some historians, essentially neo-conservative in outlook, portraying themselves as historians of order contending against those who, they see, as historians of disorder, with all this implies about the historian's objective rather than objectivity within a political world dominated in the 1980s, at least in Britain and America, by neo-conservative values.
Whether we call some individuals Ranters, others Levellers, Diggers, Muggletonians, early Quakers and so forth and then present them either as a type of ‘lunatic fringe’ to mainstream developments or, as Hill eloquently puts it in his The World Turned Upside Down : ‘the attempts of various groups of the common people to impose their own solutions to the problems of their time, in opposition to the wishes of their betters who had called them into political action’is a matter of current political alignment and represents the way we wish to intervene in the present as in the past.
The question that began this examination of the mid-seventeenth century was how can we explore the relations of Milton's and Marvell's poetry to the period?
Does it matter, though, for literary criticism whether the poetry was formed out of a period of rebellion or revolution?
Traditionally, literary criticism has paid little attention to questions of precise historical contextualisation.
To locate a text in a specific historical milieu was only the preoccupation of specialist scholarship.
The volumes of the still popular Pelican Guide to English Literature which refer to the Renaissance are called The Age of Shakespeare and From Donne to Marvell , for example.
The titles themselves clearly announce a supposed concern with only literary values.
But Shakespeare's central importance within Renaissance writing was not a contemporary phenomenon, rather the result of later critical judgements.
How can the ‘age’ be called his?
The Guide 's critical position assumes Shakespeare produced a body of autonomous work which reflected his uninhibited intentions, and this (unstated) supposition certainly pushes history to the background.
Shakespeare's standing, as any other writer's, was imagined to be determined by an expression of values which transcended the historical moment.
The Pelican Guide proposes that accounts of the social context of literature are included in the volumes to suggest the factors which merely encouraged forms of literary production.
Great literature comes to be imagined as the private, autonomous utterances of authors in a position to control their unfettered subjectivity regardless of historical constraint.
This ignores, for instance, the fact that some of Shakespeare's plays were written during Elizabeth's reign and others during James I's, when political conditions changed and, as important, the terms of political representation differed (in which dramatic productions importantly figured).
Alert as we are now to the interaction between writing and history, we can perceive that it was certainly not Shakespeare's  ‘age’.
His drama negotiates historical moments in which Shakespeare was not in control of the artistic, political or social conditions of the culture in which his writing was produced.
Similarly, seventeenth-century literary history is not merely a progress of lyric development from Donne to Marvell.
For traditional criticism it did not make an especial difference whether the date of composition of Milton's Samson Agonistes was assigned to 1647–53 during the Civil War or to the Restoration period of 1660–70.
The historical circumstances of a text were important so that localised issues could be clarified and explained — effectively so they could be explained away.
The issues in Samson were focused commonly on the internal struggles of the individual confronted with temptation, and whether the poem achieved a tragic dimension or not.
In traditional critical study, questions about politics were rarely felt important since politics engaged with transitory activities.
William Riley Parker's monumental biography of Milton, which appeared after a lifetime's research in 1968, resolutely portrays Milton's involvement with the politics of the mid-seventeenth century as an unfortunate distraction.
The prose which preoccupied Milton during the Commonwealth and Protectorate periods was to be seen as separate and certainly intrinsically less interesting than the poetry in which Parker portrays Milton participating in some universalised European humanism.
From this critical position, Milton's poetry was thought to have no points of contact with the writing of the Ranters.
Indeed Ranter writing was not thought to be a proper subject for literary inquiry.
The new insistence that a text's mediation in history is important has changed this perspective.
Christopher Hill's Milton and the English Revolution challenged the idea of a Milton primarily concerned to participate in an elite humanist culture.
As Hill demonstrated, Miltonic  ideas which scholars can trace back to antiquity were commonplaces to seventeenth-century radical groups such as the Levellers and Ranters.
Milton gathered his ideas not only from older books but from contemporary pamphlets issued by those frequently characterised by the social and cultural elite — then as now — as being on the lunatic fringe.
We have become aware that Milton's poetry as well as prose was designed to intervene in specific political instances, negotiating these through both elite and popular cultural resources.
In such circumstances, even if the date of Samson's composition remains problematised, attention shifts to the date of its first publication in 1671.
The poem obviously engages with Milton's experience of the revolution's defeat following the Restoration, and, given Milton's well-known support for Commonwealth and Protectorate, it is difficult to imagine a reader in the early 1670s perceiving the poem as evolving out of the period of the late 1640s, a time which many supporters of the English Revolution experienced as one of hope and triumph.
Samson Agonistes's presentation of a hero whose refusal to capitulate allows him to regain divine inner light and inflict a defeat on his enemies bears witness to the plea for continued resistance of the type a republican supporter would propose during a time of defeat.
Christopher Hill has emphasised how Milton explicitly has Samson bring down the temple on ‘Lords, ladies, captains, counsellors, or priests, /Their choice nobility and flower’(11.1653–4) allowing the vulgar [i.e. the common people]‘who stood without’ to escape.
Milton departs from the biblical account which has the people suffer with their rulers.
This seems a clear example of his allegiance to popular dissent against the Church and social elite who supported the Restoration.
What it is important to recognise here is that a text's negotiation with the time of its historical production is a complex operation.
With Samson we have to decide whether we should concentrate on the time of its circulation in the early 1670s or whether we should attempt to determine a precise date of composition.
A text can take on a very different character through the circumstances of its  circulation: when it finds publication, who publishes it, and what were the terms of its publication — for example, in a cheap edition offering wide access or an expensive limited edition intended for a specific audience.
These issues will play a significant part in determining the circumstances of original reception.
We need also to ask questions about why certain styles and generic forms were adopted at specific moments.
A text's style as well as content signals social, cultural, political affinities and expectations.
Samson Agonistes employs the prophetic use of Scripture beloved of the English radical tradition during the period.
Though set in a biblical past, the poem used the popular application of typology to indicate a present importance.
Since history was commonly seen as a working out of scriptural promise, what had been figured forth in the Old Testament (the original story of Samson) was accomplished in the New Testament (by Christ as second Samson winning a more lasting victory) and repeated in succeeding times (the present conflict of the godly suffering under the yoke of royalist Philistines).
The poem proposes that a cause which appeared to be defeated could be revived through God's agency.
It seems to speak this most loudly to those supporters of Protestant prophecy and  millenarianism , those who were, like the Ranters, among the most radical supporters of the revolution.
The poem can be seen offering a political agenda through its expectation of a manner of reading Scripture, a manner most popular among those who viewed the Restoration as defeat.
This is only part of Samson Agonistes ’ contextualisation.
Certainly, circulating in the world of the 1670s, the poem can be seen as important to groups of Protestant dissenters, offering them a visionary politics founded both on the scripturally based structure of history they favoured but also by appropriating and re-employing the scriptural Word which was a familiar practice of their own revolutionary writing.
Yet, the style of Samson is fundamentally different from those texts associated with the writing of popular radical groups.
Milton adopts a classical tragic high style  and models Samson to participate in Renaissance humanist parodia Christiana , the transference of Classical literary principles to Christian settings, a methodology common throughout Europe from the fifteenth century onwards especially among neo-Latin writing.
The poem stylistically asserts its participation in high literary culture, a culture by the 1670s unquestionably associated with a social elite.
In contrast popular dissenting tracts frequently insist on a strong separate identity, suspicious of being seen as formally composed and keen to assert scriptural language as a key to asserting their own experience.
Among groups who believed the structures and orders of the Church — both Roman and English — had, from antiquity, polluted the immediacy of the ‘Everlasting Gospel’, formal literary language and highly organised stylistic expression were viewed with suspicion, and were frequently seen as one more medium through which God's truth had been fouled.
This provoked popular writing which deliberately employed the unusual and seemingly random combination of styles in a uncertain structural organisation.
This feature of popular writing has commonly resulted in severe judgements among those literary critics who see stylistic control as a fundamental criterion to judging a text's accomplishment.
It is characteristic of Milton to wish his audience to see him as a writer familiar with highly regarded literary writing and able to employ it to more serious purpose than it had been previously.
Samson Agonistes is not centred on Greek legend which was the staple of classical tragedy but, as Milton's age believed, on Christian truth, and on truths capable of being repeated in Milton's present.
Milton's adoption of the high style here distances him from popular dissenting expression, instead giving him a voice (if not a message) more likely to be equated with, and find favour among, a sophisticated court culture.
Milton preferred many aspects of the religious, and perhaps even social, programmes that the more radical groups which came to prominence during the Commonwealth favoured.
It is apparent, though, that he was extremely uneasy about the cultural manifestations of such programmes.
Milton, as  Marvell, was concerned to show that the establishment of a godly republic in England could produce writing which participated in established literary culture, indeed surpass previous achievements.
Importantly, too, the use of a high style allowed Milton a voice he might not otherwise have achieved during the Restoration.
Even ten years after the re-establishment of monarchy, those in power were not keen to see the Protectorate's most eloquent defender openly engage in the unmistakable political rhetoric of the tract and pamphlet.
For a restored social elite, one which included many former supporters of Parliament, the remaining dissenters were ‘A turbulent, seditious, and factious people’ and their written style of self-presentation was further confirmation of their unruliness.
Adopting a style whose crafted formality is at the other extreme from those promoted by radical groups, Milton is not openly proclaiming his continued rebelliousness.
Stylistically,Samson is distancing itself from the very audience it should inspire, but by doing so Milton is helping to avoid potential censorship and a silencing altogether.
Samson Agonistes exemplifies a problem which has stood at the centre of current inquiry into the negotiations a text has with an historical context.
If Milton adopts a high style which allows him to voice opposition to Restoration politics, is that opposition not contained by this style, one perceived as normally expressing the values of the elite?
Does this cause Milton's text to become compromised, its message rendered politically neutered?
We can point to Milton being retained as an approved poet of high literary culture during the next century when other dissenting writing of Milton's age circulated among groups increasingly only at the margins of political life.
Milton's high style allowed Samson to be read in a manner which reassured the very groups it can be argued the poem attacks.
Milton's maintenance of the traditional Renaissance literary values of art, imitation, and exercise allowed him to be appropriated by a culturally elitist agenda indivisibly caught up with an elitist social and political agenda.
The questions  raised by literature's interaction with power, vested in the control of institutions and those who control them, has been the focus of recent debate about how texts circulate in history and is crucial to the arguments voiced in the New Historicism which will be considered in detail in Chapter 4.
What I wish to indicate here is that a new emphasis on a text's negotiation with history does not allow us to reduce literary texts to the status of documents, writing which only exemplifies the preoccupations of certain periods past and present.
Questions about what may be termed the aesthetics of a text continue to be posed, even though the aesthetic is no longer tied to a text's autonomous integrity.
One complication that we see raised with Samson Agonistes , is that a text's success in fulfilling the conditions of its chosen genre, in this case classical tragedy, may help to render it unsuccessful in terms of the way it was originally envisaged as intervening aethestically in its contemporary history.
In this instance, the employment of a high style to ensure a dissenting voice continues to be heard results in an easy official appropriation of Samson Agonistes by an elite culture empowered by the poem's style to construct a reading of the ‘tragedy’ of Samson, a reading which reduces the poem to celebrate a unique legendary/literary figure whose suffering is discussed in terms of a generalised human condition.
Milton's style, enabling the text to circulate in a politically charged climate, also works to enforce the distinctions between serious and popular writing, ironically helping to marginalise the writings of the very groups whose political agendas he shared.
The aesthetic, and how we analyse it, is not separated from the political, but circulates with it.
Is Samson Agonistes , therefore, an aesthetically satisfying or dissatisfying text?
Given the confusions rendered by its apparent message and a stylistic structure which subverts this message (or, at least, creates an audience primarily among those for whom such a message is unwelcome), can we talk of the poem as a successful work of art?
The answers will largely depend on our own perspectives on the past and the present, the way in which we, too, employ a political aesthetic.
The General Introduction to The Pelican Guide to English  Literature saw the book's role as helping readers respond ‘to what is living and contemporary in literature’:
Not that one is offering literature as a substitute religion or as providing a philosophy for life.
Its satisfactions are of their own kind, though they are satisfactions intimately bound up with the life of each individual reader, and therefore not without their bearing on his attitude to life.
The role of literature here is seen as largely inert: passive moral formation and entertainment.
The idea of literary writing participating in active political agendas, intervening in the collective life of a society, helping to mould social transformation is a largely foreign concept to traditional literary criticism.
As we can see, though, new concerns with how writing interacts with history are causing us to abandon the idea of literary study as something caught up with the transcendental.
Our new critical practice is showing that the questions we pose on Renaissance writing, which insist on the importance of contextualisation, reflect our own concerns with the function of language and value within society.
As we come to discover and worry about our own lack of autonomy, we discover in the past a similar lack of autonomy but, importantly in the Renaissance, a body of writing which never believed it possessed the power of independent expression in the first place.
Within Renaissance writing we can discover evidence which reveals that a text's recognition that it circulates within a powerful institutional context need not be capitulation to context, but its own powerful representation of that context.
Powerful because within the text lies the potential for transformation, not the mere passive reflection of history but a reorganisation of it, suggesting that history might be otherwise, representing the  possibility of change.
Literary representation enters a complex negotiation with history, a debate about ‘things’(institutions, actions, events) and the words used to name them with an awareness that both the names and the things may be otherwise.
2
Words not Things
New alignments between literature and history are only one feature of theory's impact on readings of Renaissance texts.
Contemporary literary theory has also questioned whether a relation between words and things is easily achieved, even possible.
Many cultural historians have too readily appropriated literary writing as cultural documents, subduing the problems about what language actually represents which have been examined by other forms of theoretical inquiry, notably deconstruction.
As Paul de Man has pointed out:
Literature is fiction not because it somehow refuses to acknowledge ‘reality’, but because it is not a priori certain that language functions according to principles which are those, or which are like those, of the phenomenal world.
It is therefore not a priori certain that literature is a reliable source of information about anything but its own language.
De Man's scepticism is indicative of a new type of formalism in approaching texts, where information exterior to the text itself (such as author, or period, or indeed the text's subject) is ignored or dismissed as incidental.
Critical activity becomes focused instead on the play of language.
Deconstruction further works to demonstrate that the integrity of a text — its ability to articulate a controlled self-sufficient statement — is impossible.
Language, as Jacques Derrida has forcefully argued, is a field of play.
Language does not simply stand as a signifier for some thing, an exact reference between a word and a thing.
Rather language acts as a substitute for the thing, or in Derrida's formulation it acts as a supplement.
For Derrida, language replaces the signified thing.
Language still retains a referential function but it also adds something.
Discursive practice is not applying simple correspondences between things and the language used to signify them.
Language is always something more.
It acts as a supplement to a lack, something missing, on the part of the signified thing.
Language, by not replacing the signified thing at the supposed centre of the structure it has created, discredits the idea of there being a centre at all.
Within a text, we can no longer imagine some signified object outside of language, determining the language used to signify it.
A discursive practice, therefore, also resists any attempt at offering a total description, a point where meaning can be contained or exhausted.
Discursive practices are rather fields of play, capable of infinite substitutions.
As Derrida makes clear, this lack of totality with language — something he sees as one of its inevitable qualities — occurs because, as a supplement, it reveals that there is always something missing from language.
That absence is a centre, the signified thing which language has substituted for.
The true presence of the signified thing would arrest and limit the play of substitutions for it which language generates.
But such a state is impossible.
By questioning the idea of language as a total representation of what it signifies, deconstruction refuses to limit the play of language, refuses to acknowledge that it is controlled by a centre — an author, a historic identity, the subject which it is representing.
By acting as a substitute, a supplement, to its ostensible signified, language is always suggesting the signified is somehow other than it appears in its linguistic signifying form.
Deconstruction has been especially interested in exploring language as a supplement which de-centres the apparent organisation of the signified thing, revealing self-contradiction and instability.
In many respects deconstruction has not been avidly employed in analysing Renaissance texts and there is a certain contradiction in employing it in this study.
By talking about Renaissance texts, or more accurately texts produced during a period defined by current readers as the Renaissance, we are attempting to provide a type of structure (how language operated in a defined period) which deconstruction, in some purist sense, would argue is  to miss the point of how language acts as a supplement.
In dealing with the Renaissance, we are assuming, as de Man above indicates, that there is a relation between language and the phenomenal (i.e. the range of activities undertaken in a defined historical period) which is an a priori given.
This relationship may in fact be the result of convention, the very type of convention deconstructive criticism wishes to demystify.
Scepticism about the relation between words and things indeed raises a question about whether the Renaissance is a phenomenon or whether it is a signifier, a discursive practice, which acts as a supplement for, say, the activities of the early modern period which are the things ostensibly being signified by the term Renaissance.
Under the terms of deconstruction, by proposing the Renaissance as a signifier, it suggests a lack, an absence in some sense, of ‘Renaissance’ from the early modern period.
The Renaissance then can be seen as an addition to the early modern period.
It becomes a term whose reference is linguistic and whose meaning is not determined by the phenomenon of the early modern period.
The Renaissance becomes a field of play, a field where there are any possible number of substitutions to describe what it is.
A field, further, where what would restrict what the Renaissance could be — the firm phenomenal centre of the early modern period — is missing.
The Renaissance is not the early modern period, it is an additional something more and by breaking the equation, Renaissance = early modern, the Renaissance is no longer a stable controllable thing.
The point is an important one because, as de Man goes on to argue, what we call ideology is precisely the confusion of linguistic with natural reality or reference with phenomenalism.
As we have witnessed in the preceding chapter, the ideological contest for control of the past is largely predicated on the basis of the Renaissance being a phenomenon, something that can be discovered and controlled by accurate descriptions of what it is.
The Renaissance is frequently presented as what is truest, best, and most pleasing about the early modern period.
The actual phenomenon these qualitative attributes refer to is, as we  have witnessed, contested.
But the assumption made by both historicist critical right and left is that the Renaissance does refer to something which can, potentially, be identified in a contained fashion.
To satisfy the demands of their historicist ideologies it is necessary to promote Renaissance as a phenomenon, not a linguistic term whose field of reference is unstable and above all open.
Yet, it is clear that our criticism must be aware of the supplemental aspect of the Renaissance — that it is not automatically a something open to contained description.
As any term, Renaissance is not something fixed.
If deconstruction in a purest sense is only of limited interest to a study which is asserting that texts emerge out of a particular culture called the English Renaissance, it is also true that, fortunately, there is little pure deconstruction about.
Derrida himself is interested in the tension created between discursive play and history.
But new questions about the relations of language and what language represents are of great importance to our understanding of Renaissance culture.
Certainly, similar questions were posed in the Renaissance and given that the study of language, particularly rhetoric, lay at the heart of humanist education programmes during the period this is not surprising.
The equation of a person's worth, both morally and socially, with their ability to be eloquent is found iterated both implicitly and explicitly throughout the period.
Sir Philip Sidney's argument in The Defence of Poetry that poetry's didactic superiority rested in its ability to both teach and delight is an example of a belief in the superiority of eloquent as opposed to plain language as the vehicle for communicating serious issues.
Sidney's proposal that a poet's creation of pleasing fictions is a means of transcending nature and reaching toward an imitation of the divine is perceived as a means by which an experience of the world lost by original sin may be recaptured.
Milton's Of Education expands Sidney's remarks on poetry to learning in general: ‘The end, then, of Learning is, to repair the ruins of our first parents by regaining to know God aright’.
Within a humanist perception of language, therefore, was the ability to extend and supplement existing reality and to indicate a higher reality in a perfection phenomenally lost.
This is not, in its own right, a Renaissance deconstructionist assertion about the absence of a signified.
As Milton's own language above reveals learning ‘re-pairs’, it re-establishes the link between us and a higher reality.
The language signifier is perceived as potentially representing a lost signified.
But by asserting the ability of language to create true fictions, this celebration of the power of language is also helping to de-centre language's supposed referential relation with the world of epistemological things.
In claiming one of the qualities of language was its ability to supplement the phenomenal reality of this world, the Renaissance also acknowledged the volatility of language.
Language might be able to illuminate higher ‘things’, but an admission of its fictive role also made it suspect.
This was particularly true of the highly organised rhetoric of some literary language.
George Puttenham's Arte of English Poesy , for example, readily acknowledges that rhetorical figures can ‘abuse’ a relation between words and things by creating a doubleness.
This doubleness is not dissimilar to a deconstructive view of language as a field of play:
As figures be the instruments of ornament in euery language, so be they also in a sorte abuses or rather trespasses in speach, because they passe the ordinary limits of common vtterance, and be occupied of purpose to deceiue the eare and also the minde, drawing it from plainnesse and simplicitie to a certaine doublenesse whereby our talke is the more guilefull & abusing.
As Derek Attridge has demonstrated, Puttenham is forced to rely on the idea of decorum to argue that poets can transform the ‘vices’ of rhetoric to virtues in their use of art to perfect rather than pervert nature.
Decorum, though, is not readily definable for Puttenham.
It remains an (unacknowledged) slippery circular concept for him.
Decorum, Puttenham proposed, is a quality which comes naturally to the elite, but these elite are identified by their natural sense of decorum.
As Attridge shows this means that poetry claiming to be perfecting the natural (acting according to decorum) establishes its claim to do so by using a rhetoric which is employed only by a learned few whose language is distanced from the natural language of the majority.
What has formally been thought of as natural is marginalised as rude and barbarous.
What is now considered natural is the result of learned artifice.
For Attridge, Puttenham truly supplements nature with art, by substituting art for nature.
Art occupies the centre from which nature is now absent.
It is noticeable how Renaissance theorists of literature elide the problem of language being employed in deceitful ways to create self-contradictory and unstable assertions.
Most, of course, had a vested interest in promoting eloquence as a means by which civilised, moral, and socially superior behaviour could be recognised.
Sidney's Defence of Poetry for instance assumes a hostile critical environment, maintaining that there are important groups who mistrust poetic fictions altogether.
Sidney as a poet, therefore, understandably asserts the improving role of poetry against those hostile to literature.
Scepticism about literary language, however, was not only the province of those opposed in some absolutist sense to literary practices.
Language's power to deceive, misdirect and generally subvert literary practice while supposedly promoting ‘truth’ is a feature exploited by many literary  practitioners within their own writing.
Consider Sidney's first sonnet of his sequence Astrophil and Stella :
Loving in truth, and fain in verse my love to show, That she (dear she) might take some pleasure of my pain; Pleasure might cause her read, reading might make her know; Knowledge might pity win, and pity grace obtain; I sought fit words to paint the blackest face of woe, Studying investions fine, her wits to entertain; Oft turning others' leaves, to see if thence would flow Some fresh and fruitful showers upon my sunburnt brain.
But words came halting forth, wanting inventions's stay; Invention, nature's child, fled step-dame study's blows; And others' feet still seemed but strangers in my way.
Thus great with child to speak, and helpless in my throes, Biting my truant pen, beating myself for spite, ‘Fool’, said my muse to me; ‘look in thy heart, and write.’
The opening assertion ‘Loving in truth, and fain in verse my love to show’ signals a confusion.
Does Astrophil, who is the ostensible author, mean he loves truth or that it is true he is in love?
He is disposed to show his love, or his love of truth, in verse, but ‘fain’ also acknowledges a (at least potential) feigning of this condition in verse.
A feigning could indicate that the poet is actually interested in creating a false portrayal of his love.
The line can be read: It is true that I am in love and wish to reveal this love in poetry.
Or it could mean, I am in love and will present this love in such a way as to win advantage (the next lines make clear Astrophil's wish to obtain Stella's ‘grace’(both spiritual blessing and sexual favours).
Other combinations are also possible: e.g. ‘I prefer truth but also wish to represent my love in verse.’
This last interpretation might confirm Astrophil as a lover of truth through his acknowledgement that a representation of love in verse is artificial, that he is feigning.
Or the line could be denying that there is any contradiction at all between truth and feigning (poetry, Sidney claimed in his Defence , could make true fictions).
There are a vast number of potential meanings made possible by the volatility of language.
A volatility emphasised by the juxtaposition of truth and showing and the pun on ‘fein’.
Only by supplying something outside the poem — claims for intention, the ostensible participation of the language in recognisable (and thus containable) poetic conventions, the equation of Astrophil with Sidney and his love with Penelope Rich (the sequence's Stella) and then a testing of the language's claim against their history — could the referential quality of the poem's language be critically maintained.
Such impositions on the poem are almost invariably imposed in critical accounts but, as we see, the play of the language resists such containments.
Linguistically, the line acknowledges that the representation of Astrophil's love — and what or who is not clear, Stella or his own self-absorption — may be feigned, a false and therefore different presentation of his love.
The relation between verse and what it apparently seeks to signify is disrupted and made unstable.
The poetry substitutes for the love and for the lovers — Astrophel's and Stella's reality is also only within the bounds of linguistic play.
Sidney's sonnet concludes with the injunction.
Fool’, said my muse to me; ‘look in thy heart, and write’.’
The muse's intervention occurs after Astrophil appears to be carried away in a violent frenzy, unable to find a fit language to achieve his ends.
Of course, the disorganised pattern to Astrophil's argument is wholly contrived.
This discourse is formed within a closely structured sonnet, and the muse's intervention is a conclusion which maintains the sonnet's structure.
Once more, though, the poem reveals a play of language which render meaning unstable and even self-contradictory.
The muse is a poetic convention and its appearance here to demand the authenticity of Astrophil's feelings (look in thy heart) is ironic.
But the muse's intervention also raises the possibility of abandoning poetry altogether.
Writing from the heart is the recommendation of a muse who could be seeking to make such writing a legitimate part of poetry, an activity which takes place under the muse's control.
But it could also signify that writing from the heart is different from poetry, the muse's injunction being meant as a dismissal, exiling Astrophil from poetry's realm.
The compatibility between poetry and writing from the heart is not automatic but at best conventional.
Indeed, within Renaissance convention, the two do not have the clear associations they do within Romantic conventions.
Poetry, as Sidney argued in the Defence , is art, imitation, and exercise.
Astrophil has been trying in the sonnet to proceed by imitation and been singularly unsuccessful in doing so.
The muse's outburst may be interpreted as an exasperated sentence of banishment.
Astrophil is a fool incapable of writing poetry.
The sonnets of Astrophil and Stella that follow may be the result of taking the muses' advice or ignoring the advice.
The sonnets may announce a compatibility between poetic convention and authentic expression; or the sonnets may be the result of Astrophil staying within the muse's domain, writing in imitation of familiar poetic norms and abandoning the muse's advice to look for an authentic writing from the heart.
The next sonnet in the sequence begins with Astrophil looking at his heart and finding there the conventional poetic image of love's wounding arrow.
The sonnet concludes with him employing all his wit to make his love appear differently from what his  experience tells him it is.
There are other meanings to be drawn from this first sonnet, of course, but what is clear is that the poetic sequence of Astrophil and Stella may be seen announcing itself as a failure, a success, both, or neither.
The sonnet's language allows a continuous play of substitutions.
Its meaning only becomes contained when exterior intentions are imposed — insisting that it operates according to Petrarchan or anti-Petrarchan convention, that the sonnet's explore the relation between sexual behaviour at court and ritual descriptions of this behaviour, that the sequence is a concealed articulation of Sidney's relation with Penelope Rich.
In each case linguistic play will be restricted by reference to something the language may not refer to at all.
The sonnet registers forcibly its linguistic uncertainty, rendering its own meaning unstable, and interestingly also de-centring the external conventions which attempt to contain it.
Another good example of Renaissance poetry's attempt to explore the relation between signifying language and signified thing is offered by Shakespeare's sonnet 54:
O, how much more doth beauty beauteous seem
By that sweet ornament which truth doth give!
The rose looks fair, but fairer we it deem
For that sweet odour which doth in it live.
The canker-blooms have full as deep a dye
As the perfumed tincture of the roses,
Hang on such thorns, and play as wantonly
When summer's breath their masked buds discloses;
But for their virtue only is their show,
They lived unwoo'd, and unrespected fade;
Die to themselves.
Sweet roses do not so;
Of their sweet deaths are sweetest odours made.
And so of you, beauteous and lovely youth,
When that shall  vade , by verse distills your truth.
Here the conventional representation of truth as the unadorned, stable centre which poetic ornamentation covers is replaced by a claim that truth is an ornament, an addition which paradoxically makes beauty seem more beautiful.
Truth becomes a supplement to a thing, in the analogy of the rose, it becomes the rose's scent.
But despite being a supplement it also replaces what it signifies.
The addition of scent to a rose is the way we recognise it as a  true rose.
The addition of ornament to beauty makes beauty truly appear beauteous.
Using this analogy, the sonnet looks to gain power over a youth's beauty by arguing that showy flowers merely fade but true scented roses in their death are distilled into perfume which become, paradoxically, their sweetest moment as roses:
And so of youth, beauteous and lovely youth,
When that shall vade, by verse distills your truth.
A recognisable conventional poetic strategy of indicating the power of verse to create lasting reputation, with the usual implication that what the poet actually desires is physical enjoyment of the transitory beauty, is here rendered unstable.
The truth of the youth's beauty will be distilled by the addition of poetic ornament which makes it seem more beautiful.
The truth of the object is immaterial, what the sonnet argues is that truth is created by distilling (transforming) the youth's beauty into poetry.
To achieve this ‘youth’ must first fade away.
On the rose analogy there must in fact be violence done to beauty, it must certainly be destroyed before beauty can be made truly beautiful by the addition of scent or verse in their most powerful concentrated forms as perfume or sonnet.
To capture the truth of the object then, the poem argues, the object must be absent.
Or at least seem to be absent.
For what the sonnet also reveals is that the truth of verse is not only ornamental addition, it is all there is.
The faded youth only exists within the realm of the poem, his or her traces have otherwise vanished, necessarily so to make the verses' truth actually true.
The creation of poetic truth is achieved only through the destruction of what it seeks to represent.
Rather than creating a permanent signifier of the youth's beauty, the sonnet seeks the destruction of the beauty and its replacement by a beauty supplied by verse.
This additional beauty becomes the true and only beauty of the absent youth.
But it is a beauty without subject, a field of discursive play capable of infinitely ornamenting with ‘truth’ what it has destroyed and replaced.
Within the terms the sonnet has constructed, any claim to truth, even poetic truth, is necessarily compromised and made self-contradictory.
Truth becomes a supplement, a substitute which replaces something which is missing.
Claiming to possess within the sonnet's language the truth of the youth's beauty is now to admit an absent centre.
This truth no longer points to a signified.
The poem which is addressed to a youth is claiming the absence of that youth, necessarily destroyed by the verse which has distilled his faded beauty's ‘truth’.
The sonnet has not given the youth a new centre, a pretty room, within the poem.
By claiming truth as an ornament, the sonnet insists that the youth's truth must also be supplemental to the sonnet, different from it.
The sonnet which apparently seeks to contain the truth of the youth's beauty so as to gain power and control over it, exposes that it destroys and banishes the youth's beauty.
What remains is only language, the sonnet.
But it is a language once again demonstrated to be volatile, unable to have its discursive play controlled, de-centring any attempt at a structured organisation.
Derrida's recognition of a tension created between the play of language and history has been matched in recent years by an attempt by some critics to force a polarisation between critical activities which embrace history from those which embrace linguistic theory.
In fact, though, most influential work on Renaissance texts has recognised a place for both history and analysis alert to the shifts and instabilities of language in explorations of texts.
If there is little unfettered deconstructive activity operating within Renaissance studies currently, it is largely because the questions critics wish to ask of texts are premised on ideas opposed to accepting that a text cannot speak about anything but itself.
Literary studies are increasingly directed towards cultural studies, of understanding the way texts operate with social structures.
Similarly, during the Renaissance, humanist theory was directed at language in action.
Its preoccupations with rhetoric and oratory envisaged public forms where language was used to persuade, exhort, or otherwise move.
Literary language was not removed from these public concerns, a belief that texts could communicate and move readers was of course fundamental to the assumption that poetry could teach and delight.
It is, perhaps not surprising that Renaissance  writers seem most open to the deconstructive implications of the play of language in lyric poetry, generic forms which suggest more personal and private preoccupations.
Some of the common strategies deployed within lyrics, for instance creating the impression of the lyric's reader as an intruder gazing voyeuristically into texts meant for private circulation, is one of the devices employed by poets to protect themselves.
Such devices are ways of deflecting accusations that the linguistic instability their poems expose might be read as undermining public discourses which are anxious to maintain the semblance of the relation between word and thing in, for example, celebratory accounts of influential court figures.
The text's instabilities, this device suggests, are the result of the reader straying into private discourses, where the terms of reference are apparently explicit to the knowing ‘other’ reader, the person addressed who is ostensibly real but in actuality normally a fictional construction.
An awareness of the volatility of language, among Renaissance writers and among current critics, has proved extremely valuable in drawing attention to clashes, inconsistency, and points of confrontation within texts.
It has led to our recognition of the difficulties inherent in the codes which texts employ to articulate what could otherwise not have been written, of the difficult negotiations between ideological expression and the things this expression seeks to characterise and thus control, and of the complexities of a text's own negotiations with other texts.
Importantly, by enabling us to see the lack of stability within textual play, deconstruction has helped bring attention to the exterior forces which attempt to control such play.
Recent criticism has become increasingly interested in the institutions which seek to impose controls on what we can say about the Renaissance.
As we have seen in the preceding chapter, some of these controls have overtly political agendas.
In others, the political becomes subtly incorporated into other forms of institutional control.
What we read is commonly determined for us.
Our experience as readers is formed, in part, from the texts we are given to read.
3
Founding Canons
Many teachers believe that Shakespeare's work conveys universal values, and that his language expresses rich and subtle meanings beyond that of any other English writer.
Other teachers point out that evaluations of Shakespeare have varied from one historical period to the next, and they argue that pupils should be encouraged to think critically about his status in the canon.
But almost everyone agrees that his work should be represented in a National Curriculum.
Shakespeare's plays are so rich that in every age they can produce fresh meanings and even those who deny his universality agree on his cultural importance.
This extract from English for ages 5 to 16: Proposals of the Secretary of State for Education and Science published by the British government in 1989 as a consultative paper for the planned National Curriculum in England and Wales is an appropriate place to begin a consideration of the institutional framework in which we study Renaissance literature.
The Proposals were to advise government on appropriate ‘attainment targets and programmes of study for English’ that students might be expected to gain (in the case of  this extract) at secondary schools.
The critical suppositions behind the study of Shakespeare, as we can see, are largely traditionalist with some recognition of a new emphasis on cultural studies.
There appears to be an air of condescension towards those who refuse to recognise Shakespeare's universality, as though they were a peculiar sect within the broad church of liberalism.
What is clear, though, is that Shakespeare's presence on the National Curriculum is to represent both a timeless cultural importance and one specific to the Renaissance.
A select number of Shakespeare's plays have become the only sustained acquaintance with Renaissance literature a majority of readers are likely to have before entering higher education.
Despite the stated belief in the Proposals that students at school should be exposed to a historic range of English writing, there is little attention to works  written before the nineteenth century, and certainly no recognition that new relations with history are causing literary texts to be approached in new ways.
Shakespeare is re-allocated the central place in the canon.
We all agree on the cultural importance of Shakespeare, the Report asserts, and we probably all do.
What is not voiced is that this importance is, in part at least, caused by the institutional processes which give Shakespeare a privileged position on the curriculum at schools.
What is implied, rather, is that Shakespeare's cultural importance is somehow intrinsic and not the product of powerful formative institutions such as school boards.
I am not trying to suggest that there is some conspiracy at work to centralise the importance of Shakespeare when it should be more widely shared or go to some other figure.
There is enormous value in having a body of Renaissance texts which we can assume a large number of readers have some acquaintance with.
Shakespeare's centrality has been achieved because there remains continued debate about the plays, these texts do not come down to us as ‘dead on arrival’, to borrow a phrase from Stephen Greenblatt.
But it is varying cultural transactions of the past which encouraged Shakespeare's plays to remain in wide circulating which empower Shakespeare's continued circulation.
The plays become a focus, not only for question about Renaissance drama, but about a variety of cultural debates.
‘Shakespeare’ has become more than a collection of Renaissance texts and is now a site for wider cultural explorations and controversies.
For example, a Sunday newspaper recently carried a column entitled ‘A Book that Changed Me’ in which the playwright David Edgar extolled George Steiner's The Death of Tragedy , a book he was introduced to by a programme note for a production of King Lear .
Edgar noted how the Royal Shakespeare Company's programmes' were a treasure house of enticing quotations that led the keen reader on to find and study the books themselves'.
The critical value of Shakespeare is not founded only in the texts ascribed to him, but in wider circulations and negotiations of Shakespeare within social  frameworks, in the moment of his texts' original production and in subsequent periods.
A text's value rests partly then on the demand for it, and that demand is predicated on previous demand.
Shakespeare's high valuation is supported by institutions who ensure his texts are read, these accumulated acts of reading forming part of the value placed on a widely negotiable Shakespearean currency.
One of the difficulties confronting students of Renaissance literature is that, at a time when critical and cultural theory is asking us to expand our familiarity with a wider range of reading, it is increasingly difficult to have access to the range of texts we would like to read.
Shakespeare is given a special status.
In Britain there is a large and welcome constituency for courses which study his writing.
The plays' prominence with the public are assured because of a Shakespeare industry operating in theatres, in tourist boards, and because of the centrality of his work with school examining boards.
This industry should certainly not be haughtily condescended to.
It allows an audience whose access to Renaissance writing would otherwise be non-existent to gain some insight into the past and witness some of the power of its expression.
An assured interest in Shakespeare supports the availability of a large number of editions of the plays from cheap Complete Works to the specialist Arden editions (still relatively affordable).
It is a different story with virtually every other writer.
In his Elizabethan World Picture Tillyard proposed the book's purpose as ‘to help the ordinary reader to understand and to enjoy the great writers of the age’.
The constituency that made up these ordinary readers was probably no more ordinary than Tillyard's projected Elizabethans were, yet his assumption was of a body of readers outside higher education institutions.
Tillyard could defend his belief in such a body by the existence of a considerable number of Renaissance texts in cheap, modern editions which general readers had access to.
This body of texts has largely disappeared.
Renaissance texts in circulation today are effectively course texts designed, produced, and circulated among students in  higher education or among a very small academic elite who make use of institutional libraries.
In certain respects the current conditions of the availability of texts create an increasing downward spiral about what types of material can be easily studied.
Texts are selected for courses from among those available.
The idea of mounting a course, say, in English Civil War poetry is fraught with an endless succession of practical difficulties because selections of poets such as Lovelace, Cowley, Wither, Thomas May, Thomas Stanley and so forth are not available.
The easier option is to settle for looking at Milton and Marvell and a few lyrics by Henry Vaughan.
The result of this process of ‘making do’ with what is available is that any likelihood of collections of such presently unavailable poets appearing are rendered even more economically impossible.
Instead academic publishers compete in duplication the same market, publishing different editions of the same small selection of writing.
Publishers will not publish chancy, fat collections when they can publish a small number of readily marketable volumes.
For example, a number of academics waited with great interest for the Virago Press book,Kissing the Rod: An Anthology of Seventeenth-century Women's Verse (1988).
Pre-publication, it was announced in both hard and paperback format, the latter priced so that the book could be used as a course book.
But when the volume was first published it appeared only as an expensive hardback and the opportunity for exploring an important range of writing was restricted to specialists and students willing to pass around a library copy.
In late 1990 a paperback appeared but priced at double the cost in the pre-publication announcement, placing the volume outside the price range for a course text.
The publisher had made a decision, no doubt on sound commercial information, about the viability of the book as a course text and decided it should have a more restricted clientele who are in a position to buy a large-format, expensive paperback.
One of the features of Ben Jonson's Workes 1616 was not only that Jonson was the first English dramatist to present his plays as worthy of serious literary attention but also  that he did so in a folio format.
The size and consequent high cost of the book made Jonson's audience necessarily restricted to certain classes of readers.
As his Latin epitaph on the title page announced, Jonson Workes were for the select few, not only serious readers but also affluent and socially well-positioned readers.
The economics of the book trade today are creating conditions where many important texts are not only beyond purchase by students but by salaried staff as well.
Only institutions, under increasing restrictions, can buy many important editions.
The result is that the unit price becomes even higher as publishers protect their desired profit margin.
Even more worrying, important academic publishers are commissioning fewer and fewer editions of Renaissance texts outside an increasingly narrow canon.
What is studied is substantially determined by what is available to study.
One of the factors which helps form literary canons are the economics of the book market and the way institutions consequently react in constructing courses.
It may be that the growth of desk-top publishing will allow a wider circulation of material (a great advantage of Renaissance texts is that they present few copyright problems), but there is little evidence so far.
I have previously outlined the possibilities of political constraints on what we study.
We can now add economic constraints.
We must further admit institutional constraints in the form of the time available to study Renaissance writing on a degree course.
All of these factors, some of which probably appear very mundane to readers waiting to tangle with texts and theory, contribute to the formation of literary canons.
A canon may not be a bad thing in itself, but within the institution it is worthwhile for both staff and students to ask why we are studying these texts?
What types of representative status do they possess?
How are they culturally empowered?
Institutional factors are one further area for which our critical practice needs to account.
There is no doubt that our experience of reading is involved with our previous reading experiences.
We compare and contrast such experiences, constructing a sense of a text through its intertextual relations with other texts with which we are already familiar.
It is noticeable how the novel has become the literary form on which discussions  of texts in other generic forms are based.
Thus, we will frequently think of character or characterisation in drama or poetry in terms of novels, and particularly the novels which stress psychological interiority.
Discussions of plays, for instance, can often be seen to be founded on the undeclared assumption that a dramatic figure represents a self (rather than a vehicle for dramatic ideas).
The soliloquy in Renaissance texts is frequently given a special prominence because readers (and the assumption is of play readers rather than audiences witnessing a production) believe they are experiencing a moment of privileged revelation where the dramatist reveals a character's interiority.
Take the following example from Julius Caesar where Brutus ostensibly debates the ground for killing Caesar:
It must be by his death; and for my part,
I know no personal cause to spurn at him,
But for the general: he would be crown'd.
How that might change his nature, there's the question.
It is the bright day that brings forth the adder,
And that craves wary walking.
Crown him-that!
And then, I grant, we put a sting in him
That at his will he may do danger with.
Th' abuse of greatness is when it disjoins
Remorse from power; and to speak truth of Caesar,
I have not known when his affections sway'd
More than his reason.
But ‘tis a common proof
That lowliness is young ambition's ladder,
Whereto the climber-upward turns his face;
But when he once attains the upmost round,
He then unto the ladder turns his back,
Looks in the cloud, scorning the base degrees
By which he did ascend.
So Caesar may.
Then, lest he may, prevent.
And since the quarrel
Will bear no colour for the thing he is,
Fashion it thus — that what he is, augmented,
Would run to these and these extremities;
And therefore think him as a serpent's egg,
Which, hatch'd would as his kind grow mischievous,
And kill him in the shell.
(II, i, 10–34)
This is commonly perceived as a interior debate as Brutus tries to decide what should be done.
But it hardly seems a dramatic articulation of character.
As the language with  its repeated serpent imagery suggests, the speech is concerned with finding a public representation of the grounds for killing Caesar.
Brutus is certain of what he intends as the speech opens: ‘It must be by his death.’
What he is concerned with is the discovery of the right formulation to ‘fashion it thus’, a means of presentation that will persuade an audience that Caesar needed to die and was killed by actions undertaken in the public rather than in a private interest.
What Caesar is will have to be re-presented by Brutus: ‘since the quarrel will bear no colour for the thing he is’.
Brutus's choice of Caesar as the serpent's egg is selected as the suitable formulation of the equation between Caesar and serpents Brutus has been toying with throughout.
The speech is a good example of formal rhetorical argument by analogy rather than logic.
It shows Brutus adept in the use of rhetoric and looking forward to his public defence of Caesar's assassination to the Roman crowd.
The speech does not create a distance between the public arguments used and the imagined private moments.
Brutus's self is one founded on his public and not his private identity.
Brutus and the other characters can be presented as representatives of political actions: the play explores the lack of distance between private and public relations.
All the characters are fashioning actions through words, so that the quality of both words and actions become unsettled, dependent on political expediency.
Aristotle claimed that tragedy was the imitation of an action and that character was an important but supplementary consideration.
Characters enacted the drama, but tragedy was principally concerned with the actions which resulted.
The Renaissance inherited the symbolic moral dramas of the Middle ages and, while Renaissance drama devoted an increased importance to the  complexities of the agents who enact the drama, it does not automatically follow that the plays' central preoccupations are with character.
Concentration on character may be argued to allow critical misconstruction about how the plays' dramatic action  works.
The proposal that drama somehow became more sophisticated with an interest in psychology adopted by Shakespeare and Jacobean dramatists is to come to Renaissance drama with a presumption that literary sophistication is the representation of psychological interiority, a view largely derived from the centrality of late nineteenth and early twentieth century novels within a reading experience.
It does not diminish Julius Caesar or make it less complex to approach it as a dramatised representation of the relation between words and actions within politics.
What Julius Caesar , and Renaissance drama generally, requires is a rethinking of how characters work as representations, a challenge to find a critical language which enables us to rethink the relation between symbol and character in a sophisticated way.
To do so it is necessary to examine the origins of our literary expectations which so frequently assume that the best literary experience deals with individuals capable of making moral distinctions and to question the pejorative critical formulations which tend to accompany assessments of characters as vehicles for ideas: caricature, static, incompletely realised, and so on.
Within Julius Caesar Antony's claim at the play's conclusion that ‘this was the noblest Roman of them all’ is frequently taken as some type of authentic commentary on Brutus and becomes the focus for critical exploration into Brutus's character.
Nobility is taken as self-defined, a virtue which right-thinking readers ought to recognise, or a Roman ideal the terms of which the play defines (and sympathises with).
But the play may be seen to represent ‘Roman nobility’ as a highly questionable ideal, a manner of staging oneself within a realm of political theatre.
‘Nobility’ is not an intrinsic quality, but a publicly defined attribute supported by birth and education (the conspirators and Antony, the play suggests, all went to school together I, ii, 294–5).
What Brutus or any of the characters ‘really are’ is not the centre of their dramatic interest.
The play's interest, rather, is centred on how they act: both what they do and what they say, and the gap between the two.
Institutions form canons and work to maintain hierarchies within them.
It is interesting to note with Julius Caesar the way scholarship has tried to support a reading of the play that promotes Brutus's statements as  authentic revelations of his character.
By believing the play explores a supposedly innate moral virtue such as nobility, the tragedy can be one focused on the interiority of the character and thus, so the assumption proceeds, it may be considered ‘great’.
Since the play is by Shakespeare, the critical policy has been to assume the tragedy must be of the first stature and, therefore, the play would be written to support this revelation of interiority.
Ostensibly objective textual scholarship adopted editorial policies which for many years worked to ensure the above assumptions could be confirmed.
The most notorious example in Julius Caesar was the scenes where Brutus reacts to the death of his wife Portia.
The problem appeared because Brutus tells Cassius of Portia's death (and uses it to explain his bad temper towards Cassius).
Brutus then, a few lines later, claims no knowledge of her death when two of his officers tell him of it (IV, iii, 141–92).
Editors invented elaborate textual corruptions to explain this, claiming for instance that Shakespeare had written two different versions of Brutus's reactions and that the text used for the 1623 Folio (where the play first appeared) had mistakenly copied them both.
The design was apparently to leave readers with the impression that Brutus was genuinely applying stoical philosophy to contain the shock of losing Portia.
The actions of editorial emendation in this instance worked to suppress the scene's representation of Brutus as a role player.
As Cassius remarks when Brutus has impressed the officers of his stoical resolve in accepting Portia's death: ‘I have as much of this in art as you, /But yet my nature could not bear it so’(IV, iii, 192–3).
Cassius is interested, too, in role-playing but is less successful at it than Brutus.
The scene does not necessarily present Brutus in an unfavourable light.
His collected resolve in front of his officers is assuring his troops' confidence in his controlled capacity to lead them as they prepare for an impending battle.
His action as a general is sensible.
But what was clear is that editors, believing that the play was about the intrinsically moral Brutus, could not accept a feigning Brutus and so explained away, or repressed, the scene where that role playing is most  formally represented.
Believing that tragic greatness was founded on an exploration of a great individual, the literary institution found ways of assuring that Shakespeare's plays observed their premises.
What could not be allowed was the suggestion that major characters were using language to deceive and self-present in expedient ways which suited political needs rather than the way they ‘really were’.
Literary canons, therefore, are arranged to support the (usually) unvoiced assumptions upon which study of them is founded.
By articulating and then exploring these assumptions we discover the cultural and institutional process which has helped to create and sustain these canons.
In questioning the theoretical position on which canons are grounded the possibility of other contending critical discourses with focuses outside canonical groupings become increasingly possible.
One of the most powerful forms of inquiry in recent years has been to look at Renaissance writing produced outside the cultural elite, bringing attention to texts marginalised and ignored by the institutional processes which maintains the traditional canon.
Sir Philip Sidney's claim in The Defence of Poetry that poetry was the consequence of art, imitation, and exercise may stand as much as an observation about who was able to produce poetry during the Renaissance as how it should be produced.
High literary culture was the preserve, naturally, of the literate but also of those educated within a classical tradition, acquainted with previous literary models.
The appropriation of the past and its re-deployment through the creative process of imitation, presupposes an acquaintance with the literary canons of the past.
Imitation in the Renaissance was practised as a dialogue with the past, where a text's individual distinctions was founded on its relation, both similarities and dissimilarities, with other earlier texts.
To participate in such  textual production in either a critical or creative fashion required an educative process open to relatively few.
Exercise assumes writers with enough leisure to practise their art and with access to writing material.
For the majority these facilities were  not readily available.
Paper, for instance, was not cheap during the Renaissance.
The Renaissance writer, therefore, is predominantly male, from a reasonably affluent background, and comparatively well educated.
Most of the writing assumes a similar audience.
In his letter to Sir Walter Ralegh explaining The Faerie Queene , Spenser argues the work is designed to ‘fashion a gentleman or noble person’.
Spenser is thinking of a class of person within a distinctive social framework.
His audience is not intended to be general.
Our literary canons have largely been constructed on such Renaissance suppositions.
Renaissance poetry (in Sidney's sense of seriously crafted eloquent language which could include prose) is perceived to be the province of the truly serious writer, and this is equated with elitism.
The period's drama which was not seriously considered as literature until the Jacobean period (and then only selectively) has been critically absorbed to now belong to elite literature.
Shakespeare's drama is celebrated for its poetry, a compliment that on the surface suggests ideologically neutral approval of its language, but which also belies suppositions about the attitudes the plays' language articulates.
Annabel Patterson's recent Shakespeare and the Popular Voice , for instance, demonstrates how critical writers in subsequent centuries enforced a view of Shakespeare's plays as voicing the concerns of the social elite, insisting Shakespeare be perceived as within the sphere of the ‘gentleman’, a position Patterson powerfully challenges.
Our study of literary texts is commonly based on a view that the most self-consciously crafted literature has the greatest claim to our attention.
Thus, a use of eloquent formal language, a confident employment of a literary heritage, and a preoccupation with either metaphysical themes or the large issues of state of especial interest to those in the governing classes are normally upheld as critical sign-posts directing us to the period's ‘greatest’ writing.
In contrast a sub-genre such as domestic tragedy, of which the Renaissance period is filled with wonderfully rich examples, receives much less critical attention than  those tragedies which deal with kings.
That many domestic plays are often representations of actual events is seen to reduce their claims for attention because they do not deal with issues centred on a powerful elite employing language with rhetorical refinement.
For every one current reader of Arden of Faversham there will be ten or more of Tamburlaine or The Spanish Tragedy .
Yet, it is certainly possible to argue Arden is as dramatically interesting.
Arden , certainly, is as culturally revealing.
Spenser could consider himself a gentleman only on the basis of having been to university and acquired a Master of Arts degree.
His work is filled with a hatred of savagery, of ungovernable elements in both self and state.
Ben Jonson, a ‘scholarship boy’ whose ability with language allowed him to gain social advancement, is keen to distance himself from popular writing whose techniques he so skilfully employs.
Both Spenser's and Jonson's social aspirations, geared to their ability to use language, indicates a desire to see educated cultural expression indicating a class standing, a social elitism on the part of those who participate in cultural pursuits.
It is noticeable the way current academia has developed its own critical strategies to suggest it, too, wishes to participate in a social elite.
The educated are imagined as those who read and study something different, more advanced , than what the masses do.
There often appears unconsciously held suppositions that superior literary writings will deal with issues divorced from ordinary concerns or at least adopt a perspective of the ordinary which is shared by the social elite.
Compare the following two expressions of humility in addressing the divine from George Herbert and from the mid-seventeenth-century poet An Collins:
Who says that fictions only and false hair
Become a verse?
Is there in truth no beauty?
Is all good structure in a winding stair?
May no lines pass, except they do their duty
Not to a true, but painted chair?
Is it no verse, except enchanted groves
And sudden arbours, shadow coarse-spun lines?
Must purling streams refresh a lovers loves?
Must all be veiled, while he that reads, divines,
Catching the sense at two removes?
Shepherds are honest people; let them sing:
Riddle who list, for me, and pull for prime:
I envy no man's nightingale or spring;
Nor let them punish me with loss of rhyme,
Who plainly say,My God, My King .
George Herbert,Jordan (1)
Now touching that I hasten to expresse
Concerning these, the offspring of my mind,
Who though they here appeare in homly dresse
And as they are my works, I do not find
But ranked with others, they may go behind,
Yet for theyr matter, I suppose they bee
Not worthless quite, whilst they with Truth agree.
Indeed I grant that sounder judgements may
(Directed by a greater Light) declare
The ground of Truth more in a Gospel-way,
But who time past with present will compare
Shall find more mysteries unfolded are,
So that they may who have right informacion
More plainly shew the path-way to Salvacion.
(An Collins, from The Preface to Divine Songs and Meditacions )
Herbert's poem ostensibly contrasts the elaborations of secular verse with the straightforward quality of divine celebration.
Yet his conclusion is hardly straightforward.
He, of course, has not lost rhyme with his plain saying — his final line fits comfortably into his structure.
But, further, his plain remark: ‘My God, My King’ is not the spontaneous exaltation he pretends.
Herbert is using the language of Scripture.
His statement is also that of Psalm 68 (verse 24) where the presence of my God and my King in the sanctuary is not plain but celebrated in a rich display of singers, musicians, and ‘damsels playing with timbrels’.
The skilfully deployed irony in Herbert's case is enhanced by the Psalm's announcement of God's punishment of those who are his people's enemies, rather than the reverse as Herbert's poem suggests.
But what is most striking is that by adopting the voice of the Psalm, Herbert is also adopting the voice of a king (and a shepherd) as the  Psalm was presented as being authored by a divinely inspired King David.
Despite Herbert's claim to be using the plain saying of direct felt expression and humility towards addressing the divine, he is also demonstrating his poetic standing.
Not only does his poem bring attention to its control of verse, Herbert signals a poetic origin for his expression which is regal and divinely sanctioned.
Those who would punish him must deny Scripture, and Scripture indicates it is they who will be the ones punished.
An Collins's verse is far less cleverly constructed.
Its expression of humility is made with distinct poetic selfeffacement.
Her claims to be heard are based on her spiritual topic matter and the historical accident that she writes at a time when she believes more has been revealed about the divine and therefore she possesses ‘more information’ than previously.
She does not claim any immediate spiritual direction.
Herbert's piece radiates confidence in its control of language and its message.
It is a wonderful example of learned eloquence considering the problems associated with writing poetry and spiritual expression as befits a man who was a Cambridge University Praelector in Rhetoric and University Orator.
Collins does not make poetic claims, nor does her use of language demonstrate the clever turns and plays of Herbert.
Herbert would seem to be far more obviously the choice for literary study, and the institutional canon confirms this.
Herbert is widely read, where Collins is seldom even heard of.
At the beginning of her Preface to Divine Songs and Meditacions , Collins claims she undertook to write: ‘Being through weakness to the house confin'd/My mental powers seeming long to sleep’.
The remarks probably refer to illness, but they stand in a metaphoric sense for the condition that Renaissance women usually confronted.
Collins's weakness is the patriarchal designated weakness of her sex which debars her from participation in public life outside the household.
The benefits of education were rarely extended to women.
As a sex, women joined other culturally disenfranchised groups who could not easily participate in high culture.
The cultural practice of imitation which Herbert so confidently exploits (note how the  Jordan poem above skilfully employs Sidney's first sonnet in Astrophil and Stella was rendered very difficult for a poet such as An Collins whose scope for enjoying the educated attainments open to a Renaissance gentleman was  negligible .
Those writing from below, however, also eagerly sought to employ imitation, even if their range of prior texts was circumscribed.
They, too, believed that a previous voice could be made their own.
The Ranter Jacob Bauthumley begins his tract on The Light and Dark side of God acknowledging ‘the most unto whose hand it [i.e. the tract]may come cannot read it’.
Yet, Bauthumley felt his own humble social position was one which gave his voice special importance:
And however my person, and parts be meane in the Worlds Eye, and so may cast an odium upon the things that I hold forth; yet I shall runne the hazard in that kinde, and leave the Lord to gain his own Honour and Glory in it; as seeing by sweet experience, it is one of his greatest designes in the World, to confound the high and mighty things thereof, by the most meane and contemptible.
The meanness of his voice makes it particularly appropriate to his audience, because Bauthumley holds up his own discourse as a model for the voices of those who are normally rendered silent:
there are some…that travell with me in the same birth; yet are not able to bring forth their conceptions, for so much as many times, the Truth suffers by a weake delivery; and for their sakes have I held this Glasse before them, that so they may be the better able to describe themselves to others; and to help them to bring forth that out of their mouths, which perhaps may lye in the bottome of their hearts.
Imitation did not only engage those involved in creating the fictional truths of sophisticated culture.
At a popular level the emphasis of the individual's response to Scripture prompted by the Protestant Reformation allowed biblical  imitation to dominate the discourse of socially and culturally disenfranchised men and women.
Bauthumley, who believes God speaks directly through him, offers his own writing as an imitative model to others ‘that travell with me in the same birth’.
Similarly, the mid-seventeenth-century prophetess, Anna Trapnel stresses that her discourse is that of God, gathered from Scripture and not her own.
When being questioned by magistrates about her teaching (they were suspicious of her on the grounds of her sex and lack of social position) she is confident that a greater Lord will answer for her.
She places her trust in another's voice:
as for my going before the rulers, I was no whit afraid or thoughtful, for I had cast my care upon the Lord, which I was persuaded would speak for me. therefore I was not troubled nor afraid, for the Lord said to me, ‘Fear not, be not dismayed, I am thy God, and will stand by thee'
(Isaiah 41:10)
Trapnel's example brings attention to a distinctive problem about the nature of imitative voice which separates the culturally disenfranchised from those culturally empowered through education in formal eloquence.
Writers within a high culture framework self-consciously employ a literary past to create a distinctive contemporary utterance of their own.
Imitation gives them individual voice.
In contrast, figures outside the high cultural sphere often consciously try to abandon their sense of self.
The authority of their voice is gained by it being that of another, almost always that of God, whose voice is more powerful than those of the social institutions they see ranged against them.
Trapnel recounts how during her questioning by local magistrates in Cornwall a large crowd gathered:
the rude multitude said, ‘Sure this woman is no witch, for she speakes many good words, which the witches could not’.
And thus the Lord made the rude rabble to justify his appearance.
For in all that was said by me, I was nothing, the Lord put all in my mouth, and told me  what I should say, and that from the written word, he put it in my memory and mouth; so that I will have nothing ascribed to me.
Here then, it is not only Trapnel's voice which is directed by God, but also the voices of the multitude.
The commonalty find their justification in speaking by speaking as the mouthpiece of another.
Traditional literary criticism has celebrated the growth of the vernacular as a vehicle for expression during the Renaissance.
Milton's Paradise Lost or Spenser's Faerie Queene are applauded for bringing a sophisticated use of classical epic conventions into English, creating national works which stand comparison with those of antiquity.
Yet, traditional criticism has generally been uninterested in the widening of vernacular expression among groups previously unable to record their voices.
Bauthumley's or Trapnel's texts record a different type of vernacular writing from high cultural expression; but the desire for voice, gained by imitation of approved previous writing, is a phenomenon which they too share in.
We are increasingly becoming aware of the interaction between high and popular culture, and how the Renaissance does not exclusively separate the two.
In doing so the literary canon is forced to change.
We can no longer smugly claim that literary criticism is concerned only with ‘the best’ expression of the period, because what is best is dependent on a host of preconceptions about what we wish to learn about Renaissance writing.
An Collins's expression of self-effacing humility is better than Herbert's in the sense that Collins's humility is paramount where Herbert is maintaining a strong concept of self and, indeed, self-applause.
We return to the need to make the questions we ask of Renaissance literature distinct.
If we claim our interest is to focus on the writing produced only by a sophisticated elite, and that we determine the best literature is that which, in terms of generic structure, subject, and eloquent rhetoric, concerns itself with the preoccupations of males who have a high social and political standing, then the traditional canon will serve the majority of our needs.
But if our interests are increasingly focused on different types of expression across a wide social framework, for instance if  we are concerned to pursue the dissemination of vernacular innovation across the whole social spectrum, then our previous canons will prove inadequate.
Bauthumley's or Trapnel's literary sophistication is limited, yet their writing as cultural documents are as important as Herbert's.
The resistance to Bauthumley or Trapnel as figures worthy of study is part of an institutional assumption that literary study in higher education should force a separation between the elite and the popular, the sophisticated and the simplistic.
Spenser was able to use his MA to call himself a gentleman, his education was the key to his social mobility.
The equation between study in higher education and social mobility still holds in curiously similar ways.
By selecting a canon of texts which reflect the preoccupations of elite culture there is a presumption that the student is being initiated into some form of elite culture whose distinction from popular culture must be enforced.
ln Britain, this has usually meant that ‘serious’ books from the past have formed the core of degree work in English.
Pre-twentieth-century poetic texts have commonly been at the core of syllabuses in the older universities, whereas the novel and more contemporary writing are commonly at the centre (or at least imagined by many in the academic establishment to be the centre) of course structures within the newer universities and polytechnics, institutions which are also usually viewed as less socially elite.
Given the structure of the traditional canon, this has regrettably meant that Renaissance writing was employed to mark out a high cultural orientation.
In a battle between ancients and moderns which is frequently waged in English departments, Renaissance writing is too often perceived at the centre of the argument for the preservation of a restrictive high cultural ethos in literary study.
As I hope I have demonstrated, though, this should not automatically be the case.
To evaluate Renaissance writing as only the expression of a cultural elite means being highly selective when choosing what material should be studied.
There are other texts which answer different needs, both our own and those living at the time the texts were produced.
This is not to imply that expressions of sophisticated learned eloquence should be abandoned in favour of popular writing.
I have  tried to show that our experience of the Renaissance is enriched by comparing texts produced in a variety of cultural environments.
Ranter writing should not displace Paradise Lost ;Arden of Faversham and domestic tragedy should not merely replace The Spanish Tragedy and court-centred drama.
What we require are canonical structures which allow our study of the Renaissance to include texts which speak, to use Bauthumley's words, for those things ‘meane and contemptible’ as well as for those ‘high and mighty’.
The New Historicism
I
Some of the changes to our critical practice which results from incorporating new models for thinking about the relation between Renaissance literary texts and their historical context can be illustrated by considering a sonnet by Sir Thomas Wyatt:
Each man me telleth I change most my device
And on my faith me think it good reason
To change propose like after the season,
For in every case to keep still one guise
Is meet for them that would be taken wise:
And I am not of such manner condition,
But treated after a diverse fashion,
And thereupon my diverseness doth rise.
But you that blame this diverseness most,
Change you no more, but still after one rate
Treat ye me well, and keep ye in the same state:
And while with me doth dwell this wearied ghost,
My word nor I shall not be variable,
But always one, your own both firm and stable.
This can be viewed as a familiar meditation on the theme of constancy and inconstancy between lovers, the reader being granted a glimpse into a private world whose terms of precise reference remain unknown.
But the sonnet also provides a glimpse into the dilemmas of identity the Renaissance articulated.
The sonnet stands not only as an account of some private instance but as a representative account of the pressures and inevitable containment of individuals by powerful forces outside their control.
Wyatt answers the charge that he alters his device (his project and designs but also his heraldic sign — the symbolic means by which he announces his public identity) by using the analogy of changing seasons to suggest mutability is an  inevitable and indeed appropriate condition.
His defence of his ‘diverness’ is that this is the way he experiences the world, others treat him differently all the time (especially the figure addressed in the sonnet) and he responds in kind.
He would be immutable in his relation with the addressee if she/he did not change.
Wyatt's defence of his accommodation with the world reflects, though, the harsh conditions which enforce such accommodation if existence is to continue.
‘Change you no more’ has the provocation of a challenge not expected to be accepted.
Existence depends on mutability because the conditions of the world make the maintenance of ‘one guise’ impossible.
Those who are ‘wise’ may keep to one purpose, but the implication is that such wisdom is not allowed to exist for very long.
The poet's claim that he will readily participate in any form of stability his lover settles on is accompanied by the qualification that he will do so only as long as‘this wearied ghost’ dwells in him.
Refusal to change your outward ‘device’ is likely to lead to a permanent rest.
Wyatt's articulation of the necessity to stage his identity, even within the ostensible private world of a sonnet, so that he can continue to function within the social world is reiterated by writers whose focus is more distinctly on the  public sphere.
In his life of Richard III Thomas More noted how The Duke of Buckingham in offering the crown to Richard in 1484 at Baynard's Castle assumed a role in a staged presentation in which Richard feigned reluctance in accepting the offer of kingship.
The spectators knew that the whole event was a staged act and yet complied: ‘because all must be done in good order’.
Order and obedience to the crown were commonplace principles which popular moral writing constantly rehearsed throughout the Middle Ages and Renaissance.
Even in rebellion, as Mervyn James has noted of the Lincolnshire rebellions of 1536 against Henry VIII, the rebels maintained they were loyal to the king.
The appearance of obedience, even when the participants engaged in actions which were expressly otherwise, was a compelling necessity.
The reasons behind playing this  game were not based only on an abstract conception of duty, but also on the notions expressed in More's conclusion to the stage managing which offered Richard III the crown:
these matters be king's games, as it were stage plays, and for the more part played upon scaffolds.
In which poor men be but the lookers-on.
And they that wise be will meddle no farther.
For they that sometime step up and play with them, when they cannot play their parts, they disorder the play and do themselves no good.
The appearance of obedience was difficult to maintain in Tudor times when the terms on which it was founded were not clear.
Reviewing recent historiography of the Reformation, Christopher Haigh has pointed out the constantly shifting conflicts between factions which existed in the English court between 1527 and 1553.
In such conflicts, Haigh notes, religious policy, on which obedience could be crucially tested, became both a weapon and a prize.
At any number of points events could have developed in dramatically different ways if the balance of power had shifted only slightly.
Thomas More played his part upon a scaffold.
He was one of those whose wisdom (to recall the terms of Wyatt's sonnet) insisted on his maintaining an unchanged obedience to an authority he ultimately felt to be higher than the King's.
Wyatt's worldly recognition that his ‘device’ needed to be changed if he was to continue through the seasons is likely also to have been learned through his parts in kings' games.
He was twice imprisoned when his loyalties were suspected.
But it was not only writers with established political identities who were wary about how writing might be perceived.
In general, most Renaissance texts were open to being co-opted into a part in these royal games (the term usefully suggests the way private activities such as sexual intrigues were more expressly combined with public political questions during the Renaissance).
Even those texts which appeared concerned with uncontroversial matters were open to be  seen as engaging in political and social questions in which the state could suddenly intervene and cause uneasy writers to account for their work.
At the end of the sixth book of The Faerie Queene , Spenser alludes to the troubles some of his earlier work has caused through slanders which provoked ‘a mighty Peres displeasure’.
Spenser fears the same fate may await The Faerie Queene —‘this homely verse, of many meanest’— and commands his ‘rimes’ to keep measure and ‘seeke to please, that now is counted wisemens threasure’(VI, XII, 41).
In these circumstances, the familiar Renaissance claim that poetry teaches and delights takes on new implications, pleasure among readers is not only how their attention and co-option to the didactic intention is achieved.
Pleasure also becomes the element which protects the poet from the action of the powerful against a message they may not be fully in agreement with.
As Wyatt's sonnet indicates, even in the ostensibly private address of the sonnet, writing registered its uneasiness about the nature of its voice.
One of Wyatt's ‘devices’ are the writings by which he is known, and they too must be open to seasonal change as is fitting the conditions of survival.
Considering literary texts not as autonomous utterances out of history, but as illustrations of a Renaissance culture whose forms of representation are conditioned by the social, political world they participate in has prompted readings of texts which seek to restore their former agencies and original discursive energies.
But how do we gain access to Renaissance culture, especially when our readings of the texts that document that culture indicate that a process of necessary counterfeit may have played a part in determining how these texts inscribed their culture?
The processes through which we can see texts functioning within a social and cultural context are problematic.
Even more difficult is determining the methods through which wider cultural analysis can be employed.
This chapter seeks to examine some of the means employed by New Historicism in trying to address these problems.
The term New Historicism has come in for considerable hostile criticism both from those who claim that there is nothing particularly new about it and among those who admire new  historical methods but feel the term incorrectly  suggests a unified theoretical field and subsequent critical practice within a body of critical writing in which much contending diversity exists.
While both these objections have truth to them, it is also clear that a range of critical writings which share more preoccupations than differences has emerged and that it can be contrasted to other forms of writing about texts and history.
I want to examine aspects of those preoccupations and ignore differences which are of varying orders rather than of kind.
In particular, I will elide some of the different orientations between British Cultural Materialism and New Historicism in its more distinctly American guise.
My reasons for doing so are twofold.
First, sub-divisions would only serve to create the appearance of a more precisely demarcated critical field than is in fact the case.
Jonathan Dollimore's and Alan Sinfield's collection Political Shakespeare: New Essays in Cultural Materialism , for example, contains work by writers whose same essays in other contexts are labelled New Historicist.
Second, the scope of what New Historicism involves is continuously changing, and the conflicts between contending views are often localised over a few issues.
I do not want to ignore the wood for the sake of labelling all the trees.
But, in the following discussions, I do take two leading new historicist writers, Louis Montrose and Stephen Greenblatt, as representing the current field, so it is probably inevitable that they will appear as paradigms for New Historicism as a whole.
Many other writers working with similar concerns about the analysis of culture would wish to distance themselves from aspects of Montrose's and Greenblatt's orientation, though all would likely wish to acknowledge the influence of their work.
II
I intended to explore the ways in which major English writers of the sixteenth century created their own performances, to analyze the choices they made in representing  themselves and in fashioning characters…but as my work progressed, I perceived that fashioning oneself and being fashioned by cultural institutions — family, religion, state — were inseparably intertwined.
In all my texts and documents, there were, so far as I could tell, no moments of pure, unfettered subjectivity; indeed, the human subject itself began to seem remarkably unfree, the ideological product of the relations of power in a particular  society .
Stephen Greenblatt's self-confessional epilogue to his Renaissance Self-Fashioning which appeared in 1980 articulated a change of emphasis which marked out the most pronounced critical practice of Renaissance literary criticism in the past decade — the New Historicism.
Where Greenblatt, and most literary criticism of Renaissance writing during the preceding decades, had formerly seen one of the features of the period as the growing ability for some individuals to shape their lives, there emerged a recognition that Renaissance texts were not celebrating human autonomy and unfettered subjectivity.
Instead, a new grouping of critics, working under the influence of theorists such as Louis Althusser and Michel Foucault, came to realise that literary texts did not mark out expression which could somehow break free of the culture which produced them.
Texts were inevitably part of their culture, as were the individuals who wrote them under the shaping constraints of state, family, religion.
Further, these critics no longer imagined a culture which could be ascertained only by examining selected artistic artefacts of the period.
What Renaissance culture was and how we gain access to it increasingly became seen as problematic.
The idea that the Renaissance could be named, classified, described, and interpreted so that it was rendered readily comprehensible within some generalised scheme of the humanities was no longer a clearly defined process.
Much of New Historical thought developed from the impact of contemporary anthropological writing.
Literary critics began to see themselves in part as cultural historians responding to new processes advanced for the understanding of culture by anthropologists, themselves  using interdisciplinary methods to describe cultural phenomena.
Indeed Stephen Greenblatt's preferred term for new historical activities, cultural poetics, more clearly indicates how anthropology rather than history has been the discipline which has more profoundly affected new historicist methods.
The argument advanced by the anthropologist Clifford Geertz that human societies needed to be interpreted as texts has been especially influential on New Historicist thought.
Anthropological inquiry into the meaning of cultures came to question the established categories which had provided the models and criteria to assess different cultures.
Examining the cultural foundations through which societies characterised themselves (e.g. myths, rituals, games), anthropologists increasingly perceived that history is culturally ordered and produced according to the structures by which historical happenings are understood.
Further, responding to the work of the French thinker Michel Foucault, scholars began to realise that projecting cultural order implies both rule and transgression .
The unfamiliar and the different is important for a generation of cultural meaning.
Cultural artefacts and occurrences often previously perceived on the margins of what constituted the culture — for example how a culture defined and treated insanity — were recognised as an aid in revealing a great deal about the cultural orders celebrated at a society's centre (e.g. the way court ceremony was enacted).
Through theoretical inquiries into how cultural constructions are made, it became increasingly obvious to those working across a number of disciplines that historical events were no longer simply things that happened.
An historical event was seen to be constructed from a number of different ‘happenings’ perceived as having specific meanings.
The historical event, therefore, becomes a relation between a given symbolic system projected by  a cultural scheme and a certain happening.
This is not to suggest that history only happens because some later critic constructs it.
Things do, of course, happen.
There are real sets of occurrences possessed of objective properties.
But to describe the effects of history, to give happenings meanings so they become seen as events — as happenings within a decided structure — requires that these happenings are projected from a specific cultural scheme which gives them their significance.
As we saw in chapter 2, new concerns with linguistic structures revealed that much of our understanding of ‘things’ in language rested on accepting given structures which language in itself did not necessarily support.
Similarly, anthropologists and cultural historians came to realise that our understanding of culture had rested on a priori concepts and categories.
We assessed a culture by describing its perceived contexts through our received categories.
Anthropologists such as Clifford Geertz or Marshall Sahlins exploring the cultural manifestations of the Balinese or of South Sea islanders projected interpretations of these cultures which could be read as stories the people of these societies tell about themselves.
Cultural acts and rituals could be interpreted as texts which reveal the sense of a society's ordering and structuring of experience.
Sahlins, for instance, discussed the way the Hawaiian Islanders experienced the visit of Captain Cook, placing it within their own received cultural categories to give the empirical happening of Cook's arrival a meaning.
The reality of Cook's visit came to be understood through a relation of the practical reference (the ships arriving) and the cultural sense (what the ships' arrival meant according to existing categories for interpreting experience).
Sahlins then paralleled the British understanding of the same events, again constructed out of their cultural categories reacting to the perceived contexts.
Importantly, Sahlins does not privilege one perspective over the other: the British perspective is not treated as better or more informed because to  treat it as such would be to accept unquestioningly the categories out of which this perspective constructed its realities.
Sahlins' point is to show how to both sides differing types of sense were formed of what Cook's arrival ‘meant’.
This type of analysis forces a recognition of a greater diversity of structures by which history may be written and understood.
For Sahlins demonstrates how the obscure histories of remote islanders take a place alongside our self-contemplations of a European past — a supposed history of civilisation — for their own contributions to a historical understanding.
It is no longer possible to make claims to understand a culture simply by classifying it in terms of its relations to a present western culture.
Geertz's study of Balinese culture led him to conclude:
The culture of a people is an ensemble of texts, themselves ensembles which the anthropologist strains to read over the shoulders of those to whom they properly belong.
There are enormous difficulties in such an enterprise, methodological pitfalls…and some moral perplexities as well…
But to regard such [cultural]forms as ‘saying something of something’, and saying it to somebody, is at least to open up the possibility of an analysis which attends to their substance rather than to reductive formulas professing to account for them.
The anthropologist's task, therefore, is to gain access to societies through means which contain these societies' own interpretations about themselves.
As Geertz recognises this is a potentially difficult task as the reader of a society is to some extent an intruder and capable of serious misreadings.
Cultural readers, of course, inevitably respond in terms of their own cultural preoccupations.
New Historicism in Renaissance studies responded to this awareness that an understanding of a culture was created by an examination of perceived contexts and received categories by questioning previous boundaries and classifications in which literary texts were examined.
Many of New Historicism's endeavours are shared by the wider questioning of practice that is taking place in a variety of disciplines and theoretical approaches.
New Historicism  recognises that literary and non-literary texts circulate inseparably in a society.
It perceives that an expressive act is embedded in a network of material practices within a given culture.
A limited example of this is the recognition that whether a text is published in quarto or folio or whether it circulates as a manuscript will help to create the conditions in which the text's meaning is understood within a given culture at a particular historical instant.
Not surprisingly then, New Historicism accepts that no discourse gives access to unchanging truths.
In fact, New Historicism resists claims that large-scale generalisations about a whole culture can be confidently made.
It claims to be a critical practice not an organised theoretical doctrine.
It is often sceptical of an insistence on any one theoretical model — believing, for instance, that both Marxists and post-structuralists use history as a convenient ornament to hang upon their respective theoretical structures.
In their own self-analysis, New Historians have emphasised as strengths their recognition that social and cultural events in a society commingle messily and to offer a coherent account of their relations is difficult.
Further, New Historicism is aware that every critique which purports to demystify previous critical models relies to some extent on existing structures and, therefore, risks creating new ones which fall prey to the very practices supposedly being exposed.
Most New Historical writing on the Renaissance has openly acknowledged the difficulties inherent in reading texts as cultural documents.
Louis Montrose, who has become New Historicism's most eloquent theoretical exponent, has described the self-critical awareness which prompts a new relation between texts and history as based on:
a reciprocal concern with the historicity of texts and the textuality of history.
By the historicity of texts , I mean to suggest the cultural specificity, the social embedment, of all modes of writing….
By the textuality of history , I mean to suggest, firstly, that we can have no access to a full and authentic past, a lived material existence, unmediated by the surviving textual traces of the society in question — traces whose survival we cannot assume to be merely contingent but must rather presume to be at least partially  consequent upon complex and subtle social processes of preservation and effacement; and secondly, that those textual traces are themselves subject to subsequent textual mediations when they are construed as the ‘documents’ upon which historians ground their own texts, called histories.
New Historicism is, therefore, fundamentally concerned to be aware of its critical project and considers that any inquiry into the past must be based upon a current critical partiality which marks out the inquisitor's history.
It has, not surprisingly, been at the forefront of critical enterprises which have considered literature's different relations with history that we explored in the first chapter.
Montrose's chiastic formulation of the historicity of texts and the textuality of history (chiasmus is a rhetorical balancing created by the reversal of one concept by that succeeding it) is indicative of some of the problems New Historicism's methods share with the anthropological methods for reading cultures which New Historicism adopted.
Montrose's formulation is rhetorically neat but its application could be expected to produce results which are conflicting and disruptive.
The historicity of texts might reasonably be thought to produce readings which are difficult to incorporate with the textuality of history.
As we understand more about a text's specific historicity, how it emerged from a distinctive social embedment, we might expect it to be unavailable sometimes for current employment.
The process by which a text participates in the textuality of history is, as Montrose acknowledges, a process of effacement as well as preservation.
If we recover more of a text's historicity, recapture the lost agencies which originally motivated its emergence and come to understand more about the conditions of its emergence, we may find a cultural presence strange and apparently remote from our own.
The processes through which the text has become part of the textuality of history will probably have meant the re-deployment of those original agencies so that they have reappeared in some disguised fashion within currently familiar structural organisation for understanding culture.
The New Historicists' 'reciprocal  concern with the historicity of texts and the textuality of history' would set up an exchange which might be assumed to be awkward.
Since historicity and textuality are no longer imagined as smooth pegs sliding into smooth holes, but are seen as irregular and variable-sided, fitting them together will presumably involve some difficulty.
In New Historicism this awkwardness should not be deplored but seen as proof of the integrity of its methods.
In practice, though, Montrose's neat formulation of the historicity of texts and the textuality of history reveals the characteristic roundness and balance through which New Historicist readings are conducted.
It may seem paradoxical, but New Historicism's acknowledgement of a great complexity and subtlety between text and history and its hesitancy to make generalised claims for a culture has so far produced critical analysis of texts which tend to be recognisably similar to one another.
Discovery of a text's more specific historical embedment usually finds it confronting issues which are comfortably familiar, if usually unwelcome, to a late twentieth century social and political perspective.
Further, the range of issues highlighted in the texts and their cultural specificity which have so far been those approached by New Historicism are relatively small, giving the appearance of relatively unified Renaissance cultural preoccupations.
New Historicism, thus, seems to ignore many of the premises it claims to operate on.
While on the one hand claiming to recognise the theoretical problems inherent in classifying cultural features and the possibility of interpreting otherwise, New Historicist writing tends to produce very organised, well-constructed and argued cases for a small number of Renaissance cultural features.
Inevitably, New Historicist case studies of specific texts and specific contexts start to feel like metaphors for the whole culture.
Although, claiming that they bring attention to their own historicity, New Historicists are reluctant to map out what that historicity is.
In other words, the type of critical and political self-analysis which New Historicists claim to be aware of is insufficiently foregrounded when reading a Renaissance text.
Claims for a personalised  critical engagement are made, such as Stephen Greenblatt's opening to Shakespearean Negotiations :
I began with the desire to speak with the dead.
This desire is a familiar, if unvoiced motive in literary study, a motive organised, professionalised, buried beneath thick layers of bureaucratic decorum: literature professors are salaried middle-class shamans.
If I never believed the dead could hear me, and if I knew that the dead could not speak, I was nonetheless certain that I could re-create a conversation with them.
But if Greenblatt recognises that he believes ‘literature professors are salaried, middle-class shamans’, he is reluctant to confront his position as shaman.
One of the disconcerting features of New Historicist accounts is that a recognition of critical partially and a mapping out of the historicity of texts through the textuality of history does not produce a critical manner which is careful and self-scrutinising.
Rather the critic frequently seems to adopt an inflated posture, where his or her negotiation of a text becomes a journey of discovery marked out with a rhetoric of almost heroic endeavour.
It can make excellent reading but its ordered narrative can create the impression of a unified cultural field which it is sometimes difficult to see beyond.
If Montrose chiastic formulation (historicity of texts/textuality of history) suggests an expected critical process which is not balanced but open to intrusions, constant qualification and, in effect, cultural deconstruction, what is more frequently produced is a critical narrative which creates an impression of cultural chiasmus, a balance in which the reciprocal concerns between original cultural embedment and subsequent textual mediations are equally suspended.
The result is a circulation between past and present which flows easily.
But should it?
One of the methodologies used by anthropology is ‘thick description’, the telling at great length of some cultural occurrence, one in which the anthropologist is frequently involved, followed by its analysis.
The ‘thick description’ takes on a type of metaphoric quality: it stands as a symbolic indication of some wider social meaning within the culture which is elicited through critical interpretation.
Clifford  Geertz's widely known article on ‘Deep Play: Notes on the Balinese Cockfight’ which is both an account of the way cockfighting may be seen as a symbolically charged text acting as a ‘carefully prepared’expression of Balinese life and an account of the processes by which Geertz becomes a knowing reader of this text, is a prime example of the way thick description works.
The article betrays a great deal, not only in the way it constructs its narrative, but in what it omits and suppresses.
What it does do very obviously is to construct a narrative, and a very readable one.
Although it stands as an important account of new anthropological theory and purports to throw a revealing light on the social organisation of Balinese society, its carefully organised narrative is also a good story arranged so the shifts between Geertz's account of his gradual development as an aficionado of cockfighting and the development of his theory of the social significance of this sport merge.
His narrative reveals Geertz (almost) capable of being a player himself, helping to establish his credibility as a knowing ‘reader’ of cockfighting and supporting his claims for the activity's wider anthropological significance.
The authority of Geertz's claims is supported by the article's narrative structure which combine the rigours and difficulties attendant upon Geertz's introduction into a Balinese village-'my wife and I arrived, malarial and diffident' — with the rigours of his intellectual inquiries ‘methodological pitfalls to make a Freudian quake’.
By surmounting, so he tells us, one set of obstacles in being accepted by the Balinese, he also creates the rhetorical conditions where we are likely to favour a belief that he has surmounted the theoretical obstacles attended on his methodological discovery as well.
The stylistic aplomb of the article may have us accepting the analogous links made between cockfighting and the totality of Balinese society without realising that these links are too fragmentary and partial to stand properly for the whole.
The wholeness of Geertz's cultural reading of the Balinese is achieved only by omission and suppression.
For example, Geertz's wife is introduced in the article's opening section as a companion in his rigorous journey, but  she rapidly disappears from the narrative.
It is noticeable that cockfighting is an exclusively male preoccupation, though this is not really analysed.
Geertz's assertions about Balinese society emerge from the wholly male-dominated world of cockfighting.
But just as Geertz's textually absent wife must have been present in reality, contributing to Geertz encounter with the Balinese, so women are also present in Balinese society though they may be absent from cockfighting.
If Geertz is right that cockfighting is, perceived from a particular angle, an instance of how Balinese men imagined themselves to be, it is an imaginary projection Geertz too uncannily shares.
Just as cockfighting allows a world where women are rendered invisible, so Geertz's writing creates a text where his actually present wife is ignored as a non-person.
The point is that a careful reading of this fluent and apparently self-conscious critical analysis of a culture raises serious suspicions about the nature of its claims.
What appears to work within the carefully structured world of the article seems to have a dubiously partial relation to what it represents about Balinese life as a whole.
Similarly, Marshall Sahlins's work on the Hawaiian islanders in his Islands of History , though far more acutely aware of contending multiple narratives trying to ascribe different significances to the same happenings, is also organised so that it allows Sahlins to present a narrative wherein conflicting stories/histories are mapped out in a framework which explores these histories' interpenetrations, their assimilations of each other rather than their refusals of each other.
If some anthropologists, such as Geertz, are interested in the webs of significance humans spin for themselves, while others, such as Sahlins, are more focused on the processes of how those webs are spun, both groups reveal the central role of the interpreter in shaping the material to be represented and in organising the structures in which the representations occur.
Within New Historical writing the anecdote which symbolically reveals some important facet of Renaissance culture is a familiar critical practice.
The best written New Historicism, and Stephen Greenblatt's work is particularly  exemplary, shows great skill in constructing a narrative.
New Historicism is very adept at employing ‘thick description’, a detailed skilful exposition of, usually, some text or document which has been largely critically bypassed previously, but which is shown to have a charged metaphoric function in revealing some facet of Renaissance culture.
The compelling analysis of this anecdote is then shown to have important implications for the reading of some familiar literary text, revealing that it too shares in the cultural presumptions critically uncovered in the anecdote.
What emerges is the implication that the perceived cultural exchange between these selected texts reveal preoccupations found throughout the whole culture.
Greenblatt's Shakespearean Negotiations , for instance, is interested in the way the Elizabethan theatre produced texts which were in no respect outside other institutions of the time.
Rather dramatic texts were ‘literary creations designed in intimate and living relation to an emergent commercial practice’.
Greenblatt explores the ways a self-conscious theatricality permeated Elizabethan society at all levels: in its staging of royal pageants and progressions, in the celebrations of religious ritual, even in the performance of public executions.
Greenblatt's project is to understand how works of art obtain and amplify powerful social energies.
He proposes that we employ a notion of energia , that which stirs the mind, as the means through which texts are aesthetically empowered with ‘life’.
This energy's origins are in rhetoric, but its significance is both social and historical.
A study of it leads us to witness a text's position within the social and cultural climate from which it emerged, and with which it negotiates.
Recalling the Renaissance's preoccupation with mirrors and optics, in which an exchange — something moving back and forth between viewer and image — was postulated, Greenblatt proposes a similar procedure taking place with Shakespeare's texts.
These negotiate with their age (and with subsequent ages) through a process of these mirrorlike exchanges, ones which cover a whole spectrum of representations.
We should not look for a simple reflection: ‘a single, fixed mode of exchange; in reality there are many  modes, their character is determined historically, and they are continually renegotiated’.
Greenblatt's explorations proceeds by a process of ‘thick description’, paralleling some of Shakespeare's plays with texts neither dramatic nor formally literary but which stand in symbolic relation to one another.
Thus he considers King Lear and Samuel Harsnett's A Declaration of Egregious Popish Impostures , a text directly concerned with the theatrical manipulations found in contemporary exorcisms.
Harsnett's text has long been seen as one of the established sources for Lear , but in Greenblatt's analysis a more challenging question is posed: which way was the borrowing?
Did Harsnett initially borrow from ‘Shakespeare’(or his theatre) and Lear is, therefore, a borrowing back?
Further, do the series of cultural negotiations which emerge from the two texts produce a larger ‘cultural text’ as a result of this exchange?
Harsnett's Declaration only formally supplies Lear with the model for Edgar's histrionic disguise as Poor Tom.
In reading Greenblatt it can too often seem that discussions of such selective parts of a play may appear to stand for the whole.
In this instance, Greenblatt does successfully illuminate a selective consideration in a manner which profitably and suggestively links it with larger issues the play addresses.
As he illustrates, in Harsnett's case the theatre was a: ‘symbolically charged zone of pollution, disease, and licentious entertainment’.
But it was one believed by Harsnett to be controlled by the state and at the periphery of society.
By ‘placing’ exorcism in such a zone, state institutions (which Greenblatt equates with Harsnett's text) can attempt to contain what is potentially disruptive to the state; eliminating, in this case, charismatic religious groups as a potential threat to the established Church.
Shakespeare negotiates with Harsnett's Declaration .
He adopts Harsnett's premise that possession is a theatrical performance — Edgar continually brings attention to his madness being a pretence.
But Shakespeare's manipulation ultimately disrupts Harsnett's design: ‘In Shakespeare, the realization that demonic possession is  a theatrical imposture leads not to a clarification — the clear-eyed satisfaction of a man who refuses to be gulled — but to a deeper uncertainty, a loss of moorings, in the face of evil.’
For Greenblatt,King Lear is a play haunted by a sense of rituals and beliefs that have been emptied out.
The play exposes the horror of a world which, drained of its rituals, is left exposed to a released and enacted wickedness neither its individuals nor its institutions can contain.
The result is to cause us to love the theatre: ‘the play recuperates and intensifies our need for these ceremonies, even though we do not believe in them, and performs them, carefully marked out for us as frauds, for our continued consumption’.
It is a conclusion about an almost psychiatric effect (and comfort) offered by serious drama which Aristotle would have had much sympathy with.
As a reading of King Lear , Greenblatt's is unquestionably very rewarding.
But should we raise objections about a too selective use of examples, both within Shakespeare's plays — where they are often exclusively considered — and in the choice of texts which help detail the period's ‘social energy’?
Within the narrative of Greenblatt's discussion, the Harsnett text appears to assume a type of objective status as a uncontested point of historical reference, operating as a representative example for Elizabethan attitudes toward theatricality.
Greenblatt does not explain why one ‘historical’ text is chosen rather than another, and whether they may, or may not be, considered representative of those commonly found in cultural circulation.
This has been the frequent and characteristic complaint of those (in my experience few) historians who have explored the New Historicism: the representation of history is idiosyncratic and selected to reflect the preoccupation of the literary critic, not an attempt to account accurately for the period.
New Historicism's usual response to this is to expand on Montrose's point about the inevitability of critical partiality existing.
As we saw in chapter 1 ‘history’ is largely an ideological construct.
Critics and historians represent the past in terms of their own current concerns.
The problem is that New Historicism refuses or only very reluctantly foregrounds its own historicity and position within an ideology.
For example in Shakespearean Negotiations Greenblatt discovers through a reading of Thomas Harriot's Brief and True Report of the New Found Land of Virginia and Shakespeare's Henry V the way actions which the state employs, and which should have a radically undermining effect, turn out to be props of authority.
King Lear signals the implications and terrors of a demystified world.
The work of a French doctor, Jacques Duval's Des Hermaphordits ,Twelfth Night and As You Like It are the focus for an exploration of the ways a culture's sexual discourse plays a critical role in the shaping of identity.
Discussion of work by Hugh Latimer and The Tempest considers the managing of anxiety by the state as a means of shaping and fashioning behaviour.
These are all concerns central to our own current culture, and the essays help detail some of Shakespeare's negotiations with us as well as the possible ‘social energy’ of his own era.
And nothing wrong in this.
Each of these essays has important observations about these negotiations which enrich our experience of the plays.
But if we seek through these texts to understand more about the social and cultural circulations of Renaissance England it becomes problematic.
Questions about why these examples and not others constantly loom, because we can seriously doubt how representative the selected texts are.
Central to Greenblatt's readings is the argument of subversion and containment.
It asks us to perceive Renaissance literature in a relation to the power exercised by the state's dominant political institutions.
Literature is seen as often (perhaps unconsciously) acting in a subversive relation with such power, contending with it, questioning its norms.
The real force of literature's subversive power, though, is ultimately contained because its texts are sanctioned by the state to play a subversive role, a role which state institutions can control.
The argument is clearest in its application to the theatre: recall Harsnett's view that the theatre was a zone of pollution and licence, one capable of being managed by locating it in a designated place on the social periphery.
The literary text may negotiate with its containment (as Shakespeare's do), but its contemporary  subversive force has been compromised by the political dominance of state power which excludes it from the centre and places it on the margins of socially sanctioned institutions.
Greenblatt's inquiry into the ‘half-hidden cultural transactions through which great works of art are empowered’ uncovers a process by which Renaissance texts subvert but are then contained by state institutions.
But this reveals a cultural context of great importance only when we can be satisfied that his texts' historicity — their social embedment — is not determined by Greenblatt's own desire to keep these texts empowered.
Could it be that New Historicists are only providing texts with a new textuality of history?
New Historicists acting to ensure selected texts survive and are allowed to maintain their power?
Considering the use of the anecdote as a focus for analysis, Joel Fineman discusses the way anecdotes were used by Thucydides as ta deonata , the things necessary.
Anecdotes, Fineman argues, enabled the sentiments befitting the occasion to be expressed.
It is necessary to use anecdotes to let history happen, to introduce a narration of beginning ,middle and end into it.
The selection of an anecdote to narrate the significance of an occasion is more important than the general sense of what was actually said or done.
As Fineman acknowledges, the anecdote may not be at odds with the general sense but, as we observe with New Historicism's use of anecdote, it is difficult to determine its relation to the general with any satisfaction.
When at the beginning of Shakespearean Negotiations Greenblatt half-jokingly announces literature professors as ‘salaried, middle-class shamans’ there is actually a context being uncovered which, just as the anthropologist's place in reading a culture, needs to be scrutinised.
There is something shamanistic about New Historicist writing: the critic as one who is able to uncover energies within Renaissance writing not immediately apparent to the reader but whose tribal secrets of how such energies are located are not readily revealed.
At the end of Shakespearean Negotiations in concluding  a discussion of The Tempest , Greenblatt tells a story to exemplify ‘the continued doubleness of Shakespeare in our culture: at once the embodiment of civilised recreation…and the instrument of empire’.
He relates an incident of the explorer Stanley in Africa in the nineteenth century.
Stanley was accused by natives of practising evil magic because he was observed writing about them in a book.
The natives insisted he burn the book or they would attack him.
Worried about losing his notes, Stanley burns a copy of Shakespeare which resembles his notebook.
Greenblatt records the episode about Stanley in a longish extract from Stanley's own published writing which makes a great rhetorical play on Stanley's regret at burning Shakespeare.
But as Greenblatt points out, there is evidence to suggest that Stanley made up the part about burning Shakespeare to heighten the effect of his story.
However, Greenblatt concludes:
it doesn't matter very much if the story ‘really’ happened.
What matters is the role Shakespeare plays in it, a role at once central and expendable — and, in some obscure way, not just expendable but exchangeable for what really matters: the writing that more directly serves power [Greenblatt having pointed out how Stanley's notebook proved invaluable in establishing the Belgian Congo].
For if at moments we can convince ourselves that Shakespeare is the discourse of power, we should remind ourselves that there are usually other discourses — here the notes and vocabulary and maps — that are instrumentally far more important.
And we should perhaps add to this list of discourses the critical one which organises an anecdote, which may not have taken place at all, to re-iterate a point about Shakespeare and power.
What I find uncanny here is that a book which begins with a mocking suggestion about the literary critic as shaman, ends with a story in which Shakespeare is used by an explorer pretending to be a shaman among willing believers convinced of his power.
Within the narrative of Greenblatt's book — opening with him considering the ‘magic’ of Shakespeare revivifying the  dead in Greenblatt's own voice, concluding with Greenblatt considering Shakespeare as substitute fetish for the book which the natives believed was stealing their life — this latter story also stands as a type of anecdote or fable about part of New Historicism's critical enterprise.
Shakespeare is given a role in which his plays are presented circulating with other texts in a context of history which, upon analysis, discloses a relation between theatrical text and state power.
Just as the importance of the Stanley anecdote was not whether it was true or not, in a sense it does not matter if the Renaissance cultural relations Greenblatt posits actually existed, because the truth of that cultural negotiation is exchangeable for the writing that more directly serves power, in this case the critical writing which establishes the critic as salaried shaman.
I do not wish to suggest that New Historians are involved in some huge subversive critical enterprise duping credulous students.
This is patently not the case.
New Historicist criticism, as I have mentioned, is formally reluctant to make generalised claims.
Its focus, ultimately, is on a reading of a literary text, one usually familiar and accessible to readers who can test a New Historicist reading against their own experience of the text.
However, its location and release of new energies within a literary text are based on discoveries of how that text negotiated its own culture.
This is where it becomes important to distinguish whether New Historicism uses the cultural anecdote as necessary to focus the general sense of the culture, or whether it offers a selectively constructed view of the culture necessary to the roundness of the New Historicist's negotiation.
It is a distinction which New Historicist writing avoids confronting.
Clearly, Greenblatt's argument is compromised if, in the case of King Lear , we find the play and Harsnett's A Declaration of Egregious Popish Impostures are both texts on the margins of the culture, neither representative of the culture's central preoccupations.
Critical reservations about New Historicism are overwhelmed by the benefits it has produced in forcing us to reconsider the relations between texts, historical contexts, and the methodologies we use in both establishing and unravelling these relations.
By combining a fuller investigation of a text's history with an awareness of new  theoretical investigations into the structures of both culture and discourse, New Historicism has directly confronted the problem of how literature ‘says something of something and says it to somebody’(to recall Geertz's formulation).
By arguing that ‘thick description’ of some specific cultural action indicates larger and more significant features of the culture as a whole, New Historicism maintains contact with history as part of a larger narrative.
History for New Historicism still meaningfully links past with present and even future while at the same time recognising that ‘little histories’(accounts which emphasise the particularity of specific historical acts within a localised context) must be closely explicated.
In trying to allow for the distinctiveness of the particular historical origins of a text while not abandoning the claims for larger historical consequences, New Historicism may veer too much towards seeing history as symbolic.
Literary texts can be seen acting as metaphors for features the skilled (shamanistic perhaps?) reader of the cultural text discerns and whose significances to the larger whole are suggestively indicated.
There may be a restrictiveness in the range of cultural structures illuminated, but attempting to determine at least some of the cultural webs which emerged during the Renaissance and trying to discover why they were spun indicates the dynamism of cultural representation.
New Historicism refuses to see texts as passive reflections of the cultural whole, but as interventions within it, fashioned by the whole but also re-fashioning the existing orders through which culture is written and understood.
The strength of new historical procedures becomes apparent when contrasted with aspects of ‘revisionism’ among current historical accounts of the early modern period.
In reaction to more radical theoretical models, some historians have made increasing claims for the uniqueness of localised history.
Their techniques are not unlike ‘thick description’ in some respects: setting out accounts for a closely defined topic in an exhaustive manner and assembling a wealth of documentary and  statistical evidence to assess an event.
The difference with New Historicism is in a refusal to see the incident or localised concern as symbolic or as a metaphor for larger cultural significances.
Indeed one of this form of revisionism's characteristic positions is to stress localised events happening as a result of localised pressures rather than as responses to larger national happenings or, especially, to articulated ideological movements.
Insisting that detailed historical evidence makes it hard to categorise and structure a developed narrative to specific events, this revisionist historical practice refuses to determine anything beyond what ‘the evidence’ precisely articulates.
The role of the current interpreter as both reader and writer is diminished.
Indeed, the interpretive role is restricted and its ideological claims negated through an appeal to pedantic accuracy, pointing out that cases for larger historical significances are almost impossible to determine.
This is not to imply that this form of historical revisionism is ideologically neutral or objective.
Its contextual critical focus frequently is to attack those who claim to perceive cultural preoccupations which revisionism sees as ideologically disruptive to established (and establishment) views of English cultural development.
Much recent historicist revisionism within the early modern period has been particularly vocal in opposing those who attempt to discover an organised political character among those groups outside the formal organisation of official state policy.
Since distinct evidence for political actions is contained overwhelmingly in official records, repudiating the use of other forms of cultural documents on the grounds that they can not be clearly interpreted becomes an implicit acceptance of the state's officially articulated view of social, political and cultural organisation.
At an extreme, such detailed localised studies can appear to demonstrate that during the early modern period no one outside a state-sanctioned minority of policy makers had, let alone acted on, an idea which had alternate social and political implications, rather than responded to, say, the price of corn in a specific market.
A revisionist history's emphasis on ‘local knowledge’ does usefully challenge a creation of the easy narrative which balances a symbolic reading of some specified cultural documents (literary texts, material artefacts, theatrical performances) with the critical desire of re-energising the past.
It may stress the past as different and difficult to know, an important corrective to those who claim to discover the past ‘speaking’ on the basis of only a couple of selected voices.
But in its refusal to negotiate culture and politics outside of localised concerns, and its adoption of a methodology which details relations between social structures and their representations largely with a view to correct supposed imaginative misrepresentations, this form of localised history must remain only of limited interest.
In particular, what much of it fails to do is to convince all but a handful of academic specialists that its closely delineated studies are anything more than detailed local knowledge, an interesting but benign academic pursuit.
We may praise the detailed work and massing of information, but we may sleep.
New Historicism's interest in larger cultural issues, with a current focus on the politics of reading, does offer a possible mode for addressing history as doing more than detailing localised concerns without slipping back into some grand historical narrative constructed through unaddressed critical assumptions.
At a time when the debate about what should be taught and how it should be taught is being hotly addressed in schools and higher education, new historicist procedures help confront a problem forcefully made by Raphael Samuel:
Historical knowledge is in the end indivisible, even if the multiplication of specialisms seem to subdivide it into separate spheres.
As a learning process, history is supposed to be about making connections, situating particular moments in large wholes, discovering a principle of order in the midst of seeming chaos.
As a mode of explanation it involves bringing the outside in, and linking the particular to the general.
Grand narrative, whether we recognise it or not, provides us with our markers of historical time and space.
It is something which the learner craves even if teachers think they can do without it.
Samuel's argument uses the example of ‘nation’, which he points out historians of the left have shied away from either as a subject of study or as a symbolic category.
Yet, as Samuel warns: ‘even if nation is expelled from the class-room, it will still carry on an underground existence in the corridors and playground and an altogether more uninhibited one on television and the football terraces.
If historians refuse to teach it, there will be plenty of others who will’.
New Historicism offers a possible negotiation of the problem Samuel sees not only as pedagogically necessary but as politically necessary too.
With its interest in cultural representation, the stories people tell about themselves, New Historicism is concerned to explore not only how the Renaissance fashioned itself, but how our present cultural categories allow us both to write and to understand culture.
As we witnessed in the examples with which this chapter opened, cultural negotiation is not merely about amassing information but about interpretation of texts which, of necessity, are obliged to adopt constantly shifting devices (to recall the terms of Wyatt's sonnet).
New Historicism opens the possibility of a critical analysis of a text which attends to its cultural substance rather than relying on reductive formulas to account for text and context.
New historical practice has yet to develop the critical accountability it should possess, yet its efforts in confronting the questions of our access to history need to be encouraged.
It may often seem that some critical practitioners within established disciplinary frameworks which insist on treating literary texts as documents or, oppositely, as eternal works of art or according to a closely defined theoretical structure, proffer pronouncements on texts and history which are exclusively self-confident and definitive.
These critical approaches can appear to possess a rigour New Historicism lacks.
The problem of this critical practice wedded exclusively to a narrow disciplinary framework is that its rigour is based on ‘reductive formulas’, certainties about how the past is to be discovered and what Renaissance culture was.
If New Historicism sometimes seems to fall  victim to certain formulas, such as subversion and containment, there are others it challenges.
It is, to date, the most organised critical practice to insist that our understanding of Renaissance culture can be arrived at only through complex negotiations of both text and history.
5
Civilisation and Its Discontents: The Case of Edmund Spenser
In this chapter I want to examine how some of the ideas outlined in the last chapter can redirect explorations of some Renaissance texts.
In particular, I want to consider how Spenser's The Faerie Queene may be seen negotiating within the context of Elizabeth's England.
To do so I want to use another Spenserian text,A View of the Present State of Ireland , as a further means of elucidating some of Spenser's designs.
Spenser's views on Ireland, exemplifying certain Elizabethan attitudes to a different impinging culture which England sought to control, also illustrates the unease experienced within English culture itself.
What I want to suggest is that far from representing a glorification of a golden age, confident and stable in its social organisation,The Faerie Queene exemplifies a very uneasy social and cultural fabric and I want to indicate some of the reasons for that unease.
Further, this chapter also sets out to exemplify some of the problems we confront in considering an undisputed literary text (The Faerie Queene ) in the context of a piece of writing which does not purport to be a fiction (A View of the Present State of Ireland ), yet which uses the generic and rhetorical conventions of literary writing.
Does The Faerie Queene insist that it is to be read in such a manner that its role as a history (which as both epic and romance it can claim to be symbolically) must be seen as intrinsically different from the account of the English in Ireland which Spenser outlines in A View ?
Is not a separation of Spenser's literary preoccupations with The Faerie Queene from his political preoccupations in A View the result of later critical directions which disliked presenting literary texts as political — especially when the politics is of an insupportable type within current liberal democracies?
Additionally, and perhaps even more uncomfortably, how does a consideration of Spenser and Ireland impinge on our understanding and involvement with the current ‘Irish Problem’(an involvement which may be extremely  immediate for some readers)?
Or, indeed, the reverse, how does our understanding of Ireland currently impinge on our reading of Spenser?
Early in 1990, the Irish courts refused to extradite Owen Carron and two Irish Republican Army (IRA) suspects to Northern Ireland.
Shortly after an IRA land mine exploded in Northern Ireland killing four members of the Ulster Defence Regiment.
There was nothing to suggest the two events were linked.
Neither was particularly exceptional within the catalogue of events that have taken place during the last twenty years.
However, it was linked by Mrs Thatcher, who suggested that it signified that the Irish Republic was less committed than Britain in bringing the IRA to account for their crimes: ‘You take these murders of these four people today alongside the decisions in the Supreme Court not to extradite those accused of violent crime — and one is very, very depressed’.
Some months later a colleague and I were returning to London from a meeting in Brussels.
It was clear when we arrived at Heathrow airport that security was very tight.
I travel on an Irish passport and in going through Immigration was looked up in a register of, I presume, suspects.
I was not listed.
However, the Immigration Officer started questioning me.
The questions were fairly predictable but the hostility of the tone was apparent.
At this point my colleague behind me (British passport holder, immaculately dressed, well spoken) stepped up and casually pushing forward his passport said: ‘Oh he's all right, teaches at London University.’
'Oh yes', replied the Immigration Officer, ‘which part?’
When I replied he looked at me, then at my colleague, and addressing him , said, ‘Oh well, at any rate he was born in Canada.’
A few months later, the IRA killed the Member of Parliament, Ian Gow.
Commentary at the time largely recognised that it was yet another atrocity designed to antagonise political and public sympathy and hopefully upset cooperation between London and Dublin.
From predictable corners, it produced predictable calls for sterner measures and greater vigilance against terrorism.
It also produced the following leader from the conservative Daily Telegraph :
The weak link in the struggle against the IRA continues to be the will of the Dublin government and the Irish people.
Only when Dublin has the courage publicly to take action to root out the killers in its midst…will progress be made.
As long as the Irish Republic provides a safe haven for substantial numbers of known terrorists, the British people will hold the Irish people in some measure responsible for the tragedies wrought by terrorism.
Each of these anecdotes reflects a certain common facet of the English experience of Ireland — a mistrust of it.
In my own relatively trivial example what struck me forcefully was the assumption that being born in Canada seemed to make me more ‘one of us’ in the Immigration Officer's eyes than ‘one of them’, despite the fact that, within terms of the European Community, being Irish should make me far more of an insider.
Both the former Prime Minister's and the Daily Telegraph 's implications that Ireland condones the IRA, that it somehow condones terrorism, reflect the depths of mistrust which is part of the British experience of Ireland.
The Telegraph , too, implies that British can be neatly distinguished from Irish, but one of the complexities of Britain and Ireland is that it is not that easy to do so.
IRA terrorists from the North may be travelling on British passports.
Are they ‘us’ or ‘them’?
Spenser's A View of the Present State of Ireland was written during 1596 but because it advocated far more severe measures than Elizabeth's government would tolerate it was not allowed to be published until 1633 when it appeared in a somewhat watered down version edited by Sir James Ware.
Spenser's ideas are presented in the form of a dialogue between Eudoxus ('of good report', ‘honoured’) and Irenius (the masculine form of Ireland).
The former is the voice of sound, sensible England, the latter is Spenser who had been granted land in county Cork in 1588.
Irenius is set upon convincing Eudoxus that harsh policies are necessary to subdue and civilise Ireland and that a more moderate approach, which might appear sensible from the vantage of civilised English life across the Irish sea, is inadequate to deal with the dangers posed by Ireland.
Spenser's Irenius is presented as the voice of experience, the man who has front-line knowledge of the Irish and  who, as the dialogue tries to show, has a firm grasp of the Irish situation past and present.
But Spenser's is also the voice of apocalyptic concern.
The Irish question for him is part of larger questions about the maintenance of civilisation in a hostile world.
Spenser recognises that this last perspective is unlikely to seem immediately convincing to a supposedly rational English audience.
He, therefore, uses his rhetorical skills to persuade the level-headed but inexperienced Eudoxus that Irenius's fears are not unreasonable when the nature of the Irish situation is grasped.
His technique shows a masterful grasp of the conventions of the philosophic dialogue perfected by Plato.
There is an appearance of debate, but increasingly Eudoxus asks rhetorical questions which allow Irenius to answer at length, and (hardly surprisingly) win Eudoxus over to see the sense of his proposals once the true horror of the Irish are recognised.
Rhetorically, Spenser's text is organised so that it increasingly appears that Eudoxus has no counter-arguments to put to Irenius, such is the ostensible soundness of Irenius's evidence and arguments.
Eudoxus thus appears well-intentioned but naive, while Irenius emerges as the source of reason and experience.
Spenser, thus, hopes to persuade his readers that the extremity of his views is, in fact, not extreme at all.
Irenius begins his account with an expression of anxiety which reveals a number of linked issues which constantly crop up in Spenser's writing: the establishment and maintenance of true religion and civilisation within a pattern of human development predetermined by the divine.
What worries Spenser is how human action fits in with this determined overall scheme of things whose main signposts can be discerned in Scripture, but whose timetable and precise unravelling are not clear.
Change haunts Spenser, even when he acknowledges that a providential order is operating.
At the tract's beginning, Eudoxus inquires how it is with the advantages of Ireland as a place for agriculture — a key aspect for establishing civility — that it remains savage.
Irenius responds:
Marry, so there have been diverse good plots devised and wise counsels cast already about reformation of that realm, but they say it is the fatal destiny of that land that no  purposes whatsoever are meant for her good will prosper or take good effect, which whether it proceed from the very genius of the soil, or the influence of the stars, or that Almighty God hath not yet appointed the time of her reformation, or that He reserveth her in this unquiet state still, for some secret scourge which shall by her come unto England, it is hard to be known but yet much to be feared.
Eudoxus scorns this answer, arguing that it is typical of acts with failed human agency (the ‘good counsels’ devised) to throw the reasons for their failure on to divine agency, ‘so as to excuse their own follies and imperfections’.
Spenser at this stage is establishing his own claims to rational soundness by having Eudoxus, with his common sense English perspective, be seen marginalising the apocalyptic claims of Irenius.
But the rest of A View is formulated to transform readers' approval to Irenius without loosing Spenser's claims to be pursuing the Irish question in an impartial philosophic way.
As we see in the passage above, Spenser also establishes from the outset the sense that Irish questions participate in larger questions of reformation and the establishment of civilisation.
He sets Ireland up as a type of extreme place — a place possibly cursed in its very soil or divinely reserved to act as a scourge for England.
He is creating a context which will help to justify his severe proposals for treating Irish resistance to the processes of civilisation (proposals which include genocide).
Severe actions may be sanctioned against Ireland because it is naturally cursed, or because it needs extreme measures to bring it the fruits of reformation (desired by God), or because it holds some particular horror for England which the English will deserve unless they do something about it.
Using this last possibility, Spenser implies that the English acting firmly against Ireland might demonstrate that they have purified the fault which was going to cause Ireland to scourge them in the first place, namely a tameness in executing God's designs against savage immorality.
It also indicates the much more haunting proposition for Spenser, that Ireland may scourge England because that is what is divinely desired and there is no escape.
The prospect of a civilisation being overturned by an allowed evil getting control is a real fear for Spenser.
A View of the Present State of Ireland enforces its perspective of the savage nature of the Irish by giving them a curious ethnogeny.
Spenser considers whether they are Scythian in origin or whether they may have originally come from Spain.
The latter he rejects because it is clear the Irish are too barbarous even to be Spanish, but he supports the former account of origins.
Scythians were depicted by the Greeks as being the most untamable savage barbarians.
Thus, Spenser proposes that Irish savagery excels anything that could be associated with England's most apparent enemy, Spain.
He further gives the Irish a notorious classical origin, making an implicit equation between the civilised English and Greeks, and the worst ancient barbarians and the Irish.
If England felt the recent victory of the armada against Spain to be a confirmation of God's approval of the English as an important elected and reformed people (a view Spenser allegorically depicts in The Faerie Queene , Bk V, VIII), Spenser, in projecting the English as inheriting mantels of both classical and Christian supremacy, is inflating the need for subjecting Ireland to a moral conquest of epic proportions.
Spenser's fears about Ireland become most apparent, however, when he turns to the subject of the ‘Old English’ there.
During Spenser's time Ireland was inhabited by three distinct groups.
First, the native (or in Spenser's term ‘mere’) Irish.
Second, the Old English, descendants of settlers who had come over with the first wave of English conquest during the Middle Ages.
Third, the ‘New English’ settlers who had been given land by the Tudors in a number of plantations.
Spenser was a member of this third group.
What A View of the Present State of Ireland saves its worst condemnation for is those Old English who had ‘degenerated’ and gone native even to the point of abandoning their original names and taking Gaelic ones.
For Spenser they become even more malicious to the English than the ‘mere’ Irish.
Eudoxus  initially is shocked by this possibility: ‘Is it possible that any should so far grow out of frame that they should in so short a space quite forget their country and  their own names?’.
But Irenius provides sufficient example to bring Eudoxus to proclaim: ‘In truth, this which you tell is a most shameful hearing and to be reformed with most sharp censures in so great personages to the terror of the meaner’.
Here Spenser reveals a particular fear, the tenuousness of civilisation.
What antagonises him is the prospect of the civiliser being rendered savage, the moral made immoral.
Ireland provides distinct evidence that civilisation in the hands of the few must be maintained by exclusivity (Irenius insists that any social contact between English and Irish be suppressed and expressly advocates forbidding the English the opportunity of learning Gaelic).
The savage becomes a disease which can infect the civil, and the disease is best eradicated by harsh medicine.
This anger and fear about Old English degeneracy was a common complaint among numerous New English settlers.
Politically, expressing horror at degeneracy was expedient.
The Old English tended to be the most influential group within Ireland during Spenser's time.
They, far more than the New English, had the ear of Elizabeth's government and they advocated restraint in dealing with Ireland.
It suited the more militant and ambitious New English to portray them as having Irish sympathies and having gone native.
But Spenser's fear seems more genuinely deep seated.
Spenser, or the inheritors of his estate, are most at risk of catching the same savage disease.
Irenius makes the point that the Old English within the actual English Pale (the area around Dublin directly ruled by England) have been preserved in reasonable civility.
It is rather those in the most outlying areas of Connaught and Munster (where Spenser's estate was situated) who have grown to be ‘as very patchcoks as the wild Irish’.
Where savagery is allowed to remain it is not static but works to corrupt the civilised.
From A View of the Present State of Ireland 's perspective the civilised, the moral and the godly are equated.
To allow savagery to remain is to allow evil to remain.
Having persuaded Eudoxus that Ireland must be reformed, Irenius answers his question as to how this can be accomplished other than by laws and ordinances.
It must be accomplished by the sword:
Even by the sword, for all those evils must first be cut away with a strong hand before any good can be planted, like as the corrupt branches and the unwholesome boughs are first to be pruned, and the foul moss cleansed or scraped away, before the tree can bring forth any good fruit.
Spenser, however, does not literally mean the sword.
One of the difficulties he acknowledges is that the Irish are not given to fighting ‘civilised’ battles on a properly organised battle field.
Rather they fight guerrilla campaigns, as befits their savagery, which are extremely difficult to subdue.
Spenser advocates that large sections of forest on each side of the road could be cut down to prevent ambush.
He believes, though, that a winter campaign against the Irish is the best medicine as they will then be unable to find sufficient replenishments and can be starved into submission.
He cites approvingly the use of this tactic in suppressing the rebellion in Munster, noting how the Irish were subdued through famine:
Out of every corner of the woods and glens they came creeping forth upon their hands, for their legs could not bear them.
They looked like anatomies of death, they spake like ghosts crying out of their graves, they did eat dead carrions, happy where they could find them, yea, and one another soon after, insomuch as the very carcasses they spared not to scrape out of their graves, and if they found a plot of water cress or shamrocks, there they flocked as to a feast for the time, yet not able long to continue therewithal, that in short space there were none almost left, and a most populous and plentiful country suddenly left void of man or beast.
Yet sure in all that war there perished not many by the sword, but all by the extremity of famine, which they themselves had wrought.
Spenser approves this because it does not drain English resources through having to keep a large standing army in Ireland.
But he also likes this method because it appears that the famine is caused by the Irish themselves as a result of their lack of husbandry (which confirms their savagery) and, thus, appears a natural reward of their refusal to accept the civility of English rule.
A Present View of Ireland presents a rather disturbing presentation of the means through which Spenser desires  to conduct his civilising mission in Ireland.
In his well designed writing, too, Spenser reveals that the fruits of Renaissance humanism with its concern for eloquence (a matching of rhetoric and substance) as a demonstration of moral civilised life can be used to argue genocide.
The recent debate about whether Spenser is typical of ‘New English’ perspectives on Ireland or more extreme than most is not particularly the point.
What A Present View forces us to do is to reconsider a traditional equation between humanism and liberalism.
Seeing Renaissance writing deploying its resources to justify genocide as moral, divinely justified and ‘civilising’, forces us to accept that Renaissance literature's role has too frequently been accepted as unquestionably an instrument of enlightenment in some unexplored way.
A student of mine in a Spenser class which read A Present View suggested it seemed peculiar to be reading a piece by an author commonly hailed as one of the great writers of the English Renaissance putting forward views which makes him a type of war criminal within a twentieth-century perspective.
This may seem a harsh sentence, but it does highlight how literary studies often seek to purify its canon either by exclusion or, more readily, by representing uncomfortable aspects of texts in ways which reduce their conflict with twentieth-century liberal values.
It might be worth recalling Walter Benjamin's view that there is always a verso and recto to history — each document of civilisation is at the same time a document of barbarism.
It depends who is viewing what from which perspective.
In which respects should A Present View of Ireland be linked with The Faerie Queene ?
The preoccupation with the establishment and maintenance of civilisation and true religion is a central feature of Spenser's poem as it is with his political tract.
The Faerie Queene , though, ostensibly emphasises personal development: ‘The generall end therefore of all the booke is to fashion a gentleman or  noble person in vertuous and gentle discipline’.
So Spenser wrote to Sir Walter Ralegh in a letter almost certainly designed to be printed with the poem.
As we have seen in an earlier chapter, by gentleman or noble person Spenser is thinking of a distinctive class of person, but his desire to fashion gentlemen nevertheless might be seen as directed at individual development.
Criticism of the poem has usually stressed this individual moral cultivation.
As Stephen Greenblatt noted some years ago, though, for a poem devoted to gentle discipline there is a great deal of violence.
Certainly, attempts to read the poem at a wholly symbolic level with the violence being explained away as allegorical representations of abstract moral conflicts ignore the great deal of interest the poem shows in history, particularly Spenser's contemporary history.
Spenser is not interested in history from some disinterested secular perspective.
Rather the events he symbolically depicts are part of a larger design to reveal a historia , an unfolding of a pattern which is to be found both in the self and in a social and political fabric.
Spenser uses the commonplace theory of correspondences not merely as a convenient poetic device, but to reflect his belief in linkages and parallels among (from our perspective) apparently diverse ideas.
Belief in the microcosm reflecting the macrocosm and vice versa does not produce some bland reflection of a theory of stable order.
Rather correspondences between micro and macro produces greater fears about disruptions and instabilities.
Loss of control in the self (particularly the ‘selves’ of powerful individuals), or loss of control in a wider social or political fabric could produce a domino effect bringing the whole into chaos.
Being concerned with gentlemen or noble persons, in other words those within the society who were in a position to act, Spenser directs his poem to make them aware both of dangers and responsibilities.
Spenser's preoccupation is characteristic of a Renaissance humanism which believed literature could move right readers to moral purpose.
But such humanism did not see morality as a passive condition.
Virtue was manifested by acting virtuously, not through passive reflection.
Humanism considered the most powerful or most noble within society to be the best readers and directed writing at them not exclusively because writers looked to this class for generous rewards or for some snobbish appeal.
The powerful could act, they were the ones with the scope to control and change active social conditions.
They were potentially the best readers because they could act upon their reading.
The idea of reading The Faerie Queene in an armchair and then announcing oneself as having gained virtue was a largely foreign concept to Spenser's brand of humanism.
For Spenser, the poem's effect, in essence its success, should be measured by how its designs were acted on.
The virtuous person participated in virtuous actions within the social fabric.
Without such actions any claims to virtue were hollow.
Spenser's ideas of moral reform, therefore, cannot be divorced from ideas of political and social reform within actual contemporary situations.
Not surprisingly The Faerie Queene shows how individual conduct and wider political conduct are closely linked.
These correspondences help provide the clues to the often disparate nature of the poem's various episodes.
Structurally, there often appears to be a type of miscellany within each book of The Faerie Queene , with a loose narrative organisation bringing the disparate episodes together into some inconclusive whole.
What the structure tries to provoke, though, is an awareness that the maintenance of self-control is the means by which the wider social and ultimately religious fabric is controlled.
The self and the society cannot be separated.
I want to examine how some of Spenser's concerns are manifested in The Faerie Queene through an examination of Book V. The book is concerned with Sir Artegall or Justice.
It is the part of the poem which is most fundamentally centred on Ireland, as Artegall's principal quest is to free Eirena from her enslavement by Grantorto, a cruel giant.
The request for release from monstrous tyranny is made by Eirena herself to the Faerie Queene, whose champion Artegall is.
If Irenius in A Present View was a masculine version of Ireland, Eirena is a feminine personification (though both, of course, are English prescriptions of what Ireland should be).
The quest to free Ireland begins Book V and the successful slaying of Grantorto is in the final  canto.
The basic conceptual structure is clear.
Ireland is presented as a place whose feminine nature makes the country require a more powerful masculine presence to keep it from the savagery of the giant who is unmistakably a Roman Catholic monster.
There is a potential civilised nature to Ireland, and it is this side which asks English help.
The opposition, which must be suppressed, is savage Roman Catholicism encouraged by the giant.
As with all the books of the poem, however, Artegall's quest is immediately interrupted by other events, apparent deviations and distractions from his task.
Most diverting is Artegall's encounter with the Amazon Radigund whose sexual allurements cause him to be captured and emasculated by being dressed in woman's clothes and forced to spin.
He is freed by Britomart, his betrothed, whose chastity gives her great military powers.
The episodes with the Amazons occupy the centre of the book, but rather than being unconnected with Artegall's Irish quest, they are linked.
Spenser throughout the book, and indeed throughout the poem, makes a number of equations which sit at the centre of his ideology.
Right rule is ordered, self-controlled, Protestant and masculine.
Wrong rule is disorderly, uncontrolled, Catholic, and feminine.
Spenser's world is not black and white, there are mixtures of these various combinations, but what is apparent is that a deviation from the right mixture invites disaster.
Thus Eirena or Belgae (the Netherlands) in Book V are shown to be ladies of virtue but vulnerable to aggression from Roman Catholic masculine tyrants.
Artegall himself is rendered helpless when he loses self-control through Radigund's allurements, allowing not only himself to be debased but the continuance of a disorderly Amazonian government.
Even Britomart, who seems at times Spenser's ideal, is presented as open to uncontrollable fury because of her feminine nature.
It is interesting to contrast Britomart's fight with Radigund with Artegall's final contest with Grantorto.
Both are held under chivalric conventions of a formal confrontation between champions.
But the women's fight immediately loses control and Spenser depicts them as a tiger and a lioness, beasts confronting one another with animal fury unnaturally seeking to attack their legitimate feminine identity:
With greedy rage, and with their faulchins smot;
Ne either sought the others strokes to shun
but through great fury both their skill forgot,
And practicke vse in armes: ne spared not
Their dainty parts, which nature had created
So faire and tender, without staine or spot,
For other uses, then they them translated;
Which they now hackt & hewd, as if such use they hated,
(V, VII, 29)
Britomart wins because her rage is greater.
Even in victory, however, Britomart does not immediately regain composure she: ‘Stayd not, till she came to her selfe againe’(V, VII, 34) but for a mixture of motives — revenge, anger, pain from her wounds — she decapitates Radigund.
Thus in the women's fight, Spenser presents the two combatants not as fundamentally different but very similar.
Britomart's superiority appears later when she recognises the right order of things and restores masculine rule, freeing Artegall and the country: ‘And changing all that forme of commone weale, /The liberty of women did repeale, /Which they had long vsurpt; and them restoring/To mens subiection, did true Iustice deale’(V, VII, 42).
In contrast, Artegall's final encounter with Grantorto, again organised as a formal chivalric contest, shows Artegall as intensely self-composed and controlled as opposed to the giant's enraged but chaotic behaviour.
Artegall fights as a skilful mariner controls his vessel in a storm (V, XII, 18) and defeats the giant by carefully watching for the right advantage.
Spenser depicts Artegall also beheading his opponent in victory, but almost compassionately: ‘He lightly reft his head, to ease him of his paine’(V, XII, 23).
Thus, by the end of the book, Artegall has come to learn self-control which ensures his victory over uncontrolled savagery.
His victory over the giant is the result of skill and control not fury as was the case with Britomart's victory.
Both Britomart and Radigund forgot their skill in battle (whether they also forgot their feminine nature or revealed it is more difficult to determine).
Artegall keeps control and this allows victory over a savage force which appears much larger and more powerful than the knight.
This emphasis on the triumph of masculine order is the  context of Book V's final cantos.
When Artegall was captured by Radigund, his squire and assistant, the iron man Talus — who flails the lesser rabble and common criminals with unemotional, unsparing, but Spenser emphasises, just punishments — had to seek the means to free his master.
At the book's end, with the triumph of controlled, masculine, Protestant order, Talus becomes the effective instrument of his master.
Spenser depicts Artegall's rescue of Eirena as a triumph and return of civilisation to Ireland.
Artegall remains with her for a time and restores order:
His studie was true Iustice how to deale,
And day and night employ'd his busie paine
How to reforme that ragged common-weale:
And that same yron man which could reueale
All hidden crimes, through all that realme he sent,
To search out those, that vsd to rob and steale,
Or did rebell gainst lawfull gouernment;
On whom he did inflict most grieuous punishment.
(V, XII, 26)
This should be the culmination of Artegall's task.
But Spenser has Artegall forced to return to the Faerie Court.
He is vague about the precise reason, suggesting merely ‘He through occasion called was away’(V, XII, 27) but he links the recall with how Envy (a feminine personae) spreads malicious rumours about Artegall because of his victories in Ireland which were against her desire.
Thus Artegall's ‘course of Iustice he was forst to stay, /And Talus to reuoke from the right way’(V, XII, 27).
This episode bears considerable similarity to the fate of Lord Grey de Wilton, Lord Deputy of Ireland to whom Spenser acted as secretary.
Grey was recalled because the Old English persuaded Elizabeth that the severity of Grey's tactics in repressing Irish rebellion were counter-productive.
Spenser obviously approved of Grey's measures.
Spenser's depictions in Book V are more than just an attempt to justify Grey.
Artegall's subduing of Ireland is a conclusion to acts of masculine orderly restoration which the book as a whole deals with.
After the return of right masculine rule from the tyranny of the Amazons, Artegall meets with Prince Arthur and the two of them accomplish various overthrowing of tyrannies.
Arthur restores liberty  and right religion to Belgae.
What Spenser presents then is a process by which a militant English chivalry reforms a Europe beset by Roman Catholic tyranny and savagery.
Ireland is the last and potentially most significant episode here — at least structurally it is the concluding adventure.
Its ‘restoration’ seems to promise much, but the promise is interrupted by Artegall's being required to return to the Faerie Queene's court.
Artegall's initiative in Ireland is not completed and savagery is allowed to regain a hold.
The failure to conclude Ireland's ‘restoration’ to civility is also a failure of the processes of defeating the forces of savagery throughout northern Europe, which is what the book as a whole has been symbolically accomplishing.
Although Spenser does not make it explicit, this failure occurs not because of further disruptive forces from outside confronting Artegall but through his recall to the court of the Faerie Queene.
The cause of Artegall's inability to subdue Ireland in a completely satisfactory way is the result of actions proceeding from the civilised centre, not from those of the Faerie Queene's opponents.
The book concludes with Artegall subject to the taunts and slanders of the hideous hags Envy and Detraction.
Artegall will not confront them or allow Talus to flail them, and the book ends not with Artegall's triumph but his return to Faerie Court with these two ugly figures taunting him.
The savage in Book V is closely equated with the uncontrolled, and noticeably with Roman Catholic tyranny.
The ravaging giant of Eirena's territory finds counterparts in other figures depicted as monstrous, cruel, degenerate, and corrupt.
Their relation to the Beast of the Apocalypse and other figures of Satanic inspiration are often apparent.
But what is also clear is that ideal figures such as Artegall are also susceptible to being undone, particularly by feminine guile.
Spenser's world is not filled with unassailable knights, even his heroes are open to corruption.
As Book V's conclusion makes clear, even Justice in his moment of apparent triumph is susceptible to unexpected interference.
The forces of civilisation need to remain constantly vigilant.
The precariousness of civilisation haunts The Faerie Queene as it does A Present View of Ireland .
In both texts what is particularly worrying is how the ostensibly noble  can be undone.
In the View of Ireland it is the Old English beyond the Pale, at the end of Faerie Queene Book V, it is the spectacle of the feminine Envy and Detraction pursuing Artegall into the realm of the Faerie Queene.
In another telling episode from The Faerie Queene , Spenser reveals how the savage in Ireland becomes equated with the uncontrolled aspects of the individual.
Book II, canto IX of the poem is the well-known house of Alma or Temperance episode.
Sir Guyon (Temperance) and Prince Arthur come upon a solitary well-defended castle.
Riding up they are warned away because the castle is under siege by a savage horde, but almost immediately they are set upon:
A thousand villeins round about them swarmed
Out of the rockes and caues adioyning nye
Vile caytiue wretches, ragged, rude, deformd,
All threatning death, all in straunge manner armd
Some with vnweldy clubs, some with long speares,
Some rusty kniues, some staues in fire warmd.
Sterne was their looke, like wild amazed steares
Staring with hollow eyes, and stiff vpstanding heares.
(II, IX, 13)
This is remarkably similar to Irenius's descriptions of Irish dress and manners recounted in A View , details designed to demonstrate the savagery of the Irish.
Not only does Irenius decry the Irish appearance, making the bestial comparisons Spenser also proposes in the above passage, he also dwells on their uncivilised forms of fighting such as attacking suddenly with hit-and-run tactics.
In this episode from The Faerie Queene , Spenser makes the Irish connection explicit.
These villeins (meaning the attackers are peasants, not gentlemen, and thus are not socially entitled to attack knights) are compared to insects which rise out of Irish bogs:
As when a swarme of Gnats at euentide Out of the fennes of Allan do arise, Their murmuring small trompets sounden wide, Whiles in the aire their clustring army flies, That as a cloud doth seeme to dim the skies; Ne man nor beast may rest or take repast For their sharpe wounds, and noyous iniuries,
(II, IX, 16)
The military skills and superior armaments of the two knights allow them to fight off their attackers and they gain admittance to the castle.
Spenser makes it clear that the villeins are not individually dangerous to the superior knights.
Rather, like insects, they are annoyances except when they seem to possess such overwhelming numbers.
What he does do, though, is present these foes as mysterious and indefinably threatening in a haunting manner: ‘For though they bodies seeme, yet substance from them fades’(II, IX, 15).
Gaining access to the castle, the knights are given a tour.
The castle is a human body and while retaining a conventional castle architecture, Spenser sets out to show how the well-organised body is a fortress which can maintain itself from attack by savage exterior forces.
As numerous commentators have pointed out, the ‘castle’ appears to share many of the same physical features as Spenser himself.
At the end of the tour the knights are shown three of the chambers of the mind: phantasy, judgement, and memory.
Spenser dwells longest on the first, revealing it filled with ‘infinite shapes of things dispersed thin' (II, IX, 50).
What is interesting is that the insect imagery used to characterise the villeins is continued here.
Phantasy's chamber:
filled was with flyes, Which buzzed all about, and made such sound, That they encombred all mens eares and eyes, Like many swarmes of Bees assembled round, After their hiues with honny do abound: All those were idle thoughts and fantasies, Deuices, dreames, opinions unsound, Shewes, visions, sooth-sayes, and prophesies; And all that fained is, as leasings, tales, and lies.
(II, IX, 51)
Properly controlled, phantasy is obviously an important part of a poet's castle, when by profession he is a ‘maker’, a fictionaliser in some sense.
But what Spenser demonstrates is that uncontrolled phantasy lies close to the destructive savagery which lurks, similarly insubstantial and ‘dispersed thin' without.
The maintenance of the castle is more than a concerted defence of the ordered interior against the disorderly exterior.
The interior, too, contains elements  which are potentially destructive.
As the experience of most of his knights throughout the poem reveals, they contain within themselves the opposite of their virtue and only through ordered self-control can they turn their powers to good.
But, as Spenser's discussion of the Old English going native in A View of the Present State of Ireland reveals, the destructive interior elements when placed in an environment where their exterior corresponding elements are present may gain possession of a potentially good individual or group and bring about degeneracy.
The well-tempered individual's ability to maintain order is precarious when he is located in a terrain which is uncontrolled.
The savage, debased, and bestial presences which attack virtue, may undermine its integrity because the potential to degenerate into villainy lies within even a nobleman.
It is precisely because of this danger that extreme measures are needed to suppress the savage.
As we see, therefore, for Spenser in both poem and tract there are explicit parallels.
The establishment of order and civilisation in Ireland (according to an English model) is required because only in such a context can nobility, proper religion, and morality prosper.
Without the cultural context conducive to virtue, baseness, Roman Catholicism, and immorality become menacing realities even for the both spiritually and militarily fortified minority of civilised individuals.
But, while it should be apparent now how this strikes anxieties within Spenser's specific Irish context on the supposed margins of civilisation, it also indicates more fundamental anxieties about the Elizabethan world in general.
Spenser wrote A View of the Present State of Ireland not as a vindication of Elizabethan policy towards Ireland but as a document highly critical of it under a necessarily respectful guise.
For Spenser, Elizabeth and her ministers are the Eudoxus of the piece — good intentioned but lacking the knowing attitude toward Ireland which Irenius possesses.
Spenser's design was to change Elizabethan policy, to have Lord Grey and others of the New English who advocated severely repressive measures recognised as acting in the best interests of civilisation, social order, and true religion.
As indicated, Spenser was unsuccessful, his tract censored.
Similarly,The Faerie Queene , while apparently lauding  Elizabeth, actually seems severely uncomfortable with her.
As we have seen, the feminine is at some fundamental level uncontrollable within the poem, even Britomart succumbs to passions which cause her knightly skills to lapse.
At Book V's conclusion, Artegall is a knight returning to the civilised centre accompanied by two feminine personifications of vice.
The knight may hold ‘his right course’(XII, 43) but Envy and Detraction remain a hostile destructive force at the civilised centre as well as the savage margin.
At the end of Book VI, Spenser has the offspring of these vices, The Blatant Beast, roaming the world and doing the poet harm by spreading slanders, again at the supposed civilised centre of the courtly world.
In certain respects this disruption within the civilised centre results from the controlled masculine Artegall being unable to finish his work in subduing the savage margins in Eirena's kingdom.
The reason for this failure seems ultimately to lie with the ideology of The Faerie Queene herself.
Like many others during his age, Spenser developed a variety of tactics to try to fudge the fact that England was ruled by a woman.
This meant transforming Elizabeth into a type of divine principal whose sexuality was not directly addressed.
Each book of The Faerie Queene approaches Elizabeth under oblique but obvious disguises as a paragon, yet each book reveals anxieties about women and fears about their potential duplicity.
Women sometimes are virtuous, while at other times they only appear so in order to lure men to destruction.
But Spenser also makes it clear that it is difficult and sometimes impossible to distinguish between the true and the false, regardless of how clear-sighted and self-controlled his masculine knights may be.
As David Norbrook has shown, the Faerie Queene had another guise in sixteenth-century England as a mischievous black-faced trickster, who at least some peasant rebels claimed to be led by.
Further, even when the virtue of a feminine personae is not questioned (as in the case of Belgae or Eirena), the rule of a woman is shown to be insufficient to combat the irreligious evil  which had gained control of their land.
In the first book of The Faerie Queene , Una, another paragon of virtue, is shown needing a male champion to defeat the Roman Catholic Satanic dragon which is destroying her parents' kingdom.
She may be virtuous, but she is not capable of defending civilisation against its attackers.
The position of Spenser's Elizabethan gentleman is revealed to be a precarious one.
The court of the Faerie Queene from where the knights are dispatched is absent from the poem.
There appears no civilised pale where they can remove their armour and let down their guard for any length of time.
The virtues the knights seek to develop, both in themselves and in the world, are always under assault.
Just as the individual's own make up (as revealed in the House of Alma episode in II, IX) is shown to contain elements which are potentially destructive, so it is implied that the civilised centre from which the knights supposedly originate is not impervious to the savage.
Significantly, that centre is not even readily discernible.
The implication is that it is readily observable in the reality of Elizabeth's court, but Spenser keeps the relation between Faerie Queene and Elizabeth ambiguous.
Prince Arthur's quest for the Faerie Queen which is found throughout the poem is never concluded.
Spenser suggests that the marriage and the subjection to masculine virtue, which the success of this quest would entail, would be a triumph.
But Arthur's success remains as elusive as the court of the Faerie Queene.
In both A View of the Present State of Ireland and The Faerie Queene Spenser reveals his anxieties about the resilience of the savage, the apparent inability of England to deal effectively with it.
What both texts indicate is that one explanation of this state of affairs may be a failure of resolve on the English side, an internal lethargy.
Interestingly, in Book VI of The Faerie Queene Sir Calidore, or Courtesy, abandons his quest for the Blatant Beast to experience a pastoral idyll.
England's failure may be traced to irresolution at the society's centre, the Queen herself.
It is Artegall's required attendance at the Faerie Court which prevents him from completing the renewal of justice in Eirena's kingdom, and it is Elizabeth,A View of the Present State of Ireland makes clear, who halted the  necessary civilising action undertaken by the New English there:
Her Sacred Majesty, being by nature full of mercy and clemency, who is most inclinable to such pitiful complaints and will not endure to hear such tragedies made of her people and poor subjects, as some about her may insinuate, then she perhaps for very compassion of such calamities will not only stop the stream of such violence and return to her wonted mildness, but also con them little thanks which have been the authors and counsellors of such bloody platforms.
Under the guise of complimenting Elizabeth's mercy, Spenser is implying she is easily manipulated by others.
Her nature (a just monarch or a sentimental female?) makes her clement — but the text is clear that this form of clemency is not desirable and suppresses the perpetrators of justice not its opponents.
The apparent failure of the English to contain the Irish reveals a great deal of weakness about the English in Spenser's eyes.
Patricia Coughlan has argued that A View of the Present State of Ireland is the founding text of modern English discourse about Ireland.
Spenser certainly found ready contemporary imitators, most noticeably among fellow poets such as Barnabe Rich or Sir John Davies whose interest in Irish affairs also provoked them to write political tracts.
These provide evidence that, if Spenser's tract was not published before 1633, it obviously circulated in manuscript.
But in a much wider sense it is also noticeable, in reconsidering the examples of present Anglo-Irish relations with which this chapter opened, how there exist apparent similarities between at least some current English discourses about Ireland and Spenser's.
The Irish as a people are still imagined as involved, at least  tacitly , in perpetuating a contemporary form of savagery — terrorism.
Ireland is still witnessed as a state in some indefinable way opposed to England.
Certainly, among extreme  Ulster unionists we continue to find a discourse of antiCatholicism which employs scriptural apocalyptic images which one suspects would be more readily comprehensible to late sixteenth- or seventeenth-century audiences than they are to most twentieth-century ones.
But it is not only extremist rhetoric from Ulster sects which entails a view that British troubles with the IRA are part of some wider battle between civilisation and savagery.
Responding to Ian Gow's death, his widow declared: ‘Eventually right will always triumph.
The ultimate battle has already been won’.
It is interesting to ask whether the qualities Spenser conferred on the Irish, making them the hostile outsiders who needed to be suppressed but who his texts acknowledge to be also a lurking part of the civilised English, are still part of current English imaginative experience.
English hostility and mistrust of the Irish cover uncertainties and insecurities about the position of civilisation and savagery on both sides of the Irish sea.
Equations which Spenser made between religion, class, morality, and self-control (especially in sexual matters) as a register of civility or savagery, and ultimately of good or evil, may be found uncannily, certainly uncomfortably, circulating within our current social discourses.
In a recent interview with The Spectator Lord Denning, former Master of the Rolls — one of the highest judicial positions in England — commented that he felt the Guildford Four and the Birmingham Six should have been hung because everyone would then have forgotten about them.
The Guildford Four and the Birmingham Six were convicted of separate incidents of bombing pubs frequented by soldiers in the early 1970s as part of an IRA campaign.
The Guildford Four were freed in 1990 after it became clear that evidence used against them had been fabricated by the police.
At the time of the interview, I rather discounted it.
Lord Denning is 91 and not really to be held responsible for views arising from senility.
However, I changed my mind about the seriousness of Denning's pronouncements when it was declared a few weeks later that the case of the Birmingham Six was to be reconsidered.
It now appears  evidence was fabricated in their case, too, and in 1991 they, too, were released.
When still practising, Lord Denning had refused to allow an appeal against their conviction.
Granting such an appeal he felt would have endangered respect for the law.
It would, it seems to be implied, have suggested that the forces of civilisation (the British police and legal system) were capable of acting as savages, seeking to punish people guilty only through shared racial origins in order to maintain the appearance of control and order which civilised societies require.
‘We shouldn't have all these campaigns to get the Birmingham Six released, if they'd been hanged.
They'd have been forgotten and the whole community would be satisfied’(my emphasis).
What Lord Denning's Spectator interview in his dotage had revealed was unguarded language.
The principles out of which his remarks had arisen were the same as when he held high office.
A key element in both the Guildford and Birmingham prosecutions at the time of the original trials were confessions from the accused.
These confessions were withdrawn by the accused because they claimed they were extracted from them under duress, including beatings.
The police claimed the confessions were genuine and no coercion had been used.
The police were believed.
The integrity of judicial and other institutions which enforce justice rely on their being perceived as impartial in their administration.
Behind Lord Denning's concern to protect these institutions' reputation was the fear that they would be discovered to be other than how they try to protect themselves, and that their integrity would be compromised.
The maintenance of appearances, even if it required a suppression of state violence and a tacit blind-eye to the imprisonment of the innocent, was paramount.
It is interesting that Lord Denning in concluding his interview chose the dying words of John of Gaunt from Shakespeare's Richard II to foretell the decline of Britain into what he believes is a ‘tenement’ of Europe.
Maintenance of English civilisation is upheld by keeping exclusive English control.
Here, it seems, we have a current example of Britain needing to conceive of savagery belonging to outsiders, not a part of British civilisation but an external force which could undermine British institutions unless repressed.
In  the need to maintain a belief in civilisation, practices are condoned which, in this case, allowed the Irish to be guilty by racial association for atrocities carried out by members of the IRA.
Maintaining the appearance of the civilised centre fighting the savage margins (and Europe is still a margin for some) displaces any confrontation of potential savagery at the centre, and the anxieties that raises.
Yet, there also appear dangers in resting content with proposing apparent similarities between past and present and leaving them on the table, as it were.
This is not to discount their existence.
But to imply, in however tentative a way, that there have not been some fundamental changes in the English experience of Ireland since Spenser's day, helps on the one hand to re-energise the Renaissance texts by demonstrating their continuing cultural negotiations, but also curiously helps to valorise Spenser's perspective.
One of the criticism's frequently directed at anthropological methods of inquiry is that they cause cultures to be presented as being essentially static.
The underlying cultural patterns anthropologists seek means the implications offered by changing historical circumstances are given insufficient attention.
At its most dangerous this can allow unsavoury political or social practices to be ‘forgiven’ because they are presented as stemming from some cultural constant within a society.
Clifford Geertz's analysis of Balinese culture discussed in the last chapter, for example, has the unfortunate appearance of explaining the extremity of anti-communist violence which took place on the island in the mid-1960s as somehow linked to something essential about the Balinese as a society.
My model in reading Spenser is based on assumptions that these texts act as types of cultural registers, they provide indications about how Elizabethan society characterised itself.
As should be clear, this does not mean that Spenser was ‘a typical Elizabethan’(if such a creature can ever be said to exist).
As we see, his texts were to reform English actions not celebrate them.
Spenser is arguing from the specific perspective of a militant  Protestant New English settler in Ireland and that hardly makes him a typical Elizabethan.
What I am suggesting is that Spenser's texts offer glimpses of issues which Elizabethan culture found awkward to confront directly — a belief in the precariousness of its civilisation given the existence of savagery (exemplified by other customs, baser classes, other religions) confronting a self-defined orderly minority.
Further, Spenser helps us to discern cultural issues which Elizabethan institutions prevented being openly represented, notably the uneasiness generated by a woman ruling within a patriarchal culture.
These issues continue to lurk in social experience today, but they do so in profoundly different ways.
English mistrust of Ireland, even though the rhetoric between 1600 and 1990 seems similar, is based on different conceptions from Spenser's time.
The whole question of nationalism is of a very different order.
It may suit some English commentators to think of the IRA as only a terrorist force rather than the Irish Republican Army because the acronym represents the IRA as shadowy forces of savagery and evil, which by definition it is difficult for the civilised good to understand.
But the IRA characterise themselves in a more discernible form, participating in movements of national liberation from colonialist powers in recognisable patterns of nineteenth- and twentieth-century political experience.
Like many other minority organisations, we can refute their legitimacy in adopting this guise.
But approaching the IRA from a nationalist perspective is very different from seeing them as savage, without apparent objectives other than the spread of evil.
One of the dangers then in making a link between Spenser and certain current perspectives is that it suggests that Spenser's view of England and Ireland is a founding  discourse which iterates a cultural conflict intrinsic to English experience.
What is more important, is the realisation that, while Spenser's discourses, both Faerie Queene and A View , are energised by their immediacy to pressing cultural concerns, these discourses themselves energise later perspectives.
The power invested in Spenser's literary representations helped establish patterns which became culturally entrenched even to the point of resisting changing historical categories.
Spenser represented real cultural preoccupations in his texts but these representational forms became vehicles which helped enforce cultural categories and the apparent identities they confer.
Spenser was the most important English influence on English literary writing throughout the seventeenth century (just as Milton was throughout the eighteenth).
In large numbers of writers (many now seldom encountered) we confront replications of designs, language, and generic adoptions which recall Spenser.
This is not, of course, to imply Spenser is some form of original fountainhead of these echoes and similarities many of which are encountered throughout Renaissance culture.
But Spenser's particular deployment of many widespread literary and wider cultural features had a notable impact on English writing during the following century.
Subsequent writers re-orient and transform Spenser's devices to different contexts.
What results, though, is not a nebulous diffusion of Spenserian energies, but their reinforcement.
Spenser's iterations that England and Ireland were representative of a key conflict in an unfolding revelation of good and evil become familiarly established with readers who find Spenser's terms repeated in similar patterns in other texts and different contexts.
Spenser's texts increase their expressive power within subsequent literary cultures, finding their own power increases by being reflected in later texts which have channelled these Spenserian texts for their own uses.
Examining Spenser and Ireland, therefore, raises more questions about relations between literary texts and historical contexts than it resolves.
Easy categorisation about the literary and the historical are rendered impossible.
The importance of a literary text as a representation of Elizabethan culture is clear, but defining and characterising its status as representation is not.
It may misrepresent English and Irish experience to draw analogies between Spenser and current perspectives, but it equally is misplaced to deny that past and present discourses about Ireland possess noticeable similarities which have larger cultural consequences.
The relations between what may be termed the aesthetics of cultural  generation.
The Drama's Place
I The State of Play
Christopher Marlowe's play Doctor Faustus has long perplexed students of the Renaissance.
One of the central problems confronting any discussion of a text for the play is which version should be used.
There are two main versions, a text published in 1604 (commonly known as the A text) and another published in 1616 (the B text) which is half as long again as the A version.
There are, additionally, seven other quarto editions of the play published between 1604 and 1631, all with minor variations on one or other of the two main versions, as well as records which indicate there was a 1601 quarto which is not now extant.
Marlowe died in 1593.
We know Doctor Faustus was acted in 1594 and throughout the 1590s.
It was almost certainly acted in 1589.
The conditions of its composition and even a precise date for the play are uncertain.
There is nothing particularly unusual about Doctor Faustus 's early stage and printing history, except for the number of editions.
It is always useful to recall that while we celebrate Elizabethan and Jacobean drama as a literary highlight of the English Renaissance, the drama was not readily perceived as serious literature by the majority of those who watched plays or even by the minority who bought the plays in cheap unbound quarto editions.
John Donne may have been a great frequenter of plays, but the catalogue of his books he produced in the early seventeenth century reveals no dramatist among the many contemporary English writers he assembled.
Printing plays in a cheap, unbound, quarto format indicates that the drama was commonly perceived as on the same  standing as almanacs, joke books, pamphlets, and other popular writing which appeared in the same form.
Thomas Bodley, the founder of Oxford's Bodleian Library, worked extremely hard in the opening years of the seventeenth century to gather books for his institution.
He persuaded the Stationer's Company that they should send him a copy of each book its members printed.
Yet Bodley was unhappy about including plays and other forms of cheap popular literature, feeling such texts devalued the library.
Writing to the Bodleian's first Librarian, Thomas James, in 1612 he contrasted English drama unfavourably with the learned drama of other countries:
For they [plays of other nations]are most esteemed for learning the languages, and many of them compiled by men of great fame for wisdom and learning, which is seldom or never seen among us.
Were it so again, that some little profit might be reaped…out of some of our playbooks, the benefit thereof will nothing near countervail the harm that the scandal will bring unto the library, when it shall be given out, that we stuff it full of baggage books.
Bodley's view about the literary insignificance of English drama was formally challenged by Ben Jonson who published plays in the Folio edition of his Workes in 1616 and later, and in response to Jonson's success, by Shakespeare's first editors, Heminge and Condell, who brought out the First Folio of Shakespeare's plays in 1623 (eight years after Shakespeare died).
Including plays in the expensive and handsomely produced folio format announced the works as worthy of serious reading by serious readers.
But elevating the status of contemporary drama to ‘works’ published in a folio edition was extremely unusual in the period before 1642 when the plays were actually being performed.
The popularity of the drama as a genre which participated in English or, more accurately, within London life of the period in ways other than as literary texts has become critically more significant during the past decade with the increased emphasis on literature's cultural contexts.
Even the works of a poet such as Spenser, highly acclaimed by  many other contemporary writers and influential on them, were only available to be read by a very few.
Spenser's work was published in small and costly editions.
This was in keeping with the desires of poets such as Spenser to have their work accepted seriously by high culture and who, thus, sought conditions of production which would ensure they addressed an exclusive audience.
As Milton was later to recognise, fit Renaissance readers were also likely to be few.
Inevitably, these readers' representative quality within larger Renaissance social discourse was partial and limited.
Ben Jonson actually takes delight in announcing (in Latin) on the title page of his 1616 Workes that the book is designed for the select few and not the common crowd.
A folio edition was an expensive item, but even cheaper quarto editions of most writers were not available readily.
There was no system of book distribution in any modern sense (and of course no effective postal service).
In London, and to a lesser extent in Oxford and Cambridge, readers could find some recent English literary publications with little effort, but it was only a minority who had the inclination or resources to do so.
Milton's Poems 1645 which includes works such as Lycidas took over twenty years to sell out its first edition, which, at best, was something of the order of 1500 copies and more likely to have been much less, probably a few hundred.
The first edition of Paradise Lost was printed in an edition of around 1300 for which Milton received £5.
This was doing reasonably well by seventeenth-century standards for recent literature.
In contrast, a play could be performed to thousands at a time.
The drama was popular with the complete social spectrum.
Very ordinary people (or at least ordinary men) could afford to attend a performance of a Shakespeare play in the large Globe Theatre, and appear to have done so, and the same play might be requested to be performed at court.
There were also many critical voices raised against ‘playing’, again from across a wide social spectrum among those who considered dramatic performances idolatrous or who were concerned that plays sowed social disorder.
If  the drama was not considered literature by many, it was the cultural form which engaged a much more significant proportion of English Renaissance society than any other form of secular writing.
This chapter seeks to explore some of the implications of drama as a popular form, distinguished in terms of its place and material existence from other literary writing within the English Renaissance.
The drama poses some challenging questions to modern interpreters precisely because of its difference.
The plays have been a focus not only of critical activity employing new models for interpretive inquiry but also of scholarly activity which has contested many previous assumptions about how plays were performed, codified into texts, and circulated within society.
One of the most fundamental questions which has been posed is whether we can properly speak about the drama as writing.
Certainly, there were texts of some plays printed and obviously plays were originally written in some sense.
Indeed, the conditions of Elizabethan and later Stuart regulation of drama required a written text.
Initially, The Master of the Revels who licensed plays required the players to appear in person and present the play before his official.
By 1590, however, the number of new plays was such that this was no longer practicable and companies of players were required instead to submit manuscripts before the play was acted.
The licensing of the play-text rather than the performance conferred a form of authority on the written artefact and it was this that was supposedly acted.
There were, though, no organised mechanisms to ensure that the play performed was the play written.
There are numerous records of actions being taken against plays which were considered slanderous to nobles or which were perceived to be in political opposition to government policy, such as Middleton's cause célèbre ,A Game of Chess , which opposed James's accommodating attitude towards Spain and attracted the protest of the Spanish ambassador.
But, if there were some actions of censorship against plays which had been able to secure licences, it is also true that neither Elizabeth nor the Stuarts possessed the developed  civil service or police force which could regulate every performance.
In the majority of cases the plays did not formally raise specific political concerns which would warrant such close regulation.
Plays were constantly revived and while the Master of the Revels might be expected to relicense a revival, this did not frequently happen.
Shakespeare's The Winter's Tale , for example, was revived in 1623 more than a decade after its first appearance.
The King's company apparently had lost the original licensed manuscript but the Master of the Revels was prepared to accept the word of the company manager John Heminge (one of the First Folio's editors) that ‘there was nothing profane added or reformed’.
This does not mean that the play was not performed with alterations.
Heminge may merely have been indicating that The Winter's Tale was unlikely to prove controversial to a censor in whatever version it was performed.
Our earliest play-text of The Winter's Tale is that of the First Folio, also of 1623, and whether this represents a play-text from the missing licensed text or a later version we do not know.
The companies of players did not perceive their plays as fixed texts, literary works which they felt some obligation to present accurately.
This is not to suggest the players did not take the plays they performed seriously or that authors wrote any old thing as long as it pleased.
If Shakespeare showed little inclination to control the condition of his plays' textual printing, he was both a part owner of the company which produced them and was himself a director of that company.
Artistic control was paramount in terms of the production, the medium through which the play was overwhelmingly disseminated among contemporary audiences.
What this condition of the theatre indicates is that the establishing of a singular text for many plays is extremely difficult.
It is not only a question of there being a number of versions for popular plays, such as Doctor Faustus , which were revived over a forty- or fifty-year period resulting in corrupted, revised, or differing texts.
The whole question of whether we should imagine the plays as fixed in textual form is a pressing consideration.
Yet, literary criticism, past as well as present, desires a fixed text.
Questions of authorial intention or even authorial ascription may no longer be paramount within critical inquiry, but discussing texts as cultural documents implies that there is a discernible document, an artefact.
The nature of that artefact, its meanings and position within the culture may be open to debate, but the assumption is that the document is there to be deciphered.
Can this properly be said to be the case with a play such as Doctor Faustus ?
For many years scholars have tried to establish either the A or B text of the play as more authoritative.
As indicated, the later B version of the play is half as long again as the A text.
Does this mean that the A text is a cut text?
Or does it mean that the longer B text is an entirely different Doctor Faustus ?
There have been book-length studies devoted to trying to resolve the question of Doctor Faustus 's text.
Much energy has been devoted to trying to establish which version is more likely to have been Christopher Marlowe's.
As Michel Foucault reminds us, though:
aspects of an individual which we designate as making him an author are only a projection, in more or less psychologising terms, of the operations that we force texts to undergo, the connections that we make, the traits that we establish as pertinent, the continuities that we recognise, or the exclusions that we practice.
Establishing an authorial version of the play is usually an editorial attempt to give that version authority over others.
Creating the authored version allows us to talk of corrupted texts, using a vocabulary with resonances of healthy and diseased versions.
But with Renaissance drama, where performed versions were those in widest circulation, the question of the authority of a reputed authorial version is at best confused.
To some extent it is fair to ask who is the play's author: the writer, the company or the director producing the play, or perhaps most properly a collaboration between these three?
With Renaissance drama it is more accurate to talk of numerous plays called Doctor Faustus or King Lear or Hamlet , a number of differing versions circulating at almost identical times.
We can gain some inkling of this through our own conditions of theatre-going.
Over the past twenty years I have seen about a dozen performances of Hamlet , a play which was also constantly revived in the early seventeenth century.
With some exceptions the performances during the 1970s were constructed around the psychology of Hamlet, in the 1980s on the political context of the Danish court in which Hamlet was the most significant but by no means only player.
I have seen one production which used the 1603 quarto version, one which used the uncut Folio text, but the majority were ‘constructed’ texts, omitting different passages and scenes from what is a very long play.
From witnessing multiple performances of Hamlet , I would find it impossible to speak about a singular, authoritative version of the play.
But, of course, the performed Hamlet is not the medium through which my thinking about the play has largely been derived.
Rather a text of the play is my principal experience of it, in the case of the scholarly Arden edition complete with a daunting textual apparatus which can be examined at leisure.
Thus, I speak even of my theatrical experience in terms of reference to printed texts — witnessing a quarto Hamlet or the uncut Folio text.
For the majority of those who experience Hamlet today the play's textual medium is paramount as the point of reference to what Hamlet may be.
With increasingly elaborate explorations being conducted into the establishing of texts, editors, even when acknowledging alternate readings, present impressive scholarly authority for creating an authorised version — the text on the page around which the variants and explanatory comments exist as supplemental scholia.
During the Renaissance, and especially in Shakespeare's case before the First Folio, such textual authority did not exist.
To imagine a single Hamlet in terms of contemporary Renaissance experience is misleading.
There is much to dispute in Foucault's scepticism about the author when applied to authored texts in circumstances where the authorial presence is clear.
We should distinguish between Ben Jonson's desire to confirm his authority over his Workes — collecting and seeing texts through the press, attempting to control what was ascribed to him and how these texts were to be viewed, even trying to  restrict his readership — and circumstances where such authorial interventions are absent.
Foucault's remarks are sustained, however, when we come to attempts to author Doctor Faustus .
Here desires to construct a version of the play that best reflects Christopher Marlowe is decidedly the result of continuities and exclusions recognised (and desired) by editors anxious to contain the play, to create a singular text where more than one exists.
Most students' experience of Doctor Faustus is of the longer B text, though often with an apology from editors who prefer the shorter A version on aesthetic grounds.
This preference is apparent when examining most critical discussions of Faustus — the major additions to the play found in the B text are substantially ignored.
Jonathan Dollimore has noted that ‘one problem in particular has exercised critics of Dr Faustus : its structure, inherited from the morality form, apparently negates what the play experientially affirms — the heroic aspiration of ‘Renaissance man’ '.
Dollimore perceives that critical opinion has tried to resolve this issue by tending to read the play as either vindicating Faustus or the morality structure.
Dollimore himself sees this conflict and contradiction as part of the play's design, ‘not an affirmation of Divine Law, or conversely of Renaissance Man, but an exploration of subversion through transgression’.
For Dollimore, whose reading of the play in Radical Tragedy has been one of the more persuasive recent accounts, Faustus is the site of a power struggle between God and Lucifer, both equally responsible for his destruction.
The play, therefore, interrogates heavenly power as much as hellish power and finds them both tyrannical — clearly upsetting any recourse to the older morality tradition as a satisfactory explanation for Faustus's demise.
Rather, transgressing the norms of the morality tradition, Dollimore perceives the play demystifying the limiting structures of Faustus's world, without presenting the opportunity for escape.
For Dollimore, therefore,Doctor Faustus becomes ‘an important precursor of the  malcontented protagonist of Jacobean tragedy’.
In these later plays the limiting structures become socio-political ones, a result, possibly, of censorship which hindered the drama confronting religious issues directly.
The tensions between structure and substance noted by Dollimore and earlier critics are most apparent in the A version of the play.
Here the structure of the older morality tradition is most neatly challenged by images which question its norms.
The implications of what we are presented with are left more dramatically open, challenging more directly the containment implied by the morality tradition.
Take for example the play's conclusion in the A version.
Faustus is asked by a group of fellow scholars to summon Helen as the most beautiful woman of antiquity.
He does so and the company is struck by her beauty.
An old man then reproaches Faustus for selling his soul and counsels repentance which Faustus inclines towards.
Mephostophilis condemns Faustus for disobedience to Lucifer.
Helen is resummoned and Marlowe devotes some of the play's most arousing lines to Faustus's celebration of her (V, ii, 97–116).
At the same time, the old man reappears and is tormented by devils who he scorns.
The play then moves on to Faustus's last scene as he awaits the elapse of his twenty-four-year contract in a fit of anxiety and apprehension.
The play concludes with Faustus's offer to burn his books and his cry/invocation/cursing of Mephostophilis.
A stage direction suggests devils appear and Faustus goes off with Mephostophilis.
But, even if we accept these directions as a legitimate part of the A text, what Faustus's damnation consists of is not clear.
The chorus finally appears to offer a chilling exegesis of how we should regard Faustus's hellish fate:
Whose fiendful fortune may exhort the wise Only to wonder at unlawful things, Whose deepness doth entice such forward wits, To practise more than heavenly power permits.
(V, iii, 24–7)
The scene between the old man and Helen sets up precisely the type of orthodox structure and subverting spirit Dollimore indicates.
Intellectually, the appeal is to  a morality structure which contrasts Christian asceticism with Satanic debauchery.
Aesthetically, both verbally and visually, the scene belongs to Helen.
If Hell consists of such illusions, is it so awful?
Of course, those who argue in favour of the morality tradition being decisive in the play point to Helen being a succubus and an insubstantial hellish projection.
Possibly, but the A version does not really confirm or deny this, or provide any clear resolution to the play.
This irresolution confronts the norms by which the morality structure seeks to contain the play.
By not confirming the structure, the structure's limits are revealed and the possibility of constructing the world differently, though not particularly heroically, arises.
The B version of the play is much less accommodating to this perspective.
Consider the additions to the play's end.
Immediately after the scene with the Old Man and Helen, Lucifer, Beelzebub and Mephostophilis appear to consider Faustus's ‘lunacy’ in thinking he can ‘overreach the devil’(V, ii, 11–20).
There is a scene in which the good and bad angels appear to reveal (from above) the throne of celestial happiness and (from below)‘the vast perpetual torture-house’ of hell (V, ii, 109–42).
Faustus's fate is also made clearer by the addition of a scene before the final chorus where the scholars come to visit him on the morning after his final hour and find his body torn in pieces (V, iii, 1–19).
It is possible to argue these additions to the ending still leave a degree of irresolution between substance and structure open.
They certainly help to enhance a perspective that sees Faustus as a pawn between two more powerful forces.
But it is also clear the later text is stressing the morality tradition of Faustus.
The end of the B version depicts hell and heaven in far more conventional terms, allowing these conventional limits to dominate the parameters in which Faustus's actions may be interpreted.
It is probable that neither version of Doctor Faustus represents the play as originally written by Marlowe.
This is not because it can be proved one way or the other that either or neither version is the type of play that Marlowe would have written.
Both versions reveal similarities with Marlowe's other work, but Marlowe's other work is also eclectic and difficult to categorise.
This question of an  editorially constructed author is one which challenges our preconceptions of a fixed writer in charge of a manuscript the integrity of which was zealously guarded.
Dramatists during the period frequently collaborated on their work and the dramatists were also close to the companies producing their plays.
Plays evolved, sometimes through the author's own changes, sometimes through changes in the conditions of playing.
But distinguishing why changes take place is problematic before we have the evidence, as in Jonson's case, of an author wishing to impose authority on to a text.
The case of Doctor Faustus exemplifies how we cannot be sure which version of the play was the more common experience of audiences and whether they understood the two versions as offering something markedly different or not.
It could be the case that version A was perceived as a radically sceptical play and that the B version later came to dominate because the authorities were unhappy with the other version which more manifestly challenged orthodoxies.
It could be that the play's audiences were more content with a version which conformed more readily with recognised long-repeated models for understanding the world, and thus preferred the longer B version of Faustus.
It is possible both versions may have circulated as productions in Marlowe's own time, as well as in the later 1590s and throughout the early seventeenth century.
The evidence to confirm a host of  speculations on whether we have one, two, or more plays called Doctor Faustus is not readily available.
The difficulties in authorising one version of a play which has a multiple existence has been a preoccupation of Shakespearean editors over the last decade.
The debates have been particularly focused on King Lear .
The recent Oxford University Press Shakespeare publishes two versions of the play, one the 1608 Quarto Lear and another based on the 1623 Folio version.
Shakespearean editors are showing considerable innovation in moving away from the view that Shakespeare had a fixed conception for his plays, where variants between texts are ‘error of transmission’, corruptions which crept in because Shakespeare was not  involved in preparing his plays for print.
However, in terms of considering the impact of recent theoretical directions most editors are still very conservative.
What they will now allow is that Shakespeare revised his plays.
The 1608 Lear is published by the Oxford editors because they feel it sufficiently different from the Folio version to justify seeing it as a separate aesthetic entity.
The Folio Lear , however, is believed to represent Shakespeare's final intentions.
It is permitted to speak of multiple versions, but editorial principles are still seeking to create authorised versions, this time based on a ‘final’ revision.
Revision is assumed to be a teleological operation, the process of an autonomous author in control of an autonomous aesthetic entity.
The Oxford editors, no less than earlier editors, amass textual and bibliographical hypotheses to argue forms of dramatic and aesthetic evolution.
Several previous generations of editors presented a picture of Shakespeare's evolving genius based on complete plays jumping out of his head in a pattern of development that made those appearing in the seventeenth century ‘more mature’ than those appearing in the sixteenth.
The current generation of editors prefers to see this maturity exemplified in the ‘final versions’ produced during Shakespeare's later years.
The new editorial policy complicates the process of producing authorised versions, but it does not substantially change it.
The editor now pursues ‘variations in composition’ with a view to unlocking final intentions.
This may leave open the possibility of conflicting ‘final’ with ‘best’intentions, but in practice it is unlikely to.
The editorial authorised final version is likely to be presented as the best (most mature, fullest) version.
As we witnessed with Julius Caesar in considering canons in Chapter three, ostensibly objective scholarship reflects many unvoiced assumptions on the part of the editor.
As Foucault and others have argued, the construction and then privileging of the author as a text's origins is a product of editorial desire, matched with assumptions that establishing origins is a way of clarifying a text's destination.
Even recent editorial work on Shakespeare  foregrounds the plays as literary artefacts in the modern sense.
Editors use inquiry into a play's process of composition and of transmission to discern a conscious literary producer writing texts.
But such a view of Shakespeare only emerges from the publication of the Folio, a volume, unlike Ben Jonson's, which Shakespeare took no active part in preparing.
Editors, therefore, elide the problem posed by Shakespearean plays being generated during a period when their textual status was secondary to their performed status.
If we can determine ‘origins’ in Shakespearean drama, it is likely to be through examining what evidence we can of the plays' 'destinations', the conditions of performance in the theatre matched with the cultural and social conditions of production.
Considering the two versions of King Lear , Andrew Gurr discusses the implications posed by the two endings of the play.
The Quarto version assigns the play's final lines —‘The weight of this sad time we must obey; /Speak what we feel, not what we ought to say.
/The oldest hath borne most; we that are young/ Shall never see so much nor live so long’(V, iii, 322–6)— to Albany, the Folio gives the lines to Edgar.
Interpretive cases can be made for both versions as appropriate and in keeping with the plays' directions.
Albany has tried to do what Lear disastrously did, divide the kingdom, this time between Kent (who declines) and Edgar.
If Edgar speaks the last words, they appear a sort of reproof to Albany while Edgar assumes authority over the hopes of the future.
If Albany speaks, it suggests an attempt to reassert authority he has just been trying to give away (as Gurr proposes about as upbeat a close as leaving Denmark in Fortinbras's control).
‘The alternate endings are about as different as they could be’, Gurr concludes, ‘yet all Shakespeare changed was a speech heading’.
Critical study is not particularly well geared to deal with this type of problem.
Students preparing for exams, as well as professional academics subtly re-interpreting texts, rely on some consensus about what texts are actually being considered.
Current editorial practice elides the implications of multiple texts.
We may allow multiple versions, but as long as editors are concerned to establish some idea of final versions differentiated from earlier versions, and both conceived as the product of a revising author, the question of textual authority is open to be resolved.
The editor comes to assume the responsibility for choice or creation of a text.
In terms of Renaissance drama this has enormous implications for trying to argue the drama as a representative cultural form.
Only when the plays enter stabilising textual form do they become available for the type of sophisticated analysis critics undertake.
In Shakespeare's case, only as plays moved out their popular medium of production to quarto, and finally inscribed in the Folio, do the plays become textually established in ‘final versions’ used to undertake theoretically complex investigation.
A type of paradox is created.
Current theoretical inquiry is often concerned with considering the drama within terms of cultural production, but analysis is dependent on representing the plays in a stable textual form that obscures the condition of the drama's cultural production.
There has been much important work in the past decade demystifying the editorial practice of scholarship, revealing the ideological or other cultural desires editors assume.
Surprisingly, though, there have been few attempts to acknowledge the fluidity of Renaissance plays.
Critical discussions may emphasise the drama's popularity within English Renaissance society and examine the conditions of theatrical playing within Elizabethan and Jacobean society, but considerations of plays rarely acknowledge that many possess multiple forms.
The multiplication of textual versions is likely to indicate even more produced versions.
As we see with King Lear , a small change in a speech heading can have significant implications for interpretation.
In Doctor Faustus whether heaven and hell are ‘discovered’ in a manner which confirms conventional expectations of them can have drastic implications for the play's destination, the impact it makes on its audience.
As we become ever increasingly careful in our reading of texts, we need also to question what representational  status the text has.
The state of the play we read — often a composite version constructed by a modern editor — may be a necessary feature of study, but it should not hide the fact that the playing of Renaissance drama was performed in circumstances where the cultural place of the play was very different to that of the present.