

CHAPTER ONE
‘What on earth was that?’
Robbie had woken with a start, and now she sat up, her heart pounding erratically.
Everywhere was pitch-black, and just for a moment she couldn't think where she was.
Then she remembered.
No wonder everything seemed unfamiliar — she was miles from home, in the Cotswolds, aboard Water Gypsy , her friend Caro's narrow boat, moored on an isolated stretch of canal.
It was August, and the previous day had been a scorching hot one.
Even now, in the small hours of the morning, the air in her small cabin was still warm and oppressive.
And though the tiny window was open as wide as it could go, she could detect no passage of air.
But it wasn't that which had caused the perspiration to stand out on her skin.
It was fear.
What had disturbed her?
She held her breath and listened.
Some sound had penetrated her dream — an unpleasant recurring dream.
She had been dressed in bridal white, walking up the aisle of a church — towards Hugh.
But instead of the happiness a bride should feel, she had known that her heart was breaking.
The interior of the church had been dark.
Storm clouds outside had made even the stained glass windows a uniform grey.
Her family and friends were obscured by a grey mist and the aisle had been never-ending.
In fact, Hugh had seemed to recede further and further into the distance with every step she took.
She had been calling out to him, pleading, arms outstretched, ‘Wait for me.
Don't go.’
She realised now that — as always when this dream occurred — she had been crying in her sleep, for her cheeks were wet.
She dashed the tears aside and continued to listen.
Yes, there it was again.
The same sound.
She eased herself into a sitting position and groped for the heavy torch she had placed on the shelf by her bunk.
Robbie wasn't normally of a nervous disposition, but one did hear such horrific stories of lone women being attacked in out of the way spots.
She hadn't anticipated spending her first night on board quite alone; she had expected Fenella, Caro's stepsister, to be here too.
But when she'd arrived the boat had been deserted and, as darkness had gradually obscured first the surrounding countryside and then the outlines of neighbouring boats, none of them showing any lights, she had become just a little anxious.
Tired by her journey from the north of England and the heat, she had decided to defer unpacking until the next day, standing her cases temporarily to one side of the curtain that divided her cabin from the small galley.
Dressed only in bra and panties, she had flopped down on top of the covers, trying to woo sleep.
But, city dweller as she had always been, she had been aware of every sound — the gentle lapping noises of the canal against the side of the boat, the small night sounds of birds and other creatures, and it had been some time before weary body and brain relaxed.
This noise was something entirely different.
The narrow boat rocked slightly, a light from the galley filtered around the edge of the dividing curtain and now she heard the squeak as of a cupboard door.
It could be Fenella returning home — or it could be a nocturnal prowler.
Had she locked the door of the main cabin before retiring?
Robbie couldn't remember.
She couldn't stand this uncertainty any longer.
She had to know.
Pausing only to pull on the lightweight wrap that lay across the foot of the bunk, she grasped the torch more firmly and peered cautiously around the curtain.
What she saw made her mouth go dry and her legs tremble.
This most certainly was not Fenella.
Robbie had never met any of Caro's adopted family.
Caro's widowed mother had remarried only in recent years and her new husband already had four children, all grown up and living away from home.
A man stood in the tiny galley.
He seemed to Robbie's eyes to fill the limited space.
His back towards her, he was engaged — not in rifling the boat as she had supposed, but in cooking himself a meal on the Calor gas stove.
What a nerve!
Who was he?
A hungry tramp maybe?
All she could see of him from this angle was that he was a very large man, broad as well as tall — so tall that he had to bend his head over his task.
But even with this restricted view, he didn't really look like a tramp.
His jeans and checked shirt, though old and well worn, looked clean and of good quality.
Dark hair, liberally sprinkled with grey, curled a little too long over his collar.
What should she do?
Robbie was no coward, but neither was she foolhardy.
It might be very unwise to accost him, to ask him just what he thought he was doing — trespassing and helping himself to food.
It might be more prudent to go back to her bunk and hope he would go away when his hunger was satisfied.
Cautiously she began to retreat.
But she had forgotten about her unopened suitcases.
Her leg banged against one of them, knocking it over.
The noise it made caused her heart to leap into her throat, and it certainly startled the intruder.
She heard a muttered oath and then the curtain was swept roughly aside.
‘My God!’
The man stared at her in stunned silence, his chest rising and falling with some kind of agitation.
It wasn't fear; Robbie knew fear when she saw it.
Besides, her presence wasn't likely to strike fear into this large man.
He was breathing heavily.
‘For a moment I thought you were…’
He spoke roughly, then broke off with what was almost a groan.
‘Who the blazes are you?’ he demanded, ‘and what the hell are you doing on my boat?’
Robbie's gaze flickered over him, absorbing a flood of first impressions.
He had strong, rugged not unattractive features, but his dark eyes, almost black in their intensity, were hostile.
The tiny cabin offered no opportunity for retreat.
He was frighteningly close, and Robbie, certain for a terrifying instant that she was about to be attacked, was trembling violently.
But now surprise and indignation overcame fear.
‘What do you mean — your boat?’
‘I should have thought my meaning was clear enough, even to the most limited intelligence.
And you don't look like a moron.
Nor do you appear to be a casual vagrant.
You speak like an educated woman.’
The dark eyes were raking her from head to toe, appraising her — from the long, tousled russet hair to the bare feet protruding from beneath the hem of her wrap.
A wrap, which she realised belatedly, was doing little to disguise her feminine curves.
With her free hand she dragged it more modestly across her breasts.
‘I certainly am not a ‘vagrant’,’ she agreed with feeling.
‘I —’
‘What were you planning to do with that torch?’ the man enquired.
‘Brain me, no doubt.’
He reached out and wrenched it from her hand.
The move brought him nearer, towering over her.
Robbie was tall herself, but he made her feel small and unprotected, her only weapons a quick tongue and her innately courageous nature.
‘Do you blame me?’ she retorted.
‘When I wake up in the middle of the night and find a strange man on my boat —’
He growled impatiently in his throat — a very strong throat, she noted inconsequentially, corded with muscles, revealed by the open neck of his shirt.
‘I thought I'd already pointed out, this is my boat.’
‘And I don't believe this is your boat.’
‘I don't give a tinker's damn if you believe me or not.
It happens to be the truth.
And I'm still waiting for your explanation of how you come to be here.’
‘I'm here,’ Robbie snapped, side-stepping him and moving further into the galley, ‘because I'm going to live here — at least for the next six months.’
‘Oh, no, you're not!’
A hissing noise from the stove diverted him and he turned, expertly flipping bacon, fried bread and two eggs on to a plate, and Robbie realised that her mouth was watering.
Travelling all day yesterday, she had subsisted solely on British Rail sandwiches and her supper had consisted only of the cereal and milk she'd bought at a small general store in the nearest hamlet.
She hadn't liked to help herself to Fenella's supplies.
Hunger and apprehension made her legs feel shaky.
She leaned against a cupboard door.
‘Oh, no, you're not,’ the man repeated as he slapped the plate on to one of the let-down tables and began to eat.
‘I don't know what your little game is, but —’
‘It's not a game,’ Robbie said desperately.
He should have been less intimidating now he was seated, but she still felt uneasy, and she was annoyed with herself for showing any weakness, but she couldn't help the quiver in her voice, the tears that pricked behind her eyes.
The last few months of her life had been horrible.
But her wounds had begun to heal and yesterday she had felt herself on the verge of a promising beginning — an uphill struggle, perhaps, but a definite move towards new happiness.
A new start, far away from Hugh, in this novel but secure haven.
Now, it seemed, that sense of security was all being swept away, and by another man — this large, arrogant man.
As a general rule Robbie gave people the benefit of the doubt, until she knew them better.
But now she decided she detested this man.
He was looking at her from beneath thick brows.
‘Don't turn on the waterworks,’ he advised with weary cynicism.
‘It won't get you anywhere.
There's nothing new that women haven't tried on me at one time or another.
And I'm particularly immune to crocodile tears.’
If anything was guaranteed to dry up tears fast it was his manner.
Robbie felt her anger rising.
Who the hell did he think he was, sitting there as if he really did own the place, stuffing his face with food, its aroma making her stomach cry out — but, worst of all, trying to destroy her new future?
Who was he?
‘You're a rude, unfeeling brute,’ she informed him hotly.
‘And I've every right to be here.
My rent is paid up for six months.
Just ask Fen if you don't believe me.
We're going to share.’
A forkful of bacon and fried bread remained poised between plate and mouth.
Evidently something she'd said had taken him by surprise.
Slowly he lowered the fork to the plate.
‘Now I know you're lying,’ he said grimly.
‘At first I was prepared to think you'd made a genuine mistake — that you'd got the wrong boat.’
‘It's not the wrong boat.
The key —’
‘Yes, the key.’
He pushed his plate away and stood up, came towards her, looming over her once more.
‘I'd like to know just where you got that.’
Robbie flinched, tried to retreat and once again found there was nowhere to retreat to.
She was aware of an uncertainty, an uncharacteristic edginess.
She'd never met any man before who could make her feel so disquieted.
She tilted a defiant chin at him, ‘From a friend — not that it's any concern of yours.
I —’
‘No concern of mine,’ he interrupted.
‘You've no idea who I am, have you?’
‘None whatsoever — and I don't want to —’
‘I,’ he said with heavy emphasis.
‘am Fen.’
And as she shook her head disbelievingly, ‘Oh, yes!
Short for Fenton.
But only those who know me very well call me Fen, and I don't know you from Adam — or perhaps I should say Eve.’
Suspiciously, ‘Is this some kind of seduction scene?
Did someone put you up to it?’
Again his dark eyes surveyed her obvious state of undress.
‘What's in it for you?’
‘No, it is not a seduction scene!’ she retorted indignantly.
‘Why on earth should I want to seduce you ?
Do you regard yourself as some sort of sex symbol?
And anyway, Eve didn't seduce the serpent — it was the other way about.’
The thick dark brows drew together ominously and he seemed to loom even larger.
‘If you're referring to me as a —’
‘No, oh, no!’ she denied hastily.
‘I just meant…but…but we must get this straight.
Caro said —’
‘Ah!’
He relaxed perceptibly.
‘Caroline!
Now I begin to understand.’
Robbie wished she did.
It had seemed such a marvellous idea at the time, to leave behind her northern home town, the scene of all her unhappy memories, and to apply for the job Caro had just vacated, to take over Caro's lease.
‘But,’ Robbie had protested when Caro made the offer, ‘I couldn't afford —’
‘My rent is paid up for the next six months,’ Caro had assured her airily, ‘before I knew I was leaving.
If you get the job you can take over my accommodation until you get something else sorted out.’
And, knowing her friend's financial situation, ‘Don't you dare talk about paying me back.
It's the merest pittance.
I had…
I had a special concession from…from someone.’
From a boyfriend, Robbie had assumed, and the arrival of this Fenton seemed to confirm her supposition.
Caroline was always surrounded by adoring males, showered with gifts and benefits.
But so far she had refused to take any of them seriously — sensible Caroline.
If only she — Robbie — had not taken Hugh seriously.
Robbie had been lucky.
The interview had gone well and, despite the fact that there had been three other candidates, the job was hers.
Only two weeks later she'd been on her way to Little Kirkton.
And although she'd been sad to be leaving her family behind, she had been looking forward to a few weeks' holiday and then — a new job, a new life.
She hadn't known, when she agreed to Caro's suggestion, that her friend lived on a narrow boat.
Thinking back yesterday when she'd arrived, trying to remember exactly what had been said, Robbie had realised the word ‘flat’ had never been mentioned.
She had just assumed…
She had assumed rather a lot, it seemed — or perhaps Caro had deliberately misled her?
But why should she do that?
Her friend had paid a flying visit to Robbie's home on the eve of her own departure for the Scillies and her new job, to say her goodbyes and hand over the key to her accommodation.
‘I hope you'll be very happy there,’ she had said.
‘I always have been.’
Robbie went to see her friend off at the station, and that was when Caro had mentioned, oh, so casually, that she did not actually live alone.
The train had begun to move before she imparted this piece of information and Robbie had to run along the platform.
‘But, Caro, why didn't you say so before?
I hope you've told your flatmate about me?
What's her name?
Suppose we don't get on?’
The train had been moving faster by then and Robbie could no longer keep up.
Caro's voice came faintly to her above the noise of departure.
‘Don't worry — Fen's family.
I'm sure you'll get on fine.
People always seem to like Fen.’
It wasn't her fault, Robbie thought crossly, that she had assumed ‘Fen’ was Caro's stepsister Fenella.
To her relief Fenton had abandoned his threatening stance over her and returned to his seat.
He hadn't invited her to sit down, she thought resentfully, but she was going to all the same.
Her legs felt decidedly tremulous.
It was the fright he'd given her, of course.
‘Don't get too settled,’ he advised her.
‘You'll be on your way shortly.’
‘But I've nowhere to go —’
‘Tough!’ he said unsympathetically.
His uncaring attitude incensed Robbie.
‘Oh!’ she exploded.
‘And I've always thought Caro was a good judge of character — but she said everyone liked you.
Well, I certainly don't.’
She realised she might not be helping her cause, but it was satisfying to get the anger off her chest.
Fen seemed totally unmoved.
‘Known Caroline long?’ he drawled.
Robbie nodded.
‘It seems like all my life.
We were at school together.’
Roberta Alexander and Caroline Graham had been just eleven when they first met, new girls at a boarding-school in North Wales.
But that had been more than a dozen years ago, when Robbie's family had been in better financial circumstances.
Since then they had grown up, left school, even gone to the same veterinary college.
But although they'd pursued the same career, that career had taken them in different directions, their meetings infrequent.
But they had always kept in touch, by letter and occasionally by telephone, though recently Caro's calls had come either from work or from a public kiosk.
Robbie could understand why — now.
The narrow boat didn't boast a telephone.
Fen's interest had sharpened.
‘Schoolfriends, eh?
Just as a matter of curiosity, what's your name?’
‘Robbie — short for Roberta — Roberta Alexander.’
He gave an impatient exclamation.
‘Robbie!
So you're Robbie.
I should have guessed.
The cunning little minx.
Wait till I see her.’
His meal finished now, he stood and carried his plate and utensils to the sink, and for a moment there was only the sound of the water pump as he filled the kettle.
‘Caroline left a garbled message on my answerphone about ‘letting Robbie — a colleague — stay for a week or two’.
She entirely neglected to inform me that Robbie was a girl — just as she evidently neglected to tell you who I was.’
‘But you haven't got an answerphone here.’
A bemused Robbie looked around.
‘Of course not.
At home.’
And, scornfully, ‘You don't think I live here permanently, do you?’
Robbie remembered the note from Caro, the note she'd found waiting for her when she came aboard:
Welcome to Water Gypsy .
I hope you'll forgive the little deceptions I've practised on you.
What deceptions? she'd wondered.
Believe me, it was all done with your best interests at heart.
By the way, the main cabin with the double bunk is Fen's.
But Fen isn't there all the time, so mostly you'll have Water Gypsy to yourself.
The note made sense now.
‘How did Caro come to be sharing this boat with you?’ she asked.
‘Are you one of her boyfriends?’
If so, this was a side to Caro she hadn't suspected.
Caro had boyfriends, yes, an apparent multitude of them, but all casual.
She had never given any indication of a closer relationship.
He laughed.
It was genuine amusement, and rather a pleasant sound if you were in the mood for humour.
Robbie wasn't feeling the least bit humorous.
She glared at him.
He laughed even harder.
‘What's so funny?’ she asked crossly.
‘You are.
The idea of me being Caro's boyfriend.
You really don't know a thing about me.’
And, obscurely, ‘Caroline's been playing games again.
Apart from the fact that there's an eleven-year gap in our ages and I don't go in for cradle-snatching, she happens to be my stepsister.’
Robbie knew that there were two younger boys in her friend's new family, Angus and Anthony, whom Caro had once described scornfully as being ‘disgusting little objects who left uneaten pizzas to go mouldy under their beds’.
Caro had mentioned the existence of an elder stepbrother, but Robbie didn't recall his name being Fenton.
‘You're Caro's stepbrother?’ she asked doubtfully.
‘The older one?’
He inclined his head.
‘What admirable powers of deduction.’
‘Sarcasm is the lowest form of wit,’ she told him scathingly.
‘And I still can't understand why Caro thought I'd like you.’
‘Caroline loves everyone.
She has a caring, unsuspicious nature.’
‘Unlike you!’
Robbie retorted smartly.
‘And anyway, Caro doesn't like absolutely everyone.
She certainly didn't like my boyfriend.’
‘Hugh Forster was always a selfish pig,’ Caro had said, ‘and he was always a money-grubber — even as a little boy.
I'm not surprised his new girlfriend is wealthy.
Oh, its a pity you ever got mixed up with him.
With your qualifications you could have had a much better job, a better salary.
But oh, no, Hugh sweet-talked you into working with him.
He knew, of course, that you'd make a damned good vet — a damned sight better than he'll ever be.
And as for the way he used to order you around —’
‘He didn't —’ Robbie began, then stopped, realising that was exactly what Hugh had done and that obscurely she had begun to resent it, even before their break-up.
‘And now the bastard's dumped you.
Robbie, believe me, you're better off without him.’
‘The trouble is, I'm still working with him.
I can't afford to walk out on my job.’
‘You have a boyfriend?’
Fenton Marshall sounded pleased.
‘Well, that at least is reassuring.’
Robbie looked at him uncomprehendingly.
‘It means,’ he explained, ‘that Caroline — an inveterate matchmaker —isn't up to her usual tricks.
That this really isn't a seduction scene.’
Robbie snorted.
‘You must have a very inflated opinion of your own worth if you think every woman you meet is after your body.
Personally, I wouldn't try to seduce you if you were the last man on earth.’
‘Good,’ he said with unflattering satisfaction.
‘I'm very glad to hear it.
And now we've established who and what we are, you'd better get your things together.’
She couldn't believe it.
‘You're actually going to throw me out?
Even though you know I'm Caro's friend?
In the middle of the night?
When I've told you —’
‘My good girl, you must be very naïve — as naïve, apparently, as my dear stepsister — if you think I'd contemplate even for one moment sharing these very cramped quarters with you.
Aside from the fact that I use this place for a specific purpose — a purpose that requires privacy, peace and quiet — it might lead to considerable misunderstandings.
People might think —’
‘Goodness,’ Robbie exclaimed scornfully.
‘I wouldn't have expected any relation of Caro's to be such an old-fashioned fuddy-duddy.
These days nobody thinks anything of a man and a woman sharing a flat.’
Sarcastically, ‘It may have escaped your notice, but this is not a flat.
Caro and I are not blood relations.
And,’ he shuddered, ‘I am not a ‘fuddy-duddy’— what a ghastly expression.
But I don't want an indignant boyfriend on my doorstep breathing fire.’
He paused, then with what Robbie considered to be an unutterably complacent smile, ‘And I doubt very much whether Petula would approve of your presence either.’
‘Petula?’
Robbie said.
When she'd boarded Water Gypsy yesterday, she had spotted some photographs in the main cabin, one a head and shoulders, the other a provocative, sexy pose.
Both pictured a glamorous brunette, at least a dozen years older than herself.
Beautiful but hard as nails, she'd thought then.
She glanced now at these photographs.
Obviously this was Fenton Marshall's girlfriend.
‘That's Petula?’ she asked.
‘Petula…’
Again he paused, then, with a strange twist of his mouth, ‘Yes.
So you see —’
‘Yes,’ she said slowly, ‘I do.
But —’
‘There are no ‘buts’.
Look,’ he ran one hand through his hair, further dishevelling it, ‘I'm not an unreasonable man.
And as you said, it is the middle of the night.
You can stay till morning.
But then you pack up and go.’
‘Where to?’
‘How the hell should I know?’ he demanded irritably.
‘There must be places.
Does it have to be round here?’
‘Yes.
I've just come here to work — at the vets’ in Little Kirkton — Caro's old job.
And there might be places to rent, but I just couldn't afford them.
That's why Caro —’
He sighed with exasperation.
‘I swear I'll skin her alive.
Why can't you afford to rent a place?
I should have thought veterinary surgery was reasonably remunerative.
Caroline seems to do all right.’
‘It is, but,’ she was stung into replying, ‘only if you can keep all your salary for yourself.
Caro doesn't have a mother and two brothers to support.’
‘And you have?
Why?’
‘Because my father walked out on us ten years ago when the twins were only six.
We lost our home — there was no way Mum could afford to go on living there — and had to move into a little council house.
My mother isn't strong enough to work full-time, and I —’
‘Whoa!
Whoa!’ he said wearily.
‘Enough!
I get the picture.
I'm sorry things have been so tough for you.’
At least he sounded as if he meant it, and Robbie's hopes rose.
‘So will you let me —’
‘No!’ he roared.
‘Haven't I already made it clear enough?
It won't do.’
‘You didn't mind sharing with Caro,’ Robbie pointed out.
‘As you said, you're not really related.
People could equally well think —’
‘No, they wouldn't,’ he said sharply.
‘Related or not, I look on Caroline as a sister, nothing more, and I would deeply resent the implication that it might be otherwise.’
‘OK, OK.
And I know there's still Petula, but couldn't you explain to her —’
‘No,’ uncompromisingly, ‘I couldn't.’
‘You mean she doesn't trust you?’
Robbie taunted, and was infuriated by his complacent grin.
Oh, he must be very sure of himself.
How she detested men like this.
‘That's not the point at issue,’ Fen told her.
‘But aside from that, I don't want anyone else here.
I value my solitude too much.’
‘Then you're selfish,’ Robbie said.
‘Selfish as hell.
Caro said — and you've just admitted it — you don't live here all the time.
You've got two homes.
If you throw me out, I won't even have one.’
The tears were pricking again, but she wasn't going to let him see.
She turned on her heel.
‘I'm going to bed, and if you want me out of here in the morning you're going to have to throw me out, bodily, just as I am.
Because I'm not leaving voluntarily.
Caro said she'd paid you rent for six months.
She said I could have her tenancy.’
She turned on her heel and stalked back into her own cabin.
As the curtain rattled on its rings, she realised she hadn't even the satisfaction of a door to bang in his face.
And she had half expected that he would follow her and continue the argument.
But he didn't.
Her cabin was still oppressively hot.
She peeled off her wrap, threw herself down on the bunk and gloomily contemplated the future.
It was possible her new employers might be able to recommend reasonably priced lodgings.
But however reasonable, nothing was as cheap as free accommodation, and she had been counting on these next six months to build up a bank balance.
As well as sending part of her income home, she had hoped eventually to be able to buy a car.
She had a driving licence, which would enable her to drive the practice's pet-ambulance, but she had never been able to save much from her salary.
On top of her contribution to household expenses she had unobtrusively helped her mother by buying necessities for her brothers, who seemed to grow out of clothes and shoes by the week.
She had been so thrilled too at the discovery that her home for the next six months was to be such an unconventional one.
She had seen pictures in books and on television of gaudily painted narrow boats and had warmed to the romantic life they portrayed.
But this was her first personal encounter with such a craft.
She had been delighted at her first view of the interior, the grained wood panels on which someone had painted castles and hearts, diamonds and clusters of roses in brilliant reds, yellows and greens.
Ingeniously designed, the main cabin contained a stove, a curtained bed and cupboards whose painted doors let down into tables.
Everything was tidy, clean and obviously proudly cared for.
And now it looked as though she wouldn't be living here after all.
Damn Fenton Marshall.
He was an unsympathetic, arrogant, selfish swine, and she hated him.
But was he really who he claimed to be?
The notion that Caro's stepbrother was called something totally different niggled at her.
In fact, there was quite a lot about this man that bothered her.
She couldn't explain it to herself.
It was just a gut feeling, a sense of unease.
She lay in wide-eyed turmoil for a long while, but at last sleep overcame her, and with the return of sleep the dream returned too.
‘Wake up!
Wake up!’
Someone was shaking her violently, shouting at her, and at first she thought it was part of her nightmare.
‘No, Hugh, don't!
Please!
Don't do this to me.
I love you!’
But as the shaking continued she came up out of the bad dream, trembling and drenched once more with perspiration, her cheeks damp with tears.
The cabin light was on and Fen was bending over her, disturbingly close, close enough for her to be able to see the individual pores in his swarthy skin.
He was so dark that he must have to shave two or three times a day, she thought inconsequentially as a lingering trace of aftershave came to her nostrils.
‘What the hell is it with you?’ he demanded.
‘Do you want my neighbours to think I'm raping you or something?’
Robbie sat up, still confused.
‘Why —?
What —?’
He was clad only in thin cotton pyjama bottoms.
His bare chest was bronzed and lightly coated with dark hair, darker than that on his head.
Suddenly she realised that she was here quite alone with a very large, very masculine man.
She'd never had cause to fear a man, but now she felt oddly threatened.
What had he said about rape?
as if he sensed her fear he straightened up, took a step back.
‘You were screaming your head off, and I had to wake you.’
‘Oh — oh, I see.’
Relieved, she sank back against the pillows, brushed a shaky hand over her eyes.
‘I thought…
I'm sorry, I've been having one or two bad dreams lately.’
‘So it would seem.
About someone called Hugh, apparently, who would appear to be something of a sadist, judging by your words and actions.
You were even shedding tears over him.
And yet,’ scornfully, ‘you were telling him you loved him.
Well, they do say there's no accounting for tastes.’
‘He wasn't…’
Robbie began, then remembered that it might be wiser if Fen thought of Hugh as being in the present tense rather than the past.
‘He isn't a sadist,’ she continued.
‘Dreams aren't always logical, you know.’
‘Huh!’ he grunted disbelievingly.
Then, ‘Just as well we won't be sharing this place, if you make a habit of going around half naked.’
His eyes made a comprehensive sweep of her and she realised belatedly that, in the hangover from her nightmare, she had forgotten her own state of undress.
She made a grab for her wrap.
‘It's a bit late now,’ he observed.
‘I've already seen everything that's on offer.
Unless it's a deliberate, attention-gaining ploy, I'd advise you to be more careful in future.’
‘It is not a ploy,’ Robbie said through clenched teeth.
‘And there's nothing ‘on offer’, as you put it.
And according to you there won't be a future.
Besides,’ acidly, ‘I thought you were supposed to be immune to other women, since you already have a —’
‘Don't be more stupid than you can help.
I may be already spoken for, but I'm also a normal, red-blooded male.
I'm no saint.
I'm capable of being tempted by a desirable woman — though I must say I have no present intention of succumbing to that temptation.’
Colour flooded her cheeks.
What was he saying?
Was he implying that he found her desirable?
For the first time — or was it the first time?— she noted that he exuded a certain physical magnetism.
‘OK,’ she snapped, ‘you've made your point.
But it wasn't intentional, and if you hadn't come bursting in here, you wouldn't have seen —’
‘You were screaming,’ he reminded her.
‘I was merely following my normal humanitarian instincts —’
‘Humanitarian!’
Robbie snorted derisively.
‘That's rich!
Can this really be the man who intends to make me homeless?’
Irritably, ‘I'm not starting up that discussion again.’
He moved away from the bunk and then with his hand on the curtain paused to look back at her.
‘Think you'll be all right now?’ he enquired gruffly.
‘Yes.
Thank you,’ she added.
Her expression of gratitude was grudging, for she didn't feel she had much to thank him for.
It was probably all the worry over his unfeeling attitude, his intention to evict her, that had rekindled the dream in the first place.
‘Then I'll say goodnight.’
He closed the curtain behind him.
Goodnight.
What was left of it.
A glance at her wristwatch told her it was almost four.
Despairingly, she realised she had only another two or three hours at most before he would be demanding her departure.
She snapped off the bunkhead light, certain, though, that she would not be able to get back to sleep.
The dream was totally different this time.
It was warm and comforting.
She was wearing white again and walking up that long, long aisle once more, but this time music was playing, sunlight streamed down through stained glass, irradiating the faces of family and friends.
A shaft of sunlight stronger than the rest engulfed the tall figure of her bridegroom, dazzling her, obscuring his features.
But this time he was not moving out of her reach.
Instead his hands were eagerly outstretched, and she moved towards him knowing that life could hold no greater happiness than this.
As she placed her hands trustingly in his, he moved out of the strong light and she saw his face.
It was not Hugh's face but that of Fenton Marshall.
And in her dream every line of his face was as familiar as if she had scrutinised it intently.
Handsomely rugged, bronzed, not drawn into lines of exasperation but smiling — a kind, caring man who loved her.
Aware that the dream was fading, escaping her, she struggled to retain it.
She wanted to be taken in this man's arms, kissed, caressed, held safe.
Robbie sat up, wide awake, but the dream was as vivid in her memory as it had been while she was experiencing it.
What a totally ridiculous dream — and about Fen of all people, the last person imaginable, a man she disliked.
But as she'd told him, dreams were rarely logical.
Even so, she felt extremely uncomfortable about facing him while the details were so clear in her mind.
Another problem occurred to her.
How was she to wash and dress?
There was no privacy in that compact but tiny galley.
Seeing it yesterday for the first time, she had reflected that great tact would have to be employed for two women to share quarters this size.
There wasn't room for two good friends, let alone people who hardly knew each other, to work at the same time.
For the first time she found herself agreeing with Fen.
It would be totally impossible to share such cramped quarters with a man — and such a very masculine man.
She shivered, remembering how waking to find his face so close to hers had made her insides quake.
Such strong, compelling features, but there was something about them…about him…
She swallowed.
Rubbish, she told herself crossly, this was just the shyness resulting from that stupid dream.
The moment she encountered him again the old hostility would erupt and this feeling of awareness would vanish.
And with a little give and take it would have been perfectly possible to share Water Gypsy , she thought resentfully.
Her robe firmly fastened around her, she emerged into the galley.
It was empty, and for the first time she noticed the bolt on the door between galley and main cabin.
She shot the bolt and then fetched her toilet things.
If she'd been staying on the boat for any length of time it would have been necessary to find somewhere to go for a shower or a bath, but it didn't look as if that particular problem would arise.
It was as she washed that she realised that the boat seemed to be moving.
Not the gentle swaying to the tide that had lulled her to sleep last night but a definite purposeful movement.
Then the boat seemed to bump against some solid object, making the contents of the kitchen cupboards rattle.
Hurriedly she finished her ablutions, pulled on her clothes and went to investigate.
As she emerged from the main cabin and looked about her, Robbie discovered that these were very definitely not last night's surroundings.
Instead of the quiet moorings, the long line of permanent houseboats, her startled gaze encountered a very high, very wet and slimy brick wall.
Water Gypsy was in a lock.
‘What the hell are you playing at?’ she demanded of the man at the tiller.
‘Where are we?’
CHAPTER TWO
Fen looked her up and down consideringly before answering, taking in every detail of her shabby old jeans and T-shirt.
Annoyed, Robbie glared back at him.
She knew she looked scruffy, but what did he expect?
A fashion plate like his girlfriend?
Since she was going to be evicted any moment, she hadn't seen much point in unpacking anything else.
Then she realised that his gaze was not one of disapproval but something far more disturbing.
She had seen that look of appraisal in men's eyes before.
She had lost weight in the last few weeks and the jeans were a little loose about her waist.
But slimming, whether intentional or — as now — the result of unhappiness, never seemed to affect her breasts, and the much washed, faded T-shirt clung to her like a second skin.
Self-consciously she folded her arms.
‘I wondered what you'd look like with clothes on,’ Fen observed.
Robbie felt her cheeks flush scarlet and she looked about her in angry embarrassment.
But there were no other boats and no one on the towpath above them to hear his ambiguous remark.
‘Never mind the personal comments!’ she snapped.
She was amazed to realise now just how detailed her dream of him had been and annoyed that he could make her feel so uncomfortable by his veiled allusion to last night.
‘I asked you a question.
What do you think you're doing, and where are we?’
‘That's two questions,’ he told her.
Robbie fumed.
Oh, he must be the most exasperating man she'd ever met.
‘Just answer me, damn you.’
‘OK.
We're about ten miles further upstream.’
‘What?
But why —?’
‘Because I use this boat to travel around on.
I came aboard last night ready for an early start this morning and I saw no reason to change my plans.’
‘But what about me?
Why didn't you —?’
‘Tell you?
Why should I?
Stowaways have to accept what happens to them.’
‘Oh!’
Robbie almost stamped her foot, but under his ironic gaze refrained.
‘I am not a stowaway.
I —’
‘No?’ he drawled.
‘Last night you declared your intention of staying aboard, in spite of everything I put forward against it.
In my book that makes you a —’
‘Put forward against it!’
Robbie echoed sneeringly.
‘You make it sound as though we had a reasonable discussion, instead of which you threatened to throw me out — no matter what.
Somehow you don't seem to me like a man who makes idle threats.’
‘True,’ he agreed.
‘But there were rather a lot of people about at the moorings this morning.
Aside from the fact that I'm not normally given to physical violence, I'm quite well known locally, and I didn't particularly want to be seen carrying a half-naked woman ashore — which is what you threatened me with.
So I decided to wait.’
‘But you didn't wait.
You…you just started off, brought me all this way, without so much as a by your leave.’
Fen fixed her with an inimical gaze.
‘Let's get this very clear.
I ask no one 's permission — no one 's — to use my own property.
You'll just have to make the best of the situation.
It's entirely your own fault if you chose to stage a lie-in in your cabin.
It makes no difference to me.’
‘I wasn't awake, damn you.
If I had been —’
‘Yes?’ a lift of the dark brows.
‘If you had been awake, would you have been more amenable?
I doubt it.’
Robbie knew she wouldn't have been any more willing to leave Water Gypsy .
But she didn't see that she would have had much choice.
Physically she would not have been any match for Fen.
‘This is crazy,’ she muttered.
‘You're crazy.’
And, ‘What do I do now?’
His answer was totally unexpected.
‘Hold this tiller and steer while I operate the lock.’
She stared at him for a moment, and then, as he gestured impatiently, ‘But I don't know how —’
‘Then here's your chance to learn.’
The day was growing warm and Fen peeled off his sweater.
Beneath it was one of his usual checked shirts — short-sleeved this time, revealing strong bronzed arms.
Windlass in hand, he clambered up the ladder that scaled the slimy wall.
Apprehensively, Robbie clung tightly to the tiller as he closed the gates behind them, his muscular strength making nothing of the massive balance beam which swung the heavy gates to.
The water gushed through the sluices, gradually bringing Water Gypsy up to the level of the higher pound.
As the boat slowly mounted the shining green-streaked walls, Robbie looked about her, able, despite her lack of confidence in her abilities, to appreciate the tranquil fascination of her surroundings.
Before her the long straight reach of the canal lay like a silver ribbon.
To either side the countryside stretched green and peaceful into the hazy early morning distance, typical of another hot day to come.
The only other sign of life was that of solemn staring cows.
Fen jumped on board again and took the tiller.
‘Well done,’ he said.
Robbie flushed at this unexpected praise.
‘It was more good luck than judgement,’ she admitted.
But she had enjoyed the experience, she realised now.
It would have been enormous fun, she thought wistfully, to help work Water Gypsy up and down the canal system.
And it would have been entirely possible with the right companion.
As it was, this first ever trip on a narrow boat looked like being her last, and she had been asleep for most of it.
Again she ventured to question him.
‘You still haven't told me…what am I supposed to do now?
We're miles from —’
‘Are you any good at making coffee?
I've been up since six.’
Robbie's lips parted.
She was about to tell him that was his own stupid fault and that she wasn't here to wait on him — particularly since he had proved to be so inhospitable.
But she bit back the words.
Perhaps, if she made herself useful, he might decide she could stay — for a while at least, just until she got something else sorted out.
‘How do you like your coffee?’ she asked.
‘Black.
Strong.
No sugar.’
The old quip, ‘sweet enough, are you?’ sprang immediately to mind, but she repressed it.
She was in no mood for jokes.
Besides, the words could be construed as flirtatious, and she didn't want him getting the wrong impression again.
If only she could gain his friendship, establish a purely platonic relationship…
‘Have you eaten yet?’
Fen asked.
Robbie shook her head.
‘No.
I haven't had a chance to get any provisions in.’
‘There's bacon and eggs in the fridge — enough for two,’ he added significantly.
She reflected indignantly that he'd already eaten a substantial helping of bacon and eggs about three o'clock that morning.
‘Are you suggesting I should cook breakfast for you too?’
He looked at her sharply.
‘Any objections?’
Though it nearly choked her, Robbie swallowed certain feminist instincts.
‘No,’ she muttered.
‘Right!
Then I suggest you get to it.
Give me a shout when it's nearly ready.’
He was beginning to sound just like Hugh, Robbie thought resentfully, ordering her about.
Below, she paused in the cabin before his pin-up pictures.
‘You're welcome to him, Petula,’ she said aloud.
‘In fact, you probably deserve each other.’
In the galley, she vented her feelings still further by clashing pans and cooking utensils and listing sotto voce the names she'd like to call Fenton Marshall, if only she were not so dependent on his good will.
But how long would that good will last?
He hadn't chucked her overboard bag and baggage yet, but he was probably only biding his time until they returned to their mooring.
Meanwhile she was obviously expected to make herself useful.
As instructed, she gave Fen two or three minutes' warning and felt the boat change direction and nudge the bank.
By the time he had completed the manoeuvre, she had set one of the let-down tables for two and had begun her own meal.
He came below, ducking his head as he entered the cabin.
He was so large that he seemed to fill the tiny area with his presence, and as he sat down his knees brushed hers beneath the table.
The contact gave her a not unpleasant sensation, and hastily she shifted her legs.
Fen did not seem to favour conversation while eating.
Robbie observed him through lowered lashes as he made hearty inroads on the food.
He had an appetite to match his large frame.
What other appetites had he?
She found herself wondering.
Was he as lusty in other things as in his eating?
At making love?
The thought took her completely by surprise.
What on earth had put that into her head?
She knew she had gone scarlet and hoped he hadn't noticed.
Some hopes.
‘What's made you go poppy-red all of a sudden?’ he enquired, and with uncanny insight, ‘Not indulging in romantic fantasies, I hope?’
‘Wh-what do you mean?’
‘Man and girl alone on a boat.
Propinquity.
The way to his heart is through his stomach, et cetera, et cetera .
I'm well acquainted with all the usual ploys.’
Robbie's colour fled as rapidly as it had appeared, leaving her face ashen with anger.
‘Heart?’ she snapped sarcastically.
‘I don't believe you have one, particularly where women are concerned.
I'm surprised you ever let your Petula get close enough to you to get involved.
And as for me indulging in fantasies about you…’
She shuddered delicately.
‘I'd as soon daydream about King Kong.’
He seemed unruffled by her words.
‘Oh, I have a heart.
I'm just careful about where I bestow it.
As for Petula,’ he grinned suddenly, wolfishly, ‘she didn't have to exert any feminine wiles on me.
If there's any chasing to be done, I'm usually the one doing it.’
Robbie permitted herself a small cynical smile of disbelief.
She might not know too much about men — her adult experiences had been confined to Hugh Forster — but she did know her own sex.
And she had seen the photograph of Petula.
Petula — what a name, she thought scornfully.
And if Fen thought he'd done all the chasing there, she'd eat her hat.
He wiped round his plate with a chunk of bread, emitted a satisfied sigh and looked around for his coffee.
‘You brew up as well as you cook,’ he said as Robbie poured the fragrant liquid into the large mug he held out.
‘With a mother who isn't too strong and two great hulking brothers who don't know a saucepan from a frying-pan, I've had plenty of experience,’ she told him.
‘Had to help out a lot at home, did you?’ he asked unsympathetically.
‘That why you got out?’
‘Certainly not!’
Robbie was indignant.
‘I'd still be at home now if…’
She stopped, on the verge of revealing her break-up with Hugh.
‘If a much better job hadn't come along,’ she substituted.
‘This way I can send more money home.’
‘Hmm.’
It was an enigmatic sound.
Fen leaned back, totally relaxed, sipping his coffee.
His long legs, one draped casually over the other, stretched and tightened the fabric on strong thighs.
‘Tell me more about this family of yours.’
Robbie averted her eyes from those muscular legs and looked at him consideringly.
Did he really want to know more about her background?
And if so, why?
She decided it would do no harm to tell him.
It might even enlist his sympathy, make him reconsider his eviction plans.
‘There's only my mother and my two brothers.
Mum's had a hard life.
Having the twins nearly killed her.
And then when Dad walked out…’
Robbie shivered.
‘I can still remember the dreadful rows.
Then at one time Mum was looking after both sets of grandparents as well as us.
Neil and Ian are in their last year at school.
They're good kids, but thoughtless and apt to get into trouble, and they go through clothes and shoes…’
She shrugged expressively.
‘I contribute as much as I can.
Which is why,’ she concluded significantly, ‘Caro's offer of rent-free accommodation was such a marvellous boon.’
Fen had listened carefully but expressionlessly to her account.
But now he made no comment.
Instead he stood up.
‘I need to walk off that excellent breakfast.’
She should have known, Robbie thought wearily, her story hadn't moved him one iota.
‘Want to come?’ he asked, taking her by surprise.
‘What about the —?’
She pointed to the debris of their meal.
‘Leave it.
You can do it when we get back.’
‘Talk about home from home,’ Robbie muttered under her breath as she followed him — but not quietly enough.
‘Stowaways have to work their passage!’ he told her.
He had moored Water Gypsy on a pretty stretch of river which, he told her, linked two canals.
The river was canopied by overhanging trees, and a village lay within easy walking distance.
‘We need to get some more food in,’ Fen said.
‘I'll pay for what I've eaten, of course,’ Robbie said hastily.
Again that non-committal grunt.
‘Look…’
Though she was tall, Robbie had almost to run to keep up with his swift strides.
‘You still haven't told me…we're miles from the original moorings — when do we get back?’
‘In about a month's time.’
She stopped dead in her tracks, but Fen continued walking, so that when her brain began to function again, she had to race after him.
‘Fen!
Please — stop!’
Out of breath, she grasped his bare arm.
The arm was strong, muscular, the light coating of hair was soft, startlingly sensual to the touch.
He stopped as abruptly as she had done.
But instead of looking at her, he was staring down at her hand where it still lay on his arm.
His face wore a strange expression.
Then, slowly, his right hand came up and peeled hers from his arm.
Then he looked at her.
‘Well?’ he asked curtly.
Feeling slightly disconcerted by his reaction to her touch — he needn't have removed her hand so pointedly, as if it were some obnoxious insect — Robbie stammered, ‘You…you said a month.
You're not going back for a month?
I don't understand —’
‘You have excellent hearing, apparently,’ he said, ‘but you seem to be a bit slow on the uptake.’
‘I'm not.
I just couldn't believe…
I have to get back.
I start work in three weeks.’
‘There's always public transport — or a taxi.’
‘Oh, no!’
Robbie shook her head.
‘I see what you're up to.
But you don't get rid of me like that.
You brought me here — wherever here is — so you can get me back.’
He ran a distracted hand through his hair, dishevelling its thick waves.
‘What the hell have I done to deserve this?’ he asked of no one in particular.
‘All I asked for was a month's peace and quiet to get some work done.
And what do I get?
An uninvited, aggravating, persistent female who won't take no for an answer.’
The touch of humour in his tone encouraged her a little.
‘I wouldn't interfere with your work,’ she said quickly, hopefully.
‘If you let me stay, I'd keep out of your way.
You'd hardly know I was there.
I'm not a noisy person.
And I'll be at work myself most of the time.
I'm sure your girlfriend would understand if you explained it to her properly — that I'm Caro's friend, not yours.’
Hopefully, ‘You…you could look on me as another sister.’
‘Another sister!’ he exploded.
‘It seems to me that I've got enough.
And somehow,’ he surveyed her — and there was that wry twist to his lips again, ‘I don't think even the most broad-minded onlooker would go for the ‘sister’angle.
Even from where I'm standing, you're a different kettle of fish from Caroline.’
‘Oh?’
Robbie said doubtfully, unsure whether this was meant as an insult or a compliment, but he didn't choose to enlarge on his remark.
They had resumed their walk as they talked, and now they had reached the village.
As they entered the little general store, Fen produced a long list of necessities, and when they left their arms were piled high with brown paper bags.
‘Now I know why you asked me to come with you,’ Robbie complained a little later, as she struggled back along the towpath with her share of the load.
‘Do you treat all women the same way?’
‘What way is that?’ he enquired.
‘Servants.
Beasts of burden,’ she said breathlessly as she toiled after him, his strides making no concession to her laden state.
‘I thought you wanted me to treat you like a sister?’ he threw over his shoulder.
‘Caroline never made any fuss about pulling her weight.’
‘I seem to be carrying twice mine!’
Robbie retorted.
She was not normally of an argumentative disposition, finding it essential to have the last word, but now she felt it distinctly necessary to score points.
But Fenton Marshall seemed to have an apt answer for everything.
‘You're no midget,’ he agreed.
‘Those ethereal Pre-Raphaelite looks of yours are deceptive.’
His words were casual, hardly to be construed as a compliment, but reminded Robbie of something Caro had said recently, when Robbie had gloomily deplored Hugh's defection, expressing the opinion that his new girlfriend was prettier.
‘You're better than pretty — you're striking.
I used to envy you your looks — tall, wandlike, elegant — and that red hair of yours!
One of my boyfriends once described you as the Rossetti maiden.’
‘Right,’ said Fen as they boarded Water Gypsy , ‘you can stow this stuff away.
I want to get going again.’
Yes, sir, no, sir, three bags full, sir.
Robbie muttered the words under her breath.
She quelled the impulse to hurl a packet of cereal at his retreating form.
‘Are we going back?’ she called hopefully after him.
He ducked back, under the doorframe.
‘Certainly not.
I'm not changing my plans to accommodate you.
And before you can say another word — let me repeat, if you choose to stay with me, you go where I go.’
Robbie thought furiously as she put tins, packets and milk away in their appropriate places.
‘If you choose to stay with me…’
Did that mean she actually did have a choice, that he'd given up the idea of evicting her?
She couldn't really believe that he'd weakened sufficiently to accept her presence without further protest.
But — by his own admission — he didn't relish using force.
On the other hand, she decided, he wasn't above using guile.
Maybe he thought, if he drove her hard enough and far enough, she'd quit of her own accord.
There and then Robbie vowed that his little plan wasn't going to work.
She was nobody's doormat — though she'd come perilously close to it with Hugh — but it was vital, in the present state of her finances, that she continue to live on board Water Gypsy .
She would grit her teeth and take everything he threw at her — for the time being.
But if there were any chances of subtly taking her revenge…
She smiled grimly, realising one thing — if nothing else, since she'd met Fen, she had regained her sense of humour.
Fenton Marshall might think he knew everything about women in general.
But he had a lot to learn about her.
With the provisions stored away, Robbie was at a loss for occupation.
Water Gypsy was under way again.
In view of Fen's objections to her presence, should she stay down here and keep a low profile, or should she risk going up on deck?
On consideration, it seemed a pity to waste this beautiful weather immured in her cabin.
On the other hand, she certainly didn't fancy joining Fen in the confined space between tiller and cabin.
There was something about being too close to him that made her uncomfortable.
But there was no reason why she should not stretch out on the forward superstructure and get in a little sunbathing.
She changed into her shorts — Fen had donned his before they went shopping — and, remembering Fen's earlier insinuations, she opted for a baggy T-shirt which, she hoped, made her figure as sexless as a boy's, then went aloft, tense, wary, uncertain of her reception.
She had to ease her way past Fen's masculine bulk to reach her objective, and she did this as swiftly as possible, feeling strangely uneasy at his proximity.
She wasn't sure if it was a good omen or not that he made no comment.
His gaze appeared to be fixed straight ahead, and he seemed utterly at peace with himself and his surroundings.
Even so, Robbie breathed more easily once she had put the length of the narrow boat between them.
She spread out her towel and lay flat, adjusting her sunglasses against the glare above.
She let out a long, appreciative sigh.
This was the life.
Until now she had not realised just how much she needed a holiday.
After her disturbed night, she supine position and the soporific effect of air and sun were impossible to resist.
Behind the sunglasses her eyes closed and she slept — and for the first time in ages slept dreamlessly.
She was awakened some time later by the sound of Fen's voice and his hand briefly shaking her by the shoulder.
She removed the glasses and looked questioningly up at him, her brown eyes still warmly slumbrous.
At once he straightened up.
‘You've been lying there long enough,’ he said curtly.
Water Gypsy was at rest against the bank once more.
Robbie had no idea how long they had been stationary.
‘What's the matter?’ she retorted.
‘Found another job for me?’
‘I was merely trying to prevent you getting sunstroke.
It's midday, the sun is directly overhead and extremely hot.
However,’ he shrugged, ‘if you prefer to risk skin problems and premature ageing —’
Robbie sat up and scrambled to her feet.
Having the fair skin that so often accompanied red hair, she was usually more careful.
But then she didn't usually sleep so soundly out of doors, and she put her reactions down to recent stress.
‘Of course I don't want to get burned,’ she said, and awkwardly, feeling more was needed.
‘Thank you, it's very kind of you —’
From his expression anyone would think him totally appalled at the accusation of kindness.
‘Merely self-preservation,’ he muttered.
‘I didn't want a sick woman on my hands — to have to break my journey to cart you off to hospital.’
Selfish to the last, Robbie thought.
And for a moment there she'd actually thought him capable of humanity.
‘Since you're awake now,’ he said, adding another minus to his score, ‘how about some lunch?’
He turned and made for the stern of the boat, and disappeared below.
‘I knew it!’
Robbie exclaimed, following him.
‘I knew it!
There had to be another reason.’
In the main cabin she came to an abrupt halt, feeling distinctly foolish.
Already set out was a delectable-looking salad, and two places had been laid.
‘You were saying?’
Fen enquired.
‘Nothing,’ muttered Robbie as she slid into her seat.
‘It doesn't even warrant another ‘thank you’?’
‘Oh!’
Robbie's exasperation found vent.
‘You're just trying to put me in the wrong, aren't you?
You're determined not to like me, to accept me.’
Until a moment ago she'd been ravenously hungry, but now she was certain the salad would be dust and ashes in her mouth.
‘That's right,’ he said cheerfully.
‘How did you guess?’
And then, ‘Oh, eat your lunch and stop looking at me with those great spaniel eyes.
You don't like me any more than I like you, but we don't have to be constantly at war.’
It wasn't much of a concession, but suddenly Robbie stopped feeling sorry for herself.
At least Fen hadn't repeated his insistence that she should leave the boat.
From now on she could be grateful for small mercies and be content to take one step at a time.
In time she would make him like her, accept her.
Her appetite restored, she dug into the salad, finding it every bit as good as it looked.
‘How far have we come this morning?’ she asked.
‘Only another fifteen miles.
Canal travel is quiet — and slow, thank God.
There's a speed limit of four miles per hour — a complete contrast to the noise and speed of everyday life.’
From this remark, added to his earlier defence of his right to seclusion, Robbie was beginning to build up a picture of this man.
He sounded something of a recluse.
Puzzled, she turned her gaze once more to the pictured Petula.
Where on earth would a girl like that fit into his kind of lifestyle?
She looked thoroughly sophisticated, the type to want to hit the night spots.
She looked as though she would have no objection to the noise and speed of the world.
‘Have you a precise destination in mind?’
Robbie asked, ‘or do you just wander at will?’
‘Oh, I know exactly where I'm going.’
‘But it's none of my business?’ she asked acidly, when he did not continue.
Fen looked at her consideringly.
‘Are you really interested, or are you one of these people who just feel compelled to make conversation?’
It wasn't rudely said, but a genuine enquiry, she realised, and her momentary flare of indignation subsided.
She answered him seriously.
‘It depends who I'm with.
If I'm with someone I know well, someone I feel at ease with, I don't find it necessary to talk all the time.
Silence, with the right person, can be a companionable, comfortable thing.’
‘What you're saying, then, is that you don't feel at ease with me, because you don't know me very well.’
‘Yes, I suppose so — but that doesn't mean I'm not interested in —’
‘So it looks as though you'd find it very awkward, being in my company.’
Robbie's heart sank.
Oh, he didn't miss a trick.
Here it came, another demand that she quit the boat.
‘Because,’ he went on, ‘I give you fair warning, not many people know me very well.
I don't encourage it.
I have a few close trusted friends and family, but I don't open up my heart to all and sundry.’
‘Do you dislike people so much?’
Robbie wanted to know.
‘Certainly not.
I'm no misogynist.
Neither,’ significantly, ‘am I a monk.
But my work absorbs a great deal of my time.
It's also a rather solitary pursuit — so a vast acquaintance wouldn't be practical.’
‘What do you do — for a living, I mean?’
Again that considering look from under heavy dark brows.
‘You ask rather a lot of questions, don't you?
I seem to have been bombarded by your curiosity right from the start.
Why?
I ask myself.
What possible interest can you have?’
‘If you will make such a mystery man of yourself,’ Robbie retorted, ‘you must expect people to be curious.’
Then, ‘Oh, all right,’ she said crossly, ‘Point taken.
Don't tell me anything.’
She stood up and took her empty plate into the galley.
‘I said I wouldn't interfere with your privacy,’ she called back to him, ‘and I meant it.
I won't ask any more questions.’
‘There's some ice-cream in the freezer compartment of the fridge,’ Fen said.
‘Serve up two helpings, will you?
And make mine a generous one.’
Robbie gritted her teeth, her only protest the loud clashing of crockery, the violent spooning of the ice-cream into bowls.
‘When I said ‘serve’,’ Fen informed her from right at her shoulder, ‘I wasn't suggesting a Wimbledon performance.’
Robbie swung around on her heel, prepared, despite her resolve, to give him a tongue-lashing, only to see his quizzical expression.
Quite out of the blue her sense of the ridiculous erupted; the parallel he'd drawn appealed to her, and she found herself actually laughing as she handed him one of the bowls.
‘That's better,’ he observed.
‘I was beginning to wonder if you were always so prickly.
Caroline's friends, in general, always seem to have a sense of humour.’
‘Mine's taken a bit of a bashing lately,’ Robbie admitted as she sat down to her own ice-cream.
‘Anything to do with your friend Hugh?’ he asked, his tone deceptively casual.
‘Care to talk about it?’
Robbie considered it.
Then, ‘No,’ she said with finality.
There was nothing so boring, she thought, as someone who was continually bewailing her lot.
She'd told Fen briefly about her concern for her mother, her need to assist financially where her brothers were concerned.
That was quite enough for someone who had just admitted to disliking exchanges of confidence except to his intimates.
Besides, Hugh's presence in her life — or rather her pretence at his continued existence — was a pawn in her game, the game of survival.
If Fen thought she had no other attachments, she'd be off this boat in double quick time.
Fen shrugged.
‘Suit yourself.
I just thought it might be fair exchange.’
‘Fair exchange for what?’ she demanded indignantly.
‘You don't want me to know anything about you, so why should you want to know anything about me?’
‘Good point,’ he agreed, ‘why should I?’
Carefully he scraped every last vestige of ice-cream from his bowl, then stood up.
‘Want to have another go at steering the boat — in open water this time?’
He needn't force himself to be sociable, Robbie thought.
‘No, thank you,’ she said frostily.
‘Since you made lunch, I'll wash up.’
A non-committal grunt was his only reply.
Well, what had she expected?
That he would make some attempt to coax her?
‘Perhaps I could have a go later?’ she found herself saying.
‘We'll have a long series of locks to navigate later — a bit trying for a novice.
You'll need some practice before then.’
‘I managed all right last time,’ she reminded him.
‘It was quiet then, and we had the lock to ourselves.
I couldn't risk you ramming someone.
Look, I'll tell you what — I'll wash the pots while you make some coffee.’
‘OK.’
It sounded as if he needed another pair of hands for the trip ahead — which was another reprieve so far as Robbie was concerned.
Making coffee, while Fen dealt swiftly and efficiently with the washing up, was not as simple as it sounded.
Stove and sink were immediately adjacent in the tiny galley, and he seemed to take up more than his fair share of space.
Not that there was a spare ounce of flesh on him, Robbie decided, eyeing him surreptitiously as she edged carefully around him.
He was all large bones and muscle.
Hugh, she thought inconsequentially, would probably run to flab in later life — like his father.
As the kettle began to boil, she realised that the mugs she needed were stowed beneath the sink.
When she mentioned this, Fen did not move but merely swayed his hips to one side, so that she was forced to duck her head past strong legs in order to see what she was doing.
This was the closest she had ever ventured to him, and she was forcefully aware of masculine warmth and cleanliness and an indefinable something else — an aura, almost — that for some reason made her nerve ends prickle warningly.
Quite by accident, her cheek brushed against a hairy thigh, and hastily she retrieved two mugs and scrambled to her feet, knowing her cheeks were burning again.
She hoped the hectic flush would be put down to the exertion of bending nearly double.
‘You'll need to open the new jar of coffee,’ Fen told her.
Easier said than done.
Just her luck.
This was probably the only one in the shop with a rebellious lid and they'd had to pick it.
She muttered a complaint.
‘Here,’ Fen sighed impatiently, ‘let me.’
As he took the jar from her, their fingers brushed, and a jolt as startling as that of static electricity made Robbie give a little gasp and involuntarily her eyes met his.
Though his gaze narrowed fractionally, he made no comment.
But goodness only knew what he was thinking.
She just hoped he hadn't recognised her start for the violent sexual reaction it had been — a totally ridiculous reaction, she told herself, since she wasn't in the least attracted to Fenton Marshall.
For heaven's sake, she didn't even like him.
Fen did not return the opened jar to her hand.
Instead, he set it down on the worktop.
‘I'll have my coffee on deck when it's ready,’ he informed her brusquely.
His departure, though abrupt, was a relief to Robbie.
She would have hated him to see how her hands shook as she spooned the coffee into the mugs, overdid the sugar and had to start again.
She could just imagine his look of derision, maybe even one of his put-downs.
Get a grip of yourself, Robbie, she adjured herself.
CHAPTER THREE
By the time Robbie handed Fen his mug of coffee her equilibrium had been restored.
She had persuaded herself that her recoil from his touch had been one of distaste rather than one of recognised attraction.
Even so, she was glad when he stood well back as she did a spell at the tiller, correcting her attempts vocally rather than physically.
Gradually her technique improved, and Water Gypsy glided on through a country solitude of farms and fields.
Willows fringed the banks and rippling streams ran in and out of the canal.
Lordly swans moved leisurely away from the bows.
The boat rounded sudden corners into cavernously dark reaches, passed cottage gardens ablaze with flowers.
It all seemed a thousand miles from the nearest town, though in actuality it might be only five or six.
As her confidence increased, they made desultory conversations, though, remembering Fen's dislike of being quizzed, Robbie left him to initiate the subjects for discussion.
‘What made you decide on a career as a vet?’ he asked, after they had passed a man walking an Alsatian by the canal and Robbie had enthused over its fine points.
‘I've always loved animals.
The boarding-school had a few pets and we were allowed to look after them in our free time.
We were always rescuing birds too — from the school cat.
I think that's where it began.
Are you…’ she ventured to ask ‘…fond of animals?’
‘Very.
I've a couple of dogs at home.
I usually bring the dogs with me, but it wasn't convenient this trip.’
‘What breed are they?
Who looks after them while you're away, and…where is home…exactly…?’
Robbie's voice faltered into silence, and she held her breath, realising that her wretched curiosity had run away with her again.
‘One's a Labrador, the other's a Dalmatian.
My housekeeper looks after the dogs.
And home isn't far from where Water Gypsy was moored.
It's an old manor house.
It was built originally by one of the old wool merchants, who wanted to establish his family as landed gentry.
But by the time it was furnished, the wool-based economy had begun to collapse and the family couldn't support the house.
Down the centuries, it's changed hands many times.’
‘And now it's yours.’
‘And now it's mine,’ he agreed with quiet satisfaction.
‘I only moved in a couple of years ago.
I've been restoring it — between other jobs.
It seems to be taking for ever.
I don't get a lot of time.’
Robbie was dying to ask why — how he spent the rest of his time, what job he was in.
But she was beginning to know her man.
Information about him would have to be gathered slowly and subtly.
He must think he was volunteering it, rather than being cross-questioned.
She sighed.
‘I expect you find this means of transport too slow,’ Fen suggested.
He'd obviously misunderstood the sigh.
‘It's rare to cover more than twenty miles in a day.
Young people are usually in more of a hurry.’
Not Robbie.
The soothing routine of the boat, the interest of the slowly changing surroundings, were just what her weary spirit demanded.
And for such a leisurely means of travel, a day could be astonishingly full.
There was always something to do — avoiding anglers, scraping over an aqueduct, mooring at water taps to fill up the tanks.
‘I'm enjoying it,’ she said truthfully.
‘I can feel myself unwinding.
But you don't consider yourself old, surely?’ she asked.
‘No, I don't,’ emphatically.
‘But as Caro's contemporary you may.
I'm eleven years older than you.
But maturity isn't always a matter of years.
It can be a state of mind, an amalgam of life's experiences.’
‘Goodness!’
Robbie laughed.
‘You do sound serious.’
‘And pompous, I suppose?’
Ironically, ‘Don't be afraid to say it.
I've had women accuse me of that before now.’
She looked at him.
‘I wouldn't call you pompous,’ she said slowly, and then, with a grin, ‘not that I wouldn't dare to — if I thought you were.
Do you see yourself as pompous?’
‘No.
But perhaps I give that impression because I have strong views on certain subjects and because I don't go in for the social whirl, for fast cars and fast women.’
Robbie was terribly tempted to ask how he would describe the glamorous-looking Petula, so perhaps it was just as well that at that moment they came in sight of the first lock.
From now on, Fen told her, there would be a lock every quarter of a mile, sometimes in clusters of two or three.
There was another boat not far ahead, going the same way, so that every lock was ‘against’ them, which meant they must empty each one before they could enter and must then fill it again.
‘We'll take it in turns,’ Fen declared.
‘It'll be no bad thing for you to learn how they operate.’
If he considered it necessary for her to know such things, did that mean she was remaining on board after today?
Robbie longed to ask, but didn't dare tempt fate.
Alone, negotiating the locks could have been tedious.
It was certainly tiring.
When it came to her turn to scramble ashore, she found it was no easy task to move the balance beam which swung the gates open.
Fen's superior size and strength had made nothing of it.
But she was determined not to be beaten.
Half seated, half leaning on the wooden structure and pushing with her feet against ground well worn by many such operations, she managed at last to move the gates gradually apart.
Nevertheless, she returned to Water Gypsy glowing with the knowledge of success, and was deflated when Fen made no comment on her achievement.
She stared at his back view in exasperation.
Trying to earn this man's good opinion was as easy as…as climbing a descending escalator — six steps back for every one forward.
The sun was going down and it was in a warm twilight that they reached the summit of their climb.
How much further would Fen decide to travel?
Robbie was ready for a rest and some food, and she groaned inwardly at the thought that Fen would undoubtedly expect her to prepare a meal before she could eat and sink into her bunk.
‘We'll call it a day shortly,’ he said, almost as though he read her thoughts.
‘It'll soon be too dark to navigate.’
Beyond the final lock, the canal joined a river, opening up into a very wide stretch of water, bounded by pleasant meadows and with scores of mooring places, most of them occupied.
Tantalising cooking smells wafted on the evening breeze, making Robbie's mouth water.
‘Right!’ said Fen as he finished knocking in the strong metal pins for tying up the bows and stern of the boat.
‘Food — I'm starving!’
This time Robbie allowed the groan to escape, and was incensed when he chuckled.
But — fortunately — before she could utter any complaints or accusations, he said, ‘There's a riverside inn only five minutes away.
They do excellent food.
If you're prepared to walk that far?’
Robbie nodded, mentally apologising to him for all the scathing epithets that had so nearly tumbled from her lips.
Perhaps Caro's declaration that her stepbrother was very likeable had not just stemmed from partiality.
Maybe it was just a matter of getting to know him.
Not that Robbie supposed she ever would.
It seemed unlikely that he would permit that — even if she'd desired the privilege.
Seconds later she was once more revising her opinion.
‘As you've probably realised by now,’ Fen said as he marched her briskly along the towpath, with no apparent concern for her fatigue, ‘living and travelling on a narrow boat is not all glamour and sunbathing.
It's also very hard physical work — especially for a woman.’
Unlike some of her former college friends, Robbie was no rabid feminist, but this last made her hackles rise again.
This man was enough to give anyone high blood-pressure.
‘Listen, you…you…,’ she spluttered, ‘I've coped with everything you've thrown at me today.
You can't deny it.
And you didn't hear one word of complaint from me through all those locks.’
She found that her legs were suddenly shaking — a combination of anger, weariness and apprehension.
Instead of ordering her off the boat, he was now beginning a more subtle campaign.
He was trying to undermine her self-confidence, make her believe she couldn't stand up to the exigencies of canal life.
Making her tired had probably been a deliberate ploy.
The sudden weakness in her legs made her stumble over a non-existent obstacle, there was a blackness before her eyes and she would have fallen but for his lightning reactions and the strong hand that grasped her elbow, supporting her.
‘Steady!
We're almost there.
You're nearly out on your feet, aren't you?’
There was a note in his deep voice that sounded almost like self-reproach, but Robbie was in no state to appreciate it.
As they rounded another bend she saw the lighted windows of the Swan Inn, relief swept through her.
She was bone-weary, but she would be all right, she assured herself, once she'd had a sit down and something to eat.
The inn was old and quaint, typical of such hostelries, and had probably existed when the canals were in their heyday as a means of transport and communication.
It was obviously a popular haunt — and not just with the boating fraternity — so it was some while before their food was brought to them.
Robbie, leaning against the cushions of a high-backed wooden settle, fought hard to hold on to reality.
Her head was swimming so that the gleaming brasses suspended from black overhead beams seemed double-edged, but she was damned, she told herself, if she was going to cave in under Fen's critical gaze.
He wouldn't miss the opportunity to point a moral.
‘All right?’ he asked her, and again there was that unexpected note of concern in his voice.
But he'd left it a bit late for consideration for her welfare, she thought hazily.
‘Just hungry.’
She forced a brightness she certainly didn't feel.
‘My stomach feels as though my throat's been cut.’
But she was beginning to wonder if — when the meal came — she would be able to eat it.
She now had the distinct feeling of nausea that sometimes accompanied overtiredness.
So she was glad that the first course was soup which slipped down easily, the warmth and much-needed nourishment doing a good job of reviving her and settling her uneasy stomach.
After that she felt better able to tackle the next course of chicken and chips.
It was plain fare, but no food had ever tasted so delectable.
By the time she had consumed apple pie and ice-cream she felt almost restored.
Almost.
For there was something else worrying her now.
The combination of a large meal and physical tiredness made the thought of sleep irresistible, and she longed for her bunk.
The crowd had thinned out rapidly while they ate and the bar staff were clearing up.
But Fen seemed quite happy, relaxing over his coffee which he kept replenishing from the large pot he had ordered, exchanging remarks with the landlord which revealed that he was a regular customer here.
Since nothing seemed to be required of her for the present, Robbie thought, it would do no harm to lean back, just for a moment, and allow her heavy eyelids to have their own way.
Perhaps then she would be able to cope with the walk back.
At some stage in her sleep of exhaustion she drifted close enough to the surface of consciousness to be aware of a deep voice exclaiming over her, of strong arms that lifted and carried her, but in no way could she fight her way up from the smothering blanket of physical and mental fatigue.
Then there was something soft beneath her head and she curled up and sank further and further into oblivion.
Unfamiliar sounds woke her.
Voices, the traffic of footsteps on creaking floorboards.
Her eyes slowly forced their way open, only to be dazzled at first by a strong shaft of sunlight which had penetrated fresh dainty curtains.
Curtains?
A conventional window?
Robbie was puzzled.
This wasn't her cabin.
She turned her head on the pillow and looked around.
What she saw brought her upright, but, still foggy with sleep, she took a few seconds to interpret what she saw.
It all added up to a hotel bedroom.
Wide awake now, she slid out of bed and ran to the window.
Outside, the day was already well advanced and sunlight glimmered on the waters of the canal below, the towpath already thronging with people.
Panic seized her.
Fen, still wanting to be rid of her, had taken advantage of her utter exhaustion to abandon her here.
‘Oh, the devious swine!’
Again her gaze scanned the bedroom.
She fully expected to see her suitcases standing somewhere.
But no, only yesterday's clothes neatly folded and lying on a chair.
Belatedly she realised she only wore bra and panties.
Someone, last night, had undressed her before they put her to bed.
Fen?
She grew hot at the thought of his strong hands performing such intimate tasks.
She washed sketchily and dragged on her clothes.
Her watch had stopped and she wasn't sure exactly what time it was, but she was willing to bet Fen had made the most of his opportunities.
An early start, a clear run — no more locks for some time, he'd said — and he was probably several miles away.
Well, she vowed grimly, she was going to catch up with him, however long it took, and when she did…
But meanwhile, who was to pay for this room?
She felt sick at the thought.
She had no money.
Since Fen had declared that last night's meal was his treat, she had left her purse in her cabin.
In fact, she realised with mounting dismay, everything she owned in the world was aboard Water Gypsy .
As she left the room and descended the stairs, she speculated wildly on her chances of slipping away undetected.
But that would be dishonest, and Robbie had never done a deliberately dishonest thing in her life.
She would just have to ask the landlord for time to pay.
Perhaps he would take her watch as a token of good faith?
She braced herself and went into the bar.
It was fairly quiet, just one or two elderly men conversing over a pint.
The landlord greeted her cheerfully.
‘Morning, miss.
I thought I'd let you have your sleep out.
It's a bit late to offer you breakfast, but —’
‘Thanks,’ Robbie shook her head, ‘but I couldn't afford to pay for it.
I —’
He looked surprised.
‘But your bill is settled — bed and breakfast.
Mr Marshall —’
‘Yes, Mr Marshall!’
Robbie repeated the name through clenched teeth.
But this man would not be interested in her personal feuds.
‘I have to find him —’
‘You won't have to look far, missie.
A couple of miles upstream would be my guess — one of his favourite haunts.
He said —’
‘Thank you!’
Robbie didn't wait to hear any more but strode out of the inn, her lips tightly set, eyes blazing, bent on vengeance.
At any other time she might have appreciated the beauty of the morning, a perfect, brilliant, cloudless day, golden and enticing after a refreshing overnight rain.
But today the walk was just something to be accomplished as soon as possible.
She prayed that the landlord of the Swan was right and that she only had a mile or two to cover.
But even if Fen had gone ten miles, she swore she would find him.
The sun was directly overhead, the day growing hotter, and Robbie's T-shirt was clinging to her most uncomfortably.
She flapped an ineffectual hand at the swarms of small, irritating flies that hovered above the path, landing on and adhering to her warm face in a most unpleasant manner.
Her tongue felt parched for a cool drink.
She came upon him quite suddenly.
Rounding a bend, she saw Water Gypsy tied up to the bank.
And in a field, just off the path, sat Fen.
His back view was quite unmistakable.
As she came closer, she saw what he was doing.
He was seated at an easel.
Her sense of outrage mounted.
He'd left her at the inn without so much as a word, and here he was, calmly indulging his hobby while she'd had to trek after him.
She left the towpath and advanced towards him, brushing her way through tall grasses, where bees buzzed somnolently and grasshoppers whirred their summer sounds.
He didn't even look up as she stopped at his elbow, apparently made aware of her presence by some kind of sixth sense.
‘Good morning, Robbie,’ he drawled, ‘or perhaps I should say good afternoon.’
The invective she'd rehearsed hovered on her lips, her breath momentarily taken away by the utter gall of the man.
He thought it was a joke that she had slept in and there was no sign whatsoever of guilt at his desertion of her.
But she was not silenced for long.
‘How dare you?’ she exploded.
‘How dare you dump me like that, abandon me and then make off — with all my things too, with my money on board?’
He did look up then, his tone sharp.
‘What a very nasty suspicious mind you have.
I did not ‘make off’, as you call it.
If I'd been planning to abandon you, as you so melodramatically put it, I'd have made a much better job of it.
I would have been miles away instead of leaving a message for you where to find me.’
‘You didn't leave —’ she began.
‘Oh, yes, I did.
Did you even ask if I had?’
‘No,’ she admitted.
But he wasn't going to get out of it by trying to put her in the wrong.
‘But in any case, you had no right to leave me at that pub all night.
I —’
‘What was I supposed to do?’ he demanded irritably.
‘Carry you all the way back to Water Gypsy ?
Just up two flights of stairs was quite enough, thank you — you're no featherweight.
And there was no waking you.
I did try.
In the end I decided the best thing was to put you to bed and let you sleep it off.’
‘You?
Put me to bed?
Did you…did you…?’
She couldn't go on but instead made a vague gesture with her hands.
‘Undress you?’ he drawled.
‘Does the idea disturb you?’
‘Yes, it certainly does.
It was…it was an invasion of privacy.’
‘I assure you,’ he said with weary cynicism, ‘I didn't see anything I hadn't already seen.
If you remember, you were no more decently clad when —’
‘That makes no difference.
You had no right —’
‘Look!’
He stood up, almost overturning his easel which, Robbie noticed now, held an incredibly competent and beautifully detailed study of a species of thistle.
‘I did what seemed practical at the time.
It also seemed the kindest course of action, in view of your extreme fatigue.
And considering I've no obligation to you, that you forced your way into my life —’
‘All right, all right !’
Robbie recognised that it was time to back down.
‘So I jumped to conclusions.
But do you blame me?
When you've been trying to get rid of me ever since we met?
And you're such…such an unfeeling man.’
He paused in the middle of folding up his easel.
‘As an apology I've heard better.
But it'll do — for now.’
He set off towards the canal, leaving Robbie — as usual, she fumed — to scurry after him.
‘Hurry up,’ he called over his shoulder, ‘this morning's delay has put me behind schedule.’
‘I thought,’ Robbie retorted breathlessly, ‘that you despised too much haste.
I thought you liked a slow leisurely pace.’
‘I also like to keep my promises.
I promised to be in a certain place by this time tomorrow, and I intend to be there.
So you'd better be prepared today to do everything on the move.
We'll take it in turns to eat and spell each other on the tiller.’
He seemed to be taking her continued help for granted now — issuing his orders.
She ought to feel relieved, but…
‘Would it be too much trouble,’ she enquired sarcastically, ‘to tell me exactly where we'll be this time tomorrow?’
‘Not at all.’
Fen stopped short and pulled out a folded map from his pocket and spread it out before her, stabbing at it with his finger.
‘At the moment we're here.
Tomorrow, we'll be about twenty miles and another half a dozen locks further on.
Another tiring day,’ he added with heavy significance.
He was at it again.
‘I'm not that easily put off,’ Robbie said stoutly.
Drily, ‘So I've noticed.
But just remember one thing — next time you're exhausted, don't expect me to put you to bed again.’
Reminded once more of recent liberties he had taken with her person, she flushed scarlet and, not deigning to answer, turned abruptly on her heel.
The unwary movement caused her foot to slip on the footpath made muddy by the overnight rain.
A strong hand stayed her fall and for a brief instant she was flung against Fen's chest, his heartbeat quite audible as her breathing seemed suspended.
Then he was righting her, and he sounded disproportionately angry as he said,
‘Those damned shoes you wear are quite unsuitable for this way of life.
If we'd been up on Water Gypsy 's superstructure you'd have been in the canal by now.’
‘I bet you're sorry we weren't!’
Robbie snapped.
The contact with him had left her decidedly tremulous and she reacted with anger.
‘Then you'd have had another reason for me not to stay on board.’
Unexpectedly his anger matched her own.
‘Don't be more stupid than you can help.
I don't have to look for reasons.
I can put you off this boat any time I like.’
‘You probably will,’ she retorted, ‘when you've no further need for an unpaid assistant.’
‘What exactly do you mean by that?’
His tone was dangerous.
‘I don't need to spell it out to you,’ she said scornfully, ‘but I will.
You'd have had to work a lot harder if I hadn't been around to help with those locks and cook your food, brew endless cups of coffee.
It suited you to let me stay, didn't it?
I bet once we reach your destination that will be it.’
He glowered.
‘You're certainly asking to be evicted.
What happened to the conciliatory manner all of a sudden, the eagerness to please?
Is this the real you?
Or have your financial problems suddenly gone away?’
‘No.
You know damned well they haven't.’
But his words had deflated Robbie's anger as suddenly as it had blown up.
She'd only been angry because she'd been so unaccountably shaken by those few seconds in his arms.
‘Are you…are you going to throw me off Water Gypsy now?’ she asked wearily.
Fen shrugged irritably, ‘No, damn you.
Caroline would give me hell for evermore if she thought I'd ill-treated her best friend.
You can stay for the time being.
Do whatever you like, so long as you keep out of my hair.
But if you don't I shall put you in a taxi with your belongings, and to blazes with the consequences.’
‘I'll keep out of your way,’ Robbie said quickly.
‘I promise.’
‘Good, then let's get on, shall we?’
His hand clasped her shoulder, swinging her towards Water Gypsy 's gangplank.
It was all a part of his arrogant manner, but once more Robbie felt that unaccountable weakness invade her bones.
She moved abruptly away.
‘Right.
And I'll rustle up some lunch, shall I?’
He drawled the warning, ‘OK.
But don't think you can make yourself too indispensable.
This isn't a permanent arrangement.’
He was never going to let her forget she was only here on sufferance, Robbie brooded as she made piles of sandwiches and brewed tea.
The only wonder was that he hadn't set a new time limit for her departure.
But then Fen Marshall was a total enigma.
She couldn't understand the way his mind worked any more than she could get through to him.
It was stuffy in the galley and she carried lunch out on deck.
Fen gave only a grunt of acknowledgement.
He seemed totally absorbed in his task of steering the boat, and for a while there was a silence broken only by the sound of Water Gypsy 's diesel engine.
But as yet Robbie could not feel comfortable with silence.
‘That sketch you were doing,’ she ventured.
‘It was very good.
Do you do a lot of drawing?
Are you some kind of artist?’
He shot her a wry look.
‘I wondered how long it would be before the inquisition started up again.
You're like a small drop of water wearing away at a stone.’
Robbie's occasionally quirky sense of humour surfaced.
She decided to risk it.
‘I agree you're as hard as granite,’ she returned smartly, ‘but I don't know that I like being called a drip.’
It had been worth the risk.
His craggy features dissolved into a breathtakingly attractive smile, and Robbie felt her insides give the oddest little flip.
The sensation seemed to spread right down to the very pit of her stomach.
‘You and Caroline have much in common, it seems,’ Fen observed.
‘She too has that uncanny knack of turning the tables on me.
Very well, I'll give you a potted job description.
I'm a naturalist by profession —’
‘Oh!’
Robbie breathed.
He stopped and looked at her enquiringly.
‘I've just remembered…just realised,’ she explained.
‘So you really are Caro's stepbrother.’
‘Did you doubt it?’
He sounded put out.
‘Yes, I did…a bit.
Well,’ defensively, ‘it was the name, you see.
It didn't ring any bells.
But now I remember.
Caro said her stepbrother was Robert Marsh the naturalist.
I suppose that's —’
‘My pen name, yes.’
‘But why?
What's wrong with using your own name?
I know I'd love to see my real name on the spine of a book.’
‘It is my real name — in a way.
My full name is Fenton Robert Marshall.
And I prefer my anonymity.
Fame can sometimes attract the wrong sort of attention.’
There was a bitter note in his voice.
‘But if I may continue — I do a lot of travelling, in this country and abroad, often to remote places.
I record the flora and fauna of different areas — especially rare or endangered species.
I illustrate my books myself.’
Drily, ‘Does that answer all your questions?’
Robbie nodded.
‘Yes.
Although,’ she dared to confess, ‘I'll probably think of more when I've digested what you've told me.’
They travelled all that day without a break, and for most of the time the sun beat down on them with fiery intensity.
So that when evening came they were both tired, not only from physical effort but from sheer exposure to the elements — Fen perhaps most of all, because from time to time he had insisted that Robbie go below.
‘My skin is pretty well inured to all kinds of weather — Antarctic conditions, rain forest, jungle, desert, you name it.
But you're not accustomed to it.’
Their moorings that night were in open country with no signs of any hostelry.
But Robbie didn't mind.
She had already decided that she would cook dinner.
It was just a pity that the small stock of provisions did not allow of imaginative cuisine.
However, she did her best with what was available, and was not ashamed of her efforts.
Remember what he said about trying to make yourself indispensable? she told herself wryly, and knew that was exactly what she was trying to do.
Fen made no comment about the meal she set before him, but, she noticed, he ate with relish and from time to time she felt him observing her contemplatively.
She wished he wouldn't.
It was as if he were trying to read her thoughts.
Steadfastly, she avoided his gaze, not wanting to give him an opportunity for some deflating remark.
He insisted on washing up but then sank back on to his bunk, knuckling his eyes.
‘God, but I'm tired.
Is there any more coffee?’
Robbie would have liked to sit down too and have somebody make her a drink.
‘Wouldn't you do better to turn in?’ she asked.
‘Coffee will keep you awake.’
He shook his head.
‘The way I feel,’ he declared, ‘nothing would keep me awake.’
He looked pointedly towards the galley.
She sighed resignedly.
‘OK.
But it will mean boiling the kettle up again.’
‘Here you are…’
She stopped short.
While she'd been in the galley Fen had fallen asleep.
Well, of all the contrary…!
‘Hey!’ she exclaimed, and then, receiving no response, ‘Fen?’
But he slept on.
The only thing likely to wake him now was a good shake, and that was what he deserved, she thought grimly.
She put down the coffee and moved closer, intending to administer the shaking.
Her hands were actually extended towards him.
But something halted her.
To begin with, it was a strange shivering reluctance to touch him.
She was remembering, unaccountably, that moment when their hands had brushed.
Then, as she watched him, still hovering indecisively, she felt an odd compassion stir her heart.
To fall asleep so suddenly, so soundly, he must be absolutely exhausted — even more tired than she felt.
She picked up her coffee and sat on the far end of the wide bunk, feet curled under her, watching him speculatively as she sipped her drink.
It was the first real opportunity she had to study him unobserved.
He was really very good-looking, she decided.
She liked a man to have strong features.
She liked the shape of his nose, his mouth…
But there was more to it than that.
He was endowed too with a very strong male chemistry.
He was not her type, of course, she told herself.
Hugh had been blond, fair-skinned.
Fen was much taller and broader and his swarthy colouring was not something that had appealed to her hitherto.
And yet…
Her drink finished, she leaned back still watching him, the steady rise and fall of his broad chest beneath the checked shirt, its short sleeves revealing the strong muscular forearms lightly coated with dark hair.
His chest, she suspected, and the rest of his body would be similarly hirsute, and she had a sudden strong curiosity to see evidence of that.
The sharp sensation in her midriff shocked her by its intensity.
Whatever was the matter with her, indulging in such thoughts?
Why the devastating effect of her imaginings?
And why Fen, for goodness' sake?
Still totally disillusioned by Hugh's defection, she had not begun to consider the possibility of a new relationship.
Yet since she'd met this man…
Ridiculous and totally unrealistic.
All in her imagination — the product of a weary mind.
Resolutely she averted her eyes away from the sleeping figure.
She was tired too and she ought to get up from here and go into her own cabin.
She would in a moment, when she could summon up the energy.
Then inexorably nature took its course, and Robbie slept.
For a moment she thought she was dreaming again and that her dream had turned Water Gypsy into an ocean-going vessel.
‘I thought I warned you not to make a habit of this,’ a deep voice remarked gruffly, close to her ear, and she realised that the swaying sensation was that of Fen carrying her to her own bunk.
‘I…
I'm sorry,’ she faltered.
‘Please, put me down.’
She wriggled ineffectually.
His arms were like steel bands.
‘Well, let this be the last time.
I suggest your boyfriend might be a little miffed to find you asleep beside another man.’
He dumped her unceremoniously — as though he couldn't wait to be rid of his burden, she thought.
‘We'll be making an early start in the morning again.
I'll give you a call, shall I?’
‘Please.’
But after he had gone Robbie did not immediately prepare herself for bed.
Instead, she sat on the side of her bunk analysing the strange feelings which had possessed her immediately before she had fallen asleep.
In the last day or two, she realised, she had thought less and less about Hugh, whereas her curiosity concerning Fen was mounting hourly.
She was even beginning to wonder if she'd really been in love with Hugh — properly in love.
He had been her first and only boyfriend.
Maybe she'd been too ready to believe it was the real thing?
And if she could find herself being attracted to another man so soon…even so slightly attracted…
Fool! she castigated herself.
Don't get any stupid ideas.
You've heard of love on the rebound, and falling for Fen could prove to be even more disastrous.
It just isn't worth having new wounds superimposed on old scars.
Besides, he's spoken for — even if you don't think she looks good enough for him.
And as far as he's concerned you're just a nuisance, to be got rid of somehow, or at the very most, endured.
It was another glorious morning, Robbie discovered when Fen, true to his word, gave her an early call.
The passing scenery was just as inspiring as yesterday, the world of the canals was their oyster and yet she could not raise any enthusiasm.
Where was she going? she asked herself, and by that she did not mean the waterways stretching out ahead.
It was the direction of her life she was questioning, for the first time since she had settled on a career.
A few weeks ago she had decided that — in future — her career would provide sufficient fulfilment.
Today — no, last night, she had realised she wanted more from life than that.
This morning she felt even more certain.
When Fen had entered her cabin this morning, briefly grasping her shoulder to rouse her, deeply asleep one moment, she was awake in an instant.
At less than arm's length she could feel and smell his warm clean breath, mingled with masculine body odours, and she had to clench her stomach muscles against the small ripples of sensation.
Feelings she'd believed anaesthetised had given evidence of being very much awake.
Much good that would do her, she thought gloomily.
As though mirroring her mood, the day which had started so well turned to rain mid-morning.
‘Sun before seven, rain before eleven,’ Fen quoted when she complained.
‘You can stay below if you like.
Or you could use Caroline's oilskins.’
She opted for the oilskins.
He wasn't going to accuse her of being a fair-weather boatman.
Besides, somehow she didn't want to be on her own with her troubling thoughts.
Though it was doubtful that Fen's company was any less disturbing.
An incessant internal monologue occupied her most of the morning, during which, by turns, she tried to convince herself that Fen's effect on her was all in her imagination or berated herself for being fickle.
You didn't get over a broken romance that quickly.
It was mid-afternoon when Fen suddenly pointed ahead.
‘We're almost there.
We'll tie up just beyond the lock, just in front of those other boats.’
It was a pretty site.
An inn and a few old cottages stood to one side of the lock.
Above it an old man fished while others sat on benches, tankards in hand.
Beyond the inn a church tower perched in the tree-tops and behind it crowded high green sheltering hills.
The rain had stopped a short while ago and once more the sun was burning up the atmosphere.
‘What now?’ asked Robbie, following Fen down into the cabin.
He shrugged.
‘You can do whatever you like.
I have an important appointment.’
‘Oh.’
Robbie felt disproportionately deflated, considering she had promised to keep out of Fen's way and mind her own business.
She ought to be relieved to be free of his company for a while.
He was stuffing drawing and painting materials into a shabby old bag.
Perched on his bunk, disconsolately, she watched him.
‘How long will you be?’ she ventured.
‘As long as it takes.’
His tone was sharp.
‘That's the worst of having a woman around.
They always want to tie you down to times.’
Robbie bristled indignantly, the more so because she had felt strangely bereft at the thought of being without his company.
‘I don't care a damn where you're going or how long you'll be —’
‘Then why ask?’
‘As the one who'll probably be preparing the evening meal —’
‘My God, you're beginning to sound like a wife.
Don't push your luck.
I'll be eating out,’ Fen told her peremptorily.
‘So you can have your meal where and whenever it suits you.
And if you're short of something to do,’ he added, ‘you could get on a bus and go into the nearest town.
Get yourself some suitable shoes — sportswear, ideally — with soles that will grip the deck in all weathers.’
‘I would,’ she retorted, ‘if I thought it was worth my while spending the money.
But I don't know where I am with you —’
‘I told you once — how many more times?— you can stay, dammit.’
Robbie risked pressing home her advantage.
‘For how long?’
‘How long?
How long?’ he repeated the words irritably.
‘I don't know.
For as long as Caroline told you that you could, I suppose.
What was it?
Six months?’
‘Yes!
Oh, Fen, do you really mean it?
Oh, thank you.’
Impulsively Robbie stepped towards him, her face glowing, but an upraised hand warded her off.
‘No gratitude necessary,’ he told her.
‘I'm just making the best of a bad job.
This month's trip was already planned, so there's no getting out of it.
I'll just have to make alternative arrangements for the other five.’
Well, she thought, as he left the cabin in long hurried strides, that really told you, my girl.
And you thought maybe he was softening towards you.
CHAPTER FOUR
Robbie spent the afternoon as Fen had suggested, and when she alighted from the stifling, ancient bus crowded with country folk, she felt in no mood to go back to the boat.
It was too hot for sunbathing and it would still be stuffy below decks.
Instead, she decided to take a look at the old church — mellow golden Cotswold stone, skirted by crazy-angled tombstones.
It would be cool inside the church.
The heavy timber door closed resoundingly behind her and the heels of her sandals clicked on the stone floors.
Two men, seated in a pew in earnest conclave, looked round at her approach.
Too late she realised that one of the men was Fen.
He stood up.
‘Looking for me?’
He sounded annoyed, and Robbie felt a wave of irritation at his cavalier attitude towards her, but since he had made it perfectly clear that he didn't appreciate her intruding on his private life…
‘No,’ she denied hastily.
‘Just exploring.
I had no idea…
Don't let me interrupt.’
She made to move on.
‘Oh, I won't, don't worry.’
‘A friend of yours?’ the other man asked as he too rose, but more slowly.
Robbie saw now that he was a clergyman.
‘A friend of my stepsister's, actually.’
He needn't be in such a hurry to disclaim her, Robbie thought indignantly, then realised the little clergyman was expecting her to shake hands.
‘I hadn't realised Mr Marshall was not alone.
I've invited him to the rectory for dinner.
You'll join us, of course?’
‘Oh, no,’ Robbie began quickly.
‘I couldn't possibly impose —’
‘But I insist.
Someone for my daughter to talk to.
She'll scarcely be interested in the subject of Epipogium aphyllum .’
Robbie looked to Fen for enlightenment.
‘Common name ghost orchid,’ he explained.
He sounded impatient, as if resenting the necessity.
He was probably displeased too that she would be joining his friends for dinner.
In fact he probably thought she'd come here on purpose, when the last thing she had wanted to do was antagonise him.
‘Mr Taylor has discovered a small colony of orchids in the woodlands beyond the rectory garden.’
Robbie's eyes lit up with interest.
‘Is it an important find?’ she asked.
‘It's a comparatively rare species and hitherto unknown in this part of the country.’
‘Mr Marshall has kindly agreed to validate and record it,’ the little clergyman said enthusiastically.
‘But come along, please.
My daughter will scold me if we're late for dinner.’
And despite Robbie's protest that his daughter might also scold if he brought home an unexpected extra guest, the Reverend Mr Taylor hustled them out of the church and towards the adjoining house.
The rectory parlour had the same musty unaired aroma of the church.
Mr Taylor bade them be seated while he went in search of his daughter.
There was an uncomfortable silence.
‘I'm…
I'm sorry,’ Robbie ventured after a surreptitious glance at Fen's set profile.
‘I didn't plan to intrude on your evening.
I wouldn't have come near the church if I'd realised —’
‘It's done now,’ Fen said shortly.
‘But I would prefer,’ he added, ‘that you don't tell the Taylors we're sharing our accommodation.’
Robbie looked at him questioningly.
How well did he know the Taylors?
Had he some interest in the rector's daughter?
She found she didn't like that idea, didn't like it at all.
‘Septimus Taylor's a very unworldly man,’ Fen went on.
‘As a clergyman he might well consider our situation to be improper.
And I've no wish to offend or embarrass him.’
She was about to ask him, tartly, if he found her presence offensive or embarrassing, but the opportunity was lost with the rector's return, accompanied by his daughter.
Her first sight of Miss Taylor dismissed Robbie's speculation.
Miss Taylor was skinny, raw-boned and probably old enough to be Fen's mother.
She was delighted rather than otherwise to have an extra visitor, and she chattered throughout the excellent dinner, preventing Robbie from concentrating on the fascinating conversation going on between Fen and the rector.
Robbie would have been happy to listen quietly, for the snippets she did overhear told her more about Fenton Marshall.
It didn't surprise her to learn that he was extremely knowledgeable where his subject was concerned.
But a new light was shed on his character by the way he treated his host and hostess.
Towards the rector he was a polite listener, a concession to the man's advanced years and his calling.
To Miss Taylor he was gently charming with just a hint of flirtatiousness in his manner.
Not enough to be offensive, but enough to make the older woman sparkle in return.
Robbie could scarcely believe this was the same man who was at such pains to keep her at a safe distance, until she reflected that in Fen's eyes Miss Taylor would present no threat to his reserve.
‘And is Miss Alexander helping you with your work?’
Mr Taylor asked Fen at one point.
And to Robbie, ‘Are you a naturalist too, my dear?’
‘Hardly —’
‘No —’
They both spoke together and, with a little gesture of impatience, Fen deferred to her.
‘No, I'm not a naturalist,’ Robbie finished her sentence.
‘Though,’ she qualified, ‘I did enjoy botany at school, and I'd love to see your ghost orchids.’
‘Then you must certainly do so, my dear.
But I shall have to leave your guidance in Mr Marshall's hands.
I have a wedding tomorrow — no time, alas, for woodland walks.’
The parallel conversations continued after dinner, though now the rector was riding another hobbyhorse, that of local Roman remains, with which apparently the Cotswolds were plentifully endowed.
The subject of Romans led to that of ghosts.
In particular Mr Taylor had bloodcurdling tales to relate about the spectres of Roman soldiers killed in violent battles or driven to suicide in the bleak grey Cotswold winters.
It was well after midnight when at last Fen said they really must go.
The Taylors had told Fen of a short cut to the canal, via the cemetery and an adjacent meadow.
Robbie had wondered if they would be able to find the path at night.
But as it turned out their way was lit by a full moon, hanging still and strangely ominous in a black velvet sky.
The churchyard yews cast long sinister shadows over the drunken tombstones.
It was utterly quiet, save for vague rustlings in the overgrown grasses.
The uncanny quiet prompted Robbie to move a little nearer to Fen.
‘I wouldn't like to walk back this way on my own,’ she said.
‘I suppose Mr Taylor's ghost stories have made you uneasy?’
Fen seemed to find the idea amusing, and hastily Robbie denied it.
‘Of course not.
I was thinking more of prowlers, being mugged — that sort of thing.’
Then, unable to control the nervous edge to her voice, ‘Wh-what was that?’
To her ears the strange sound was very like a groan.
And before Fen could answer her question a dark bulk moved out of the shadows into their path.
Robbie screamed and flung herself against the protective width of Fen's chest.
His reaction, as instinctive as her own, was to close his arms about her.
Then Robbie, her face buried against him, both felt and heard the deep rumble of laughter.
‘Relax.
It's only a cow.
It must have got into the churchyard from the meadow.’
Cautiously she raised her head and was reassured by the sight of retreating flanks in the moonlight.
‘I…
I'm sorry,’ she said, looking up into Fen's face.
‘I'm not normally nervous or superstitious.
It's just that…’
Her voice trailed away.
There was something in his utter stillness — a tension that communicated itself to her.
Abruptly he released her and stepped away.
‘As a vet,’ he said curtly, ‘shouldn't you have recognised the sounds a cow makes?’
Her edginess exacerbated by his strangeness, Robbie snapped back, ‘I wasn't expecting to find a cow here.
And in any case, I only deal with small domestic animals.’
She scarcely registered the rest of the walk.
Her brain was too active with seething thoughts, all of which concerned Fen Marshall.
He irritated the hell out of her, and it wouldn't be so bad if she could write him off as being thoroughly detestable.
But he wasn't, and during those few seconds while he'd held her, she'd had to admit this growing physical attraction she felt for him.
Was it just a rebound thing?
It was over three months now since she had known the sensation of being held in a man's arms.
After the break-up with Hugh she had resolved to concentrate on her career for the next few years.
In fact, there were women who lived quite happily and self-sufficiently all their lives without a man.
Ironic that the man who was now causing her to doubt her resolution should be already spoken for.
On their walk back it had been the dark shadows she'd found unnerving.
Now she was edgy for an entirely different reason.
Aboard Water Gypsy , in the main cabin, she paused irresolutely.
‘Well…goodnight, then,’ she said reluctantly.
‘Goodnight.’
Fen didn't even bother to look at her but instead busied himself pulling curtains across the cabin windows.
She paused once more on the threshold between cabin and galley.
‘Will it be all right,’ she ventured to say, ‘if I come and look at the orchids tomorrow?’
He shrugged uncaring shoulders.
‘I can't stop you.’
His back was still towards her.
‘If you don't want me to —’ she began.
He did wheel towards her then, his face contorted with an emotion she couldn't fathom.
‘Whether or not I want you around seems to be beside the point, doesn't it?
My wishes seem to have counted for very little with you so far.
If I had my way you'd have been off this boat days ago.
Now, for God's sake, go to bed, and let me do the same.’
Robbie went.
She lay awake for some time, puzzling over Fen's behaviour.
What on earth had made him so angry all of a sudden?
It couldn't be just her intrusion on his evening with the Taylors, surely?
Robbie was surprised and relieved to find Fen his usual phlegmatic self next morning.
He had already eaten breakfast when she emerged from her cabin.
‘If you're still planning to come with me, you'd better get a move on.
And a packed lunch might be useful,’ he suggested.
‘I take it that means you want one?’
Her tone was truculent.
He might be back to normal, but Robbie hadn't forgotten the way he'd turned on her last night.
‘Mine's done.
I'll be off in ten minutes.’
He was probably hoping she wouldn't be ready in time.
Or perhaps he thought, if he was rude enough, she would cry off.
Robbie ate her breakfast while preparing her sandwiches.
She confronted him on deck, lunch in her hand, a rug tucked under her arm.
‘I'm ready,’ she told him triumphantly.
He looked her up and down.
Since they wouldn't be working the boat today and because the weather promised to be hot again, she'd elected to wear a short skirt and skimpy blouse, together with the sandals he had decried as being unsuitable.
She waited defiantly, expecting some comment, ready to defend her choice.
Nothing was forthcoming.
He merely grunted something incomprehensible and turned on his heel, leaving her — as always — to follow.
Even encumbered by his painting gear and a heavy camera case, Fen strode along as fast as ever.
Robbie's sandals were low-heeled, but even so she found the pace hard going.
Once or twice Fen stopped, looking impatiently over his shoulder, but though Robbie was prepared with several incisive retorts, he said nothing.
The woods beyond the rectory garden consisted mainly of beech trees, very tall, as though sending their branches up to the light.
Once the Cotswolds had probably all consisted of entirely deciduous forest, with beech the dominant tree.
Robbie was glad of their shade, for today must be the hottest of the summer.
The glade where the ghost orchids grew amid the crumbling remains of what had once been a Roman villa was as cool as the church, and an unmistakable smell of summer blossoms mingled with the lush green growth of the wood.
To Robbie's disappointment the orchid was an undistinguished-looking plant with its leafless stalk and flowers of pallid white.
‘It looks like an old-fashioned sunbonnet,’ she pronounced, ‘I can't really see what all the fuss is about.’
‘I didn't suppose you'd find it very interesting,’ said Fen, ‘but you would insist on coming.
I shall be here for some time — I have to make detailed drawings and take photographs.
If you're bored I presume you can find your own way back?’
‘I'm not bored,’ Robbie told him indignantly.
‘I'm not that shallow-minded.
There are plenty of other things to look at besides your precious orchids.
The villa, for example.
I expected it to be preserved and labelled, like the sites around Hadrian's wall.’
Fen shrugged.
‘It might be one day.
This wood is church property and no one suspected anything was here until just recently.
As well as being an ardent botanist, Mr Taylor is also something of a historian.
Personally, from the point of view of nature conservancy, I'd rather see it left unspoiled.’
Robbie spread her rug under a tree, close to where Fen had settled with his sketchbook.
She sat down and leaned against the bole of the tree, watching him.
He began to draw, but he didn't seem to be enjoying the pursuit today.
Several sheets of paper were torn off, balled and thrust into his bag.
At last it seemed his irritation must find an outlet.
‘Do you have to sit where I can see you?’ he demanded.
‘It's damnably distracting, having you in the edge of my vision like that.’
Privately, Robbie considered he was over-reacting, that he was blaming her for his own inability to work today.
But for the sake of peace and quiet, she muttered an apology and scrambled to her feet.
‘I'll go and have a wander around the Roman villa.’
‘Watch yourself,’ he called after her.
‘Some of those old stones are crumbling and dangerous.’
Picking her way carefully as he'd instructed, Robbie paused from time to time to cast a puzzled look back at Fen.
She'd become accustomed to his remarks about her unwanted presence, but she had believed him to be resigned for the time being to having her around.
Last night and today a different note had crept into his complaints.
She couldn't fathom the difference, but something about his mood made her feel uneasy.
It was like sitting on the edge of a smouldering volcano, waiting for it to erupt.
There was something frightening yet vaguely exciting about the sensation.
Weeds and other flowers had forced their way up through the cracked paving of the floors.
Trees and vines had encroached, running wild among the remnants of an ancient civilisation.
It was a melancholy thought that this had once been someone's home.
Did the former occupants lend their ghostly beings to the hordes of Roman spirits reputed to wander hereabouts?
Robbie shivered suddenly, almost as if she had encountered the aura of one of these sad ghosts.
Feeling a need suddenly for warmth and companionship, she turned, meaning to retrace her steps to where Fen sat, apparently engrossed now that she had left him in peace.
A loose stone unsteadied her and with a little cry of surprise, she fell.
Her ankle was unhurt, but there was a thick growth of stinging nettles and within seconds her bare shoulders, arms and chest seemed as though consumed by prickly fire.
Her exclamation of pain reached Fen's ears, and at once he was on his feet, striding towards her.
‘I told you to be careful,’ he snapped wrathfully.
‘If you've sprained an ankle —’
‘I haven't,’ she gasped, tears of pain on her cheeks.
‘But I've stung myself — all over, it feels like.’
By now he was close enough to see the red blotches erupting on her creamy skin.
Without another word, he swung her up into his arms and carried her back to her blanket beneath the tree.
Then he was gone again, foraging among the plants and weeds.
‘Dock leaves,’ he explained briefly as he returned to kneel by her side.
He began to apply the cooling foliage to her skin, turning the leaves back and forth as they took on her body heat.
Robbie, her eyes closed in protest against the agony she'd felt, gave a little murmur of relief.
‘It will feel better soon,’ said Fen.
His voice sounded oddly strangled, and she opened her eyes to find his face unexpectedly close to hers.
The hands applying the leaves to her skin were still now, resting just where the swell of her breasts showed above the low neckline of her blouse.
His eyes seemed riveted on his hands — or on what they touched.
As she watched, unable to take her eyes off his face, she saw him pass his tongue over his lips, saw him swallow convulsively.
She was on the volcano edge again, and the painful stings faded from her consciousness as ripples of other sensations began to invade her body.
Her breasts, just below the ministering hands, began to ache and she was aware of a tense throbbing in the lower part of her body.
Another moment of this and she would not be able to conceal her reactions.
‘Mr Marshall!
Miss Alexander!
I'm so glad you're still here.
How are you getting on?
I —’
Mr Taylor, bursting through the trees, came to an abrupt halt, disconcerted by the scene before him.
In a flash Fen was on his feet.
‘Miss Alexander's been badly stung.
I've been administering first aid.’
‘Dear me, dear me!’
The little clergyman was all concern.
‘You must come back to the house — calamine lotion is the thing, I believe.
My daughter has a well-stocked medicine cabinet.’
Fen hadn't even bothered to come with her, Robbie brooded indignantly much later that day.
He'd been quite happy, relieved even, to hand her over to Mr Taylor's care.
What would have happened if Septimus Taylor hadn't appeared on the scene when he did?
Would anything have happened?
She could swear, that in those few seconds before the interruption, Fen had been as aware of her as she of him.
She'd been certain he was about to kiss her.
The interval during which Miss Taylor had applied calamine and sympathy had not been sufficient to quell Robbie's own longings.
The burn of the nettle stings might fade, but not the burning heat of her body.
She had been impatient to escape, to get back to the beechwood.
At last she had managed to persuade Miss Taylor that she couldn't possibly stay for lunch, that she and Fen planned to picnic while he worked.
Hurrying back to the site, she had felt as nervous as a teenager going on her first date.
Mouth dry, heart thumping, she just wanted to see Fen again, to see if that quivering tension could be rekindled between them, brought to some conclusion.
Her brain skated over what form she wanted that conclusion to take.
For the moment the sensations were sufficient.
But when she entered the glade, Fen had gone.
The only sign that anyone had ever occupied it was the flattened grass beneath the tree, where her blanket had been.
The anticipation drained from her and for a moment she stood irresolute.
Then she realised — of course!
His work finished, or perhaps even abandoned, he had gone back to Water Gypsy , expecting her to be there.
Hurriedly she retraced her steps, the breathless excitement of seeing him mounting again.
Despite the blistering heat she almost ran along the towpath.
‘Fen!
Fen, I'm back.
I —’
But the boat was untenanted.
There was no sign that Fen had called in even briefly.
Robbie sank down on his bunk, feeling an absurd desire to burst into tears.
She felt stupid now, humiliated by her own behaviour.
She wasn't even sure now that she had correctly interpreted that little scene in the wood.
Perhaps it had been all in her imagination, fuelled by her own desires.
Thank God she hadn't revealed those desires to Fen.
It was only days since he had made it quite clear he was unavailable, that her presence was unwanted.
From now on, Robbie vowed, she would put a closer guard on her own feelings and emotions.
That they were false ones in any case, engendered by the situation, was obvious now.
After all, put any man and woman alone together and there were bound to be misapprehensions.
You had only to look at holiday romances, she told herself, or shipboard affairs, to know that unfamiliar surroundings and propinquity acted as a hothouse, a forcing ground for unrealistic situations.
Fen, it seemed, had foreseen such an eventuality, hence his attempts to evict her.
Evening came and still Fen had not returned.
Robbie began to wonder if he'd gone permanently.
If so, how on earth was she to manage Water Gypsy alone?
There was no way she could work the boat unaided, back through all those locks, to the original moorings.
Finally, when she could sit up no longer, she went to bed.
If Fen hadn't returned by morning she would have to pack a few essentials, lock up the boat and make her way back to Little Kirkton by public transport, and Fen would have achieved his objective — to be rid of her.
It was a depressing thought.
Her eyes were just drooping into sleep when she snapped back into consciousness.
Water Gypsy had definitely moved at her moorings, and now there were muffled sounds of movement.
Fen was back.
Relief swept through her, followed immediately by anger.
How dared he do this to her?
Just vanish, leaving her not knowing what to do for the best.
For all she'd known, something might have happened to him.
He could have been involved in an accident.
She slid out of her bunk, grabbed her robe and stormed through the galley into his cabin.
‘Where the hell have you been all this time?’
He swung round, glowering at her.
In the short time he had been aboard, he had undressed.
Now he wore only the bottom half of pyjamas, thin cotton ones that clung to him, revealing more than they concealed of his strong muscular body.
The sight made Robbie's throat contract in a nervous swallow.
‘I was hoping you'd be asleep by now,’ he snapped.
‘And where I've been is none of your damned business.
I'm not answerable to you for my every movement.
You've caused me to lose a whole valuable day's work.
Get back to bed and stop flaunting your body at me.’
‘I am not —’ Robbie glanced down.
In her haste to confront him, she had not secured her belt properly.
Her robe hung open, revealing that she wore only a brief pair of panties.
Her breasts, unencumbered by a bra, were also half exposed.
She snatched the edges of the garment together.
‘From our very first encounter,’ Fen growled, ‘I've seen more of you without clothes than with them on.’
‘That's not my fault —’
‘No?
Are you sure?
Oh, it may not be a conscious act.
But maybe, subconsciously, you feel this need to challenge me, this need to prove your sexuality.’
Robbie stared at him incredulously.
‘What?
Why should I —?’
‘Because I made it crystal-clear, right from the start, that I didn't want you here, complicating my life.
It's as though you have to show that you —’
‘I don't want, or need, to prove anything.’
Robbie was white with anger.
‘I told you before — you must have an inflated idea of your own attractions.
I'm not interested,’ she lied.
‘And even if I were, I don't poach other girls’ men.
You also made it ‘crystal-clear’ that you were already spoken for.’
‘Then how,’ he demanded, ‘do you account for this afternoon, in the woods?
You were determined to come with me.
You wore a damnably provocative outfit, made sure you draped yourself where I couldn't help seeing you.’
‘Oh!’
Robbie could scarcely breathe for fury.
‘I did not —’
‘Maybe falling in the nettles was an accident.
I'll acquit you of deliberate, self-inflicted injury, but —’
‘Why, you — you…’
‘— but then, while I was merely trying to relieve your pain,you were issuing the blatant invitation —’
‘Shut up!’
Robbie finally got her breath back.
‘Shut up!
You impossibly arrogant man.
You don't know what you're talking about.
Everything you've said — it's all in your mind —’
‘Is it?’ he said grimly.
‘I'm willing to bet that if Mr Taylor hadn't put in an appearance —’
‘Nothing would have happened,’ Robbie insisted.
Was it only hours since she'd been wishing that it had?
‘No?
I'm willing to bet, if we recreated the situation —’
‘Well, fortunately we can't.
And I wouldn't even if we could.’
Robbie knew she was growing incoherent, but it wasn't just with anger.
It was the odd way he was looking at her, almost as if he were some kind of predatory animal waiting to pounce.
‘It's true we don't have the woodland, or the sun beating down on us.
Sunshine can be a potent aphrodisiac.
But we are alone, with no likelihood of intervention, and the night air is as warm, just as sultry —’
‘No,’ she began, seeing now the distinct intent in his eyes, the flicker of calculation.
‘Stay away from me,’ she breathed.
‘Don't you dare so much as lay a finger on me.’
‘What will you do?
Go on, say it — women always do.
Say you'll scream.’
‘If I do,’ she warned, ‘people will come running — from those other boats.’
‘I wouldn't bet on it.
They're more likely to steer clear of involvement.’
His eyes were boring into hers, mesmerising her.
Despite her threat she doubted if she could summon up enough voice to scream.
Her throat felt dry and constricted, while her heart was beating so violently that she felt Fen must be able to hear its pounding.
Then his hands grasped her shoulders.
His face was only inches away.
This close it was more disturbing than ever.
His expression gave away so little.
What were his true feelings, his intentions?
‘All I have to do,’ he muttered, ‘is kiss those very delectable lips and —’
‘No, Fen, don't!
Oh, please —’
She put her hands against his chest in an attempt to thrust him away.
It was a mistake.
At the feel of his bodily warmth against her palms, the quivering began inside her, and then any further protest she might have made was cut short by his mouth descending forcefully on hers.
His fingers bit deep into her shoulders, but the pain scarcely registered in comparison with the sensations that possessed her, the fire streaking through her whole nervous system.
She only fought him for a moment or two.
She couldn't help herself.
With her eyes tightly closed, she arched towards him, her arms, as though having a will of their own, went around his neck a little moan of submission escaping her.
Crushed against that bare muscular chest, his thighs hard against hers, she felt her head spin.
Her lips parted, inviting him to deepen the intimacy of the kiss.
Then his hands were running over her back, their caress sensuous, moulding her even closer, so that she was deeply aware of muscular hardness, firm flesh and sinew.
Her helpless response had its effect upon him.
She could feel the accelerated thud of his heart.
The thin cotton pyjamas could not conceal his aroused state.
His breathing became more and more uneven.
Then his hands were pushing aside her robe, exploring, possessing her breasts.
A grinding ache grew within her, grew and intensified.
That first fierce kiss had told Robbie all the things she had tried to hide from herself.
Her body shaking in his arms, her soft mouth totally responsive to the hot possession of his, she tried to fight the knowledge aside.
But it was no use.
She wanted him.
She wanted Fen Marshall so badly, with a bodily hunger she had never before experienced.
She had been fighting this insidious physical attraction, trying to deny its existence ever since they'd met.
But now he had ignited a fire within her that could never be put out.
Yet, unbelievably, he was putting her away from him, his movements rough, unco-ordinated.
‘See what I mean?’
His voice was harsh, yet strangely lacking in triumph.
She couldn't believe it.
He was turning his back on her.
He knew what had happened to her.
He must have felt it, that helpless, hungry response her body had made to his.
And she knew…she just knew he'd wanted her, as badly as she'd wanted him.
Yet he seemed to be able to switch off whatever it was he experienced.
But then he felt nothing for her.
He had just used that aggressively male body of his to make a point and — to her shame — he had succeeded only too well.
She ought to tell him just what she thought of him, but she felt too shaken, too drained for further conflict.
With shaking fingers she retied the robe he had displaced.
She was white-faced, her whole body clenched in an effort at self-control, the desire he had aroused still throbbing away.
‘Fen —’
‘Get back to your own cabin.’
He snarled the words at her.
‘Get back to bed, damn you — out of my sight.’
For a moment her every inclination was to beg him to finish what he had begun.
She took a step towards him, one hand outstretched to touch his arm.
But something about his tense immobility, something ominous in the atmosphere, deterred her.
Pride came to her aid.
She would not plead for what she wanted, needed.
She drew herself up straight, turned on her heel and, even though Fen was not watching her, made what she hoped was a dignified exit.
But in her own quarters once more, dignity was forgotten.
She lay face down on her bunk, desperately trying to subdue her body's aching need.
She would not shed the tears that threatened.
If Fen entered the galley for any reason, the curtain was not sufficient barrier to muffle the sound of sobbing.
He must never know how successful his demonstration had been, how much he had hurt her by his sudden rejection.
Two hours later she was still awake, her body aching with its needs, her brain a whirling turmoil.
Oh, God, she cried silently, why had her path to cross with this man's?
She hadn't wanted to feel this way about him — a man who wasn't interested in her.
When finally she slept, she slept heavily, dreamlessly.
It was some time since Robbie had woken with such a heavy burden of depression weighing on her chest.
Just for the first few seconds she was back in the days after Hugh's desertion.
But then she remembered…
How on earth was she to face Fen this morning?
She looked at her watch.
Damn!
In all the turmoil of last night she had forgotten to wind it.
She had no idea what the time was.
She knelt up and peered through the tiny porthole.
Brilliant sunshine illuminated the scene.
She must have overslept.
As she washed, she listened tensely for the sounds of movement.
But nothing reached her from the other cabin.
Presumably Fen had taken himself off somewhere — back to the those orchids, probably, to make up for yesterday's abortive efforts.
She hoped they kept him occupied all day.
How should she pass the time?
Her head ached and her throat constricted at the thought of trying to force food past the lump in her throat.
Breakfast very definitely did not appeal.
Suddenly Water Gypsy 's hitherto charming interior seemed claustrophobic, and she decided a brisk walk along the towpath might blow away the cobwebs and the fit of blues that bedevilled her.
She scrambled into shorts and T-shirt, tamed her thick russet waves by tying them back in a ponytail.
Passing from galley to main cabin, she stopped short.
It was still in darkness.
The bunk was still very obviously occupied.
Nervously she eyed the bulk beneath the lightweight cover, trying to detect the regular rise and fall which would indicate that Fen still slept soundly.
Then, holding her own breath and moving stealthily on tiptoe, she began to ease her way towards the exit.
In the gloom her foot caught something — one of Fen's shoes — and she stumbled.
The sound was enough to bring him upright.
A hand shot out and grasped her wrist.
The painful grip made her exclaim.
‘Oh, it's you.
For a moment I thought —’ Fen released her.
He swept back the curtain above his bunk.
His tousled hair gave him an appealingly boyish appearance, and Robbie found herself aching to smooth it for him, to run her fingers over the dark stubble on his cheeks.
‘What the hell are you doing up so early?’ he demanded.
‘It's not early.
I —’
‘It damn well is!’
He extended his wrist.
‘See?
Half-five.’
‘Oh!
I…
I thought it was later.’
He surveyed her suspiciously.
‘Sure you weren't doing a moonlight?’
‘No — sorry to disappoint you,’ Robbie said sarcastically.
Then, fiercely, ‘But if I had anywhere else to go, I would.’
‘Hmm.’
It was an enigmatic sound, as enigmatic as the eyes which, clear of sleep now, surveyed her.
Robbie, her own eyes avoiding that scrutiny, looking anywhere but at him, noticed a pair of pyjama trousers slung carelessly on the floor.
They were the pair he had worn last night, which meant…she swallowed convulsively.
Which meant, beneath the covers, he was totally naked.
Her imagination conjured up an erotically vivid picture and she knew a hectic flush had risen to her cheeks.
Fen had followed the direction of her eyes and she heard a sound which this time could be interpreted as amusement.
‘It was a hot night,’ he said, ‘didn't you think?’
Since Robbie's own heated state had been engendered by his unexpected physical onslaught, she found herself without a suitable answer.
‘I…
I suppose so,’ she mumbled feebly.
‘If you weren't doing a runner, where were you going in such a hurry?’
‘For…for a walk.’
Somehow her eagerness to escape Water Gypsy had evaporated.
It was as though the atmosphere in this cabin had her mesmerised.
She knew the sensible thing to do was to go, yet she wanted to stay.
She wanted Fen to put out his hand again — this time to pull her closer — into that bunk with him.
She wanted to see if the reality matched her fevered imagination.
Fen yawned.
‘Seeing that I'm awake,’ he said, ‘I might as well come with you.’
‘Why?’ she asked bluntly.
‘I like to work up an appetite for my breakfast.
Besides, we need to talk and…’ slowly ‘…fresh air is more conducive to sanity than this cabin.’
Robbie found it necessary to swallow again.
She didn't know exactly what he meant.
But she did know she was badly in need of a dose of sanity herself right now.
‘I…
I'll wait for you outside,’ she said hurriedly as he showed signs of moving.
She didn't think he would actually throw back his covers in her presence, but it wasn't a risk she was about to take.
On the towpath, she drew in reviving gulps of fresh morning air.
Down there in the cabin, the silken strands of sexual awareness had established themselves once more, creating an invisible but strong pull between herself and Fen.
She couldn't believe he hadn't felt it too.
He'd said they had to talk.
What about?
Was it about this violent chemistry?
And if so, what solution would he propose?
Robbie was very much afraid that she knew the answer.
She waited tensely for him to appear.
CHAPTER FIVE
The walk looked like being one of Fen's brisk route marches, and Robbie thanked heaven she was wearing her new shoes.
Though the sun was bright there was no warmth in it as yet and the air was gently bracing.
After a while they left the towpath and followed a winding road between high hedges.
Fen kept going for what seemed like ages and, despite his statement that they had to talk, he seemed disinclined for conversation.
Several times Robbie considered taking the initiative, but each time she thought better of it.
It wasn't as if she was in any hurry to learn her fate.
At last, where a five barred gate provided a break in the hedge, Fen stopped.
He leaned on the gate and without looking at Robbie, he said:
‘About last night —’
‘You don't have to worry,’ she said quickly, ‘I know it didn't mean anything, that you were just —’
‘What I was going to say is that it's not working out, is it?
Sharing, I mean?’
Although she had been expecting something like this, Robbie's mouth was suddenly dry, her tongue cleaving to the roof of her mouth.
She couldn't answer him.
Behind her back, her hands intertwined and twisted feverishly upon each other.
He turned to look at her.
‘I said it's not working — sharing the boat.’
Robbie found her voice.
It didn't sound like hers; it sounded harsh and croaky.
‘Does…does that mean you want me to go, after all?
I…
I thought we had a deal.’
It was only hours since he'd said she could stay.
A week ago she would have been full of indignation at the thought of losing her accommodation.
Now there was the sense of a greater loss.
She didn't want this interlude to end, because it would mean saying goodbye to Fen Marshall.
For that was what it would mean.
Once he returned home, there was no real reason other than chance why their paths should cross again.
He was frowning.
‘I'm not in the habit of welshing on deals.
I ought to be the one to go.
I behaved abominably last night.
And I've no excuse to offer — except my own vile bad temper.
I had no right to accuse you of…
I mean, you have a boyfriend, so it's not as if …
You've no need to…
Oh, dammit!’
As Fen spoke, Robbie's heart had lightened a fraction.
She had expected more censure, more blame, but instead Fen seemed to be taking everything upon himself.
Perhaps things weren't going to be so bad after all.
‘Can't we forget about last night?’ she asked hopefully.
‘I'm willing if you are.
I'll…
I'll try harder to keep out of your way, try not to annoy you.
Just…just ignore me, if you like.’
He made a mirthless sound.
‘Easier said than done.
Look…
I have to go on with this particular trip.
It's all mapped out.
But maybe I can speed things up.
Certainly we must get back to the mooring in time for you to start work.’
‘Thank you,’ Robbie began, but he went on without pause.
‘And as soon as we get back, I'll clear out — up to the house.
Other sites in connection with my current project I can visit by car.
Water Gypsy will be yours — exclusively — for the six months Caroline promised you.’
‘Oh, but I…’
He waved her intended protest aside.
‘You said you needed rent-free accommodation.
I presume you're saving up to get married as well as helping your mother?
Who knows?
By the end of six months your boyfriend may be tired of waiting and your accommodation problem will be solved.’
Robbie listened uncomfortably, deploring the fiction about Hugh that she'd allowed to continue.
But if she hadn't, she would have been out on her ear right away.
She wouldn't have experienced this last week.
She sighed.
Perhaps it would have been better if this last week had never happened, if she had never even met Fen Marshall.
Last night had taught her just how important he'd become.
Last night — and in every waking moment since — she had tried to convince herself that hers was just a chemical reaction, the response of a healthy female body to that of an unusually attractive male.
When that argument had failed, she had tried taunting herself with infatuation — with having developed a schoolgirl-like crush that wouldn't outlast separation.
Who was she trying to fool?
The one person you couldn't fool was yourself.
It was incredible but true — incredible because she'd only known Fen for a week — incredible because she'd begun by disliking him — but true that she was in love with him.
And separation wasn't going to alter the way she felt.
It could only make it more painful.
She sighed again.
‘Why the sudden despondency?’
Fen asked sharply, suspiciously.
A hasty cover-up was necessary, if only for the sake of her pride.
‘I'm perfectly all right,’ she assured him.
‘I just feel so terribly guilty — at inconveniencing you.
After all,Water Gypsy does belong to you.’
Fen shrugged.
‘Six months is neither here nor there in the scheme of things.
I may even be abroad for some of that time.’
‘Oh,’ Robbie said rather flatly.
If he went abroad she wouldn't even encounter him accidentally.
He consulted his wristwatch.
‘And now, if I'm to speed up my schedule, we'd better get back.’
‘I…
I do wish you wouldn't,’ she said unhappily as once more she tried to match her steps to his.
‘I mean…
I wish you wouldn't on my account.
I have another two weeks before I have to get back and…’ wistfully ‘…
I am enjoying this trip.
Because,’ she qualified hastily as he broke stride to look narrowly at her, ‘I've never travelled this way before.
It…it's so restful.
I badly needed a holiday.’
‘Hmmph.’
It was one of his enigmatic grunts, impossible to interpret.
‘But I suppose,’ Robbie went on, almost as if bent on self-disillusionment, ‘you must be in a hurry too, to get back to Petula.’
‘Yes.’
‘Does…does she ever stay on Water Gypsy with you?’
‘Frequently.’
‘So…so you might have wanted the boat for you and her…during the next six months?’
‘She could have shared my cabin,’ he pointed out.
‘Oh…oh, yes…of course.’
Her voice very nearly cracked at the thought that Fen might have been making love to his girlfriend only feet away from where she, Robbie, lay.
At least she'd be spared that.
‘Is this Hugh of yours likely to visit?’
Fen asked.
Oh, God, how she hated this.
But once you'd lied — even if it were only by implication or simply by failing to deny something — you were forced to go on lying.
‘He…he doesn't have a lot of free time —’
‘Well, if he does, feel free to use the main cabin.’
Curtly, ‘I presume the usual intimacies take place between you?’
‘If you mean have we ever made love,’ Robbie felt compelled to say, ‘the answer is no.’
‘Oh?’
His brows rose fractionally.
‘What's up with the fellow?
Or is it you?
But you don't strike me as being frigid.
Certainly last night —’
‘I'm not,’ she said hastily.
‘I just happen to believe in waiting till after marriage.
Call me old-fashioned if you like —’
‘Your beliefs are entirely your own business.
Nothing to do with me.’
‘But…but you don't agree with them, obviously?’
‘What makes you think so?’
‘What you said about…about Petula sharing your cabin.’
‘What I think, what I do, has as little to do with you as your activities have to do with me.’
‘Oh…of…of course.’
There was another of those long silences which Robbie had come to dread.
She hated not knowing what he was thinking, planning.
‘I suppose,’ she ventured as they neared Water Gypsy , ‘you'll have to go back to the beechwoods this morning.
I mean…you didn't finish your work on the ghost orchids?’
‘I did enough for my purposes.’
As he spoke he was busy releasing Water Gypsy from her moorings.
‘We're…we're moving on?
Already?
Aren't you going to have any breakfast first?’
Robbie asked incredulously, with memories of his gargantuan appetite.
‘Not hungry.
Anyway, I'd sooner get under way.
But you go ahead if you like.
I'll have something later.’
‘Actually, I'm not hungry either,’ she confessed.
She still felt as if food would choke her.
Oh, why couldn't life be uncomplicated, so that the man you fell in love with felt the same way?
‘I'd sooner help, if…if that's all right…’
Her voice trailed away.
He'd implied — and she had promised — that she'd keep out of his way.
‘Take the tiller, then,’ he said curtly.
Water Gypsy moved out into midstream.
Ahead of them the canal curved in a broad right-handed sweep, its bed terraced out of smooth green hillside.
The boat glided underneath a bridge, its mellow brickwork radiating a whole spectrum of colour in the sunlight.
But Robbie was blind to her surroundings.
She worked on automatic pilot, hands carrying out the necessary movements, her brain active elsewhere.
In the first place, she was accusing herself of hypocrisy.
She'd told another lie.
It was a fact that her relationship with Hugh had never progressed to actual intimacy.
But she'd told Fen she didn't believe in sex before marriage.
It might have been true once — and she was glad now that she had never succumbed to Hugh's importuning.
Her feelings for him had been a pallid thing beside what she now felt for Fen.
But if Fen were in love with her — if he were to make love to her again, the way he had last night…if he were to ask her…
He wouldn't even need to ask.
There would be a natural progression, as natural as breathing…
‘Tiller to the right!
Tiller to the right!
Robbie!
For God's sake…’
Too late.
There was an almighty crash.
Water Gypsy shuddered from bow to stern.
The impact flung Robbie sideways and she fell heavily in the confined space, striking her head against the side of the boat.
Everything went black.
‘Robbie!
Robbie?
Can you hear me?’
Slowly, hazily, consciousness returned — returned painfully.
Her head was aching dreadfully.
This must be what a hangover felt like — except that she rarely drank, and certainly never to excess.
For the moment she didn't want to open her eyes and release the tears of pain.
She was aware of lying flat on something soft.
Someone had applied a damp cloth to her head.
‘Robbie!’
It was an autocratic command.
‘Open your eyes.’
Slowly, carefully, she did so, to find Fen's face only inches from hers.
It was his hands which still held the cloth to her head.
Despite the pain she felt, his nearness still affected her.
She closed her eyes again, kaleidoscopic colours whirling behind her eyelids.
‘Wh-what happened?’ she mumbled.
‘You cracked your head, that's what happened.
After you'd allowed Water Gypsy to stray into the path of another boat.
What the hell did you think you were playing at?’
She remembered now.
Her thoughts hadn't been on the task in hand.
‘I…
I just didn't see it.’
‘What?’ disbelievingly.
‘You couldn't miss it.’
Grimly, ‘And you didn't.’
‘I…
I'm sorry.’
She looked at him, trying to gauge just how angry he was, and the tears, despite all her efforts, spilled over.
‘Oh, for God's sake!’
Fen moved restlessly, but his hands still held the cloth in place.
‘H-have I done much damage?’ she managed to ask.
‘Not a lot.
Water Gypsy , fortunately, is tougher than your head.’
‘And…and the other boat?’
‘Similar.
No one on board was hurt.’
‘They're…they're not going to sue you or anything?’
‘No.
Fortunately the owner was a woman.
She took the view that it might have happened to anyone.’
Robbie was willing to bet Fen's appearance had charmed her into saying that.
‘It wouldn't have happened if you'd been steering,’ she said miserably.
‘No.’
He didn't have to agree so readily.
Fen removed the cloth and peered closely at her head.
The movement brought him too close for comfort.
She could feel his breath on her face, the warm aura of masculinity surrounding him.
She groaned.
Fortunately Fen mistook the sound for one of pain.
‘Maybe we should get you to hospital — for an X-ray.’
‘Oh, no!’
She sat up hurriedly, swinging her legs over the side of the bunk.
If he took her to hospital they might keep her in.
The time she had left with him was short enough already.
The sudden movement had been a mistake.
The cabin — Fen's, she realised — swam round her and she toppled forward, into his arms.
He held her — just for one heart-stopping, breathtaking moment.
Then, gruffly, ‘Lie still, damn you.
You're obviously not fit to move yet.’
He pushed her down, then stood up, his hands thrust deeply into his pockets.
‘Fortunately we're not far from a large town.
We'll push on and take you to have that head looked at.’
He didn't wait for her to argue further but turned on his heel and disappeared.
Soon she felt Water Gypsy get under way once more.
She must have slept, or drifted into unconsciousness again, for the next thing she knew was that Fen was shaking her, urgently, his voice rough with concern.
‘Robbie, wake up.
For God's sake, wake up.’
‘Wh-what's wrong?’
She attempted to sit up, but his hands on her shoulders kept her pinned down.
‘What's wrong?
I'll tell you what's wrong.
For a while there I thought you'd gone into a coma.
How does your head feel?’
Robbie put up an exploratory hand.
‘Sore,’ she said wryly.
Impatiently, ‘I mean the headache.
Is it any worse?’
‘No.
In fact, it's almost gone.’
He allowed her to sit up.
‘Slowly now!’ he warned.
He scrutinised her closely as she lowered her legs to the floor and his hand went out as she stood.
He didn't actually touch her, and she was glad of that.
Contact with him might result in another kind of dizziness.
‘See, I'm all right,’ she said.
‘Perfectly OK.’
‘No giddiness?
No double vision?’
‘Nothing like that.’
‘Even so, now we're here, we'll get you checked over.
No, don't argue.
Much as I may deplore it, for the moment you're very much my responsibility.’
‘Here’ was a small Cotswold town, small enough to be delightfully picturesque and unspoiled, large enough to boast its own cottage hospital.
As they dropped down the steep winding road, the sky was a brilliant blue, the sun gleaming on the gilt weathervane of the church and on the butter-and-honey-coloured buildings.
It was only a short walk to the fringes of town, and there Fen insisted on taking a taxi to the hospital.
After a comparatively short wait, an X-ray was taken and Robbie declared sound.
‘Just take Paracetamol for the headache,’ the doctor advised.
Robbie insisted that they walk back.
She'd seen enough from the taxi to tell that every house, cottage, shop and inn was simply full of character, each different but still in the traditional Cotswold style she was beginning to recognise.
‘You heard the doctor,’ she said.
‘There's no need for more expense.
There's nothing wrong with me.
Besides, I'd like to see more of the town.
I love this golden stone.’
Fen nodded.
‘Yes…it seems to have developed the knack of trapping the sunlight within it.’
Robbie nodded appreciatively.
‘That's it exactly.’
It was turning into yet another hot day, and Fen suggested they break their walk at a local hostelry.
In the oak-panelled bar of the Cotswold Lion, sunshafts warmed the ancient flagstones as they drank cooling shandies and studied the menu.
Robbie suddenly realised how hungry she was.
Neither of them had breakfasted that morning.
‘Do you read a lot?’ she asked suddenly.
‘I do.
Don't you?’
‘Yes — now that I'm not studying all the time.’
This led to a discussion of favourite books and authors, then on to music and art.
They had many tastes in common, Robbie discovered wistfully.
‘Why Cotswold Lion, I wonder?’ she said, looking around the pub, as they waited for lunch to be brought to them.
‘After the breed of sheep — huge creatures — that used to be bred around here.’
Fen seemed to know a great deal about the area, and as they ate their sandwiches, served with a generous helping of salad, he talked continuously, so unlike his normal taciturn self that Robbie suspected he was steering clear of more personal and controversial topics.
‘Have you ever walked the Cotswold Way?’ she asked.
‘Naturally.
I think Petula and I covered most of it shortly after we moved down here, stopping off overnight at inns to break the journey.’
‘Petula likes walking?’
Robbie couldn't keep the note of incredulity out of her voice.
That girl in the photos didn't look as if she ever did more than totter from A to B on the highest of spindly heels.
‘Very much.’
Fen smiled — a fleeting, secretive smile that made Robbie think he must be reminiscing about incidents on that walk — probably the overnight bits.
Damn Petula.
Damn her.
Robbie wished the other woman didn't exist.
‘I wish I could walk at least part of it,’ she said wistfully.
‘No reason why you shouldn't some day, is there?
Since you'll be living round here.’
What had she expected?
Robbie asked herself scornfully.
That he'd offer to be her guide?
Abruptly she downed the last drop of her shandy and stood up.
‘We'd better be getting back.
My problems have wasted most of your day — again.
I'm sorry.’
He stood up too, but in a more leisurely fashion.
‘Can't be helped.
And there's no point in rushing now.
We wouldn't get much further.
We may as well make a day of it, then start out early tomorrow.’
‘Make a day of it?’
Robbie looked doubtfully at him.
‘I'm sure there's shopping you'd like to do.
In my experience women never need much encouragement to go shopping.’
‘But what about you?
‘In my experience’,’ she mimicked, ‘men hate hanging around while women shop.’
‘I'll have no trouble filling my time.
I've not visited this particular town before and there are one or two old buildings I wouldn't mind looking at.’
‘Could…could I skip the shopping and look at buildings too?’
Robbie asked diffidently.
She didn't want him to think she was thrusting her company upon him.
But wandering around this town, however delightful, held little charm for her without his company.
‘What?
No shopping?’ he mocked, but he didn't seem dismayed or put out by her request.
‘No money,’ she retorted.
‘I could lend you —’
‘No!’ sharply and then, more quietly, ‘No, thank you.
I'm not broke.
I just meant I don't have any to fritter on shopping for the sake of it.’
‘Because you send money home?’
Fen said frowningly.
‘You did say your mother had a job?’
Surprised by what seemed like a complete change of subject, Robbie nevertheless shook her head.
‘Not a proper job.
Only two half-days a week in the local newsagents.
She never had a career as such.
She married young, so she's got no real qualifications — except,’ drily, ‘as a housekeeper and mother.’
‘And she's good at that, is she?’
‘Yes,’ Robbie said simply.
‘You get on with her?’
‘I love her very much.’
‘And your brothers?’
‘Them too — even though they're a bit of a handful.’
‘In what sense?
Tearaways?
Vandals?’
‘Certainly not.’
Robbie was indignant.
‘We were brought up to behave ourselves.
They're just noisy and high-spirited, always hungry — and…’ she sighed ‘…hard on clothes.’
As they talked they had moved out of the pub, back into the sunlit streets.
‘Do you really feel like a bit of sightseeing, then?’
Fen asked.
‘Or would you rather go back to Water Gypsy and lie down?’
For just one fleeting moment, Robbie visualised a long warm sultry afternoon in her cabin or on Water Gypsy 's deck, with the subtle torture of knowing Fen was close at hand but totally unavailable.
What had he said?
Sun was a potent aphrodisiac?
No, safer by far to stay here in town until the day cooled.
All the buildings, shops, inns, picturesque cottages, the larger houses — mostly built by cloth mill owners, Fen told her, were a joy to see, many dating from the fifteenth century when the wool trade had flourished.
But to Robbie's surprise, Fen's first choice was the local church.
She had not, so far, suspected him of having any religious creed.
‘I haven't,’ he admitted when, hesitantly, she questioned him.
‘It's history I look for, and architecture.
The Cotswolds have quite a variety to offer — small bare exquisite churches, the self-important wool churches, the eccentric, the beautiful, the ugly.
Are you a churchgoer?’ he threw her question back at her.
‘Only occasionally, I'm afraid.
Easter and Christmas.
But I'd like to get married in church.’
Now why on earth had she blurted that out?
Unless it was the flowers left over from some recent wedding — a country wedding — meadow and hedgerow flowers with huge sprays of beech leaves, creamy cow parsley mixed with great white daisies and lilac.
Fen was wondering too, judging by the arrested expression on his face.
‘And your boyfriend feels the same way, presumably?’
Robbie let out a little breath of relief.
Naturally he had associated her remark with Hugh, whereas she had been recalling her dream, the dream in which Fen had appeared as the waiting bridegroom.
But she didn't want to talk about Hugh, didn't want his third presence intruding here, on her day with Fen.
She changed the subject, pointing out the high-backed pews with doors, rhapsodising over a particularly fine example of stained glass.
‘Look, this one depicts wild flowers,’ she said.
Fen moved closer, to stand at her shoulder, and his words were almost lost to her in the rush of feeling his nearness engendered.
He rested one hand casually on her shoulder, pointed with the other to a section of the window.
‘The ghost orchid.
So it was around here even in those days.’
Robbie could hardly breathe and she had to swallow before she could answer.
‘I wonder if Mr Taylor knows about this window?’
She didn't know whether she was more disappointed or relieved when Fen moved away to study other stained glass designs.
That afternoon, as they moved from church to market square and strolled admiringly past rows of handsome eighteenth-century houses, greedily Robbie recorded every second, every sight, every sensation, building up a store of precious memories to take out and brood over when this time out of reality — as it must — came to an end.
The culmination of the afternoon was — at Fen's suggestion — tea in a quaint picture-book shop whose bowed windows with their original bottle-glass panes overlooked a busy thoroughfare.
They were fortunate enough to secure a seat actually in the window alcove, which, although the shop was crowded, gave an illusion of privacy to their conversation.
‘I have enjoyed today,’ Robbie said.
‘Even though it started out so badly,’ Fen quizzed, ‘with a bump on the head?’
She nodded.
‘Yes.
Don't get me wrong — I love narrow boat life.
But my idea would be to meander up and down the country, stopping off at interesting towns like this.
Unfortunately,’ she sighed, ‘you need unlimited means to be able to live that way.’
‘You'd like to be rich, then?’
Fen seemed inordinately interested in her answer, his eyes intent on her serious face as she considered the question.
‘Not in a greedy kind of way,’ she said at last.
‘But I would like enough money to have a nice home of my own — and to be able to set my mother and my brothers up somewhere else.
Somewhere comfortable and attractive.’
‘A country cottage with roses round the door?’ he suggested half humorously, but Robbie nodded gravely.
‘Yes.
Mum would love that.’
‘If you decide to stay in this part of the world, would she consider moving down here to join you?’ he asked.
‘Oh, but I'm forgetting, you'll have to go back, won't you, to get married?’
‘Oh — er — yes, yes, I suppose so.’
‘You don't sound too certain?’
Again his gaze was intent, and not for the first time Robbie cursed the need for evasion, the maintenance of her fiction concerning Hugh.
‘Nobody can forecast the future with that much certainty,’ she said with an attempt at lightness.
‘Besides, we can't afford to get married yet.
Hugh's not rich either.’
‘So you wouldn't consider marrying a man for his money, then?
To be able to give your mother a better standard of living?’
‘Certainly not!’
Robbie told him indignantly.
‘There's one thing I am certain of — and my mother would agree with me — love is more important than money.’
‘There are one or two women in the world who might disagree with you,’ Fen said.
It wasn't a suggestion but a statement of fact, and privately Robbie decided he must know some very unpleasant women.
What, she wondered, were Petula's views on riches?
Aloud, she said firmly, ‘Well, I feel sorry for them.
Money on its own doesn't ensure happiness.’
‘True, but,’ cynically, ‘some people find it helps them to endure misery better.’
Robbie looked at him searchingly.
‘You sound very…very disillusioned?’
He smiled wryly, ‘Not about people in general— just one or two in particular .’
‘Women?’ she hazarded.
‘Women,’ he confirmed.
‘But…but not Petula?’
His smile broadened.
‘Strange how often she crops up in conversation.
No, not Petula.
I think you'd like Petula, Robbie.’
Robbie was quite sure she wouldn't.
At last the golden afternoon was over, and Robbie heard with regret Fen's decree that it was time they returned to Water Gypsy .
They had been conversing easily all afternoon.
Yet, the nearer they approached to the canal, the more spasmodic their exchanges became.
For her part, Robbie was aware of slowing steps and mounting nerves.
The sun might be going down, but she had no need of its heat to stimulate her feelings for Fen Marshall.
And in a very short while they would be back in the enforced intimacy of Water Gypsy 's cabin.
She cast a sidelong glance at Fen.
Was he remembering last night too?
Unlikely.
It would scarcely hold the same significance for him.
He believed her to be promised to Hugh — and then there was Petula.
Damn and blast Petula.
For a moment she was afraid she'd said it aloud, because Fen stopped suddenly.
But just as she was waiting apprehensively, he said,
‘You don't have to worry, you know.’
‘About…about what?’
Her mind was still on Petula.
‘About tonight.’
‘T-tonight?’
Robbie's stomach reproduced the sensations of a too-rapid descent in a lift.
‘What's happening tonight?’
‘Nothing,’ Fen said tautly.
‘Precisely nothing.
That's what I'm trying to say.
My behaviour last night was totally uncharacteristic.’
‘Oh…oh, so was mine,’ she told him with hasty fervour.
‘I wouldn't want you to think —’
‘I don't.
I accept full responsibility for what occurred.
I just want you to know nothing of that kind will happen again — ever.’
‘Oh!’
Robbie said again, but feebly this time.
His total certainty was depressing.
It was growing dark by the time they reached the narrow boat.
‘I…
I think I'll have an early night,’ Robbie said as they entered the cabin.
She couldn't face an evening in the cabin with its inevitable tensions.
They might be sensations that only she felt, but even so…
Fen's eyebrows rose fractionally.
‘It's a bit early, isn't it?
Eight o'clock.’
‘It…it's been a long day.’
‘You haven't got a headache again?’
His slight movement towards her sent her into retreat.
‘N-no, of course not.’
‘Don't you want any supper before you turn in?’
‘Er — no.
That cream tea filled me up.’
‘That was three hours ago.
Oh, well,’ he shrugged, ‘suit yourself.
Personally I'm ready for a fry-up.’
Why on earth had she said she wasn't hungry?
Even the heavy curtain between the galley and Robbie's cabin could not exclude the delectable smells of crispy fried bacon and eggs — Fen's favourite standby.
Slowly she undressed, then rummaged for nightwear.
It was cooler tonight than it had been of late, besides which she no longer dared to sleep in her underwear, and she pulled on a shortie nightshirt, a farewell present from her brothers.
Bless them, she thought fondly, it must have taken them forever to save up for it from their meagre pocket money.
How she wished she could do more for them and for her mother.
It had been her private dream for years to amass a fortune and ease her mother's life.
She sighed.
An impossible dream.
Her mother had been appalled when Robbie unwrapped the nightshirt and displayed it.
‘Boys!
Wherever did you get that.
Whatever were you thinking of?
It's not decent.
Robbie can't possibly wear that.’
‘Of course I can,’ Robbie had insisted, anxious not to hurt her young brothers' feelings.
She knew the gift had been chosen in all innocence.
‘No one 's going to see it but me, and I think it's great,’ she assured them.
‘It's…it's really…different.’
She read for a while, trying to close her mind to the sounds from the galley, the picture of Fen enjoying his supper and — simply — any pictures of Fen at all.
But the aroma of the food lingered long after all the sounds of movement had ceased.
Robbie lay there, telling herself sternly to go to sleep.
She could wait until morning.
An indignant rumble from her stomach said otherwise.
It was no use, she would just have to eat something.
There was no chance now of bacon and eggs, but a sandwich would be better than nothing.
She padded into the galley.
The main cabin was in darkness and silence.
Working by torchlight, she located the bread and jam and made two satisfyingly thick rounds.
She was just congratulating herself that Fen need never know how she had weakened when the galley light was flicked on.
Caught red-handed, her plate piled high, she swung round.
Plate and sandwiches went flying.
Fen, arms folded, leaned nonchalantly in the doorway, surveying her.
There was a look in his eyes that she couldn't quite remember seeing before, and she found it distinctly disturbing.
He had undressed but wore only brief sleeping shorts.
Robbie averted her eyes from the sight of a broad strong chest and firm muscular thighs.
So far he'd said nothing, and she found this more unnerving than speech.
She scrabbled feverishly for her sandwiches, restacked them and then, because her hands were shaking, set the plate down on the worktop.
‘I…
I'm sorry, did I wake you?
I tried to be quiet,’ she said, knowing she was babbling but unable to prevent it.
‘I wasn't asleep,’ he drawled.
Then, ‘Suffering from night starvation, are you?’
Somehow the comment, which should have been entirely innocent, seemed loaded with an undercurrent of meaning.
Robbie found she was colouring.
‘I…
I found I was hungry after all,’ she admitted.
It seemed important to let him know what construction she intended to put on his words.
He scarcely seemed to hear what she said.
There was a rough, slightly husky edge to his voice as he went on, ‘That's a very eye-catching garment you're wearing.
A present from the boyfriend, no doubt?
But he's not here to see it, is he?’
And before Robbie could decide whether to deny the source of the gift or whether perhaps it would be safer to agree, Fen continued his speculative monologue.
‘So why wear it, I wonder?’
And, ‘Has he put its suggestion into practice?’
For the first time Robbie found herself wishing her brothers had given her a less striking gift.
The simple garment only skimmed her thighs, the soft clingy material was almost flesh-coloured and on the front the designer had added — in black — the imprint of two hands.
These were strategically placed so that the hands were exactly one at each breast.
And below the motif, in bold lettering, were the words ‘Handle with Care’.
‘Or perhaps it's an open invitation?’
Fen mused, slightly moving towards her now.
‘Perhaps it's like the glass slipper in Cinderella …’
Wide-eyed, Robbie backed away, but found her retreat cut off by the worktop.
‘Wh-what do you mean?’
‘The man whose hands fit the —’
‘No!’
He wasn't touching her, but even so Robbie strained away from him, the hard edge of the wooden top bruising her spine.
‘No — don't, Fen.
Stay away from me.
Remember, you promised —’
‘I wasn't counting then on encountering such severe provocation,’ he murmured throatily.
‘You do have this unfortunate knack…
Is it unwitting, I ask myself, or —’
‘No!’
She folded her arms across her chest, hiding the design, and as his expression betrayed his misunderstanding of her denial.
‘I mean — no, it's not deliberate.
Why should I want to…to…?
Well, anyway, as you're always reminding me, I've got Hugh.
And…’ another desperate reminder ‘…you've got Petula.’
‘There are some women,’ Fen said with a bitterness in his voice which aroused Robbie's curiosity, ‘who have no objection to playing one man off against the other.’
‘Well, I'm not one of them.’
Her eyes sparkled with anger.
‘It's your hard luck if that's the kind of women you mix with.’
Then, seeking for an even more telling shot, ‘And it's not my fault that you're so…so weak-willed that you're incapable of keeping your word.’
For a moment there was a flash of something in the dark eye.
Anger?
Or something equally primitive?
Robbie couldn't be certain, the expression was too fleeting.
‘My dear Robbie,’ he drawled, ‘you over-anticipate.
Provocative you may be.
I'll give you the benefit of the doubt as to whether it's deliberate or not.
But I'm perfectly capable of resisting your allure.
And I never break my word.
Which is why — in spite of your unfortunate propensities for disrupting my life and my work — you're still aboard Water Gypsy .’
‘Then why all this?’
Robbie asked, her gesture encompassing the exchanges of the last few moments.
‘Just to demonstrate — if it were ever in any doubt — the total unsuitability of our present situation.
Another man might be more unprincipled —’
‘Oh, well,’ scornfully, ‘if it's just so you can blow your own trumpet…’
A restless movement on his part betrayed that she had provoked him once more, but in a different fashion.
Still, anger was a safer reaction, Robbie thought as she edged sideways, aiming for her cabin.
‘Do you always have to have the last word?’
Fen demanded tautly.
Considering this question, with some surprise Robbie realised that had never been her aim — until she'd met Fen Marshall.
‘You bring out the worst in me,’ she muttered.
‘Well, just remember,’ he snapped before turning on his heel, ‘that that's the effect you have on me .’
CHAPTER SIX
Now what exactly did he mean by that remark?
The speculation kept Robbie awake for some time.
She would have liked to believe Fen meant that he was irresistibly attracted to her, despite all his resolutions.
But she had to admit that, realistically, he probably meant that she annoyed him beyond measure and that he was hard put to it to treat her civilly.
‘Satisfy my curiosity,’ he said as they set off early next morning.
Robbie looked at him with some anxiety.
It was a change for him to evince curiosity.
He was usually decrying her for displaying that vice.
Now what?
‘If I can,’ she said cautiously.
‘You've been down here — what, a week or so?
You've not been near a phonebox or a letterbox.
Won't the boyfriend be expecting to hear from you?
Or at the very least, your mother?’
‘I sent my mother a postcard — the day I went to buy shoes, remember?
The day you went to see Mr Taylor.’
‘Of course.
I'd forgotten that.
So you wrote to your mother.
But what about the boyfriend?’
He was very concerned about Hugh's welfare all of a sudden, Robbie fumed.
But presumably he thought, if her relationships at home were kept in good working order, he would be less at risk from her attentions — the conceit of him.
The trouble was, though he might not know it, his misgivings were well founded.
‘Oh,’ she said, ‘he knows I'll get in touch when I can.’
‘You sent him a message via your mother, perhaps?’
‘Er — yes,’ Robbie agreed.
More lies.
Where would it all end?
But it wasn't her fault, she thought indignantly.
All this deceit was being forced upon her by his…his paranoia.
‘If you want any letters posted,’ Fen said, ‘I have to go into the next town we come to.
I estimate that'll be in a couple of days.
I'm getting low on a few colours.
And I could do with some more film.
It slipped my mind yesterday.’
For which he probably blamed her, she brooded.
But he was waiting expectantly.
‘I'll get something written,’ she muttered, ‘but I can post them myself.’
He shook his head.
‘I'm afraid we won't both be able to leave Water Gypsy at the next stop.
The moorings are too close to town centre.
Someone has to stay aboard for security reasons.’
Get yourself out of this corner, Robbie thought moodily.
She was feeling tired and edgy.
Aside from the fact that she hadn't slept well last night, she was not a ‘morning person’ as a rule, and half-past five — even in summer — seemed like the middle of the night.
Yet that was the hour at which Fen had called her, telling her of his intention to get under way.
This morning even the scenery could not lift her from her jaundiced mood.
But she knew, morning person or not, if Fen only felt for her the way she felt for him, she would happily be up at half-past three or even earlier, just to be with him.
As it was, it would be better to maintain a discreet distance.
She was becoming increasingly afraid of giving herself away.
‘I think I'll walk for a bit,’ she called to him.
They had just negotiated a lock and it had been her turn to go ashore.
Ahead of her the canal turned in a broad left-hand sweep, its line dominated by trees until it disappeared beneath the parapet of a bridge.
But — so much for her wish to escape Fen's disturbing proximity for a while — after the first few yards beyond the bridge the towpath ceased to exist.
It had been completely washed away.
‘Never mind,’ Fen said, studying her disgruntled face as she came aboard once more, ‘we'll be stopping soon and going ashore.’
‘Oh.’
Cocooned in her own personal gloom, she was only mildly interested.
‘I thought you said it would be a couple of days before —’
‘We're going walking,’ he interrupted.
‘You said you'd like to see something of the Cotswold Way.
Some exercise would probably do you good.
I don't know what's got into you, but you've been behaving like a caged lioness all morning.
We'll take a packed lunch in case we don't encounter a suitable place to eat.’
‘But,’ Robbie protested, ‘I thought you were in such a hurry?’
‘I am.
But I've no objection to including the Way in my itinerary.
I can combine our walk with some useful work.’
‘Please don't change your plans on my account,’ she said stiffly.
‘I'm not,’ he said abruptly.
‘My reasons are purely selfish.’
Now that Fen had made the suggestion, Robbie was eager to be off.
Quickly she put together a few sandwiches and, suitably dressed for walking, waited impatiently as they chugged slowly towards their planned point of departure.
‘I hope you're a good walker,’ Fen said as he tied up.
‘I like to keep up a brisk pace.’
‘I've noticed,’ she said drily.
‘These long stretches of uplands were once the old sheep walks,’ Fen explained as their path began to climb.
A few sheep still grazed there.
Here and there in the close-cropped grass grew small blue harebells and masses of fragrant pink thyme, and Robbie was surprised to see one or two sheep nibbling at the herb.
‘It's the thyme that gives the local mutton its superb flavour,’ Fen told her.
‘You must be sure to try it.’
Beyond the uplands lay a stretch of woodland, and Robbie was glad of the shade.
It had only just turned midday and the sun was directly above and very hot.
‘How the boys would love all this.’
She gestured to the sweeping prospects around them.
‘It would be so much healthier for them than city streets.’
Then, ‘Oh,’ she exclaimed, ‘are those really strawberries?
Growing wild?’
In an instant she was on her knees, quenching her thirst with the summer sweetness.
And far from showing irritation at this delay, Fen joined her.
‘Your lips are even redder now,’ he murmured, his face close to hers as they crouched over the same clump of fruit.
‘You don't wear much make-up, do you?’ looking at her closely.
‘I approve.
I don't like a woman's face to be artificial.’
Robbies cheeks, already warm from sun and exertion, glowed even more.
And then, before she could realise what he was at and pull away, his lips brushed hers, so gently, so fleetingly that she might almost have dreamed it.
‘Strawberry kisses,’ he murmured as she stared at him, bemused, ‘delectable.’
And then, with an abrupt change of mood, straightening up, ‘Come on — we've miles to go yet.’
Her mind in a whirl, her body in an equally unstable condition, Robbie followed him up the hillside.
That kiss!
Oh, if only he had deepened it.
If only he had meant it.
But she knew it had been just an impulse — a ‘strawberry kiss’, he'd called it.
Now she would never be able to eat her favourite fruit without thinking of him — bitter-sweet memory.
What a hill.
Almost perpendicular.
Even with his knapsack containing not only their sandwiches but his camera and painting materials, Fen seemed to be making nothing of it.
Indeed, he was moving at top speed, as though some demon pursued him, but Robbie struggled — the only word for it — in his wake.
He wasn't even offering her a helping hand, she brooded.
But perhaps it was just as well, and at least the physical toll the climb was taking had, temporarily at least, driven other sensations from her body.
But at last they reached the top and set out along a ridge under the clear blue sky, valleys running steeply to left and right of them.
After a while, to Robbie's relief, Fen threw off his knapsack, suggesting they stop and eat their sandwiches.
She had been too proud to announce her fatigue and growing hunger.
They had breakfasted so early too.
‘Why does food almost taste so much better out of doors?’ she asked rhetorically.
There was wild thyme growing up here too, and as she lay back for a few blissful moments' rest its delicate perfume assailed Robbie's nostrils — another sensory memory to be stored away, she thought wistfully.
Would she ever have any memories that were not bound up with Fen?
‘This is the life,’ she murmured, eyes closed against the sun's brilliant glare, her body relaxed in total surrender to her surroundings.
‘The outdoor life certainly seems to suit you,’ Fen agreed.
She opened her eyes briefly.
He was stretched out on his side, raised on one elbow, regarding her.
His shirt was open two or three buttons, revealing the strong line of his bronzed throat and the scattering of dark hairs on his chest.
Robbie had to fight down an impulse to reach out and run her fingers over the dark mat.
Relaxed like this, he looked a gentle, tender man, no traces of the irritability with which he occasionally treated her.
Was it her imagination, or had he moved fractionally closer?
Hastily Robbie closed her eyes again.
But all her senses were alert, aware — her body suddenly more alive than she had ever known it.
The very air around her seemed alive with tension and expectancy.
Kiss me, she willed him, kiss me.
Just for a short while let this be the most perfect day of my life.
That's all it needs.
Everything else is just right — the sky, the hills, the sun, the sound and smells of nature.
Oh, Fen, please kiss me.
She knew she was trembling and wondered if her agitation was visible to him.
Her breasts rose and fell on a shaky little breath and a fierce warm ache assailed her loins, the pit of her stomach, her innermost being.
Oh, God, why didn't he kiss her?
He must feel it too.
It was so strong, so intangible yet so strong, this thread of awareness running between them.
She dared to open her eyes again and found him still there, close to her.
Somehow she found the courage to hold the gleaming brilliance of his gaze with her own, as if by this encounter of eyes she could mesmerise, draw him to her.
Her mouth felt suddenly dry and her lips parted just sufficiently to allow her tongue to moisten their parched surface.
He didn't move, but he was unnaturally still, as if turned to stone.
She saw him swallow, saw a small nerve jump edgily in his jaw.
‘Has anyone…’ his voice seemed to emerge with difficulty and he cleared his throat, began again, ‘Has anyone ever told you that you look very much like the women in the Pre-Raphaelite paintings?’
She nodded slightly, wordlessly, aware somehow that she must not speak, must not allow the spell to be broken.
‘Voluptuous, passionate-looking women.
The ideal of womanhood.’
His free hand reached out and lifted a strand of the red-gold hair.
He wound it around his fingers.
‘She…can draw you to her with a single hair’,’ he murmured.
‘Wh-where's that from?’ she whispered.
‘Dryden.
Women's hair is often mentioned in poetry.
‘The loose train of thy amber-dropping hair…’
Milton.
If I were a poet…’ he paused, shrugging his inadequacy, but his hand remained still fascinated by its silken snare.
Robbie wanted to ask if he really found her hair worthy of poetry.
But there was something she still wanted far more.
She twisted her body a little, so that she too lay on her side, facing him now, decreasing the distance between them.
The sensations within her grew in intensity until she felt they must be reflected in her eyes.
‘Do you know any more poetry?’ she whispered.
He considered her for a moment.
Then, ‘The light that lies in woman's eyes has been my heart's undoing’.’
‘I might have known,’ she sighed, ‘that you'd come out with something cynical.’
‘All right, perhaps you'd prefer this, then?’
As he spoke he disentangled his fingers from her hair, traced instead the curve of her jaw.
‘Soft eyes look'd love to eyes which spake again.’’
Then her wish was granted as his head blotted out the sun, and Robbie emitted a little ecstatic noise as the space between them melted away entirely and they lay body pressed to body, mouth to mouth, his hands moulding her to him with a sudden, startling ferocity.
She could feel every bone and sinew of him.
The strength of his hard ribcage, the flat muscularity of his stomach and…her head swam dizzily…a delicious throbbing bulkiness that told her of his desire.
She moved against him, little sounds of need rippling in her throat as she demonstrated her willing response.
The sun-baked ground, hard beneath her hip, was forgotten in her urgency.
Her hands slid beneath his shirt and the reality of his flesh under her fingers made the blood sing in her veins.
Nothing in the whole of her life had ever given her so much pleasure as this.
Her ardent response brought an answering leap from the body pressed to hers.
His breathing quickened and his kiss deepened, became hungrier, demanding, draining her whole body, the urgent pressure of him growing.
His hands moved beneath her T-shirt, found her breasts, invaded their lacy covering.
Then, splayed sensually, his fingers stroked her nipples into agonised peaks.
He lifted his head for a moment to look at her.
There was a question in that look.
She knew what the question was and her eyes held no fear, only need.
Prisoner of her sensations, she had no thought of denying him anything.
Then the front zip of her jeans yielded to his importuning hands and he eased away a little so that his fingers could slide inside, seeking, exploring, sensitising, until shudders shook her from head to foot.
There was an ache within her, a burning, dissolving sweetness.
Fen was breathing hoarsely now, his mouth moving downward until his face was buried between her breasts.
‘Fen, oh, Fen!’ she murmured shakily against the hollow just beneath his ear.
Feverishly her hands fumbled with the waistband of his trousers, desperate to give him the pleasure he was giving her.
‘No, Robbie,’ he spoke the words between kisses that could not slake her need and as she gave a little whimper of protest.
‘Be patient.
I can't make love to you the way I want to — not here.
It's too open, too public.
Let's move on, find somewhere more secluded.’
She needed his support to stumble to her feet, hair dishevelled, eyes languorously glazed.
For an instant he caught her to him in a swift hard embrace and she knew that his desire was not one whit diminished.
He snatched up his knapsack, not bothering in his haste to shrug it on.
Hands linked, they hurried on, in silence now.
Robbie couldn't tell what he was thinking, but her mind was only on the goal ahead, some private spot where their lovemaking could be renewed, where she could give herself up to him and all the promised delights his body offered hers.
Fen was leaving the well-worn path now to fight a way for them through giant cow parsley and into a beechwood offering shelter from prying eyes.
It was very still in the wood.
Even the shade could not diminish the sultry heat of the day.
Somewhere high up in the cloudless sky, hidden by the leafy canopy, an aeroplane droned lazily, the sound mirrored closer at hand by the drowsy noise of insects.
Somewhere, occasionally, a heat-stupefied bird called a muted note.
Forever after, summer would mean Fen — and this moment.
He turned to look at her, and she knew the interval had not diminished his desire.
He held out his hands and she put hers into them, unresisting as he pulled her close and bent his head to hers.
The ground beneath her feet seemed to become unstable as he kissed her.
Fire shot along her nerves and she arched towards him.
Then, gently, he pulled her down with him into a nest of long fragrant grasses.
They were silent as they undressed each other, their movements slow and sensual.
There was no hurry now they had found their retreat.
Fen's mouth was on hers once more, and Robbie began to tremble again, her fingers moving into the thick blackness of his hair.
She returned his kiss, her lips soft, sweet, utterly giving.
He began an exploration of her body, a constant revelation of tormenting pleasure.
Her nerve-ends in total chaos, Robbie could hardly believe this was really happening, this shivering delight.
He caught her to him more closely, his body urgent, his kiss deepening in passion.
And for a moment they strained together, their breathing harsh, uneven, then with a sudden movement he rolled on top of her, his weight crushing her down into the grasses.
Their limbs moved in naked smoothness, shifting against each other, intertwining.
Robbie could think of nothing but the deep growing ache around which every sense seemed focused.
‘Oh, Fen, please!’
Begging for his possession, she ran her fingers over his long smooth back and felt his muscles tighten in response.
Huskily he murmured something — she had no idea what.
But it didn't matter, the tone was enough.
Their bodies merged.
Now that it was happening it seemed it had been inevitable from the start.
A wild, harsh moan escaped him as his body melted into hers.
If it had been incredible before it was more so now, this whirling tumult in her blood.
Their breathing rose and fell in agonised pleasure, in waves of passion.
To Robbie the release came like drowning, a sinking into sensuality, a feeling almost of faintness.
Behind her closed lids, a kaleidoscope of flashing colours whirled giddily.
She heard Fen groan his own unbearable delight.
For a moment they lay entwined, drained, shattered by the violence of their mutual experience.
Robbie felt herself drifting, sleepy, sated with the wonder of it all.
‘Oh, God!’
She raised her head slightly to look at him.
He had moved, rolled away from her, and now he was pulling on his clothes, his actions feverish, his hands shaking slightly.
His face, in profile to her, was grim and set.
‘Fen?’
She sat up.
‘Fen, what is it?’
‘You don't know?’
There was a harsh incredulity in his voice as he turned to stare down at her, his eyes cold and glittering.
She shook her head.
‘I must have been insane,’ he muttered.
‘Oh, thank you very much!’ snapped Robbie tartly.
If that was all he could say about something which, to her, had transcended all the experiences of her life…
‘After everything I've said…
Why the hell did you let me do it?’
‘I'm not your conscience,’ she snapped.
A sensation of nausea underlay her anger.
She had been deluding herself that their lovemaking heralded a new direction to their relationship — that it presaged a beginning.
‘Don't you have any conscience of your own, for God's sake,’ he demanded, ‘where your boyfriend's concerned?’
He wasn't going to get away with that totally unfair crack.
‘You mean as much as you apparently have — about Petula?’
He regarded her, a baffled fury in his eyes.
‘Oh, put some clothes on.
I told you, you bring out the worst in me.
I thought if we got away from the boat for a while…’
Robbie scrambled into jeans and T-shirt, not bothering in her haste with the bra he had removed.
His attitude infuriated her.
How dared he try to blame her for what had happened?
It had been just as much his fault.
And now he was already moving off, as if he couldn't wait to leave this place.
She cast a last anguished look around, imprinting the details of the woodland glade on her memory.
Until a moment or two ago, she had pictured her recollections as being satisfyingly happy ones — woven into an overall design for the future.
But now?
Now they would be only threads in a tapestry of regrets.
She hurried after him.
‘Why are we going this way?’
For Fen was retracing their earlier route.
‘We're going back to the boat,’ he said tersely.
‘And at the next winding hole we're turning around.’
‘You mean…you're…you're going home?
But…but what about your sketching trip —’
He paused to glower at her.
‘Just how much work have I achieved so far?
Practically nothing.
I knew it was a mistake to let you stay on.
Well, you can have Water Gypsy all to yourself.
I'll make alternative arrangements.’
‘How…how long will it take us to get back to your moorings?’
Robbie ventured to ask when the long, uncomfortably silent walk was over and Water Gypsy was under way once more.
She had never thought of herself as an indecisive person, but now she didn't know whether she wanted the time to pass quickly, or whether she wanted to guard jealously the hours left to her of Fen's company.
It seemed as if he was now embarrassed by hers.
‘Several days,’ he said tersely.
‘Remember all those damned locks?
It's a pity you can't manage the return trip by yourself, but it would be too much for a woman alone.
And if you weren't a woman,’ he concluded grimly, ‘none of this would have happened.’
‘Why is it always the woman who's to blame, in your book?’ an angry Robbie wanted to know.
‘It seems to me,’ shrewdly, ‘you must have had an unfortunate relationship to make you so prejudiced.
But it's not fair to tar every woman with the same brush.’
Fen waited until he had negotiated a narrow stretch of the canal and a close encounter with another boat.
Then, ‘I don't normally generalise about women, but your behaviour,’ he told her, ‘hasn't done anything to convince me that you're any different.’
‘My behaviour?
What am I supposed to have done?
And different from whom?’
He ignored her questions, or perhaps he didn't even hear them, engrossed as he was in making his point.
‘When I saw you for the first time, I thought for a moment you were Sybil — come back to plague me.’
‘Were you disappointed?’ she taunted.
‘Disappointed?
No way!
But in fact the similarities between you and Sybil are quite incredible — suspiciously so.
Enough to make me wonder, when we first met, whether Caroline…
But then — in view of the fact that you already had a boyfriend — I acquitted her of any devious motives.’
Robbie wasn't quite sure what he was talking about.
But his reference to Caro's motives struck an answering chill in her heart, simply because she, Robbie, knew so much that Fen did not.
She too had been suspicious, for Caro had deliberately misled her, letting her believe she would be sharing Water Gypsy with another woman.
And Caro knew that Hugh was out of the picture.
Had Caro deliberately…?
Was it possible her friend had been matchmaking — her stepbrother and her best friend?
But Fen was still talking.
‘You could almost pass for Sybil's younger sister.
Tall, same shade of hair, same eye colour.
The only difference…’
But here, frustratingly, he stopped.
‘Did Caroline tell you any of this?’ he demanded.
Robbie shook her head.
‘Her letters only mentioned you once or twice — in the early days — just after her mother married your father, and then only by your pen name.
And you know I was expecting to share Water Gypsy with Fenella.’
‘Fenella!’ he scoffed.
‘Fenella's my sister and I'm very fond of her.
But I have no illusions.
The thought of a day, let alone months, spent on board a narrow boat would fill her with horror.
Fenella's not the outdoor type.’
‘And was Sybil the outdoor type?’
‘Very much so.
When I met her, I thought I'd met the ideal woman.
We seemed to suit each other in every particular.’
Robbie gave an involuntary sigh.
Every particular.
That meant that they must have had a good sexual relationship too.
She found herself wondering painfully how she compared in that respect with this Sybil.
‘But she was just a gorgeous bitch,’ Fen continued.
Then, ‘But no, that's doing dogs an injustice.
She was more feline.
She had a cat's grace, but she also had its fickleness, its cruelty.
Dogs relate to their owner.
Cats will happily go to anyone who feeds them — and in Sybil's case it was anyone who fed her ego.’
‘You must have loved her very much — to be so  devastated ?’
‘At the time I thought I did.
We were engaged, within weeks of marriage, when I discovered she was seeing another man.
Sybil had a very deprived childhood.
Perhaps it was that which made her avid for the things that money could buy.
I'm not poor by any means, but he was wealthy beyond even Sybil's dreams of avarice.’
‘But you must have got over her — eventually,’ she pointed out.
‘I mean, there's Petula now.’
He went in for some pretty awful names, Robbie decided — first Sybil, now Petula.
‘Oh, I got over her all right,’ Fen said grimly.
‘I learned some salutary lessons too.’
Robbie shrugged.
‘We all learn from experience — me too.
But I don't think it's fair to take it out on the next person.
If your attitude to me is anything to go by, Petula must have a thin time of it.’
‘On the contrary,’ he smiled thinly, ‘Petula's the only one of whose love and fidelity I have no doubts.’
His smile broadened.
‘Petula and Sybil loathed each other.’
Robbie shook her head a little, in wonderment and disbelief.
The more she looked at the photographs in Fen's cabin, the less she liked the look of his girlfriend.
She wouldn't trust her to the end of the street.
But love was blind, so they said, and obviously Fen was blinded again by his emotions — and probably by his physical desires too.
That they were pretty overwhelming was evidenced by the way — against all his resolutions — he'd made love to her.
Another thought occurred to her.
‘If you're right about Petula, then you're not being fair to her, are you?
You certainly weren't faithful to her today — unless you believe it's OK for men to have double standards?
And,’ she warned, ‘it's no good trying to cast all the blame for what happened on me.’
‘For your information, I don't believe in double standards for men — any more than I believe in them for women.
But you employed them today, didn't you?
What about your commitment to — what's his name?
Hugh?’
Robbie drew breath to vindicate herself, to tell him that she had not been unfaithful, that so far as she was concerned Hugh had ceased to exist.
But then she thought better of it.
The fact that she was free didn't alter Fen's situation.
‘There doesn't seem to be much point in discussing this any further,’ she said quietly.
‘I think we'd both better forget that today ever happened.’
‘You won't tell Hugh?’
Was he afraid of a scene? she wondered scornfully.
‘No.
Will you tell Petula?’
Suddenly, unexpectedly, Fen grinned.
It was a mirthless grimace, but, ‘Oh, yes, I'll probably tell her all about it.
She's my chief friend and confidante.’
She must also be a very tolerant and understanding person.
But how marvellous, Robbie thought wistfully, to be in a relationship where your lover was all things to you.
If only Fen could be both friend and lover to her.
It was raining by the time they stopped for the night.
Robbie began preparing a meal while Fen completed mooring procedures.
‘I think the good weather's broken,’ he said as he came below.
‘It's turned quite cold and I think we're in for quite a wet spell.
Just as well we're on our way home — there's nothing worse than being confined in a small space by bad weather.’
Unless, Robbie — testing potatoes with a fork — thought darkly, unless you happened to be in love with the person sharing your confinement.
How cosy this could have been, the rain lashing down outside providing a curtain from the world and the two of them here with no occupation except to pleasure each other.
She served up their meal, but had no appetite for it herself.
Water Gypsy 's narrow let-down tables didn't present much of a barrier to those seated at them, and her proximity to Fen was torture to her senses.
The slightest move by either of them could result in the encounter of a foot or, worse still, the brushing of knees.
The conversation was stilted.
Fen for the most part seemed absorbed in his own thoughts, which, judging by his expression, did not please him.
Robbie was glad when she could clear away and wash up, relieved when Fen did not offer to help.
But how was she to get through the rest of the evening?
‘I…
I expect you'd like me to disappear now?’ she suggested, hovering on the threshold of the main cabin.
‘I mean — go to my own quarters?’
Fen didn't answer immediately.
Then, gruffly, ‘No.
It seems a bit extreme to banish you to solitary confinement — especially at this early hour.
Look, we're both adults.
We're not likely to make the same mistakes again.
How about a game of cards?’
A wry smile.
‘That's a pretty harmless occupation — keeps the mind and the hands occupied.’
Robbie felt her spirits lighten a little.
His earlier black mood, the brooding silences, seemed to be at an end.
‘I'd love to play cards,’ she said warmly.
‘We often played at home.’
There was nothing quite like a fast and furious game of cards, she thought, to ease a situation.
Much laughter and badinage arose out of trying to outdo each other, block each other 's moves, and the evening passed more swiftly than she would have believed possible.
‘Well, I'd better say goodnight,’ she said, when at last they called a halt.
‘And thank you.’
‘For what?’
Fen sounded surprised.
‘For this evening.
You could have made it a very unpleasant one for me, but you didn't.’
‘Robbie…’
He stood up and moved restlessly around the cabin.
‘I've no wish to make things uncomfortable for you.
What happened today was unfortunate.
I hadn't intended…
But I'm only human, and you…’
He paused, far too close to where she sat, ‘you are an extremely beautiful and desirable young woman.
Under any other circumstances…’
He broke off, and Robbie waited impatiently, her heart beating fast.
‘But things are as they are,’ he shrugged.
‘And I hope we're both mature enough to treat each other with civility and respect for the few remaining days we're forced to spend together.’
Civility and respect — what cold emotionless qualities he expected of her.
Robbie was becoming almost accustomed to sleepless nights since she'd met Fen Marshall.
Tonight he had left her with a few unanswered questions, and speculations buzzing around her brain.
In what way, for instance, was she unlike Sybil?
Was that good or bad?
And what other circumstances could Fen envisage whereby their relationship might have been different?
Was it possible he had any regrets that they were neither of them free to give the undoubted chemistry between them full rein?
These problems and a long evening incarcerated below decks without fresh air were giving her a headache.
If she'd been at home and beset by devils like this, she would most likely have gone for a walk.
Fresh air and exercise, she generally found, could banish most megrims.
The thought of escaping from her stuffy cabin became irresistible.
She had never suffered from claustrophobia, but right now she could imagine just how its victims felt.
She had to get out.
But to do so meant passing through Fen's cabin, and she'd tried that once before and been caught out.
She sat up, flicked on her torch and looked thoughtfully at the cabin window.
It wasn't a large one, but she was slim; she might be able to wriggle through.
The rain seemed to have stopped.
The sky was clear and a full moon shone, lighting the landscape.
It was worth a try.
She pulled on jeans and T-shirt, opened the window to its fullest extent and cautiously inserted her head and shoulders in the gap.
Yes, it was possible, and where head and shoulders could go the rest should present no difficulty.
Despite all her caution, her wriggling movements made Water Gypsy sway a little at her moorings, and once or twice she stopped and held her breath, but no movement or challenge came from the narrow boat's main cabin.
At last she was through, with a narrow foothold on the side of the boat.
From there she should be able to jump the eighteen inches or so to the towpath.
She braced herself, measuring the distance.
‘Hey!
What the hell…?’
About to jump, Robbie lost concentration, her grip and her foothold, and fell with a splash into the murky waters of the canal.
Although she could swim a little, she had never particularly liked the sport.
And certainly she'd never had to swim in these conditions.
Hampered by her clothes, her ears, nose and mouth full of foul-tasting water, she floundered.
She was dimly aware of another splash close at hand, and visions of water-rats crossed her mind.
She struck out blindly and found herself taken in a firm grip.
She tried to speak, but the effort cost her another mouthful of water.
‘Shut up and hold still,’ a familiar voice adjured her.
‘Don't for God's sake struggle.’
His admonition was unnecessary, for Robbie chose that moment to black out, and the next thing she knew she was lying face down on the canal bank, with Fen applying rough but effective resuscitation techniques.
‘Fen…
I…’
Her words were lost in a fit of coughing, and at once he dragged her to her feet, supporting her across Water Gypsy 's gangplank.
‘What the bloody hell did you think you were playing at?’ he demanded savagely.
Despite her faint protests and attempts to ward him off, he was busily stripping off her wet and foul-smelling clothing.
‘You could have drowned.’
‘I…
I wanted to go ashore,’ she told him through teeth that clattered together unpleasantly.
He enveloped her in a large towel and began a vigorous and painful rubbing.
But after the first few seconds, the rubbing was no longer painful.
It was a sensual experience, the warm friction of the towel moving up and down her legs, gently massaging her thighs.
Then she realised that the sensation was becoming too pleasant, and she tried once more to pull away.
‘Keep still,’ he commanded, and then, ‘Tell me, why didn't you use the conventional exit?’
‘I…
I didn't want to disturb you.
I thought…’
‘You don't think…that's your problem.
I wasn't asleep.
I wasn't even in bed.
And your witless behaviour is causing me more trouble in the end.
It's lucky for you I was out on the towpath —’
‘Lucky!’
Robbie interrupted from between still chattering teeth.
‘If you hadn't been out there, if you hadn't shouted at me I'd never have fallen in.’
‘That's debatable.’
Fen paused in his ministrations and without turning a hair stripped off his own sodden clothing.
Hastily Robbie averted her eyes.
‘I…
I'll get back to bed,’ she muttered.
‘You won't.’
He wound a towel around his midriff.
‘You'll stay right where you are until I've made you a hot drink.
The weather's turned cold, and heaven knows what germs you've imbibed from that canal water.’
He pushed her down on to his bunk, pulling his duvet around her, then took a fresh towel and began to dry her hair.
‘Please,’ Robbie whispered, ‘let me…’
‘You keep yourself wrapped up.
I'll attend to this.
As it is, it's going to take quite a while — it's so long and thick…and still beautiful,’ he said huskily, ‘even when it's wet.’
There was something extremely sensuous about having a man dry her hair, especially this man.
For such a large man, for such large hands, he was surprisingly gentle.
He was standing very close to her, his waist and hips only inches from her face and covered only by the towel wound sarongwise about his middle.
An inexpressible lethargy, born of shock and mingled desire, made her want to lean her head forward against him, to have her face and mouth close to that part of him which, earlier, had taken her into such a seventh heaven of ecstasy.
She shivered and Fen swore.
‘Dammit, you're probably going to get a chill.
And we've no hot water bottles or extra blankets on board.
I'll get you that drink.’
The drink when it came was hot milk laced with whisky, and Robbie pulled a wry face.
‘Drink it,’ Fen ordered, ‘and take these.’
He handed her two aspirin, then stood over her while she drank it.
‘Feeling any warmer?’ he demanded.
‘Yes,’ she lied, and he knew she lied.
‘Move over,’ he ordered, and as she stared uncomprehendingly at him, he repeated the order, his tone ragged with irritation.
‘We've got to get you warm somehow, and the best way I know is transferred body heat.
Turn your back to me.’
He was getting in beside her, and Robbie shrank away from him.
‘No, Fen, I…’
‘Be still, damn you!
I'm not assaulting your virtue — not this time,’ he added the grim rider.
The overhead light went out and Robbie felt him move up close behind her, his arm pulling her firmly into the curve of his body.
‘Now try to sleep,’ he ordered.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Try to sleep!
Even if Robbie had been in the mood for laughter, it would have been a cynical mirth.
How for heaven's sake did Fen expect her to sleep — like this — her every sense screaming his proximity and her need of him?
Whenever she had allowed thoughts of sharing a bed with Fen to enter her mind, just the imagining had racked her body with sensuous shivers.
And now this was the reality.
She stirred restlessly.
‘Lie still!’
Fen growled in her ear, but despite the stern admonition his breath was a subtle caress.
‘I…
I can't,’ she admitted, ‘not like this.
I…
I'm not used to sharing a bed.’
‘Is it disturbing you?’
He was husky now.
‘You…you know it is.’
He must know what their closeness was doing to her, if its effect on him was anything to go by.
For she could feel a certain unmistakable stirring in the body curved so tightly to hers.
‘Fen,’ she pleaded, ‘please let go of me.
I'm all right now, really I am.
I…
I'll go to my own cabin.’
She hoped her words carried more conviction than she felt.
She didn't want to go.
She wanted to stay here, the place that was her idea of heaven — Fen's arms.
She wanted to turn to face him, to bury her face against that broad chest, to feel his bodily stirring grow until…
She groaned, tortured once more by her own vivid imagination.
‘Robbie?’
His arm, at first placed so firmly and impersonally around her, relaxed and instead his hand moved at her waist, caressing its curve.
‘Robbie, what is it?’
His tone was suddenly, unexpectedly velvet, making her nerve-ends quiver.
‘You know !’
The words burst from her.
‘You know what's wrong.
Fen, this is more than flesh and blood can stand.
You know — right or wrong — the effect we have on each other.
And this is just asking for trouble.’
‘Yes.’
He seemed to have difficulty articulating just that one word.
And his restless, questing hand moved upwards, encompassing a breast, thumbing the hardened nipple.
She bit back a gasp of sheer pleasure.
‘Fen, please — don't do something you'll regret later.’
Hypocrite, she adjured herself.
You're not making that much effort to resist him.
Words aren't enough to stop what's happening between you.
But though she knew she ought to deter that straying hand, struggle free of him, insist that he let her leave his bed, her own treacherous flesh kept her prisoner.
Just a few minutes more of this heaven, she told herself.
Her words certainly weren't having any effect on him, and the hand was becoming more importunate, turning her to face him.
He was too strong for her, but even now she made a last-ditch stand, her hands going out to thrust at his chest.
But oh, the sensation of hair-roughened skin, slightly dampened by perspiration…
Her defensive movement became an involuntary caress.
‘Fen, this is insane.
I…’
But her words were cut off, his mouth capturing hers, denying its freedom of speech.
Not just one hand now but two were enforcing his onslaught on her senses.
Somewhere deep in Robbie's rapidly fading consciousness a little warning voice admonished her not to let this happen, that it would only lead to heartache.
But the small voice was drowned in the rush of sensations engulfing her.
With a little sigh, she slid her arms up and around his neck, her hands caressing his nape, allowing him to pull her hard up against the delightful seduction of his manhood.
At her sudden acquiescence, he made a little sound of satisfaction deep in his throat and his embrace tightened, becoming almost painful in its intensity, making it difficult for her to breathe.
His mouth moved hungrily, devouring hers, his tongue darting, flickering, suggesting the deeper intimacy to come.
She felt him reach up above his head and the bunk headlight came on.
‘Fen?
Why?’
‘I want to see you,’ he told her throatily.
‘I want to look at you.’
She couldn't meet his eyes, the expression in them was too intense.
But in averting her gaze, she caught a glimpse of two photographs, whose pictured image seemed to be staring at her accusingly — Petula.
Incredibly, for a short while she had managed to forget the other girl's existence.
Now the sharp reminder supplied the impetus she had lacked to break free.
‘What the hell?’
Fen exploded as she scrambled over him in a tangle of arms, legs and dishevelled hair.
But Robbie was not about to stay and explain, or argue.
Instead, she made good her escape, bolting the galley door so that he could not follow her.
In her own cabin, she pulled on her nightdress, then huddled in her bunk, curled in a circle of misery.
But she was not cold now.
She was burning hot with embarrassment and guilt.
She knew that when Fen recovered from his temporary insanity, his self-disgust would only be matched by his disgust for her.
So far as he was concerned they were both promised to other people.
She wasn't angry with Fen.
She recognised that their situation had imposed an intolerable strain on his self-control — as it had on her own — more than human flesh and blood could endure.
And one thing Fen had proved himself to be was very human.
She was, however, very much afraid that he would be angry with her.
He was probably livid right at this moment, at her rejection of him.
But surely not as furious as he would have been afterwards, if they'd given way to the temptations of their flesh?
When she woke next morning, she knew at once that Water Gypsy was on the move.
A glance at her watch told her it was already mid-morning.
She wasn't surprised Fen hadn't called her.
Their first encounter today was going to be a tense and difficult one.
She just didn't know how to approach him or how he would treat her.
The sight of the bolted galley door reminded her that Fen would not have breakfasted.
That wouldn't improve his humour.
Should she cook something — as a peace-offering?
He would probably prefer to eat as they travelled.
After last night he would be more anxious than ever to have their journey over.
‘I've made you some bacon sandwiches,’ she said diffidently ten minutes later.
Fen did not even look at her.
He acknowledged the plate she set within his reach with an incomprehensible grunt, which might or might not have been one of thanks.
‘How…how long have we been on the move?’ she asked.
She looked around in the hope of recognising some landmarks.
‘Since seven.’
His tone did not encourage further conversation, but Robbie persisted.
They had at least three or four more days together.
They couldn't maintain this strained silence indefinitely.
‘Would you like me to take a turn at the tiller?’
‘No, thanks.’
To her horror, Robbie felt tears welling up in her eyes.
She couldn't bear it if he was going to be coldly hostile again.
He didn't know, of course, how much it hurt her.
He couldn't know how much she loved him — would probably be horrified if he guessed she felt more than a physical attraction.
‘I'm sorry,’ she murmured brokenly.
‘Last night —’
‘Last night,’ he snapped, ‘was entirely my fault.
Night-time madness isn't appealing, seen in the cold light of day.
I'm not proud of myself, and I want to forget all about it.
And if you're going to cry,’ with a brooding look at her, ‘damned well do it out of my sight and hearing.’
Robbie fled back to her cabin.
She flung herself down on her bunk, burying her face in the pillow.
She would not cry, she told herself fiercely.
She wouldn't shed tears over that…that brute.
He didn't deserve her love — he was utterly hateful.
Immersed in her misery, her fight for self-control, she didn't notice that Water Gypsy was no longer under way.
Her first indication that they had stopped was Fen's voice close at hand and then his hand on her head, stroking her hair.
‘Robbie —’
‘Go away!’ she choked.
Couldn't he leave her some shreds of dignity?
He was sitting on the edge of her bunk now.
She could feel him there, inches away.
‘I'm not usually such a brute,’ she heard him say.
‘I had no right to take out my anger with myself on you.’
A sob she would not let him hear racked her from head to foot.
Why did he have to choose this moment to be nice to her?
The kindness in his voice, his touch on her hair were undamming the tears she had resolutely forced back.
‘Robbie!
Robbie!’ he groaned.
‘I can't bear to see or hear women cry.
It —’
‘Then go away, damn you!’ she said indistinctly through clenched teeth.
He sighed heavily.
‘I can't leave you — not like this.’
His hands were on her shoulders now, lifting and turning her until she was within the circle of his arms.
One hand, fingers protectively splayed, held her head against his chest.
Her hands clenched in the wool of his sweater, Robbie fought a losing battle for control.
‘I…
I wasn't crying,’ she hiccuped between sobs, ‘I wasn't.
Not until you c-came.
I would have been all right.
Someone being nice to me always makes it h-harder.’
She felt his chest rise and fall on a long, slightly unsteady intake of breath.
But his only answer was to continue the rhythmic stroking of her hair.
She ought to insist that he go away.
This was only undoing her newly formed resolution to hate him.
But, as someone had once said to her — she couldn't remember who — hate was only a hair's breadth away from love.
‘Does…does this Hugh of yours ever make you cry?’ she heard Fen ask.
‘He only made me cry once,’ she mumbled against his sweater.
The only time she'd cried over Hugh was when he'd ditched her.
Before that, she realised, during the three years she'd known him, he had never moved her to any great depths of emotion — not the same soaring heights and plummeting depths she'd known in just a few days with Fen.
‘Only once?’
His voice was taut as though with anger.
But why?
‘What did he do to you?’ he demanded.
Robbie found that instead of sobs she was now fighting back a hysterical desire to laugh.
What would Fen say if she gave him a truthful answer, told him that Hugh had done her a good turn, jilted her before she could make the most dreadful mistake of her life?
She hadn't been in love with Hugh.
It had been a pale imitation.
This was the real thing — but her encounter with Fen had come too late.
Misery welled up once more.
Fen held her a little away from him, his hand going under her chin so that she could not hide her tear-streaked face.
Her eyes tightly closed in a vain attempt to hold back more tears, she could not see his expression, but she did hear his harsh intake of breath.
‘Only a dyed-in-the-wool swine would make you cry,’ he muttered, ‘so what does that make me?’
His lips brushed her eyelids, the kiss insubstantial as butterfly wings.
‘Why can't I keep away from you,’ he demanded, ‘when I know damned well I haven't the right —’He didn't finish his sentence.
Instead he covered her quivering lips with his own, and at once Robbie felt the familiar tightness in her chest, the growing warmth in the pit of her stomach.
She wasn't quite sure who deepened the kiss, or who moved until they were in contact from head to toe and she felt the pulsing of his hard, warm body.
Her head spun dizzily.
‘Water Gypsy ahoy!’
The voice, loud and close at hand, rudely shattered the moment.
With a muttered curse Fen was on his feet and out of the cabin.
Robbie could hear him talking to the intruder.
Then, moments later, she felt Water Gypsy 's engine fire.
He wasn't coming back.
They were moving off.
Later, much later, she learned that in his haste to come after her, Fen had not secured their mooring properly and Water Gypsy had drifted, blocking the path of another boat.
But for the present she stayed where she was, collecting her thoughts, disciplining her emotions.
It was just as well, she told herself, that they had been interrupted.
What had been going on in her cabin could only have led to one thing, and that was something that must never happen again.
Because it was destroying her, these violent swings from high to low, the arousing of needs that had no right to be fulfilled.
It seemed that Fen had made the same resolution.
For, over the next few days, his manner was coolly polite and impersonal.
Wherever possible he avoided her company.
He made no reference to what had so nearly happened again.
And when they tied up at Water Gypsy 's permanent moorings, he gathered his few possessions together and left with only the most perfunctory of farewells.
After he had gone, Robbie sat for ages on his bunk, her eyes fixed unseeingly.
There was a hard knot of misery in her throat, but she seemed to have no tears left to shed.
Once again her life felt lacking in direction and purpose.
This had become her world, this boat with Fen, and now the energising force had been withdrawn, leaving her in a limbo of despair.
As her eyes refocused she noticed a depression in the pillow Fen had used — and something else.
She leaned closer and reached out, to pick up a few strands of dark hair.
They clung magnetically to her fingertips, and for a moment she stared at them, a strong urge to preserve this memento possessing her.
But then, with an exclamation of self-mockery, she went into the galley and brushed the hairs into the waste bin.
It was time to put Fen Marshall out of her mind.
She reported for work two days early.
‘I was getting bored with being idle,’ she told her new employer.
‘And the weather's a bit dismal right now for boating.’
The veterinary surgery was a busy one, serving a large catchment area, and at least Robbie's days were full.
It was the night-times which gave her problems.
It was then that she couldn't put Fen out of her mind.
It was then that her physical need of him kept her wide-eyed and restless.
‘You're looking a bit peaky,’ they told her at work, and she tried desperately to conceal her fatigue.
Whatever happened she mustn't crack up.
She couldn't afford to lose this job.
She was contributing more than she had been able to before to her mother's household expenses.
So far her work had been in the surgery.
But after she had been there three weeks, she was asked to make a house call.
‘It's a bitch in pup, due to whelp soon,’ the receptionist told her.
‘There seem to be problems, and everyone else is out.’
She gave Robbie directions.
‘It's called Chimneys.
It's a long way out, but you can't miss it.
Just watch out for the gateposts — topped by lions.’
One of the practice's vans was at her disposal, and Robbie found herself almost enjoying the drive.
Since she'd started work she had seen nothing of the surrounding area, except that covered by the bus route which took her to work and back each day.
After a busy day she was far too tired to do any exploring.
Most of her free time was spent in Water Gypsy 's main cabin, reliving the memories it held for her.
Though summer was waning now, the air was still warm, but it was the sweet warmth of autumn, golden and smoke-smelling.
Already some of the trees were losing their leaves, carpeting fields and lanes with red-gold, bronze and copper.
It was a long way, the road winding narrowly, curving unhurriedly over the flanks of the sheep-spangled hills that contoured the valley, gaining height slowly but steadily.
Below her there were fugitive glimpses of a winding thread of water that was the canal.
Somewhere down there, hidden among the trees, was Water Gypsy 's mooring.
She found the house easily.
Her first glimpse of it was through elaborate iron gates set between two large stone pillars surmounted by rampant lions.
The perfect house — a beautiful golden stone Elizabethan manor of steeply pitched roofs, the tall chimneys that gave the house its name, pointed gables and mullioned windows.
The house was fronted by a flat Italianate lily pond.
It was the house of her dreams, slightly mysterious, yet beckoning, welcoming, inviting admiration.
An elderly woman answered the doorbell.
Her anxious expression cleared as Robbie announced her errand.
‘Thank goodness.’
She led the way through a vast entrance hall, but at such a rate that Robbie received only a jumbled impression of floorboards polished to the lustre of old tortoiseshell, of panelled walls and copper jugs holding arrangements of dried grasses and ferns.
The pregnant bitch was in the vast kitchen, a surprisingly modern kitchen.
She looked up eagerly at the sound of footsteps, but then, as she saw the two women, with an almost human expression of disappointment she turned her head away and with a heavy sigh lowered her head to her paws.
‘She's missing her owner, I'm afraid,’ the elderly woman said.
‘Then you're not —?’
‘Oh, no.
I'm just the housekeeper.’
A strange sinking sensation invaded Robbie's stomach, and as, at that moment, another dog wandered into the kitchen — a magnificent male with a noble head — her fears mounted.
An old manor house, a golden Labrador and a Dalmatian…
‘Wh-what is the owner's name?’ she asked, but scarcely needed the answer.
‘Mr Marshall.
But he's away, I'm afraid, abroad.
That's the problem.
I'm here on my own, and I've just had a phone call from my brother-in-law to say my sister is dangerously ill.
I've simply got to go to her.
But there's the dogs, you see.
I was wondering if you could board them.
It's not what they're used to, but…’
The housekeeper shrugged helplessly.
Robbie's nerves had steadied.
At least she was not in imminent danger of encountering Fen Marshall.
‘So there's nothing actually wrong with the bitch at present?’
And as the woman nodded, ‘We do have pens available,’ she said slowly.
Then, ‘All right, I'll take them back with me.
Wh-when do you expect Mr Marshall back?’
The housekeeper spread her hands in an expression of uncertainty.
‘I never know.
And I didn't like to ask.
He was in a very strange mood when he went away this time.
He's usually the most charming of men to work for, but just lately…talk about bad-tempered.
You've never seen anything like it.’
Robbie rather suspected that she had.
It was with great difficulty that she persuaded the two dogs into the rear of the van, and they barked their protest all the way back to the surgery.
It was a relief to hand them over to the kennelmaid.
‘What are their names?’ she was asked.
‘There's only a phone number on their collar tags.’
Robbie looked blankly at the other girl.
‘I haven't a clue.
Everything happened so quickly, and I never thought to ask.
I suppose I assumed…that is, won't we have their names on record?’
But the receptionist when consulted shook her head.
‘They're not registered with us.
But I suppose we'll have to hang on to them now until the owner gets back.’
Because the dogs belonged to Fen, Robbie could not help taking a deeper interest than usual in their welfare.
Over the next few days she made a point of visiting the two animals in their enclosure.
It was ridiculous, she told herself, and no help at all in her attempt to forget Fen Marshall.
It was soon apparent to everyone that the two dogs were fretting.
But then, on the Friday evening, the Dalmatian bitch became unusually restless, pacing the concrete yard and making little whimpering noises.
It was obvious to Robbie that the bitch was likely to give birth very soon.
‘Damn,’ the senior vet said, ‘and it's Saturday tomorrow.
The boss is away for the weekend and I'm on call.
I'll probably be in and out all day.
Yet someone ought to keep an eye on her.’
‘I've got an idea,’ Robbie said slowly.
She knew she was crazy, but…
‘The boat I'm living on belongs to Mr Marshall.
The dogs are used to spending time there with him.
They might be happier —’
‘Brilliant!
Absolutely brilliant.
Couldn't be better.
They're all yours.’
At least this time she had some help loading them into the van.
But then there was the journey, with its repeat performance of doggy protests.
Once they reached the canal bank, however, Robbie had no doubt that she'd done the right thing.
Both dogs were out of the back of the van, straining on their leads to reach Water Gypsy 's gangplank.
Once aboard, she found she could let them off the leash.
The Labrador settled down on deck, but the Dalmatian made a beeline for the smaller cabin and took possession of the bunk.
Since Fen's departure, Robbie had continued to use the smaller cabin.
The larger one would have been more convenient, but somehow it was imbued too strongly with Fen's personality.
Now it looked as if the choice had been taken away from her.
The Dalmatian, politely but firmly requested to ‘get down’, bared her teeth and rumbled a growl, and Robbie was not prepared to risk doing battle with her.
She left the bitch in possession and took her evening meal up on deck — the evenings were just warm enough and light enough.
The Labrador, a much easier-going animal, edged its way towards her and sprawled at her side, wistfully eyeing her food but much too well mannered to help himself.
It was probably very bad for his discipline, but Robbie couldn't resist those enormous soulful eyes, and she slipped him a chocolate biscuit.
From then on the Labrador followed her about devotedly.
‘But you're a totally different kettle of fish, aren't you?’
Robbie told the Dalmatian.
The bitch was wary of her advances and, though she condescended to pick at the food Robbie put down for her, she refused to leave the small cabin even to accompany the Labrador for an evening walk.
Robbie and the dog had just returned from their stroll and she was about to lock up and go below for the night when a sound from the towpath caught her attention.
Half in and half out of the cabin door, she watched the approach of three figures.
They were only silhouettes in the dusk.
Three youths, judging by their build and voices.
What were they doing in this quiet spot at this time?
Visions of vandalism crossed her mind.
The Labrador growled softly in his throat and she put a restraining hand on his collar, glad of his company.
If the youths showed signs of any untoward behaviour the loosing of this magnificent animal should be sufficient deterrent.
She waited.
One of the lads seemed to be carrying a bag.
The three paused at the water's edge, not far from Water Gypsy 's moorings.
The bag was swung back and forth, then launched into the water.
With a sudden bark the Labrador pulled free of Robbie's too-gentle grip and in one bound made the towpath.
The youths, startled by his unexpected appearance, turned tail and ran.
Robbie had expected the dog to pursue them, but instead there was a splash and she realised he had gone into the water.
Of course, a well-trained Labrador made a good retriever.
She ran down the gangplank and watched as the dog heaved himself up the bank, dragging his burden.
It was a black plastic dustbin bag.
He placed it at Robbie's feet and sat, head on one side, as if saying, ‘Well now, what about that?’
The bag twitched and Robbie heard a faint sound.
She crouched over the bag, untied the knotted corners and peered in.
In the dim light she could just make out some moving shapes.
A piteous cry revealed the occupants' identity.
Kittens.
Cruelty to animals made Robbie furious.
‘The rotten little beasts!’ she exclaimed aloud.
Sweeping up the bag, she hurried aboard, down into the cabin, the dog following.
Gently she tipped the furry contents on to the floor.
Three kittens, one white, one tabby, one ginger.
All still alive, thank God.
There must have been sufficient air trapped in the bag.
But if their rescuer had not been so swift…
‘Well done, boy!’
She patted the Labrador's head, and at her tone of approbation his heavy tail thumped the floor.
‘Poor little things,’ she continued aloud, ‘I don't believe they're even old enough to be weaned.’
She fetched a cardboard box left over from her last shopping trip, lined it with an old towel and put the tiny creatures in.
Minutes later, with a medicine dropper from the boat's first aid kit, she was endeavouring to give the kittens some warmed milk.
But it was hard going.
‘This is going to be a full-time job,’ she muttered.
She set her alarm clock to go off at hourly intervals throughout the night, but even before its first summons she was disturbed.
‘What the…?’
Then, ‘Oh, no — the bitch!’
Bleary-eyed, she pulled on her robe and hurried through to the other cabin.
‘You do choose your moments, don't you?’ she demanded.
‘And it looks as if you're going to need my help.’
Half an hour later Robbie sat back on her heels.
Satisfaction warmed her heart as she watched two healthy pups suckling contentedly.
This was what it was all about.
This was why she'd chosen this profession.
She reached out and stroked the Dalmatian's head, and to her surprise the bitch licked her hand.
‘Well, well,’ Robbie chuckled.
‘Animals are full of surprises.
You're not so stand-offish after all.
Looks as though I've made a friend for life.’
A day or two later she was to receive another surprise so far as animals were concerned when the ginger kitten, more adventurous than his brothers, found his way into the cabin where the Dalmatian was suckling her pups and joined in the free feast.
To Robbie's amazement the bitch, despite the fact that the minute claws kneading her dugs must be extremely painful, was tolerating the kitten's presence.
‘Now I've seen everything,’ Robbie exclaimed.
She would miss the two dogs now she had returned them to their home.
‘How is your sister?’
Robbie had asked the elderly housekeeper.
‘On the mend, praise be.
But she'll never be very strong.’
A sigh.
‘I wish I weren't so far away from her.’
‘I suppose,’ Robbie said with assumed casualness, ‘you haven't heard anything from Mr Marshall?’
A shake of the head.
‘No.
The first I'll know, I expect, is when he walks through that door.’
A week later Robbie was to have a similar experience.
She was just preparing her evening meal when she was aware of someone coming aboard.
Now that the evenings were drawing in, she really must start locking up once she was aboard.
She turned down the gas and hurried to intercept the intruder.
‘Oh, it's you,’ she said flatly, a tone which did not reflect her inner turmoil.
‘I've had more enthusiastic greetings.’
Fen was wry.
Robbie shrugged.
‘I wasn't expecting to see you again.’
‘Since this is my boat, I would remind you I can come and go as I please.’
‘Are you…do you want to use Water Gypsy ?’ she asked anxiously.
‘No, I…
What the deuce?’
A mewling sound from the cardboard box attracted his attention.
He investigated.
‘Kittens?
Are you starting some kind of floating menagerie on my boat?’
Hastily Robbie explained.
He seemed mildly amused.
‘So old Boris is setting up as a lifesaver, is he?’
‘You don't really object, do you?’ she asked.
‘I won't be keeping all of them.
Just this one.
He's my favourite.’
She picked up the ginger kitten and held it cradled in the curve of her neck.
Fen smiled.
‘He's certainly the one for you — your hair almost camouflages him.’
He reached out and caressed the tiny creature, and Robbie felt her insides quiver.
It was almost as if stroking the kitten was a substitute for touching her hair.
‘What are you going to call him?’
Robbie felt herself colouring.
‘Er — Raff, actually.’
‘He certainly has a raffish look.’
‘Yes,’ Robbie said thankfully.
She'd been afraid he might guess that ‘Raff’ was short for Raphael.
She too had been struck by the similarity between the kitten's fur and her own hair, and Raphael would have been another subtle reminder for the future of Fen.
‘I'll…
I'll find homes for the others,’ she croaked.
‘They're weaned now.
Perhaps,’ encouraged by his petting of the kitten, ‘you'd take one of them.
You like animals —’
‘I like dogs.
And Petula hates cats.’
If Robbie had needed any reason to deepen her dislike for his girlfriend that was it.
She looked the sort who would think more of her appearance than of anything else.
She wouldn't want cats' hairs on her clothes or their claws snagging her tights.
‘How could anyone possibly hate such adorable little creatures?’ she said indignantly.
Robbie had no time for anyone who disliked animals or children.
She would have liked to express her opinion of his girlfriend, but prudently refrained.
Fen seemed to be in an amiable mood today.
She didn't want to destroy that.
Instead, ‘You never said why you were here,’ she reminded him.
‘To thank you.’
And at her puzzled expression, ‘For looking after the dogs while my housekeeper was away.
I gather you delivered the pups?’
‘Yes, but how did you —’
‘I went to the surgery first, and they told me you'd taken responsibility for the two of them.
I'm very grateful.
Neither of them has ever been cooped up in kennels.’
Robbie shuffled her feet.
‘It was the least I could do,’ she said gruffly.
‘You let me stay aboard Water Gypsy — even though you hated the idea.’
If only he knew that looking after his dogs had made her feel that she had just the smallest stake in his life, that it had in some measure comforted her for his absence.
‘You must have quite a way with animals,’ Fen went on.
‘They both tend to be very much one-man dogs.’
‘I usually find animals respond to people who like them ,’ Robbie said.
Then, greatly daring, because somehow she had to know, ‘You…you said your girlfriend doesn't like cats.
Does…does she like dogs?’
‘Petula's very fond of dogs,’ Fen said.
His tone was grave, but there was a twinkle in his eye as though, heaven forbid, he knew why she couldn't seem to keep off the subject of his personal relationships.
There and then Robbie vowed she would never pose another question on the topic.
It would be humiliating if he ever guessed exactly how she felt about him, how much she envied the other woman.
There was a long silence during which she tried desperately to think of some further topic of conversation — just to keep him here a little longer.
‘How was —’
‘How are —?’
They both began to speak at the same time, and Fen gestured to her to go first.
‘I was just going to ask how your trip went.
I believe you were abroad?
Was it to do with your current book?’
‘No.
A climbing holiday.
I felt in need of a break, some vigorous exercise.’
Robbie eyed him consideringly.
She had felt much the same herself of late, restless, needing to work off that restlessness, only she hadn't had the same opportunities to indulge herself.
‘And you enjoyed it?’
He shrugged.
‘So-so.’
‘What were you going to say?’ she asked.
‘Oh, just how are you making out, now that the summer's over.
You may find the boat a bit cold when winter really sets in.’
‘I'll manage.
I'm used to it.
Our house doesn't have central heating.’
‘Your mother must be a very remarkable woman,’ said Fen and the genuine admiration in his voice made Robbie's eyes prick.
‘She is,’ she said simply.
She couldn't trust herself to say any more on that subject.
She gestured toward the galley.
‘Have you eaten?
I was just about to —’
‘I haven't, actually.
My housekeeper's away again.
I gather you know about her sister?
She's had a relapse.
I was planning to have a pub meal.
Something certainly smells good,’ he said wistfully.
‘Then why not have something here?’ asked Robbie.
Why on earth couldn't his precious girlfriend look after him? she wondered.
But perhaps with her looks she wasn't the domesticated sort.
Poor Fen.
‘It's only bacon and eggs, but —’
‘But you just happen to know I'm very partial to bacon and eggs.’
He chuckled reminiscently.
‘We certainly ate quite a lot of that, didn't we?’
But she hadn't needed this reminder of their time together to bring back other, painful recollections.
All she could seem to think of these days was the way Fen had kissed her, made love to her.
She could recall every sensation as if it were happening again — here, now.
‘I was going to say — perhaps you'd rather not stay.
I —’
‘I'd like to stay.’
Then, quickly, ‘But I promise you I won't be making a habit of it.’
No, she thought sadly, I didn't suppose you would.
CHAPTER EIGHT
It was as well, Robbie thought, that cooking bacon and eggs did not require too much concentration and expertise.
The knowledge that Fen was leaning in the doorway of the galley watching her made her hands shake.
Her every sense was vitally aware of his presence.
‘What have you been doing with yourself,’ he asked, ‘apart from work?’
‘Not a lot,’ she admitted.
‘Have you written to your mother lately?
The boyfriend?
He hasn't been down yet?’
‘I telephoned Mum.
It's better than a letter to hear her voice.’
‘Everything all right there?’
‘Except that she's missing me,’ Robbie said.
‘I can understand that.’
There was something in his voice that made her determined not to look at him.
He wasn't going to start all that again, was he?’
‘And the boyfriend?’ he persisted.
‘I told you — he's very busy.’
She hesitated, wondering if she dared, then, ‘And how's Petula?’
He gave one of his irritatingly complacent smiles.
‘Couldn't be better.’
Hideous, hurtful answer.
What he felt for Petula must be real love, that transcended the sexual titillation he felt for her.
That seemed to have exhausted all permissible topics of conversation.
But fortunately their meal was ready now, which as a rule gave Fen an excuse not to talk.
He was certainly quiet, but it was one of his brooding silences.
From time to time she caught him looking at her, his expression unfathomable, and each time the tension in the cabin seemed to grow.
Robbie had been hungry when she got home from work, but now she only toyed with her food.
That knot seemed to have established itself in her throat once more.
She couldn't decide which was worse.
Not seeing Fen for weeks or seeing him and knowing the futility of it all.
The moment he had finished eating, he stood up to leave.
‘You're not going?’ she asked.
‘Yes.
It may seem churlish to leave so soon after eating your food, but I think it would be better.
Perhaps I shouldn't have come.
I wouldn't have done, if I hadn't felt you deserved to be thanked for looking after the dogs.
And if I were to stay…’
He broke off, then, ‘You must allow me to repay your hospitality some time.’
‘Don't bother,’ she said shortly.
‘But I insist.
I always pay my debts.
There's no reason, is there…|?’
He stopped, then went on more positively, ‘There's no reason why we shouldn't be friends.
Your boyfriend couldn't object to that, surely? after all, we do have something in common— Caroline is your friend and my stepsister.
There's no reason why we shouldn't meet socially.’
And was that all they had in common, then?
Robbie wondered painfully.
But she mustn't think about that.
‘I must write to Caro,’ she muttered.
The only trouble was, what could she find to tell her friend?
The only important thing that had happened in her life of late was Fen, but that was a subject she must avoid.
Caro was too astute, quite capable of reading between the lines and discerning Robbie's feelings for her stepbrother.
But it seemed Fen was not to be put off.
‘How about tomorrow evening?’ he asked.
‘I'll be eating out mostly until my housekeeper gets back.’
She ought to refuse, and of course if she really had a boyfriend in the background, as Fen supposed, she would refuse.
After all, if he chose to see her, despite the existence of Petula, that was surely up to him?
And so long as they were eating out…
It was not as if she would be going to his home.
‘All right,’ she said.
How she got through the next day, she couldn't remember.
Fortunately it was an unusually quiet day at the surgery.
As it was, her abstracted mood did not go unnoticed.
‘Anyone would think you were in love,’ one of her colleagues teased.
She skipped lunch in order to go shopping, spending some of her carefully hoarded wages on a new outfit for the occasion.
Only for the sake of her own morale, she assured herself.
It would take all the poise she possessed to spend the evening with Fen, on their new footing as ‘friends’, without revealing her true feelings for him.
It was still light when he picked her up, and his appreciative gaze told her that missing her lunch had not been wasted.
‘With your colouring, you should wear that shade of green more often,’ he told her as he ushered her into the dove-grey Daimler.
‘It exactly matches your eyes.’
She had expected Fen to drive back into Little Kirkton, to one of the restaurants there, but instead he headed out into the country.
She recognised this road.
‘Where are we going?’ she asked fearfully.
‘Surely this is the way to —?’
‘To my house?
Yes.
But,’ drily, ‘don't worry.
Our route just happens to take us that way.’
As they passed the stone pillars, Robbie took a fleeting wistful glance at her dream house, but it was just as well, she told herself firmly, that she was not to enter it again.
Some day, she supposed, Fen would be setting up home there with his girlfriend, and the less she knew about the interior of Chimneys the less material her jealous imagination would have to fester upon.
A few miles further on they came upon one of the delightful little villages with which the Cotswolds seemed to abound.
The houses were all pretty, gabled, with distinctively steep stone roofs and mullioned windows.
In the centre of a large green, a wooden seat, built around three large oaks, was made for village gossips, and at the far end of the green stood an inn — the Golden Fleece.
‘It will be busy,’ Fen warned her, ‘it's very popular.
But I expect that will suit you, since you seem to be afraid of being alone with me.’
Remembering his determined departure the previous evening, Robbie bit back a sharp retort.
She didn't want to spoil the evening.
It was unlikely that there would be many more occasions like this, and she wanted to make the most of it.
The Golden Fleece, though not very large, was a handsome building, half-timbered, with small bay windows at the front and octagonal, projecting stairway and gallery at the back.
A sign over the door proclaimed that the hostelry still brewed its own beer.
The interior, however, scarcely matched its exterior attractions, being plain and functional.
Simple oak settles and tables stood on an uncompromisingly bare floor of white stone flags.
‘But the food's good,’ Fen, immediately attuned to Robbie's disappointment, was able to promise her.
‘Are you enjoying your new job?’ he asked as they waited for their order to be filled.
‘Do you think you'll stay?’
‘I can't afford not to.’
Robbie was unaware how bitter her tone sounded until Fen commented on it.
‘Oh, it's not the work.
I love that, and I like the people.
And I've fallen in love with this part of the country.
But the money is an essential.
In fact,’ she sighed, ‘but for a couple of things, everything would be absolutely perfect.’
‘Oh?
And what are these two drawbacks?’
Fen wanted to know.
One of them she was not prepared to reveal, since it concerned Fen himself.
‘I miss my family,’ she said.
‘With no relatives on either side, there's only the four of us, and we've always been very close.’
‘And I suppose the other problem is being so far away from the boyfriend?’
Fen suggested, and not for the first time Robbie wished she could clear up this misapprehension.
But to deny any current involvement with Hugh would only leave her open to other, dangerous questions.
And so instead she shrugged, a gesture that, fortunately, could mean many things.
‘Thank you for the meal,’ she said as Fen dropped her off at the end of the towpath.
She knew better than to invite him back to Water Gypsy for a coffee.
‘My pleasure.
It's no fun eating alone.’
And with a salute he engaged his gears and was gone.
And that, she supposed, was that.
Debts paid.
No further encounters necessary.
So she was surprised when, on the following Saturday, just as she was doing her chores, Fen turned up.
He would catch her like this, she thought disgustedly, old jeans, old sweater, dirty hands — and face, a quick glance in the mirror told her.
‘I called at the surgery first, but they said it was your weekend off,’ he explained before she could say anything.
‘Do you need a vet, then?
Is something wrong with one of the dogs?’
‘No, nothing like that.
I was wondering if you could spare me an hour.’
‘What for?’ she asked ungraciously.
He seemed to think he could walk in and out of her life at will, just as it suited him.
‘I thought we might go for a coffee somewhere, and then there's something I'd like to show you.’
‘I've just had a coffee.
Can't you just tell me what it is?
I'm very busy.’
‘Too busy to do something that might benefit your mother?’
‘No, of course not.
But what —?’
‘Wait and see,’ he tantalised.
‘I'll have to wash and change.’
Robbie looked down disparagingly at her person.
‘Nonsense, your clothes are fine.
Though perhaps it might be as well to remove the smuts from your face.’
He reached out and with one finger traced the mark on her cheek.
Sternly Robbie suppressed a shiver.
She was not going to allow herself to react to him.
The Daimler was parked at the end of the towpath, and they took the same road.
But this time they did turn in between the lion-surmounted gateposts.
‘Why are we coming here?’
Robbie asked suspiciously.
He'd said this would help her mother in some way, but just what did he expect of her in return?
Fen didn't answer, but instead of continuing straight up to the house he took a fork in the drive which then wound its way around the perimeter of the grounds, inside the high boundary walls.
At length they came to another smaller gate, flanked by a gloriously lopsided storybook cottage.
Its roofing, arranged so that the small slates at the top graduated to larger ones at the eaves, had the same orderly beauty as a fish's scales.
The path to the front door was edged with autumn-flowering plants.
‘Ivy Cottage,’ Fen said as the car drew to a halt.
‘Do you think this would suit your mother?’
She turned to look at him, her suspicions flaring anew.
‘My mother?
But…how…why…|?
I don't understand.’
‘It's quite simple really.
My housekeeper isn't coming back.
She's needed to look after her sister and brother-in-law.
From what you've told me, your mother sounds as if she might be just the right person for the job.’
‘She wouldn't…we couldn't…
I wouldn't accept your charity,’ Robbie said distractedly.
‘Charity be blowed,’ Fen growled.
‘She'd be earning her living.
And the cottage goes with the job.’
‘Did your housekeeper live here, then?’
‘No,’ he admitted.
‘She lived in.
But very shortly I shan't be wanting a live-in housekeeper.
I'll be wanting more privacy.
Someone who comes in by the day would suit me admirably.’
Soon he wouldn't be wanting a live-in housekeeper.
That sounded as if he was planning to get married soon.
She had to know.
But she didn't like the answer to her question.
Oh, this just wasn't fair, Robbie mourned.
Here she was with an opportunity to do something for her mother, something she had always dreamed of doing, and she would have to refuse.
If her mother were living in this Hansel and Gretel cottage, she would naturally ask Robbie to move in as well.
And even if Robbie decided to remain independent, she would visit her family…knowing that Fen was only a stone's throw away — with his wife.
Again she shook her head.
But by now she had marshalled her thoughts and had a legitimate excuse ready.
‘My mother couldn't possibly cope with that great big house of yours,’ she said.
‘I told you, she's not very strong.’
‘Great heavens, woman, what sort of idiot do you take me for?
I'm not expecting her to do the heavy work.
I have an army of women coming in from the village to do all that.
Apart from planning and preparing meals, her role would be merely a supervisory one.’
‘Wouldn't your…your wife do her own cooking?’
Robbie enquired tartly.
Fen grinned.
‘Occasionally, perhaps.
But I hope she'd be far too busy with other things.’
‘Other things?’
Robbie could have bitten her tongue out immediately the words escaped.
There had been no need to ask.
She could well imagine for herself what alternative occupations Fen had in mind.
‘Yes…well, for a start, she has a career of her own.
I wouldn't ask her to give that up — unless she wanted to, of course.
And then, in the natural course of events, I would hope there would be children.
Chimneys is a family house.
It needs an army of children to fill it.
Would you like to see inside the cottage?’
Robbie clenched her hands into fists, the nails digging into her palms.
She would love to see inside Ivy Cottage, but…
‘There doesn't seem much point,’ she forced herself to say.
‘I really don't think…’
‘You mean you're not even going to give your mother the chance to decide for herself?’
Fen asked incredulously.
‘That just doesn't tie in with what I know of you, the way you feel about your mother and your brothers.’
And as she remained stubbornly silent, ‘Well, at least you're going to take a look — and see just what you're turning down.’
He was out of the car and round to her side, opening the door, almost dragging her from the seat and then propelling her up the path.
Despite its crazy appearance, it was a solid little cottage, the walls thick and sturdy.
‘Warm in winter and cool in summer,’ Fen said.
It was also larger than it had looked from outside.
The ground floor consisted of two sizeable rooms and a kitchen, while upstairs there was a bathroom and three bedrooms.
It was ideal in every respect.
‘It will need a bit of redecorating,’ Fen said.
‘It's been standing empty for a couple of years.
But by the sound of it your brothers are a hale and hearty pair.
I'll provide the materials and pay them for their labour.
I should think they'd jump at the chance of some pocket money.’
They would, Robbie acknowledged.
Oh, all this was making it so much harder to refuse.
And Fen was right, had she really got the right to deny her mother and her brothers this opportunity?
‘I don't quite see,’ she said slowly, ‘why you should want to do this.’
‘It's simple.
I need a new housekeeper, and I always prefer to go on personal recommendation.’
He paused, and then as Robbie made no comment, ‘So,’ impatiently, ‘will you write to your mother?
Tell her about my offer?’
‘I…
I don't know.
I'll have to think about it.’
‘Why, for God's sake?’ he exploded.
‘I'm giving you an opportunity to make life easier and more comfortable for your mother — something it might take you years to achieve on your own.
Are you really going to let her wait, eking out a miserable existence, just because of some misplaced notions of pride?’
‘It's not just a matter of pride.’
‘No?
Then what is it?’
She couldn't tell him she was afraid of their lives becoming more entwined.
It was all very well for him to talk glibly of ‘friendship’.
For her it would be an intolerable situation.
Better to make a clean break now than…
‘Well?’
He broke in on her distracted thoughts.
‘I told you.
I just need time — to decide.’
‘Well, don't take too long about it.
Or I might give the job to someone else.’
How would her mother get on with Fen?
It was today that her mother and two brothers would be arriving in Little Kirkton.
Because Robbie was working, Fen had offered to meet their train and take them up to the manor house.
It was a pity that the weather was so bad, Robbie thought, looking out of the surgery window.
She would have liked her mother to see the Cotswolds at their best.
But for the past few days there had been continuous rain, and the forecast was for more bad weather to come.
Already it was becoming difficult to keep warm at night, and life aboard Water Gypsy seemed less appealing when you were cold and alone.
‘Shall I bring them down to Water Gypsy this evening, or will you come up to Chimneys to see them?’
Fen asked.
‘I could see them at the hotel.
I booked rooms —’
‘I know.
But I cancelled them.’
‘You what?
You've got a damned nerve, haven't you?
Interfering with my arrangements.’
He was unabashed by her anger.
‘Not really.
I thought it would give your mother a better chance to assess the situation if she spent a night at Chimneys.’
In the event, Robbie didn't see her family at all.
‘Where are Mum and the boys?’ she demanded when Fen appeared late that evening.
The wind was gusting outside and he brought a blast of cold air aboard with him.
‘Gone.’
‘Gone?
Gone where?’
‘Home.’
‘Then she turned you down!’
It should have been a crow of triumph, but Robbie felt very far from exalted.
How inconsistent can you get? she demanded irritably of herself.
First you don't want your mother to take his wretched job, and now you feel let down because she's refused it.
‘Quite the reverse,’ Fen said complacently.
‘She fell in love with Chimneys and Ivy Cottage.’
‘Then why —?’
‘Because she couldn't wait to get back and start making arrangements.
Tomorrow she'll be giving notice to the Council and arranging for a removal van.
She hopes to be installed at Ivy Cottage by the end of next week.’
Robbie stared speechlessly at him.
In under ten days her mother would be living locally.
She should be pleased and excited, but all she could think of was the complications it would add to her life.
Her dismay showed in her face.
‘Good God!’
Fen gave vent to his exasperation.
‘Anyone would think you'd just received a death sentence.
Are you sure,’ suspiciously, ‘that you're as fond of your family as you pretend?’
‘Of course I am,’ Robbie retorted indignantly.
‘Have you ever found me to be a liar?’
And when he didn't answer immediately, ‘Fen?’
‘Not a liar, perhaps,’ he said slowly, ‘but — shall we say — less than honest about some things.’
Robbie's lips parted, about to issue an angry denial.
But the breath she'd drawn for speech was expelled in a sigh of frustration.
It was true, of course.
There were grey areas in what she had told him — or rather allowed him to believe.
Hugh, for example…
Oh, heavens — suppose the subject of Hugh had cropped up today?
It had simply not occurred to her to warn her mother that Fen believed…
Was that what he meant by ‘being less than honest’?
Better not to enquire.
Hastily she changed the subject.
‘Don't think I'm not grateful for what you've done for Mum and the boys,’ she said, aware that her gratitude sounded stiff and forced.
‘I —’
‘How grateful?’ asked Fen.
The words came from deep in his throat.
She looked warily at him, her pulses sounding an alarm, and was taken aback when he suddenly began to laugh.
He seemed to find something inordinately funny.
‘You should just see your face,’ he said when the paroxysm had passed.
‘It's all right, Robbie, I was pulling your leg.
You so obviously expected there to be a price to pay, I couldn't resist —’
‘Oh!
You — you…’
Without thinking what she was doing, Robbie flew at him, fists clenched.
He fended her off simply by the expedient of grasping her wrists, holding her at a distance so that she couldn't even contrive to kick his shins.
‘So,’ he mused, ‘you have a matching temper to go with that fiery hair.
I've often wondered.’
‘You're enough to make a saint lose her temper,’ Robbie told him, trying vainly to escape his hold.
‘And you're a long way from being a saint, aren't you?’ he drawled mischievously.
‘Thank goodness.’
‘What do you mean by that?’
‘Aren't saints, if not immune, at least determined to resist temptation?’
Suddenly he wasn't teasing any more.
He was deadly serious, and the expression in his eyes set off her early warning system.
‘We're neither of us saints, come to that,’ she said tartly.
‘And I understand sainthood is achieved by avoiding the occasions of sin.
So for the future, stay away from me, Fen Marshall.
Just because my mother is going to work for you it doesn't give you droit de seigneur!’
Her words had the desired effect.
He flung her hands away from him as if they had become loathsome.
‘So that's what you really think of me, is it?
Well, it's just as well to find out now, I suppose.
You really do think I helped your mother for my own ulterior motives.’
‘Well, didn't you?’ she challenged.
‘As it happened, yes,’ he shocked her by saying.
‘Does that satisfy your suspicious little mind?’
Far from feeling satisfied, Robbie felt utterly devastated.
Though a romantic at heart, she had a strong streak of realism.
No man, however beloved, was entirely perfect.
It wasn't humanly possible.
But it was a shock, nevertheless, to find that Fen had very unpleasant feet of clay.
‘I think you'd better go,’ she said.
‘Oh, don't worry.
I'm going.’
He paused in the doorway, ‘And I wish you joy of your solitude, since that's what you seem to prefer, but I warn you it's going to be a wild night, so you'd better make sure everything is secured before you turn in tonight.
Those winds out there are almost gale-force.’
He hadn't offered to help, Robbie thought, as she struggled out on deck and across the gangplank to check Water Gypsy 's moorings.
But she supposed she shouldn't be surprised, after the angry words they'd exchanged.
Fen was right — she did have a temper to match her hair.
She didn't lose it very often, but when she did…
When she did, she was capable of doing and saying things she afterwards regretted.
Fen had seen her angry before, but never so angry that she had lashed out physically as well as verbally.
She hadn't meant half the things she'd said to him.
But Fen wasn't to know that.
She had probably forfeited any good opinion he might have had of her.
But right now she was more concerned about the effect her behaviour might have had on his offer to her mother.
She groaned aloud.
Suppose he rescinded that offer?
She couldn't believe her own stupidity.
At the time of her break-up with Hugh, not wanting to worry her mother, she had kept much of her own unhappiness hidden.
Now, when far greater things were at stake, she had allowed her emotions to run riot.
She had probably ruined everything.
When Robbie lost her temper, it was a sudden eruption, short-lived and always followed by remorse.
She had never been one to sulk and she was always ready to apologise.
But there would be no apologising tonight.
It would be foolhardy to try and reach Chimneys, alone and on foot, in this weather.
Below once more, with everything as secure as she could make it, she decided she might as well have an early night.
In fact right now bed would be the warmest place.
The wind seemed to be finding an incredible number of chinks in Water Gypsy 's structure.
‘Come on, Raff,’ she told the ginger kitten, ‘it's just you and me now your brothers have found good homes, and you make a good hot-water bottle.’
The kitten was soon curled up, snoring contentedly, but Robbie found it impossible to sleep.
Outside the rain lashed against Water Gypsy 's decks and roof.
The wind howled dolefully, making the narrow boat sway and rock at her moorings.
Was the movement strong enough to make the boat pull the iron stanchions free of the bank?
It would be awful to get up next morning and find she had drifted down the canal.
Fen's words about narrow boat life not being all glamour returned to mock her.
A sudden thought occurred to her, and she sat up straight in bed.
She didn't need to stay on Water Gypsy any more.
Provided she hadn't ruined her mother's chances of a job and a home, her financial support was no longer needed.
She could afford to pay rent — for she had decided there was no way she was moving into Ivy Cottage.
There was no longer any need for her to be beholden to Fen Marshall.
She snuggled down again.
But sleep still eluded her.
Seconds later she was sitting upright again.
Whatever was that noise?
Had the wind caused some awful damage?
Then she realised the regular banging noise was someone knocking.
At this time of night?
Her wristwatch told her it was well after midnight.
Sighing, she made her way through the galley and main cabin.
The knocking was continuous now, as though someone were in desperate need.
But there was no way she was going to open that door until she knew who was there.
‘It's me — Fen,’ was the answer to her demand.
‘Open up.’
‘Go away.
It's the middle of the night.’
‘Robbie, don't argue.
Open up — it's urgent.’
‘I don't believe you.’
‘Dammit, Robbie, I wouldn't be here if it wasn't.
At this time of night, in this weather?’
With trembling fingers she began to unfasten the bolts.
Now that she was convinced of his sincerity, she was wondering what could be so vital.
Her immediate thought now was of her mother and the boys, travelling home by train.
Had there been an accident?
Had he come to break it to her that…?
‘Come on, quickly!’
He was in now.
‘Get your things together.
Just your immediate needs.
We've got to get you out of here.’
‘Wait a minute!’ she shook off his urgent hand.
‘What's all this about?
I thought you'd come to tell me —’
‘I've come to tell you that the reservoir upriver has burst its banks.
The river's flooded and the water's coming downstream — fast.
When it reaches the canal, God knows what'll happen.’
‘How do you know —?’
‘I heard it on my car radio, dammit.
Don't waste time.’
‘But what about Water Gypsy ?’
‘Water Gypsy will have to take her chances.
Your safety is the important thing.’
Almost but not quite convinced now, Robbie nevertheless ran back to her cabin and pulled on her jeans, sweater and shoes, grabbed up the sleeping kitten and ran back to join Fen.
‘If what you say is true, I'm not leaving him to drown,’ she said defensively as Fen looked as though he might object.
‘OK, OK.
But it's at your own risk.
Or rather his.
The dogs —’
‘Remind me,’ said Robbie, ‘to tell you at some more convenient time about Raff and the dogs!’
Weather conditions had definitely worsened since she went to bed, and she needed Fen's support to struggle along the towpath in the face of the gale, in order to reach his car.
‘Shouldn't we stay,’ she ventured, ‘to see what happens?’
‘It's pitch-black,’ said Fen, ‘we wouldn't see much, and it's too damned cold to sit about.
You're wet and shivering as it is.
I want to get you back to the house and into a warm bed.’
Whose bed? she had an insane desire to say, but for once she managed to keep a check on her unruly tongue.
Fen dropped her off at the front door of Chimneys.
‘The door's open.
I'm just going to park the car well away from the house, just in case this wind brings down any of the roof.’
The two dogs were in the hallway, and as Robbie entered they started up, a low growl escaping the Dalmatian.
But then she recognised her erstwhile midwife, and by the time Fen rejoined her Robbie was enjoying a rapturous welcome — a welcome in which an indignant, ruffled Raff was sharing.
‘I told you it would be all right,’ she said at Fen's look of surprise.
‘He's by way of being her foster-son.’
Fen was in one of his brisk, organising moods.
‘Right, we'll get you a hot drink — laced with something alcoholic, I think, and then get you to bed.’
‘I don't need a drink,’ she told him.
She was shivering, but it was not with the cold, nor even reaction to what apparently had been a near escape.
She still only had Fen's word for that.
No, it was being here with Fen, knowing that they were alone in the house, remembering the measures he had taken once before to restore warmth to her body.
He shrugged.
‘Suit yourself.
I'll show you your room.’
The dogs followed hard on their heels up the deep-treaded, creaking staircase that made a gradual ascent to the first floor.
Robbie had time to admire the rich patina of lovingly cared-for wood.
Upstairs the old house seemed to be on a multitude of different levels, with steps up and down, unexpected recesses and windows, all of which had been given a character of their own, by a carefully chosen ornament or floral arrangement.
No wonder her mother had fallen in love with Chimneys.
She was a born homemaker.
How she would enjoy tending this beautiful place.
If the job were still hers!
Impulsively, Robbie turned to Fen.
‘I was going to come and see you tomorrow,’ she said.
His eyebrows lifted.
‘Oh!’
‘Yes.
I…
I wanted to apologise — for some of the things I said —’
His expression became quizzical.
‘Only some of them?’
‘Yes…well…the thing is…
I was afraid you might change your mind…about my mother.
And I —’
‘You really think I'd be that vindictive?
I thought you at least knew me better than that.’
Fen moved on abruptly and threw open a door.
‘You can use this room while you're here.
Stay!’ he commanded the dogs.
It was necessary to descend two steps to enter a room carpeted in a rich red, which contrasted strongly with white walls and black beams.
The curtains were of a deep pink and a multi-coloured patchwork quilt covered the king-size bed.
‘But this is a double bed,’ she pointed out somewhat unnecessarily.
Robbie hadn't realised just how much she'd missed sleeping in a conventional bed, with plenty of room to stretch out her long legs.
But this bed was vast — for just one person.
‘Suspecting my motives again, Robbie?’
His tone was as icy as the weather outside.
‘N-no, of course not.
I just wasn't expecting…
I mean, any old room would have done.
The servants’ quarters, even.
After all, that's what my family's going to be, isn't it?
Your servants.’
For once she hadn't meant to be provocative, but Fen swore explosively and rage such as she had never seen filled his dark eyes.
Before she could move he had her by the shoulders, his furious eyes blazing down at her.
‘I don't have to take any more of this,’ he grated harshly.
‘It's time we got a few things sorted out.
But first…’
His mouth came down on hers, stifling any protest she might have made.
There was no tenderness, only anger.
It terrified and drained her.
It only lasted a matter of seconds, but when Fen lifted his head Robbie felt incapable of speech and movement.
He looked down into her eyes, a strange light burning deep in the blackness of his own.
‘I told you,’ he said bitterly, ‘that you bring out the worst in me.’
He bent his head again, and this time it was his gentleness which took her by surprise.
He drew her against him so completely that shafts of sexual awareness pierced her and a blind hungry need made her cling to him.
When he finally let her go she was still speechless — and trembling violently.
Oh, the cruel torture of a kiss that could not further its intent.
‘You also have other, very different effects on me,’ Fen said huskily.
‘And now we're going to talk.’
‘But it's late —’
‘Plenty of time to sleep tomorrow.
You can stay in bed all day if you like.
But you're not going to postpone this showdown, so don't think it.’
‘Sh-showdown?’
‘Sit down.’
He indicated the side of the bed, but Robbie shook her head.
Seated, she would feel too vulnerable.
‘Very well!
Defiant to the end, I see.
Tell me, Robbie, why did you lie to me about Hugh?
Don't shake your head.
You let me think you had a serious boyfriend, that you were on the point of marriage.’
‘I didn't…or at least I didn't say that.
You just assumed…’
And, scornfully, ‘Because you were obviously terrified of unattached women, I let you go on thinking…
I suppose my mother told you?’
‘I made it my business to enquire just how serious your alleged relationship was.
It seemed a very odd state of affairs to me.
My experience of women in love is that they're constantly letter-writing or making telephone calls.
You seemed just too casual about the whole thing.
Then there was your response to me…
You couldn't hide it.
Were you another Sybil, I asked myself, devious, two-timing?
But no — your relationship with Hugh,’ he accused, ‘was finished long before you came down here.’
‘Yes.’
And, defiantly, ‘I don't mind you knowing now.
Because it doesn't matter any more.
You won't even have to throw me off Water Gypsy .
I don't need to live there any more.’
‘That's the only reason you kept up the pretence?’
He was looking at her narrowly.
‘So that you wouldn't lose your accommodation?’
Robbie shrugged.
‘What else?’
‘It wasn't because you believed me to be unavailable, to keep me at bay, by any chance?’
She gave an inelegant snort.
‘You made it pretty clear that any attraction you felt for me was unwilling.
Anyway,’ she reminded him indignantly, ‘you shouldn't need keeping at bay.
Your relationship with Petula should have been sufficient deterrent.
At least I wasn't being a hypocrite.
I wasn't being disloyal to anyone.’
She had silenced him, but it was a baffled, frustrated silence rather than an angry one, and Robbie pressed home her advantage.
‘You should be thoroughly ashamed of the way you behaved…
With her photos plastered all over your cabin too.’
‘Two photographs,’ Fen said dryly, ‘hardly constitute wall-to-wall plastering.
And,’ obscurely, ‘my behaviour’, as you call it, might have been very different if I'd known Hugh was a thing of the past.’
‘I don't see how it could have been much worse,’ Robbie said.
‘OK, that afternoon, up on the Cotswold Way, we were both at fault.
We were both carried away by our feelings.
But in your cabin…with those reminders of —’
‘Would it make any difference,’ Fen asked, ‘if I told you those photographs are not of Petula?’
Robbie stared at him disbelievingly, ‘But they are.
You said —’
‘No, I didn't.
If you think back, you'll find you assumed they were.
I admit I let you go on believing…but that was before —’
‘Then who's the woman in the photographs?’
Robbie was still sceptical.
‘My sister — Fenella.
She's a photographic model.
Those were copies of two of her recent portfolio photographs.’
‘Why would you keep photos of your sister in your cabin?’
‘Firstly, because I'm quite proud of her achievements.
Fenella and I have always been close.
There was only a year's difference in our ages.
We were the ‘first generation’.
My brothers are a lot younger.’
‘And secondly?’
Robbie asked shrewdly.
‘Secondly, as you've probably deduced by now, as a deterrent to importunate women.
I told you, fame has its price.
Sybil had her eye on the main chance, and so have a lot of other women over the years.
And then, of late, I've had Caroline's machinations to contend with.
I'm still not certain,’ he went on slowly, ‘that you're not the latest in her attempts at matchmaking.’
‘Well, if I was,’ Robbie told him tartly, ‘I knew nothing about it.
I wouldn't have lent myself to any schemes like that.
Caro never told me,’ she went on, ‘that her stepsister was successful too.’
Fen smiled wryly.
‘Caroline and Fenella don't hit it off too well, and certainly Caroline would never refer to my sister as ‘Fen’.
That increased my initial suspicions about you.’
‘I take it Caro doesn't like Petula either?’
He smiled enigmatically.
‘Let's forget Caroline and Fenella for the moment.
Let's talk about us — you and me.’
He moved towards her, and at the expression in his eyes, Robbie felt her heart begin thumping in an irregular crazy rhythm.
She backed towards the bed, one hand raised to ward him off.
‘There isn't any ‘you and me’.
There can't be…
You…’
But he had her in his arms now, moulding her firmly to the length of his hard, muscular body.
‘Deny that you love me,’ he said.
And before she could do just that, his lips possessed hers, compelling, sensual, arousing, provoking a passionate response she was incapable of hiding.
‘Deny that you want me,’ he growled.
She struggled unavailingly to be free.
‘All right,’ she sobbed, ‘OK, you win.
I do want you, I do love you.
But I've no right to love you, and you've no right to do this.
It's despicable to make me admit it.
Just because there isn't anyone in my life doesn't mean…
There's Petula…’
His clasp loosened a little, but he wasn't going to let her escape.
‘And is that the only bar to our relationship?
Be truthful now, Robbie.
It's important.’
She nodded miserably.
‘You love me?’ he pressed, ‘really love me?
Enough to marry me and —’
‘Yes!
Yes!
Damn you!
If you were free…but you're not.
What more do you want?
Fen, please, go away.
I can't take any more of this.’
But she felt no relief when his arms fell away and he moved towards the door.
She felt cheap, humiliated.
Was it so necessary to his male pride to wring that admission from her?
Fen opened the bedroom door and she waited tensely for him to close it behind him and be gone, so that she could give vent to the misery that threatened to swamp her.
But he was still on the threshold.
‘Petula!’ he called.
Robbie's legs gave way and she sank down on the side of the bed.
Oh, God, his girlfriend had actually been in the house while he was making love to her.
And now he was calling her in.
Why?
To confront her, to complete her, Robbie's, humiliation?
Fen turned around and walked back towards her.
‘It's time I made some formal introductions,’ he said.
‘Boris you already know.
This is Petula.’
Robbie stared through tear-glazed eyes at the Dalmatian.
‘Th-this…?
I don't…
You…’
‘Think back, Robbie,’ said Fen as he came to sit beside her.
‘All the things I told you about Petula…they applied just as much to a jealous dog as to a jealous woman.
It suited me at first to have you believe there was someone in my life.
Then, when I knew I was in love with you…and I thought you weren't free…’
Robbie's expression was anguished as she stared at him, trying to read the truth in his eyes.
‘You're…you're not lying to me?’ she begged.
‘From now on, Robbie,’ he told her, his arms going about her, ‘there's going to be nothing but total honesty between us.
And I'm going to begin by telling you everything…the exact moment when I knew I was in love with you…the things I love about you.
And then…’
He paused and seemed to have trouble with some obstruction in his throat.
‘And then…?’
Robbie too swallowed.
‘And then I'm going to make love to you…now…and through the night…and possibly all day tomorrow too.
But first…’
He stood up and with a hand on the Dalmatian's collar took the bitch to the door and firmly evicted her.
‘In the past,’ he said as he returned to Robbie's side, ‘she's been accustomed to sleeping at the foot of my bed.
But tonight…’ he spoke abstractedly, his hands occupied with their seductive task ‘…tonight is going to be something that only two can share.’