

THE AIMS OF THE SOCIETY
Despite the jokes about it, the Bishop's Castle Railway served the town and the district well for seventy years at a time when transport (rapid by the standards of the day) was becoming ever more important.
Our first aim too is to serve the district according to the needs of our time, the first of which is to preserve knowledge of the life of the area.
With the advances of modern science, and the social changes induced by it, the people of the next century might find it difficult to understand our way of life.
The South-West Shropshire Historical and Archeological Society is already doing a good job in recording the history of the area, especially that which is in living memory, or only one or two generations removed.
We expect to co-operate with them whenever our interests coincide.
A developing industry in South Shropshire is tourism, and the County Council is concerned that we should make the most of it.
The railway and the many stories about it are usually mentioned in guidebooks as being one of the local points of interest.
Thus we hope to establish a small museum, ideas about which are mentioned elsewhere in this Journal.
We also would like to be a general interest railway society.
In other words we want to help local enthusiasts to keep in touch with what is happening in the wider world of railways.
Some of the items in this Journal are of that nature.
As a part of that we intend to arrange excursions from time to time, and there will be winter lectures.
Finally it would be unrealistic to raise hopes of restoring part of the railway itself as has been done elsewhere, at least for the foreseeable future.
The costs and the human effort required are simply too great.
However there are many less ambitious preservation projects which would be possible with as few as a dozen determined people and not too expensive.
A possible first project is to restore the platform at Horderley Station, whose owner is one of our committee members.
This is described more fully elsewhere.
OUR PRESIDENT
We are delighted to report that Lady More has agreed to become the first president of the Society and has given us a most generous donation in memory of her husband.
For the sake of those members who are not local I will briefly explain that the More family has long been a prominent one in this area.
Sir Jasper More was the M.P.
for this constituency for several years prior to his retirement, and was also a lifelong railway enthusiast who had great affection for the BCR.
His family is mentioned in Edward Griffith's well-known history of the line.
Lady More has told us that her husband would have been pleased that this society has been formed, thus ensuring that the BCR will not be forgotten.
MEMBERSHIP
To date the number of paid up members of the Society is 51 -a satisfactory start -but please do your best to recruit further members.
OBITUARY
Mr Frank Sinclair
It is with deep regret that I report the death of Mr Frank Sinclair of Bishop's Castle.
I had spent many happy hours with Frank, recording details not generally known to the public of his own and his father's involvement with the BCR.
These records will be placed in the museum, when it is established, as a memorial of the Sinclair family.
Ivo Peters
It was recently reported in the Press that Ivo Peters, the distinguished railway photographer, died on the 7th of June.
Mr Peters was particularly famous in connection with the Somerset and Dorset Railway, and was not known to have any link with our line.
Nevertheless it is fitting that we should add our tribute to the many that have been made throughout the country.
COMPETITION -Journal Title
The Society is looking for a title for the Journal.
Please submit your suggestions to the Committee for judging.
When writing, please give the reasons why you chose the title.
My own suggestion is taken from the names of two of the engines that worked on the line -‘PERSEVERANCE & PROGRESS’.
The reason that I chose this title is, firstly, we as a Society have to persevere to build our Society up and, secondly, we hope to make progress over the years.
COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Your Committee has held meetings on 3 April, 22 May and 19 June 1989.
Matters under active discussion include:
MUSEUM
Enquiries are in hand for a possible location for a Museum and you will be kept informed of developments.
Fuller details are given later in this Journal.
TRACTION ENGINE RALLY -BISHOP'S CASTLE
An approach has been made to the Salop Steam Engine Society with regard to space for an Exhibition by BCRS at the Show to be held at Bishop's Castle on 27 and 28 August 1989.
Your Committee is delighted to announce that the Salop Steam Society have granted this request and take this opportunity of expressing their grateful thanks to them.
PROGRAMME OF EVENTS
A programme of events for the winter months is being drawn up and details of these will be forwarded to you in due course by the Social Secretary.
Meanwhile if you have any special requests or suggestions, please let him know as soon as possible.
BCRS JOURNAL
The production of an interesting and informative Journal is going to depend largely on you, the Members, providing items of news, reminiscences etc and we do appeal to you to contact the joint Editors with any material suitable for inclusion in future issues.
A well-known newspaper article in 1935 announcing the closure referred to the family atmosphere of the line.
We hope to continue in this tradition, so please note that personal news about members' activities is always likely to be of interest.
If it has a railway theme then so much the better, but it is not essential.
MUSEUM NEWS
The Society are planning to open a museum in the near future.
If you have an item or items that you would be prepared to loan for display, please get in touch with us.
It does not have to be connected with the Bishop's Castle Railway, but BCR items would take preference.
Maybe you have something connected with the Snailbeach & District Railway or the ‘Potts’?
We are also interested in the Central Wales Line, the Shrewsbury and Hereford Line and the Cambrian, particularly where they run through this area.
Whatever you have, please contact the Hon.
Secretary.
RAILWAY EXHIBITION AND LECTURE
The Bishop's Castle Public Hall was the venue for an Exhibition and Lecture on the former Bishop's Castle Railway on Thursday, 11 May 1989.
The event was staged jointly by the South-West Shropshire Historical & Archeological Society (SWSHAS) and the Bishop's Castle Railway Society.
Opening at 2 pm, the Exhibition contained photographs of the stations, locomotives and rolling stock, copies of documents, some of the surviving artifacts from the line and, giving a modern touch, some computer drawn relief representations of the terrain through which the line ran.
The aim was to give an impression of the atmosphere of the line and its district A particular point made was that the BCRS wishes to contact people who worked on the line or have other personal reminiscences of it.
Introduced by Mr J Smyth of the SWSHAS, Mr Martin Davies of Harrogate enthralled his audience with a most interesting talk and slide show.
He began with a short discussion of the planned scheme, the construction of the line and its early financial difficulties.
The rest of his time was taken up with a slide show with commentary.
Mr Davies's research has obviously been very thorough, for some of his photographs were unknown even to old BCR fans.
He presented several little known facts and original appraisals of the line.
For example, it is not widely known that there were turntables at both Bishop's Castle and Stretford Bridge in the line's early years, though they seem to have been little used and the railway gained its reputation for unusual working practices right from the start.
A Board of Trade requirement that the engine would always operate chimney first was disobeyed from the early days.
Mr Davies challenged the usual assumption that the line was a failure, pointing out that it did a good job for the district, particularly in transporting goods in the days before motor transport.
In fact the railway was quite prosperous in the early years of this century, crippled only by its burden of debts from the past.
The evening closed with questions to the Speaker and a vote of thanks from Mr John Roberts, Chairman of BCRS.
Both Societies would like to express their thanks to the many people who loaned exhibits or gave their time helping to organise the events and providing refreshments.
SHREWSBURY ABBEY PROJECT
An enterprising project entitled ‘Shrewsbury Abbey 2000’ has just been inaugurated.
Proposals for the redevelopment of the land on which the domestic buildings of the Abbey once stood have been made.
They include the possibility of commemorating the Potteries, Shrewsbury & North Wales Railway by launching the Shrewsbury Abbey Railway Station Heritage project.
A small museum and heritage centre would be maintained within the Abbey development.
Some track and equipment remains, and more, hopefully, may be donated or ‘imported’.
BCRS would certainly look forward to any opportunity of co-operating in this venture.
HORDERLEY STATION PLATFORM
There is the possiblity of refurbishing the remaining section of the disused platform.
The station already does much to capture the appearance of a part of the BCR, thanks to the unaided efforts of the Rev and Mrs Arnold.
Naturally the Society was delighted when the prospect of further restoration work was broached.
Those members of the BCRS who would be interested in participating in this project are invited to contact Ken Lucas, 18 Kerry Green, Bishop's Castle or Keith Lucas, ‘Bryn Awelon’, New Cross, Aberystwyth, Dyfed, SY23 4LY.
‘Carlisle leaving Horderley 1935’.
Presented to the Society by Mr J E Cadwallader from Capetown, South Africa -the last employee to be taken on by the Bishop's Castle Railway.)
WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact Paul Lucas -Bishop's Castle 638446.
COLLECTORS' PAGE -POSTAGE STAMPS
One of the most collected items in the world is the common postage stamp and, if one looks around, one can soon compile a collection of postage stamps covering railways.
The above are a few samples that we have collected.
Try your local stamp dealer and see if he has any on his lists.
In future editions of the Journal we hope to feature other items that are collected.
LATE NEWS
CENTRAL WALES LINE TRIP
The Shropshire Railway Society used to do an evening trip from Shrewsbury to Llandrindod Wells on the Central Wales Line.
The idea was a pleasant trip through beautiful countryside, talking the while about railways and in particular this line, then an hour in the pub or a walk round Llandrindod, and then the return trip.
The current timetable unfortunately allows only thirteen minutes in Llandrindod before the return train.
However we decided that it was worth trying, arranged it for Thursday 22nd June, starting from Craven Arms, and very successful it was, with 29 people coming on the trip.
Our evening was made by the presence of a very jolly guard, Mr Howard Morgan, who went out of his way to make the trip a pleasant one and moreover told us much of interest about the line.
We were also pleased to see our member Mr Turner and his wife.
Mr Turner was the BCR booking clerk at Craven Arms at the closure and he held various positions on other railways after that, rising to the position of stationmaster.
Mr Morgan, Mr Turner and your Social Secretary were interviewed by Russell Mulford on the train.
There were various reasons for making this trip.
As mentioned, it is a pleasant and inexpensive evening out.
The views from the line are very fine.
Furthermore the line has several times been proposed for closure and only strenuous efforts by local politicians and the Heart of Wales Line Travellers' Association (HOWLTA) have kept it open -indeed it is a minor miracle that it survived the Beeching closures.
Thus our trip was also a gesture of support for the line and in particular for the cheap Rambler ticket now available.
For the present the chances of survival are good — BR have just spent a lot of money replacing the Glanrhyd bridge, the scene of a tragic accident two years ago, also on track and signalling improvements.
The passing loop at Knighton is scheduled to be restored by next year, which should make an improved service possible.
Thus it is up to us, we must ‘use or lose’ the nearest railway line to Bishop's Castle.
At least the members of the BCRS can pat themselves on the back for having used it at least once in 1989!
BC TANDEM TRIATHLON
During the last New Year celebrations (before we had actually formed the Society, though it was under discussion) the Social Secretary talked himself and his daughter Wendy into entering for the Triathlon.
When our entry was confirmed the Society was already getting up steam, so the obvious thing was to consider ourselves its representatives.
After some months of training, a last-minute panic to obtain a working tandem, and indeed a first ever tandem ride the night before the event, we managed to complete the course.
Feel free to make jokes about puffing like ‘Carlisle’ ascending Mynd Mill bank, one partner picking mushrooms and then overtaking the one who continued on the tandem, etc.
Another member, Bernard Edwards, entered for the second time with his partner Steve Kenning and achieved the excellent time of 2 hours 34 minutes and a few seconds, knocking more than a quarter of an hour off their time last year.
A possible carnival-time idea is that perhaps we should think of entering a float in the procession next year.
If you like the idea, and would be prepared to spend a couple of evenings helping to build it, please mention it to a committee member in good time and we will see what can be done.
NEXT OUTING
At the time of writing the next excursion is not far ahead, on Saturday the 15th of July.
Possibly you will not receive the Journal before this date.
If you do then we hope that you will make every effort to come.
We are visiting the famous Severn Valley Railway, which gives a very good ride and a captures well the atmosphere of a rural branch line.
There is the option of a couple of hours for shopping in Kidderminster, or a short talk on the construction and restoration of railway goods vehicles.
The coach to Bridgnorth departs at 9.15 a.m. from the Boar's Head, Bishop's Castle and will return there at about 5.30 p.m.
Since the coach is kept at Snailbeach earlier pickups can be arranged if notice is given.
We are also trying to arrange a walk along part of the BCR trackbed.
The provisional date is Sunday the 17th of September.