

ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The Annual General Meeting of the B.C.R.S. will be held at the Community College, Bishop's Castle at 7.30 p.m. on Friday 3rd of May 1991.
All members are cordially invited to attend.
Apart from the formal business, it is your opportunity to put forward suggestions for the improvement of the society and for future events that we might promote.
CO-OPERATION WITH OTHER SOCIETIES
This issue sees a welcome development in our activities.
We have established contact with two other local railway societies, the Marches Line Association and the Craven Arms and District Model Railway Society (CADMRS) and outlined ways in which we can co-operate for mutual benefit.
Some of these benefits are described elsewhere in this Journal.
FILM/SLIDE SHOW — R. MULFORD
This is an addition to the couple of paragraphs that appeared under ‘Five Years of Railway Slides’— which referred to Col. Savill's talk — in our last issue.
The subject of a very well attended meeting held at the Community College, Bishop's Castle on Friday 4th January 1991 was a film/slide show given by Russell Mulford (a society member) with a very knowledgeable and humorous commentary.
Firstly he showed a film which he called ‘My Unfinished Symphony’, made in the early 1960s featuring the ‘Manors’ on the Shrewsbury to Aberystwyth line — unfinished because the Manors were withdrawn before he had time to complete filming.
Apart from the pure nostalgia generated among those of us who know the route well, it was enlightening to hear from Russell of the practical problems and time involved in making such a film — 200+ hours and many journeys, hoping to be at the right place at the right time — and, as always, the great unknown — the weather.
All agreed that this was a fine record of steam on this line.
This was followed by a film of workings in the Shrewsbury sheds and the demolition of the GWR shed.
What a busy place Shrewsbury Station was in the days of steam!
COMING MEETING
We have kindly been invited to visit the Craven Arms and District Model Railways Society (CADMRS) for a demonstration of their activities, at 7.30 p.m. on Friday 10th May 1991 at their club house in Craven Arms.
Those of us who ran a BCRS stall at the CADMRS exhibition on Easter Eve had a preview of the layouts and modelling techniques to be seen in this department of railway enthusiasm.
It is fascinating.
Don't miss it!
TALK BY J. H. DENTON
Our February talk was given by the well-known lecturer, Mr John Horsley Denton.
Speaking without notes, Mr Denton gave us a clear picture of the way the railways were first developed as a freight service, and indeed their rapid rise as a people carrier was an unexpected consequence.
This seems to explain the early prints showing people travelling in what were little better than cattle trucks.
Mr Denton went on to explain that the traditional ‘heavy’ railway may not have a future except for journeys between the main population centres.
On the contrary, the light rail systems found in experimental services throughout much of this century, but maturing only recently with the use of modern technology, could have a very bright future if Governments come to regard them as a necessary investment to meet an increasing transport need.
(It has been pointed out that Governments tend to speak of ‘subsidising railways’ and ‘investing in roads’— which shows a clear difference of attitude.)
As examples Mr Denton described the Tyne Metro in favourable terms, and the Docklands Light Railway, but in planning this system some mistakes have been made.
Following his talk, Mr Denton has kindly agreed to let us publish a map containing his outline for a Shropshire Metro and has contributed some notes.
He has also asked us to make it clear that this plan is in no sense intended to be fixed and final.
Any scheme actually implemented would have to reflect the county development plans, and the details would depend on which areas were chosen for expansion, actual traffic flows etc.
Thus, although the scheme as presented here excludes places such as Baschurch on the Shrewsbury — Chester line, and possible use of the old Minsterley line, these could be considered if the transport needs of those areas were large enough.
This plan was first suggested in a radio forum about three years ago, but unfortunately the subsequent reports did not bring out these points.
Mr Denton has asked us to stress that flexibility must be the order of the day.
His own notes follow:—
A Shropshire Metro?
This is not, in any way, an attempt to teach British Rail how to run a railway.
Given the limitations which road-lobbied central governments impose upon it, BR performs its functions extremely well.
In the present climate of political thinking the Shropshire Metro has no chance of gestation.
But the plan is not just an ideal for those who do not drive or are frustrated when trying to do so.
Neither is it an expensive luxury for those who prefer to travel by rail.
It could, indeed, save money.
Huge sums will soon have to be spent to relieve road congestion; persuading a proportion of the public to travel by a convenient alternative has already proved to be cheaper than building more roads in many areas.
Like some other rapid transit systems, this plan utilises only former and existing railway routes.
It differs from the ordinary railway by using lightweight trains, calling at more convenient places and operating economically by the use of advanced technology now available for the custom-built rapid transit systems.
We have got rethink our transport.
Other countries have made considerable progress on lines similar to this.
It is high time we realised that we are lagging behind and that roads alone cannot solve our problem.
Notes:
The system would mostly operate a service of at least half-hourly frequency, but the Twotowns North line would incorporate the existing BR express service between Shrewsbury and Wellington with Metro stopping trains at the alternate half-hour.
A bus or rapid transit link between Telford Central and Telford Randlay would serve Telford Shopping Centre.
BR trains on the Welshpool and Hereford lines would call at Shrewsbury South.
Provision is made for an extension of service from Telford Randlay to Stafford Park (now Madeley Junction) and the Severn Loop line might also utilise the former Severn Valley route through the Gorge with a branch calling at Ironbridge and Jackfield, terminating at Coalport.
MEMBERS' EVENING
Our first Members' Evening was held at the Community College on Friday 1st March 1991 and its success can be judged by the fact that it went on until the Social Secretary literally had to call a halt at 11.15 p.m.!
Proceedings commenced with ‘My Youth on the Sheds’ by Gerald Cattle.
The Sheds were the Shrewsbury ones.
This was a fascinating story of a long family tradition of service on the GWR, with plenty of amusing stories and excellent photographs.
This was followed by Mr Gissing on ‘Railways in the Rugby Area’, illustrated with photographs taken in the early post-war era up to the present day.
Many of the lines have of course succumbed to rationalisation.
Robin Hill digressed to steam traction engines, both self-propelled and portable, and their importance to an agricultural community, again with excellent early photographs.
Chatham Dockyard, now extensively preserved, was Ron Mardol's subject, in particular its considerable length of rail and preserved industrial type locomotives.
Obviously this is a site well worth visiting.
Philip Field dealt with with railways in the Severn Valley (not the preserved SVR), showing some of the station buildings which have been converted to domestic use, e.g. Coalport.
The evening concluded with a most informative and at times humorous talk by Mr Sid Breeze, a retired main line steam driver on the former GWR routes.
Originally he worked from Shrewsbury on the Bristol run and then on the West Country routes when he moved to Old Oak Common, London.
This was an intriguing first hand account of how an engine works, its maintenance, and driving.
Such was the interest generated by the above contributors, we look forward to their giving full length talks in the future.
Meanwhile.
if other members have material on similar themes, the Social Secretary will be pleased to hear of them with a view to their incorporation in a future programme.
MARCHES LINE ASSOCIATION (M.L.A.)
The Association Newsletter deals with some items of interest to BCRS members, viz:—
Craven Arms Station Lighting
The lighting in the station approach has long been the subject of complain and the Association is actively pursuing the matter with BR.
Ludlow Station
Mr F. Dunn has taken over the Rail Agency at Ludlow Station.
Passengers can now buy tickets, make travel enquiries, have tea or coffee, buy a paper and have a friendly chat.
All railcards can be issued so that South Shropshire people no longer need go to Shrewsbury or Hereford for this purpose.
The telephone number is 0584-877090 .
We hope that this project will be a great success.
RAILWAY HAPPENINGS IN MID-WALES
The Vale of Rheidol
The railway ran over Easter and featured No. 8, reverted to its old name ‘Llewelyn’, complete with a cast iron name plate.
The livery remains black.
This loco failed on Easter Monday morning and was substituted by the diesel, but was back on duty for the afternoon run.
There is some doubt about No. 8's condition.
It was seen on the evening of the following Thursday, passing so slowly over Llanbadarn crossing that two motorists jumped the lights.
Watching the engine being put away, I was conscious of a lack of atmosphere at Aberystwyth terminus.
The Cambrian Line
In recent weeks the single Class 158 allotted to the Cambrian has been stabled at Machynlleth.
Most drivers and guards are now trained.
The training runs have taken place between Machynlleth and Welshpool.
Regional Sector has no locomotives of its own and in the last months of the loco-hauled Cambrian Coast Express various locos have appeared.
A recent visitor has been 37418 ‘Pectinidae’ on hire from the Petroleum Sector.
There have once again been reception problems with the radio signalling and sometimes the token has only been received in the back cab.
Remaining manual semaphores are at Caersws Station and the Llanidloes Road crossing.
The locomotive pool for the recently announced steam runs on the Cambrian is now known and consists of GWR 4-6-0 7819 ‘Hinton Manor’, LMS 2-8-0 8233 Black 8, BR 4-6-0 75069 Standard Class 4 and LNER 2-6-0 3442 ‘The Great Marquess’.
The fare has also been announced — an astounding £47.
This is disappointingly high and the Shropshire Railway Society has already cancelled its proposed trip.
All loco-hauling has ceased on the Crewe-Cardiff route, though a shortage of Classes 155 and 156 on Easter Monday evening led to the use of a Class 150/2 from the Cardiff Valley Lines.
An interesting news item is the discussion on the possibility of land-fill trains carrying household refuse from Manchester to Nantlle in North Wales.
This would involve re-opening the closed section from Afon Wen to Nantlle.
BISHOP'S CASTLE RAILWAY — DOCUMENTS DEPOSITED AT COUNTY RECORDS OFFICE, SHIREHALL, SHREWSBURY
This is Part 4 and concludes a list of documents deposited at the County Records Office, Shirehall, Shrewsbury.
485
Bishop's Castle & Montgomery Railway, sealed plans.
(Presumably a duplicate of No. 484.)
487
Dep. 30 Nov 1882
Midland, Birmingham & Wolverhampton Junction Railway (from junction with the Midland Railway & L.N.W.R. at Willenhall and a north & south facing junction with the Stour Valley Line of the L.N.W.R., south of Wolverhampton via Bridgnorth to the Central Wales Railway and the Shrewsbury & Hereford Railway at Craven Arms and branch to the Bishop's Castle Railway near Cheney Longville.
Engineer:
John Addison
Solicitors for the Bill:
Baxter & Co., 5 & 6, Victoria St., Westminster.
Benbow, Saltwell & Tyron, 1, Stone Buildings, Lincoln's Inn, Neve & Cresswell, Wolverhampton, Cooper & Hazlewood, Bridgnorth.
Parliamentary Agents:
Dyson & Co., 24, Parliament St.
1 O.S. map 1’, 21 sheets, plans and sections, bound with titled cover.
1 duplicate set of 21 plans, sections as above without O.S. map.
1 book of reference containing notice.
489
Dep. 30 Nov. 1883
Bishop's Castle Railway, extension to Montgomery (Lydham Heath to Montgomery station) see No. 484.
Engineer:
John Addison
Solicitors for the Bill:
Neve & Cresswell, Wolverhampton, Cooper & Hazlewood, Bridgnorth, G. O. Harrison, Welshpool.
1 notice, 1 O.S. map 1’, 6 sheets, plans and sections, bound with titled cover.
1 duplicate set without map.
1 book of reference & duplicate.
I wish to acknowledge the work of John Horsley Denton, upon the indexing of these plans and documents that are deposited at the Shirehall, Abbey Foregate, Shrewsbury.
A WORKING DAY AT THE GWILI
On Saturday, 2nd February 1991, four members of the B.C.R.S. Preservation Group paid a working visit to the Gwili Railway following a tip-off that they have just acquired a six wheel GWR passenger coach, which, when fully restored will be the fourth oldest coach in preservation.
(Congratulations are in order to the Gwili on the Taff Vale brake 3rd, a must to see.)
The four members were Steve Wallace, Keith Lucas, Laurie Nottingham and myself.
Having signed in for work (a must), we discovered that we were having a steam hauled works train, due to frozen diesel in ‘Nellie’, the Yorkshire engine, so Rosyth No. 1 0-4-0ST was hastily put in steam, the work on the line was re-sleepering, which is great fun, and some shunting duties, and also a great deal of idle chatter.
We hope to arrange some more of these days in the future, so anyone wishing to join us please contact Keith or myself, it is a great day with some super Welsh lads.
EVEN MORE GEMS FROM MY TICKET COLLECTION
Bishop's Castle Railway employees were able to travel at a much reduced rate on all railways in the British Isles.
Privilege tickets at fares somewhere near a third or a quarter ordinary rate were issued at any booking office on presentation of an application form.
Employees of other ‘foreign’ railway companies could travel also on the B.C.R. on a Privilege Ticket.
I have several used halves of B.C.R. Privilege Tickets, the return fare over the whole line was a princely 8d (today just over 3p).
The privilege half illustrated was issued to a female as a hunk was cut out of the top of the ticket, and could have been used by the one lady employee, or the wife or female dependant of an employee of the B.C.R., or any other railway, who took a ride on the 17th January 1934.
I also have ticket No. 1747 of the same batch dated 24th October 1934, suggesting that they sold 40 of these tickets between those dates.
The Third Class ‘Parly’ half of the Excursion Return was issued until almost the closing of the line.
Of course these ticket stocks could have been used up as Day Returns as no rate was quoted on the ticket.
In my collection I also have two outward halves from Craven Arms to Bishop's Castle, No. 6410, dated 20th August 1934, and No. 6417, dated 4th January 1935, both are ‘Parly’ with no rate quoted.
Not many wer sold here either.
The numbers on the tickets illustrated gives a very good indication of the volume of traffic between the several stations.
Plowden seems to have been the most used intermediate station.
On some tickets, notably the First Class to intermediate stations and the Plowden ‘Golf’ returns, numbers suggest that they were not even worth printing!
However, two of the First Class singles illustrated seem to be a late or a second printing.
Maybe I can offer an explanation to George Hearse's remarks on Plowden being the most used intermediate station.
R. W. Francis, butcher of Church St., Bishop's Castle, used to buy whinberries in bulk from local pickers, and Plowden Station at the foot of the Long Mynd was an ideal pick up point for these pickers.
They would take a train to Plowden, where my uncle, Will Lucas, was station master, and his other unofficial duty was to act as an agent for R. W. Francis, buying, weighing and paying the whinberry pickers.
He would then pack them in wooden barrels, till he had a truck load, and then would send them direct from Plowden Station to the dye works where they were used.
The price alterations are a study in themselves, an example being the First Return from Craven Arms to Eaton, the original fare perhaps dating from the last century, crossed out and altered by some unfortunate clerk, by gas light, with a fine nib pen and a bottle of railway ink., round about 1915.
It was again altered to a lower rate about 1921, but by no means as low as the original fare, in this instance from 2/3d to 4/4½ (quite a big jump) and finally down to 4/- (today 20p).
BCR DEBENTURE HOLDERS — PART II
Part II of Schedule II
1
R. W. Atker's representatives, 21, Manchester Buildings, Westminster, London, W. £1,200
2
William Bailie, Banker, Bristol, £600
3
Richard Lewis, Llanwst Bettws, Montgomery, £200
4
North and South Wales Bank Ltd., Liverpool, £2,600
5
Benjamin Piercey's representatives, care of F. G. Whitwham, 8, Draper's Gardens, London E.C.
£2,000
Total amount due under this heading, £6,600
Schedule III
Other Debts
24
Rev. William Bishton Garnett-Botfield, Decker Hill, Shifnal, Salop.
Note: The said sum of £240 is made up of £180 allowed from arrears of rent charge down to 24th October 1895, and £60 for two years arrears at £30 per annum down to 24th October 1897.
The creditor is entitled to further payments from that date at the said rate.
Schedule IV
Claims Disallowed.
6
John Beamond, Whitcott, Wentnor, Bishop's Castle.
£16
8
The Clearing Committee, Railway Clearing House, Euston, London.
9
John Robert Cooke (representative of the late John Cooke), Sun Inn, Norbury, Bishop's Castle.
£32
10
Edward Crumpton,(representative of the late Richard Crumpton), The Handless, near Wentnor, Shropshire.
11
William Evans, Care of E. Whittal, Wentnor, Salop £16
12
John Everall (representative of the late John Everall), Brew Farm, Norbury, Salop.
£40
13
E. and J. Griffiths (Executors of Thomas Griffiths, deceased), Bishop's Castle.
and
14
E. and J. Griffiths (Executors of Thomas Griffiths, deceased), Bishop's Castle; and Mary Wilding (executrix of William Wilding, deceased), Montgomery.
15
George Jones, Blacksmith, Bishop's Castle.
£16
16
London & North Western and Great Western Railway Joint Committee, Birkenhead
17
John Mickleburgh, Montgomery.
18
William Munslow, Gravenor, Bishop's Castle.
£8
19
Mary Ann Schofield, widow, Harry Norton Schofield, & Walter Whitehead (executors of the will of Christopher James Schofield, deceased), care of Messrs. Tipton & Biscoe, Solicitors, 22, Surrey Street, Victoria Embankment, London, 624 preference shares of £10 each (no amount stated).
20
Mary Wilding,(executrix of William Wilding, deceased), Montgomery.
21
E. Whittal, Wentnor, Salop, cash paid in receipt of two ordinary shares of £10 each (no amount stated).
THE COST OF USING A CAR
I ought to start this note with a health warning — it contains some mathematics; not a lot, but some.
Since some people have problems with maths.
I will try to simplify the argument — and give my apologies to those who think I have overdone it.
It was said to me recently, by a railway enthusiast, no less, that, when you have a car, the only cost in using it is the petrol.
Actually the true cost is much more.
First let us be clear that the cost of buying the car in the first place, garaging it, taxing it, the M.O.T.
and the insurance do not come into the present argument.
You have to pay them and they can be pretty steep, but they are standing costs that arise because you own a car, whether you ever use it or not.
At present I am only interested in the extra amount it costs to take the car out on the road.
Secondly, to make the mathematics easier, let us make some assumptions.
Some of the errors introduced will cancel one another out and the answer we get will still be a reasonable approximation.
For example, let us suppose that depreciation depends only on the age of the car, not its mileage.
(When selling a seven year old car you might try to get a bit more for it because of its low mileage.
Very often you will be disappointed —‘…you want that for a seven year old car.
You must be joking!’.
Just what you or I would say if we were buying a car!)
The main assumption is that you observe the exact service interval (say every 6000 miles) and that all servicing is done then, even to the little things like oil and new headlamp bulbs, and big things like tyres, batteries, exhaust systems etc.
Of course this is not strictly true, but it makes the explanation simpler, and after all it doesn't really make any difference to the cost whether you pay for your bulb or tyre when it fails or at the next service.
This assumption means that all of the running cost of the car, apart from the petrol, is incurred in the service.
Now we can do the maths.
Every mile that you do in your car costs 1/6000 of a service, since 6000 miles make a service.
Most of us have no idea how much we actually pay for services, because in fact we do buy parts at odd times when they are needed, so the cost is spread out over the year.
Let us call it £300, and that is probably on the low side.
So every mile costs 1/6000 of £300, or 5p.
We mustn't forget the petrol of course.
Let us say that we get 40 miles per gallon overall, and pay nearly £2 a gallon.
(Most people grossly over-estimate the fuel economy of their car.
One friend told me that he regularly got 35 m.p.g. from a petrol-engined Land Rover.)
Thus we pay £2 for 40 miles, or 5p a mile.
On these figures the extra service cost of using a car adds on an amount equal to the cost of the petrol.
I don't expect most people to agree with these figures.
(’ I do all my own servicing, so my garage bills are nowhere near £300.’)
Fine!
Don't forget to include the cost of tyres, exhausts and of course body repairs, since most damage to the bodywork is caused when the car is being used.
Also you should add in the cost of your time!
Possibly you regard car maintenance as a hobby, something you would do anyway as a pleasure.
(Does that mean that you will also service my car without charge, apart from the cost of the parts?)
If not then add the cost of your time, charged at your usual rate of pay — and if you are like me then you will take at least five times as long as a garage, because of having less experience and fewer tools (such as a hoist).
Does £300 still look ridiculously high?
There is another way to reduce the £300 — by skimping servicing.
There is then an increased risk of an accident (or a fine) and in any case the car will depreciate faster, use more petrol etc.
Finally here is one comparison of a rail fare and a car fare.
The current Super-Saver return from Aberystwyth to London is £25.
The distance is given as 212 miles in the AA book — call it 200 miles.
Say that my car does 40 m.p.g.
(It doesn't any longer!)
That makes at least 5 gallons each way, or £20 for the return journey.
However that is just the petrol cost.
If the above argument is anywhere near correct then I should double that to find the true cost.
So I really pay £40 to go by car.
If my wife and I both go then the car is cheaper by £10, but that is not a lot to pay for the increased safety of rail travel, the convenience of not having to take a car into London and indeed the fact that we can read or go to sleep on the train.
In my opinion, where the option exists, the train wins unless at least three people are travelling.
PRESERVATION
Wet weather has meant a delayed start on preservation activities this year, since Glenburrell Bridge is less accessible than Horderley Station.
Some work has taken place, mainly tree removing, but we have also started labelling and stacking some of the parapet stones.
Because of concern about further damage to the parapet we have decided to give this job higher priority.
We expect to be working on the bridge fairly regularly from now on, and, as usual , we will be very glad of extra willing volunteers.
OBITUARY
Mrs W. E. Marston
It is with regret that we have to record the death of one of our founder members, Mrs W. E. Marston.
A long term resident of the Bishop's Castle area, she was widely known and respected.
Until failing health prevented it she was a regular at our meetings and trips.
Mrs Marston actually came to the town on the Bishop's Castle Railway with her parents when she was a young girl, and when we formed the BCRS she told us that it is difficult to see how they could have made the move, complete with furniture, in any other way in those days.
(She also taught the social secretary to play the piano, but he was not an apt pupil and must have been a great disappointment to her.)
FOR SALE AND WANTED
Any member who has surplus railway tickets to dispose of please contact PAUL LUCAS,— Tel.
No 0588 638446 (BCRS member).
Any BCR or similar railway tickets wanted.
Please contract MR M. LAWSON-FINCH, ‘St. Cyres’, 20 Downs View Road, Seaford, E Sussex, BN25 4PT (BCRS member).
NIGEL BIRD, Bryn Hir, Llanio Road, Llwyn-y-Groes, Tregaron, Dyfed.
[BCRS member]
Railway books, magazines, ephemera and antiques — bought and sold.
I also issue regular catalogues about every 3-4 months, 50p each or £1.50 for 4 issues.
I also search for any out of print railway books.
New books purchased to order.
NEW: I am now publishing a new publication as from June 1990 entitled ‘Railway Antiques Monthly’.
Full details on request.