

COMMITTEE MEETINGS
Museum
Your Committee is pleased to report that they have reached agreement in principle with the owner of suitable premises adjoining Bull House, Bull Street, Bishop's Castle, for their use as the Bishop's Castle Railway Museum.
Planning permission has been granted by the South Shropshire District Council and further details will be available by the time of the A.G.M. (see below).
David Young
Note
In fact events have developed rapidly in the last few weeks and it was announced at a Committee meeting on Monday 1st June that we had every hope of opening the museum by the end of the month.
(STOP PRESS: A 5th July 1992 opening date has been suggested — our museum may be open by the time you receive this Journal!)
Museum Appeal
Unfortunately we were not able to meet all the requirements for County support and it was decided some time ago that we would go ahead with an experimental opening without it.
Of course a scheme like this does incur considerable costs, but it will be for the benefit of the town and help to preserve a record of a popular part of Bishop's Castle's history, while we still have people who remember ‘our’ railway and travelled on it.
If you would like to help with a donation, by giving up a couple of hours occasionally to help to run the museum (you don't need to be an expert on railways, knowledge of the area is also important)— or in some other way, please contact either the Hon.
Sec., Ken Lucas, or the Treasurer, Ralph Edwards.
ANNUAL GENERAL MEETING
The A.G.M. of the Bishop's Castle Railway Society was held in the Fletcher Room, Community College, Bishop's Castle at 8 p.m. on Friday 8th May 1992.
The Chairman welcomed the members present at the meeting and was pleased to see that it was well attended.
He gave a resume of the year's work and wished the Society another successful year.
The Minutes of the last A.G.M. were read and it was agreed that they be signed by the Chairman as correct.
Membership Secretary
The Hon.
Sec. read a letter from Mr P. Field resigning from the post of Membership Secretary due to his moving from Bridgnorth and this was accepted with regret.
It was agreed that a letter be sent to Mr Field thanking him for his work as Membership Secretary and on the Committee.
This work will now be done by the Hon.
Treasurer.
Hon.
Secretary's Report
Mr K. J. Lucas, Hon.
Sec. in his report remarked on the high level of activity there has been during the past year.
Highlights have been the visit of Mr J. Scott Morgan with his book on the Bishop's Castle Railway, and much work behind the scenes in connection with the proposed Museum.
In particular he wished to thank the staff in the Resources Room at the Bishop's Castle Community College, Mr R. Mulford and Mr. W. Jarvis for their work in connection with publicity for the Society and the Tea ladies for refreshments at society meetings.
Hon.
Treasurer's Report
The Hon.
Treasurer presented the Balance Sheet to 30th April 1992.
The position was satisfactory but the Society faced considerable expenditure in connection with the Museum and donations would be particularly welcome.
The sale of books had been encouraging.
He reminded the members that the annual subscription is now due and should be paid to him as the Meeting had appointed him as Membership Secretary (see above).
He was thanked by the Meeting for his report.
Museum — Vice Chairman's Report
Mr R. Newcombe was pleased to report that agreement in principle had been reached with Mrs Davies for the use of part of her premises in Bull House, Bull Street, Bishop's Castle as a Bishop's Castle Railway Museum.
a)
The rental for the first year would be £250 rising to £500 thereafter on an annual licence.
The legal agreement would be concluded in the near future.
b)
Much preparatory work had been done but volunteeers were needed and offers of help would be welcome.
Please contact him (R. Newcombe) or the Hon.
Sec.
c)
The Vice Chairman went on to thank all the people and organisations who had helped in any way and he gave special thanks to
the Curator of the Acton Scott Museum;
Mr R. Batson, Hyssington for preparing the plans and submitting them to the Local Authority for planning permission.
The Society had paid a fee of £92 to the Local Authority in connection with the application.
Mr R. Mardle for painting a museum sign and helping with the interim layout;
Mr R. Davies for building/decorating materials;
Mr A. Stevens of Hall, Wateridge and Owen, estate agents for the Valuation;
Mr D.J.
Woodruffe, MA, Solicitor (Morgans of Ludlow) for legal advice;
Mr Pat Roberts for installation of a coin operated electricity meter.
The meter had cost £40.
Mr L. Davies for exhibits and a cash donation;
Mr G. Hearse for a ticket cabinet and a cash donation;
Mr J. Scott Morgan, £25 cost of a print of the opening of the Bishop's Castle Railway;
our President, Lady C. M. More for a generous donation;
Mr R. Arnold for an artifact;
Mr M. Lavender for model coaches;
Messrs K. and P. Lucas for various articles.
The Vice Chairman went on to explain that due to the Society only being able to have a licence rather than a lease on the premises, it was not possible to get grant aid.
As a consequence the original idea of installing an additional floor in the building could not go ahead at present.
This would considerably reduce the display space available.
However the Committee had felt that the reduced scheme was still worthwhile and he looked forward to the Museum opening in the near future.
The Chairman thanked Mr Newcombe and all others concerned for their work in connection with the setting up of the Museum.
Social Secretary's Report
The Social Secretary recalled the visits and meetings in a busy year.
He particularly mentioned the trip to the Llangollen Railway in September 1991, the warm welcome received from their members and the way they made the visit so interesting and informative.
Shares will soon be offered in the Llangollen Railway and details will be available to our members in due course.
Outlining his proposals for the 1992/3 season, the Soc.
Sec. suggested that the main trip be by BR from Newtown, Powys to Towyn and thence on the Talyllyn narrow Gauge railway.
This was agreed.
Cost was estimated at £10-11 per person.
The date was agreed as Saturday, 5th September 1992.
It was also agreed that the annual Central Wales Line trip from Craven Arms to Llandrindod Wells take place on the evening of Friday 19th June 1992.
Departure from Craven Arms at 17:22 was the recommended option, and would allow time in Llandrindod.
Those who could not leave work in time could catch the 19:46 and we would all travel back together.
Outlining the provisional Winter Programme the Social Secretary suggested:—
4th Sept. 92
A talk on the East German Railways until shortly before reunification.
This will be given by our member Gordon Gissing.
2nd Oct. 92
Mr John Scott Morgan — the Col. Stephens Railways.
7th Nov. 92
Members please note that this is a SATURDAY .
The Welsh Marches and West Midlands Premiere of the new Colin Garrett show ‘Britain's Railway’.
Open to the public in the main hall of the Bishop's Castle Community College.
Admission was expected to be about £4.00 full rate, and there would as usual be concessionary rates.
He asked the opinion of members on whether a ‘Bring a Pensioner’ scheme would be worth trying.
The idea is that anyone bringing a pensioner (or indeed a minor) would be admitted at the concessionary rate.
This is essentially a more flexible version of the family ticket.
This show will be even better than the last one and is not to be missed!
Members' Quiz
The experiment of holding a members' team quiz, at a time when travel from outside the area might be difficult, has been agreed to be worth repeating.
All of these meetings commence at 7.30 p.m. and, apart from the Colin Garrett show, will be held in the Fletcher Room at the Community College.
The remainder of the Winter Programme will be announced later.
Members should note that the current intention is not to hold a January meeting as the first Friday of the month is New Year's Day.
Members agreed that the past year's social events had been most successful.
Preservation Report
Mr T. Wallace reported on the activities during the year.
Work on the Glenburrell Bridge had been slower than hoped for as there had been some discussion with the County Council as to ownership.
It had now been acknowledged that Major Minton-Beddoes is the owner and work can now resume.
(Volunteers needed — please contact Tim Wallace.)
Another factor had been the effort to help with the Museum project.
A sponsored walk to aid the preservation fund was held on 1st February 1992 and realised the excellent sum of £200.
A countryside walk will be opened in the near future and will include part of the old BCR trackbed.
It was suggested that a picnic meeting be held at Glenburrell Bridge during the Summer — details later.
Mr W. F. G. Plowden has agreed in principle to the Society having the Bishop's Castle Railway goods van, at present used as a shed at Eaton Station House — but the Society will have to provide a shed in lieu.
This offer has been gratefully accepted but a suitable site for the van will eventually have to be found.
ELECTION OF OFFICERS
The Chairman, Cllr.
J. Roberts regretted that due to his many commitments he had not been able to play as active a role in the Society during the past year as he would have wished.
He offered his resignation to the meeting.
After discussion it was proposed by Mr Ken Lucas, seconded by Mr G. Cattle and carried that this be accepted and that Mr Roberts be made Vice President of the Society.
Mr Roberts was thanked for all he had done for the Society since its inception.
Mr R. Newcombe (Vice Chairman) was duly elected Chairman.
The post of Vice Chairman was left to be decided at the next Committee meeting.
The committee was re-elected en bloc with the addition of Mr V. Smith.
The next committee meeting was to be on the 1st June 1992.
TALK BY MR AND MRS PRESHOUS
Following the A.G.M. Mr and Mrs Preshous of the S.W.S.H.A.S. gave a talk and slide show.
Introducing them, the Social Secretary said that he considered Mr and Mrs Preshous to be the true founders of the railway society.
It was their much-praised BCR exhibition in 1986 that revived his own and others' interest in the old railway and led to the process of discussion that (in the relaxed South Shropshire way) led to the formation of the Society three years later.
The exhibition not only demonstrated many old ideas, but also at least one new one — Mr Preshous' original idea of hiring a light aeroplane to enable him to take aerial photographs of the route.
In the talk, first Mr Preshous (Principal of the Bishop's Castle ommunity College) recalled how they came to Bishop's Castle in 1973 when the Borough was celebrating Charter Year marking the 400th anniversary of the granting of the Borough Charter.
He traced the development of the Community College and role in bringing together and assisting local organisations.
He also mentioned the educatonal and recreational facilities available.
From the Charter Year celebratons it was clear that there was much interest in local history/archeology and this culminated in the formation of the South West Shropshire Historical and Archeological Association (S.W.S.H.A.S.) in 1988.
Over the years particularly prior to the formation of the BCRS considerable research had been done on the BCR and its influence on the area it served.
The talk concluded with slides by Mr and Mrs Preshous on topics of local interest.
These illustrated the some of the changes which gave taken place in the local street scene over the years.
The Social Secretary thanked Mr and Mrs Preshous for a very informative presentation and all agreed that time had run out all too quickly.
SIGNAL BOXES — J. MASSEY
The March meeting consited of a talk/slide show given by Mr John Massey.
Many of the slides were of boxes now demolished.
A great deal of effort was needed to compile such a record — there were over 90 boxes in Shropshire at one time.
We owe Mr Massey our thanks for information on a perhaps neglected side of railway history.
THE CAMBRIAN RAILWAYS -L. DAVIES
This talk/slide show took us to many of the stations forming part of the former Cambrian system.
Again many slides were of demolished/derelict scenes.
Impressive night time shots provided added interest at many locations.
We thank keen Society member Len Davies for showing the results of much photographic effort.
EDITORS' COMMENTS
Referring to the talk by Mr Vincent in February, members wishing to pursue the subject of the narrow gauge railways of North Wales will find the following informative:—
A Regional History of the Railways of Great Britain Vol. 11 [David & Charles]
The Talyllyn Railway by D. Potter [David & Charles]
Railway Adventure by L. T. C. Rolt [David & Charles]
Talyllyn Century by L. T. C. Rolt [David & Charles]
Corris — A Narrow-Gauge Portrait — John Scott Morgan [Irwell Press]
I particularly like the writer's use of reductions of the O.S. 1:2500 scale maps in both this and the book produced on the Bishop's Castle Railway, covering the full length of the tracks in question.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Following a conversation I had with Mr Breeze, a Society member and retired GWR main line driver, he has written this letter concerning the driving of a steam train through the tunnel:—
Severn Tunnel
Dear Mr Young,
I think you would be interested if I take you through the Severn Tunnel.
There is a signal box at each end, East and West also the Breakdown Vans, ready when they are wanted.
Indication Lights are fixed in the tunnel to warn the driver a train is approaching a change of gradient.
White lights are fixed in both directions.
They have two lenses, one light to face an approaching train and the other to reflect it across the rails.
One light is fixed to the left side a ¼ mile before the point where the falling gradient changes to level and two lights, one above the other, 40 yards before reaching the level.
The maximum speed through the tunnel is 75 mph.
What communication is there in the tunnel with the signalmen at either end?
A special telegraph wire is fixed on the wall of the tunnel on the up side of the line about 5 feet from the ground.
This wire is connected with a Tell Tale Bell in the Signal Box at each end of the tunnel in such a way that upon the wire being cut or broken the bells will commence ringing and the Signalman is made aware that something has happened.
He must prevent another train entering the tunnel.
The wire must always be cut in cases of mishap.
The person who severs the wire coils it into a large loop so that the metal inside the insulation will not touch the ground or the wall.
If it does so, the bell in the signal box will cease ringing.
Telephones are placed about ¼ apart, numbered 1–17, not on all on the same side of the tunnel.
No. 1 is on the Up side, No. 2 is on the Down side and so on alternately.
The metal telephone cases are placed in the Man Holes with an electric light shining on them.
Failure in the Tunnel
The Guard cuts the wire.
The Driver in the case of a light engine then goes to the telephone to inform the Signalman each end of the tunnel and give them all particulars and if blocking both lines.
If no reply is received, walk to the other side and call from there.
If you break down in the tunnel and you require assistance, the fireman takes from the driver a Wrong Line Order, colour green, and walks to the signal box, putting down three detonators as a guide when he pilots the Break Down on the wrong line to the train.
Mr Young, I hope you will be able to follow my comments, but there is a lot more to add.
Perhaps you would like me to give a talk on S & T.
P.S. I noted that BR accepted responsibility for the recent accident in the tunnel.
Syd Breeze,
The Runnis,
Minsterley
Note: The Social Secretary is hoping to arrange for Mr Breeze to give us a further talk.
D. H. Young
STILL MORE TICKETS FROM MY COLLECTION.
In view of the interest shown in the last issue of the Journal, No. 11, on the Liverpool Overhead Railway tickets, I have dug out a few more interesting examples for the 12th issue.
The sections of the railway were opened as follows:-
The workshops were at Seaforth Sands.
In its final stage there were 38 motor cars, 19 trailers, a diesel locomotive, and two wagons.
Trains ran as 3-car sets, a motor car at each end with a trailer in the middle.
The system was 6 miles long, the voltage was 525 D.C. and current collection was by a third rail, central until 1905, then outside.
On special occasions L.O.R. trains ran through to Southport, although the voltage on this line was 600 D.C. which sometimes caused problems.
I visited the workshops in 1947 and was shown round by the engineer, a Mr Rostron, who was the son of Captain Arthur Rostron, master of the liner Carpathia, who rescued the survivors from the Titanic.
At that time I was working for the LNER on the Tyneside electrified lines, and had had a gentle hint from my then boss that he would like to know what Mr Rostron was up to.
He in fact had rebuilt and modernised some of the the rolling stock, which was very comfortable.
I estimate that the L.O.R. must have had a stock of at least 1000 tickets to cover all needs.
There were through Workman's tickets to other lines, but for internal use these were referred to as Early Morning Returns.
Through booking was not only with the L & Y but with the Mersey Railway and the lines in the Wirral, one example being a Special Day Return to Meols.
Railway Companies were noted for paper.
Departments waged paper war on each other; if nothing else it provided employment.
In my railway days, if you wanted a Privilege Ticket, you filled in a form to obtain a form, filled in by a clerk, which you presented to a booking clerk.
The return Privilege from Huskisson Dock to Pierhead costing 1½d old money.
It would have been cheaper to let the railway worker go for nothing!
15 April 92
(The ‘Editorial Assistant’ apologises to Mr Hearse for omitting his name from the corresponding article in the last Journal.)
MID-WALES RAILWAY NOTES
Shrewsbury-Aberystwyth Line Supporters' Group
Efforts have been made for some time to get this off the ground and a successful public meeting was held at Newtown at the end of April.
BR local officials attended and the first meeting of the association group was scheduled for Saturday 30th May to get the whole thing properly under way.
The press reporting of the public meeting at the end of April was very unhelpful, concentrating on the ramblings of a local councillor who most stations between Welshpool and Machynlleth to be reopened!
The New Summer Timetable on the Cambrian Lines
Without doubt this is the best for the Shrewsbury -Aberystwyth line for many a long year.
The first train ex Aberystwyth is at 07.00 arrives at Euston at noon.
The last down train leaves Euston at 18.15 and arrives at Aberystwyth at 23.13 (with one change).
Most services are in the hands of Class 156 and 158 DMU's with 153's to be used to strengthen sets.
However in the first week of operations insufficient availability of 158's resulted in the 08.22 ex Salop and 11.00 return working ex Aberystwyth being a single Class 153.
This left Aberystwyth packed and buses were used past Newtown.
One through Birmingham to Pwllheli working survives.
Surprisingly there is now one spot in the timetable when there are two passenger trains in Aberystwyth at the same time, necessitating shunting in the station to the centre road or run round and shunt token working with Borth as the intermediate point.
This occurs with the 17.56 Machynlleth to Aberystwyth which on arrival in Aberystwyth at 18.28 is shunted.
This is followed in by the 16.05 ex Birmingham — in at 19.14, out again at 19.22.
The recessed set then forms the 19.45 to Machynlleth and apparently the 20.50 to Pwllheli.
Freight Traffic
The Wednesday only Stanlow to Aberystwyth remains the only freight working west of Salop.
Normally arrival in Aberystwyth is around 08.15 and with the 08.10 Machynlleth -Aberystwyth arriving at 08.39, departing 08.45 to New Street hard on its heels, short section working and quick shunting is needed to clear the following passenger train.
Locomotive 37418 is often seen on this working, which sometimes runs erratically.
On Wednesday 20th May it arrived mid afternoon, the loco returned to Machynlleth, on depot at 17.30, with the tanks left overnight in Aberystwyth.
Other Loco Working
There is now only one summer Saturday loco-hauled holiday train.
Leaving Birmingham at 09.25 it runs with one Class 31 to Salop where two Class 31's take the train out at 10.40 to Pwllheli, arriving 14.45.
Leaving Pwllheli at 15.30 it then returns to Crewe, arriving 20.17.
All Machynlleth drivers are passed for the Class 31 and the last one passed out only in the week before the new timetable came in.
Parcels Workings
Red Star to Aberystwyth is not particularly healthy and the computer link was taken out in mid May.
Any parcels are now sent with emergency written labels.
In April the talk was of what few parcels there were being handled by road van with Regional Railways carrying no parcels at all.
However this did not materialise.
Red Star ‘Door to Door’ is delivered to the area from Llandudno Junction by road.
Your author recently had 49 parcels to his place of work by Red Star from London Heathrow parcels point.
The route was: Heathrow -Paddington (road?),
Paddington -Euston (cross London by road), Euston -Llandudno Junction (rail), Llandudno -Aberystwyth by road with delivery by 11.10.
The next point of call for the van was Welshpool.
Welshpool Station
Sunday 17 May saw the final slewing of the track and train operated point installation for the new Welshpool Station.
The Welshpool bypass, for which road works can be seen from the train, will occupy the old trackbed, but the station buildings on the up side are being kept.
The Vale of Rheidol
Train services started on Good Friday and from then until the start of two train working on Monday 25th May loco No. 9 operated the two trains per day.
Loadings do not appear to be good with one train having only three coaches.
and the 11.00 on 17th May reported as having only six passengers.
The 11.00 on Good Friday was the first passenger train over the rebuilt Rheidol Bridge which is a particulary fine structure.
A new manager is in charge at Aberystwyth following last September's shake-out.
He is an engineer and apparently very approachable.
John Wildig
24 May 1992
ROADS TO RUIN?
This is a delayed report on a one day conference that took place on the 27th April 1991 at the Gateway Centre, Shrewsbury.
The full title was ‘Roads to Ruin?
Transport and the Environment’ and the delay is not the fault of the author but of myself, Keith Lucas (editorial assistant?) who lost the original draft.
The conference was organised jointly by the Shropshire branch of the Council for the Protection of Rural England,(C.P.R.E.) the Shropshire Wildlife Trust (S.W.T.) and Shrewsbury Friends of the Earth (FoE).
The report is in note form.
Attendance
About 70, one third of whom had arrived by public transport, a twelfth by Park and Ride.
Routes for the Future
Given by Andrew Purkis, National Director, C.P.R.E.
Government is poised to forecast a huge increase in the extraction of aggregates -one third of which go to roads.
Mr Heseltine announced ‘Corridors of Growth’, spawned journal ‘M40 Corridor News’.
One fifth of village homes have no car, hence ‘Cat's cradle of car journeys’.
Car dependence accidentally increases house prices.
Suggestions
(a)
Raise company car and fuel taxes.
(b)
Reward catalytic conversion and engine emission reduction.
(c)
Far better transport/land links in planning.
(d)
Greater self-sufficiency, e.g. mobile shops, works buses.
(e)
Department of transport (DTp)‘a gigantic loose cannon on the deck’ whose attitude is that motorist time-saving is sacrosanct.
Kill present policy basis.
Deliberately procrastinate over Trunk Road Environmental Assessment.
Working Group Summary
Emphasise road pricing.
Fuel tax militates against poorer people.
DTp schemes everlook local views — gant-aided presentation.
Reduce work -residence distances.
Planning encourages travel by catering for car-park spaces.
Unity of campaigning groups.
Transport — The Planner's Perspective
Keith Madelin, Shropshire County Surveyor
People choose to afford cars.
Salop public wanted main road traffic growth increase of 50% since 1979.
Illustrated fundamental problem of ownership -nearly doubles journeys made; UK cf.
Denmark lower (!)
European and use of cars.
Upper = West Germany, Netherlands, Norway, USA 1963 more than UK 1990.
Built-in credit cards: true parking and motoring cost
’ Causes me to act selfishly’.
New opportunities, needs.
Travel is not an end in itself.
Ridiculous Government forecasts become self-fulfilling.
Road freight: greater production = cheaper = distribution explosion.
Trans-shipment centres — concentrated use — inappropriate for Shropshire.
‘Total inadequacy of rural roads’, farming community, heavy goods vehicles.
Questioner
Rail and river cheaper (W. Germany).
Prof. Button, Loughborough University, calculates that cars consume (high) 18% of Gross Domestic Product.
Rural Transport
Malcolm Kimber
Centralised society, HGV influence, supermarkets (food, drink, tobacco) caused average haul length up 11% since 1979.
Increasing tare without restricting routes a fundamental error.
Social Aspects of Transport
Important minority car-less — nationally 33%
Prosperous in-comers diminish demand for shop, school, P.O., cottage hospital, hence closures.
Day will never dawn when everyone has a car — not a free choice in his (Kimber's) case (wife's job moved)
67% of motorists ignorant of emitting CO 2 .
Hoped Shrewsbury -Wolverhampton electrification connections would be better than frustrating Chester -Manchester he does does not use.
New station Whittington ‘would have saved ten minutes if open’; Baschurch?
Shropshire — 575 scattered settlements — county planning primarily buses.
Many are market day only, but better service than people realise.
Enterprising ticketing impossible since Deregulation.
Community Bus.
‘Dial-a-Ride’.
’ Individual needs to make sacrifice’.
Working group Summary
(Delivered by another RDS — Railway Development Society — member).
Car destroys community spirit.
Dormitory villages.
Organise spare capacity school buses.
Inequalities in funding rural roads.
Lack of investment in railways.
Roads not user-friendly — divide communities.
Changing Attitudes to Cars
Steven Joseph, Director, Transport 2000
Progress, freedom, privacy, deeply held values.
’ At any one time majority of population do not have use of car.’
Most journeys are short — pedestrians and cyclists ignored.
Noise, severance, domination — transport fastest growing source of greenhouse gases.
Intrusive — Government = oversize lorries.
Unhealthy: four roadside monitoring points — Bristol shows toxins — cf 86 Holland.
Undamaging three minute longer Dorset bypass route does not justify cost-benefit analysis!
’ Rolling law-breakers’— overloaded.
Derisory enforcement of HGV regulations — illegality make goods 20% cheaper.
’ Moving warehouses’— huge lorries.
Lorry tax ‘track costs’ should rise 15%-55%.
European Sunday trunk road lorry ban.
Government policy does not believe transport planning gives road haulage impetus!
Road widening undermines railway investment.
£137 M would bring workable rail service = one trunk scheme
Bus lanes; light rail; pedestrianisation; walking (33% of journeys)— physically unattractive subways.
Car dependency
traffic calming and restraint
individual bad decisions: 80% of children chauffeured to school (local intervention required)
‘Addiction — Government is drug dealer’.
Unacceptability of drunken driving is hopeful sign.
’ Where will next Shrewsbury by-pass be built?’
Questioner (who was cheered): Why had Sainsburys been allowed to develop alongside the railway at Meole Brace without providing a station?
Working Group Summary
Explore guilt.
Hard-hitting publicity, car as evil object.
Dim advertising glamour.
Remove assumption that car is more attractive.
Pay real costs.
Roads at a Crossroads
The full title was ‘Roads and Wildlife Corridors at a Crossroads’.
Given by John Tucker, Head of Conservation, S.W.T. Thought that bus service from Pontesbury was too poor (corrected!)
Transport system decision-making fundamentally flawed.
Ensure reflect need to move people and products rather than vehicles.
Winning fuel and materials pollutes, consumes energy, destroys habitat.
Royal Society for Conservation advocates:
transport policies to emphasise need to protect statutory sites, e.g. Much Wenlock — where by-pass damages S.S.S.I. on one side, conservation area on the other.
Stabilise 1998 traffic at 1990 levels; reduce by 15% by 2010.
Reduce need to travel.
Alternative transport systems, framed environmental constraints.
M40 has eliminated a species of butterfly!
15% Shropshire prime site loss — Development = Planning control.
Value of ‘ordinary’ countryside disregarded.
Road fragmentation kills vulnerable species, e.g. barn owls.
Working Group Summary
Multilateral opposition to road schemes.
Educate disadvantaged [sic].
Cash in on insularity: parochial concerns.
Vociferous local opposition — e.g. anti-nuclear waste.
’ Losing Ground’report, R.S.N.C., wildlife losses.
Speaker mandated by meeting to approach public bodies to cost wildlife losses → Government.
Hook on to wildlife — specific examples.
Roads Programme — Alternative
The full title was ‘The National Roads Programme: Alternative Assessment’.
Given by Roger Higman, National Transport Campaigner, FoE.
Misleading Government propaganda of the last 30 years — rail investment at an all-time high.
Core areas between big cities, National Roads Programme most damage — e.g. manchester, one or two orbital roads?
Publicity leaflet: ‘Would a New Road Corridor Improve YOUR Environment?’
British Roads Federation includes:
Grand Metropolitan, Shell, A.A., R.A.C.
Freight Transport Association, including Sainsburys.
Road Haulage Association, Quarrying, Institution of Civil Engineers.
Reasoned argument less effective than political clout -one sixth attending conference have written to their MP.
Successful campaign more letters on roads than poll-tax, MP, local council and politicians — make minister sweat!
Possible Thirty per Cent Club — towns effectively reducing traffic.
Successful Hackney ‘No Through Road Campaign’ visibility: Expose road lobby, e.g. not all new roads lead to more employment.
Journalist's Friend; postcard plan highlight threatened beauty [sic].
Beat the Bounds; repeated coverage — weekly; letter to Queen on destruction of local cinema; take to streets; ‘parish pump’ enlist actor — Eastenders in this case!
‘No Cause for Alarm’ pro-road after, before Journalist ‘Homes Escape the Bulldozer’.
40 major London road schemes abandoned; ‘Important to commit ourselves as opposed to roads’
Working Group Summary
DTp assess BR (8% return) cf. no control road expansion;
Bigger arguments against Western Orbital rather than Shrewsbury;
No private cars in Shrewsbury loop.
Chairman's Summary?
By Robert Hutchison, Shropshire County Council, p.m. chairman.
Mileage allowances generating traffic contradict C.C./FoE approved Environmental Charter and Structure Plan statement.
Loss of children's freedom — intimidation of traffic;
Sense of values —‘push’ Co.
Surveyor;
Carbon taxation
‘Copernican Revolution’ in transport policy required;
Dehumanising; Walking should be ‘king’;
Cycling, Park and Ride, Rail User groups.
Contributor's Notes
Why official car-sharing initiatives do not last and should ‘Leisure Drive’ signs be removed?
‘Few people can visualise the size and nature of new civil engineeering works or their impact on landscape before they happen.
Even fewer can appreciate in advance the effect, not just of the structures, but of the constantly moving stresses of traffic on them.
They tend to take existing tranquility for granted — until it has gone.’
‘Goodbye, Britain?’, 1976
Giles Angell
December 1991.
BCRS JOURNAL
Members are urged to submit articles on relevant railway topics for inclusion in the Journal.
Soon it will will be no articles — no Journal!