

COMMITTEE MEETING
On 28th September 1992 your Committee held its first meeting since the Museum opened in July.
The Hon.
Sec. reported that there have been about 2,000 visitors so far, mostly from outside Bishop's Castle.
No admission fee is charged but donations given by visitors amount to £180.
Donations from an appeal for funds amount to £700.
After expenses the Society's bank balance is £994 plus £400 in the Perservation Fund.
The Hon.
Sec. and helpers were thanked for their efforts in getting the museum started, and application has been made for membership of the Association of Independent Museums.
It was agreed that the official opening of the museum take place at 2.30 p.m. on Saturday 24th October 1992 — when it is hoped that as many members as possible will attend.
The Colin Garratt show was arranged for 7.30 p.m. on the 7th November 1992 at the Community College, Bishop's Castle.
Admission rates were £4 for adults, £concessionary, with further concessionary rates of £10 for a family (2+2) and a ‘bring a pensioner’ scheme whereby anyone bringing a pensioner (or a child) could get in at the concessionary rate.
The last scheme was an attempt to address the transport problems of the area.
It is hoped that formal Articles of Association will be ready for discussion and adoption by members at the next AGM.
TRIP TO THE TALYLLYN RAILWAY
On Saturday 5th September some twenty-odd members of the Society and guests gathered on the platform of Newtown station to catch the 09:12 to Machynlleth.
The Mardles, Ron and Carol, joined us at Caersws.
We arrived at Machynlleth at 09:59 and changed to the 10:26 Pwllheli train.
While waiting some of us were given a quick look behind the scenes, and then to my surprise I bumped into three members of the Gwili Railway, on a trip to collect some railway hardware.
We arrived at Tywyn at 10:56 and walked the half mile to the Talyllyn.
We had time to potter for a while before our train, which was hauled by ‘Tom Rolt’.
Graham Vincent met us as arranged at Abergynolwyn and accompanied us up to Nant Gwernol.
We had decided earlier that our idea of investigating the old rope-worked inclines above Nant Gwernol would not be practical with a mixed party including some elderly members.
There is however considerable interest among some of the younger members in doing this and there is a project that some of us will return to the Talyllyn when it can be arranged.
If you interested please let me know.
On our return to Abergynolwyn we had a half hour wait to allow the Talyllyn's vintage train to pass through and this allowed us to get a snack in the refreshment room.
Graham saw us on to the train and went by car to Pendre Works where the Talyllyn has its workshops.
We got out at Pendre and Graham and the chief engineer gave us very detailed guided tours showing the extent of operations.
The final activities were another guided tour, back at Wharf Station, where Graham showed us round the museum that he played a central role in setting up.
We had time to look round the shop before leaving for our BR train, whither Graham, his daughter Sue and her daughters escorted us.
Again we have been given right royal treatment by a preserved railway, following our wonderful trip to the Llangollen last year.
The BR train was late but there was a compensation — it was, as somebody remarked, a ‘proper train’, in other words loco hauled.
It was in fact the Butlins train, that runs on summer Saturdays to serve the Butlins holiday camp at Pwllheli.
We finished the trip on a through train, drinking white wine and eating crisps, looking at the Cambrian line scenery.
Eat your heart out those who missed it!
Keith Lucas
A GERMAN NARROW GAUGE RAILWAY
A recurrent theme in Society activities is that we have plenty of speakers amongst our own ranks.
I had tested the waters with the evening of mini-talks in our second season.
One of the speakers that evening was Gordon Gissing, so I had no hesitation when he told me about his visit to a picturesque narrow (metre) gauge system in East Germany, and offered to give us a talk on it.
The talk kicked off our 1992-3 season.
The system is called the Harzquerbahn, which means a railway crossing the Harz Mountains.
Gordon went as a member of a party of 57 and presented his talk in an innovative way, starting with usual slide sequence with descriptions of the views, then for the second half showed a video that had been shot on the tour.
The scenes were stunning, this system of lines is a little gem.
Unfortunately its future must be uncertain in these changing times.
We must hope that it will prove sufficiently attractive to tourists, so that, like several of our own rural lines, it is kept open mainly for its summer traffic, allowed by the powers that be to run even out of season, and can continue to serve its area.
There are some encouraging signs.
Charter trains run.
They even create photographic opportunities by letting the passengers get down and take photographs while the train does two or three runs past.
Gordon included in his presentation a few shots of the journey through the UK to join the tour and some tram photographs.
Several members of the Society like trams so we were definitely not averse.
Keith Lucas
STEAM IN THE SEVENTIES
Unfortunately John Scott Morgan had to postpone his planned October talk (but he has been booked for next May, see below).
We are very grateful for Dr Carey Griffiths and Vic Smith for stepping into the breach and presenting us with a two-part programme.
Dr Griffiths spoke first and showed us some of his own cine films of steam runs mainly in the 1970s.
We saw the anniversary of the Rainhill trials, with the large range of locomotives exhibited there, and runs by the classic locomotives that have survived into preservation, many of them on the Marches line.
Some of these shots could not be taken today in this, either because building has made them impossible or simply because the crowds who congregate to nowadays to take these shots would detract from the scene.
In the second half of the evening Vic Smith showed us some scenes at Crich, the National Tramway museum, plus a couple of shots of trams abroad.
Members might like to note that Crich is a front runner for next summer's trip.
COLIN GARRATT
Colin's visit has now come and gone and was a great success.
Because this Journal is already full we will hold over a full report until the next issue.
CHAIRMAN'S AND SECRETARY'S VISIT TO NRM, YORK
On Monday 13th July 1992 our Chairman, Richard Newcombe and myself paid a visit to the N.R.M. York, where we had an appointment to see Dieter Hopkin, Curator of Collections, in respect of BCR artifacts that are stored there.
We travelled by train, CA to Manchester Piccadilly, and then on to York, on 158's on both journeys.
On arriving at York we walked the short distance to the N.R.M. and first of all paid a visit to the Reading Room to look through the Selwyn Higgins collection of notes, photos etc. relating to the BCR.
We were pleasantly surprised to find quite a few previously unseen photos relating to the demolition of the line, als osome unseen material that we arranged to have photo-copied for the Society.
Reluctantly we had to stop as it was time to go to see Mr Hopkin, who made us most welcome.
We presented our case to him, of our interest in having the artifacts of the BCR returned to Bishop's Castle for display in our museum.
We had gone prepared for any questions he might ask, together with all the official documents regarding planning permission etc. and a collection of excellent photographic evidence of how we had set up the museum regarding exhibits etc., taken by our good friend Russell Mulford.
Mr Hopkin expressed his opinion that we had done a very good job in our efforts, he then gave his professional advice
that we join the Association of Independent Museums
on cataloguing items and issuing receipts for items on loan or donated
on advertising the museum, etc.
To obtain the artifacts back from York we have to submit a list of the items deposited at York.
He then sends an inspector to our museum and it is upon this inspector's report that it is decided whether we are successful in our application.
The artifacts remain in the National Collection, but Mr Hopkin informed us that if successful with our application then we will retain them for ten- year periods.
Mr Hopkin then took us to see the artifactsin the Store and Refurbishment building, down steep steps into the vaults.
There were engine name plates everywhere, what a paradise.
He then showed us the brass plate of ‘No. 1’, still attached to the piece of cab as Selwyn Higgins cut it off.
Then to our surprise he produced CAST IRON plate ‘No. 2’ off Carlisle, and if that were not enough, the wooden trespass board that appears in the well known photograph of ‘No. 1’near Horderley.
We did not see the signal as it was fast approaching time for our departure from York, but just before we left Mr Hopkin he informed us that there were also tickets, buttons, maybe som small brass fittings, an 1864 rail chair and possibly the original chimney of Carlisle from before her 1924 heavy overhaul.
It was back to the Reading Room to pick up our briefcases, and farewell (for now) to the N.R.M.
What a marvellous day!
Note: Further to our visit we have placed an order for the set of Selwyn Higgins photographs, together with the six photographs taken by Dr J. Simpson.
The Society has also applied for membership of the Association of Independent Museums.
We will keep members informed of the developments regarding the artifacts from York.
Ken Lucas
MUSEUM OPENING
After a hectic three months' work load, by a small but willing group of members, the BCRS Museum is up and running
We opened our doors to the general public for the first time on Saturday 18th July 1992.
At present we are opening on Saturdays and Sundays from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m.
The flow of people so far visiting the museum is very encouraging, not only local people, but visitors to the town from as far afield as the south coast and Scotland have come.
No admission is charged at present, instead a donation box is in place.
The small shop area has to be completed and we hope to have a full range of items for sale in the near future.
My thanks to Tim and Steve Wallace, Ron Mardle, our Chairman Richard Newcombe, Paul Lucas, my wife and our grandchildren who acted as sweepers up, errand boys and girl, etc. for all their work in achieving this opening in a short space of time, for the actual work of putting everything in its place I would like to thank the afore-mentioned and my daughter Bridget, also for manning the museum now that it is open.
During the course of receiving items for display in the museum, several items have come to light.
They will make a base for me to pen some more articles for the Journal.
Now that I have time again I shall also be able to finish off the other articles that were put on one side during the museum work.
OFFICIAL MUSEUM OPENING
Background
After several weeks of hard work by Ken and Paul Lucas, Tim and Steve Wallace and Richard Newcombe, our museum opened to the public on 18th July 1992.
Like all important ventures it went through a test period before holding an official opening ceremony which took place on Saturday 24th October 1992.
Our feelings at the end of this test period are best described as ‘cautiously optimistic’.
We have seen around 2,000 visitors come through the doors in the three months.
The income from donations and sales is reasonably good.
We could certainly do with a rota of people to man the museum and more volunteers to put on it.
We have the problem facing us of implementing the planned museum extension, i.e. of building the mezzanine floor over our landlord's garage.
The plans are passed, but we still have to find the funds and the effort to do this job to the high standard of the existing museum.
The message to all of us must be ‘A good start, boys, but don't rest on your laurels’.
It goes without saying that those of us without laurels to rest on will need to create some.
The Official Opening
The event started at the museum itself.
Ken Lucas, the honorary secretary described the achievements of the Society in its three years of existence, our monthly meetings, our quarterly Journal, the restoration of the platform at Horderley, the commencement of work on the Glenburrell bridge (suspended for the nonce because of other commitments), the acquisition of the GWR coach from Clunbury, and the negotiations over the proposed acquisition of the goods van at Eaton.
He said that the GWR coach alone would probably be a ten- year programme.
Our Chairman, Richard Newcombe, who has taken a particular interest in the museum, then spoke, welcoming the guests and thanking them for their support.
He introduced the guest of honour, Lord Ross of Newport.
Lord Ross, a long-standing railway enthusiast, took us further afield with a brief description of the railway scene on the Isle of Wight, an area of interest of his.
He spoke of the fight to preserve as much of possible of the Island's rail network in the period of the Beeching closures.
An amusing note was that the old London Underground stock operating the remaining BR line has recently been upgraded from 1924 Central Line units to postwar Bakerloo Line stock.
An encouraging note mentioned in Lord Ross's speech was the recent reconnection of the Isle of Wight by the preservation society with the BR line.
(Dammit, we'll beat the anti-rail lobby yet, thought I.)
Lord Ross now lives near on the Central Wales Line, and is a frequent user.
One of our Committee members, the Rev. Ray Arnold, gave a short address and dedication, saying that enterprises like this one can so easily be a flash in the pan, but this one has surmounted its problems so far and achieved much.
We were particularly pleased that Lady More, our President, who had not been expected to speak, said a few words about her late husband's interest in railways and congatulating us on our achievement.
Tea
After the official ceremony the party moved down to the Town Hall, and incidentally how appropriate that the Railway and the Railway Society that have always been so intimately involved with the town should hold its celebration at Bishop's Castle's ancient Town Hall with the mayor, district council chairman in attendance.
Furthermore we were very pleased to be supported by Major S. Minton Beddoes and Lt. Col. P. Sykes, descendants of original shareholders of the BCR, with Mrs Sykes, Mrs and Miss Minton Beddoes.
(Mr and Mrs William Plowden were away and had sent their apologies.)
The scene at the Town Hall was of an informal party of people of all stations (excuse the pun) in life, pulling together in the long-established South Shropshire manner, to have a good time.
The support was considerable and very gratifying, Others present were Cllr. and Mrs St John Penney, Mayor and Mayoress of Bishop's Castle, Mrs Margaret Griffiths, Town Clerk, Cllr. and Mrs J. MacCormick, Cllr. and Mrs T. Summerfield, Chairman of Craven Arms Town Council, Mr D. Preshous, Principal of the Community College and Mrs Preshous, author of ‘Bishop's Castle Well Remembered’.
Also in attendance were our past chairman John Roberts and Mrs Roberts, and Mrs Davies, who owns our museum building.
Members will know that there was a locomotive called ‘Bishop's Castle’ owned by the BCR before the advent of Carlisle and No. 1.
Railway enthusiasts, local or not, might recall that in this century the GWR named a Castle Class locomotive ‘Bishop's Castle’, though unfortunately, unlike ‘Clun Castle’ it did not survive into preservation.
Well at least we had one of its nameplates at our opening, kindly brought all the way from London by Mr and Mrs Barry Cordell.
The refreshments were supplied by several members, and organised by Mrs F. Lucas.
The Society is indebted to Ralph and Mrs Edwards, Mr and Mrs Vic Smith, Dr Grey, Mrs C. Evans, Mrs Newcombe, Mrs Wallace, Ron and Carol Mardle and members of the Lucas and Nottingham families, both for providing the food and helping on the day.
The events have been recorded both by Ray Graham and John Roberts and we look forward to seeing the videos.
STILL MORE TICKETS FROM MY COLLECTION
Special tickets issued for unusual reasons are always very interesting, many date from World War Two.
Furlough tickets at a reduced rate for members of HM Forces appeared for thoses without a free leave pass.
Disguise was also used, for example the 1st Class Special Single ticket from the now closed Leith Central Station to Portabello on the N.B. main line, south.
Note the fare rate number printed on the part to be nipped.
All my furlough tickets are LNER, but I assume that other companies issued them.
The Isle of Man Railway Company issued HM Forces tickets both between stations on the island and from the island to destinations in the UK, together with a sea crossing.
The example from Sulby Glen was for a steamer via Liverpool; I have others via Fleetwood.
As World War Two progressed, the island steamer service terminated at Fleetwood, but returned to Liverpool about 1946.
Via Liverpool tickets could be either an early wartime issue or post 1946.
The Spadeadam Rocket Establishment came into being some time after 1950 when the Cold War was at its height.
This bus ticket suggests that security was not a major consideration.
From the ‘other side’ in World War Two cheap tickets were issued for their armed forces.
The Wehrmachtfahrkahrte was issued it Mistelback to Wien Ost on the 26th November 1938, on what was once the Austrian State Railways, by then part of the DR.
If the then bogus rate of exchange is ignored, the 0.85 RM would have cost the soldier about ten old pence.
I wonder where he is now, if still about!
Although a pioneer line, very little is ever heard of the Volks Electric Railway.
I have no date for the 3d ticket but it could be post war.
Ticket varieties from the Liverpool Overhead Railway are never ending.
You could leave your bicycle at Dingle Station every day for a week for only 6d, at your own risk of course.
That line only seems to have issued two HM Forces tickets, a 1st Class return at 9d, and a 3rd Class at 7d.
No doubt shorter journeys were deemed to be within the pocket of the serviceman of woman.
An unhappy story to end up with, is that when passenger services ceased on the Shropshire and Montgomeryshire Railway, all the remaining tickets were tipped into a ring of bricks and burnt.
An acquaintance of mine arrived some weeks later to be told that he could have them if he had turned up sooner.
However he was allowed to dig into the soggy mess to see if anything survived.
Strange to say, a few tickets were lodged between the bricks and were almost undamaged.
George S. Hearse
TIM'S AND STEVEN'S VISIT TO THE SOUTH
Day by Day
Friday 31 July 1992
We stayed at Leighton Buzzard.
Across the road from where we stayed is the track of the LB Narrow Gauge Railway which is celebrating its 25th anniversary.
On the first night we went on aguided tour of the Stonehenge works and saw various locos dating from the first world war and plenty of ex-sand wagons which were used in the pits of the area.
Also we went down to the H.Q. at Pages Park where we saw some men putting up photographs of the line in the past.
The line went from Munday's Hill Pit down to the Leighton to Hatfield line (L.N.W.R.)
Saturday 01 August 1992
Next day we went down to the Nene Valley Railway.
We went through Bedford and on the food road (A1) because there were Little Chefs, Happy Eaters and AJS about every half mile.
When we got there we found that it was a diesel day with three Class 14's, a Class 40 and one Class 03.
The coaching stock was one set German (DB) and one set BR Mark I. In the yard we could see their ‘Kriegslok’ 2-10-0 on display.
The line runs on the ex-L.N.W.R. which is rebuilt to the Berne loading gauge and runs from Peterborough to Yarwell Junction with the H.Q. at Wansford Station, Stibbington, where there is a very good museum.
Sunday 02 August 1992
We were up early the next morning at 06.00 to go up to the station to catch the 07.19 Leighton -Euston train, which is a semi-stopper, it took an hour to get there.
We then went on the Underground on the line to Victoria where we caught the 08.35 train to Hayward's Heath.
At 09.35 we had a cup of coffee on Hayward's Heath station, where we met a member of the Bluebell Railway who could see where we were going from our BCRS members.
He told us about the open-top Leyland ‘Queen Mary’ PD3 double-decker bus (service 769) which runs from Perrymount Road, Hayward's Heath to Sheffield Park station.
A joint ticket for bus and rail cost £8.50.
At Sheffield Park is the H.Q. of the Bluebell Railway.
We got there at about 10.55 in time to see the 11.00 train which was hauled by 323 Bluebell and their LMS tank.
Locos in steam were Class U 1618 and their Merchant Navy Class.
We looked around the sheds with 928 ‘Stowe School’, BR Standard Class 4 (75027), BR Standard Class 9F (92240), ‘Sir Archibald Sinclair’, Battle of Britain Class (34059) and many more.
After lunch we took one of the trains hauled by 1618 which took us to Horsted Keynes and up the new extension to New Coombe Bridge.
We were lucky because we had a ride in the LNWR observation car.
On the way back we stopped at Horstead Keynes to look at the Carriage and Wagon Dept.
There is a genuine 1882 food and full bar buffet.
Monday 03 August 1992
On our final day we went to Didcot.
We called at Penndon museum which was closed, but looks good, and then went to look at the Cholsey and Wallingford Railway which has plenty of rolling stock.
Then we went on the Didcot and the Great Western Society.
We parked in the InterCity car park which had plenty of room.
We crossed the western main line by a bridge to get to the G.W.S. Outside the first shed was King George V. We went to see the broad gauge track layout with the transit shed and broad gauge signal and after that took a look at the carriage shed which contained some clerestory coaches.
One was painted in crimson lake which was the livery between 1900-1923.
We went to the museum with all aspects of the Great Western Railway and finally to the gift shop, the only one we visited that had the Bishop's Castle Railway book on sale.
On the way back over the lines west we saw a lot of traffic with trains going to Oxford, coal to Didcot power station, 125's to the West Country and three class 37's up and down with nowhere to go.
Stephen and Tim Wallace.
BRUNEL'S BROAD GAUGE AND THE BCR
Introduction
This is the introductory article to an occasional series on Broad Gauge topics, in particular on modern developments centring on the Firefly Project, in which a team at Didcot is building a broad gauge locomotive..
Origin
Since most railway enthusiasts, especially the GWR buffs, will know something about Brunel's broad gauge, I will try to keep this brief.
First let us be clear about the use of words.
‘The’ broad gauge means Brunel's magnificent 7 ft track, the largest serious gauge ever conceived — I exclude dockyard cranes and a daft idea of Hitler's to build a line from east to west Europe with a 4 metre gauge (over 13 feet!), later scaled down to 3 metres (nearly 10 feet).
There are of course other broader-than-standard gauges, some still in use today, for example in Russia, Ireland, Spain, Portugal, India, Australia and South America.
Confusingly, in broad gauge circles, our standard gauge is known as ‘the’ narrow gauge and I will use this term here with an occasional reminder.
In 1833 Brunel was engaged, by a group that later formed the GWR, to engineer a railway between Bristol and London.
He surprised everybody by choosing a 7 foot gauge to increase capacity and improve the ride.
He was right.
The broad gauge set the standard for developments for half a century, largely because the greater stability permitted higher speeds than were then possible on the narrow gauge and hence led to engineering advances that would make such speeds possible, eventually in the narrow gauge as well.
Description
Brunel designed a new track support system as well as a new gauge.
He used a lighter rail with a section known a ‘bridge rail’ supported on longtitudinal baulks of timber with light cross ties or transoms to maintain the gauge.
After some early problems this was proved to be a successful system.
An example can be seen at the Didcot Railway Centre With the fine locomotives designed by Daniel Gooch, the GWR's broad gauge trains formed the first real expresses and indeed the inaugural train from London to Bristol led to the comment that this must be the only time on record that an engineer had exceeded his promises!
Unfortunately the use of a new gauge led to a simple practical problem — the break of gauge where the broad met the narrow gauge with the consequent need for transshipment of goods and passengers.
Various methods were adopted to get round the problem.
A third rail was laid over many miles of track to allow trains of either gauge to run.
Some special vehicles were constructed to allow easy conversion or transshipment.
A Gauge Commission was set up in 1845 to investigate the problem.
It made a detailed study and in particular conducted trial runs on both gauges under similar conditions.
The broad gauge won, but the narrow gauge put up a respectable performance.
The Gauge Commission's report said, essentially, that the broad gauge was technically superior but that there was much more narrow gauge track built and so conversion from broad to narrow gauge would be easier.
Also tunnel conversions would be easier.
Recommendations were made that would eventually phase out the broad gauge.
In fact it lasted for nearly another half century, until 1892.
Extent — and the BCR Angle
At its peak in 1866 the track mileage of the broad gauge reached 1040, with a further 387 miles of mixed gauge.
It covered most of South Wales west to Milford Haven and north to Llandyssul, in England north to Hereford and Wolverhampton and of course the famous main line all the way to Penzance with its branches.
It was this last area that kept the broad gauge alive for its last twenty years, after the conversion of South Wales in 1872.
The BCR Angle
I learned recently from an article on Craven Arms station in the Railway Journal that the Shrewsbury and Hereford Railway, authorised by Parliament on the 3rd August 1846, was not the only scheme to link these towns.
Brunel had carried out a survey at about the same time and submitted proposals for a broad gauge line linking up with the Hereford, Ross and Gloucester Railway.
If Brunel's scheme had been adopted, what would have been the effect on the plans for the BCR nearly twenty years later?
There would surely have been a strong argument for it to take its gauge from the parent line and worry about the break of gauge later, when it met the Cambrian — which of course would probably not have happened.
Decline and Fall
South Wales was converted in 1872 and most of the English broad gauge lines at about the same time.
The broad gauge lived on only in the Paddington to Penzance expresses, corresponding goods trains and services on feeder lines.
These lines were finally converted in a single weekend, 21-22 May 1892.
Surviving artifacts are few.
There are some lengths of original bridge rail, ‘Tiny’, a works locomotive found at Newton Abbott and now at the Dart Valley Railway, and the two locomotives discovered by Colin Garratt in the Azores.
Two locomotives (’ North Star’and ‘Lord of the Isles’) survived for some years at the Swindon works, but were judges to be taking up too much room and Churchward ordered that they be scrapped after the Science Museum had turned them down.
Rebirth!
Some of the components of ‘North Star’ survived and were incorporated in a non-working replica built for the Stockton and Darlington centenary.
This can now be seen at the Swindon Railway Museum.
Even more encouragingly, a working replica, ‘The Iron Duke’ was built for the GWR 150 celebrations in 1985.
It was commissioned by the Science Museum — obviously with a more enlightened policy than in 1906.
Externally ‘Iron Duke’ is fully authentic, but not internally, for it is built around an Austerity boiler.
Some replica coaches were also made and ‘Iron Duke’ has run on a temporary track in Hyde Park, at Didcot and on a short length of track at the National Railway Museum.
The Firefly Trust
This is a group of enthusiasts who are trying to raise finance to build a replica of another class of broad gauge locomotives called Fireflies.
So far wheels, frame and chimney have been built and I believe that progress has been made on the boiler.
This loco will be almost fully authentic, only differing where it is necessary to conform to modern safety practices.
For example the original was built round the boiler, which had to bear structural stresses.
This has been avoided in the new design.
Acknowledgements
For further details on the broad gauge see ‘Broad Gauge’ by Lance Day [HMSO]from which some of the details in this article have been taken.
The British Railway Journal referred to earlier is No. 32, Summer 1990, published by Wild Swan publications Ltd.
Keith Lucas
CAMBRIAN LINE NOTES
Monday May 11th saw the new timetable introduced and with the withdrawal of InterCity from Shrewsbury, a basic hourly service from Birmingham to Shrewsbury has been provided by Regional Railways to Shrewsbury with alternate services onwards, one going to Aberystwyth and the other to Chester.
On the Cambrian lines, a basic diet of 156's and 155's was promised with some 153's being used on the Cambrian Coast line services.
In many ways the service to and from Aberystwyth is a good one and trains now leave for Shrewsbury and Birmingham at 07.00, 08.45, 11.00, 13.10, 15.21, 17.25 and 19.22, and for passengers going to London only one change is needed.
However, as usual BR was under-resourced and with 158's coming on stream not equipped for RETB, some services from Shrewsbury westwards became 153's with resultant overcrowding.
In the early weeks of the timetable, delays were legion and Class 150 Centros appeared frequently.
However, of late punctuality and reliability has improved, although some would say loadings are not that good.
(Not my experience in several recent trips into Aberystwyth — KWL)
Summer Saturdays have continued to be a nightmare as they have for the nineteen summers your author has lived at Aberystwyth!
Pressure for multiple units has been alleviated by making the 09.25 summer Saturday Birmingham to Pwllheli loco-hauled with a 31 providing the motive power.
However, this service has not been without delays and mishaps and early in the season Regional Railways had no stock for it, an InterCity rake with buffet + DVT was substituted but the DVT came off at Salop!
However motive power on summer Saturdays in the form of units is always short and a frequent occurrence this summer has been the appearance of buses in Aberystwyth as the 07.25 Birmingham Aberystwyth, and the 10.50 Aberystwyth to Machynlleth return working.
On one occasion both the 10.50 and 13.10 departures were buses, and no train was seen in Aberystwyth from 08.45 until 15.00!
Old time railwaymen would turn over in their graves!
The National Eisteddfod in Aberystwyth in the first week of August saw on the Monday to Friday of that week a Class 31 hauling Regional Railways coaches on the 11.00 and 17.25 departures.
Cambrian Coast line services were also strengthened.
The only other differences in the motive power is the use of a Class 37 on the Stanlow to Aberystwyth tanks which normally arrives around 08.10 on a Wednesday and departs around mid afternoon.
May saw steam back west of Shrewsbury with the Severn valley Standard 4 operating a Crewe to Tywyn Service.
However Bridge restrictions at Dovey Junction were reinforced and the train terminated at Machynlleth.
Passengers were compensated by an additional Machynlleth to Talerddig service.
Your author forgot all about the steam service and has tied a knot in his tie already for the September retreat.
One reason given for the termination at Machynlleth was the risk of setting fire to the wooden Dovey Bridge!
Weather wise the early part of the season was good, but August has been poor with a lot of rain.
This has had its effects on tourism and many Welsh attractions are having a very lean time.
This is true of the Great Little Trains with Bala lake apparently very badly hit, the Ffestiniog being quiet and the same can be said of the V of R in Aberystwyth where for most of June early July just 4 coaches serviced the two trains a day up the valley.
John Wildig, 26 August 1992
Additional Notes
It is noticeable that 153's are working the Aberystwyth trains quite often.
A week or two back I caught the 17.18 ex Shrewsbury to Aberystwyth, which has a change at Machynlleth for Aberystwyth passengers with the train proceeding up the coast.
Both were well loaded to Machynlleth, but the bulk of the passengers at this time of year are headed for Aberystwyth and on the Tuesday I was surprised to see a lightly loaded train consisting of two 156 units go on to Pwllheli while the crowd on Machynlleth had to get into a 153.
To be fair there were free seats, but very few.
On the following Saturday two car trains were assigned to both destinations.
I have to make two remarks that bring me great pleasure.
The 07.00 that Saturday morning was a very well loaded four car train, which incidentally crossed with another four car train at Westbury.
The second comment is that loadings on the 17.18 ex Salop train have been so good that the caterers are experimenting with extending the buffet service from Saturdays only into the week.
My final comment is that loadings on the Central Wales line seem fairly light at present, judging by the two or three times I have been on it lately.
Do take the occasional trip on it if you can, it is a pleasant way of getting to Shrewsbury and practical if you live anywhere near the line.
As they say,use it or lose it!
Keith Lucas
SOCIAL PROGRAMME
I seem to have surprised myself by getting well ahead with this and I outline current plans below.
A possible change, still to be approved by the Committee and the AGM, is that Vic Smith and I are likely to do this job jointly in future.
I have already benefited from Vic's support and ideas to a considerable extent.
4th Dec 92
A team quiz
January 93
NO MEETING (New Year's Day)
5th Feb 93
Keith and Paul Lucas — Cape to Cairo Rly.
5th Mar 93
Ron Davies — Cape to Cairo Rly.
2nd Apr 93
John Wildig — BR from Beeching to the Present Day
7th May 93
Mr John Scott Morgan — the Col. Stephens Railways.
3rd Sep 93
To be arranged
1st Oct 93
Col. Savill — title to be announced
5th Nov 93
Richard Morriss — title to be announced
3rd Dec 93
Mr and Mrs Preshous — local history
7th Jan 94
Ron Davies — Rlys. of the Indian subcontinent
All of these meetings commence at 7.30 p.m. and will be held in the Fletcher Room at the Community College on the first Friday of the month, unless anounced otherwise.
Notes
The use of the same title for the February and March 1993 talks is not a mistake.
This is a deliberate double billing with the aim of presenting different viewpoints on the railways of, mainly, southern Africa, a decade apart.
Ron's talk will consist mainly or entirely of cine film.
John Wildig is a research agriculturalist and a life-long railway enthusiast who would have been in his late teens during the period of the Beeching closures.
He has sub-titled his talk ‘A Layman's View’, but you can expect some thought-provoking views.
John Scott Morgan, author and a member of the Society, had to postpone the talk originally arranged for October 1992.
He will give the talk at the AGM, subject to when the AGM is held.
The November and December 1993 talks are intended to be joint meetings with our sister society, SWSHAS, the local history society.
There will be some railway content to both talks.
I personally like to idea of meetings like this, both because of the element of local co-operation and also because we can hear the views of other people, railway sympathisers rather than railway enthusiasts perhaps, on how railways fit into the scene.
I arranged Ron Davies's talk on the Indian sub-continent some time ago and we postponed it because of the African theme.
Only the date has still to be confirmed.
PRESERVATION REPORT
Recent activities, since the opening of the museum, have centred on preparing the GWR coach at Clunbury, which has now been bought by the Society, for removal.
It is Joe Lawley's opinion that we have no option but to dismantle it, but this has to be done with very great care if we are not to compound the damage done by sixty years of weather and so destroy it.
Ron Mardle has drawn up a plan for the dismantling, and we have dug out round the base and marked up some key parts of the vehicle for future recognition.
To start with it is to be stored until other jobs are out of the way.
We are planning to resume work on the bridge early in the New Year and try to bring that job to completion before becoming heavily involved in vehicle restoration.
At a time still to be determined we shall also need to do further work on the museum.
Keith Lucas
BCRS JOURNAL
We still need articles for future issues of the Journal.
Just a few jottings on an interesting rail topic can make useful copy.
Even a railway journey with a missed connection can have its moments.
Recently my wife and I had to travel from Holyhead to Aberystwyth when coming back from a funeral in Ireland.
The standard way to do this journey is by changing at Chester, but I am never averse to a trip on my favourite line, the Cambrian Coast, so we did it via the Ffestiniog and the Conway Valley line.
Unfortunately another passenger left a child on the platform at Bangor and had to pull the communication cord, so we missed our connection at Llandudno Junction.
Under the new procedure BR sent us, plus two Americans we'd persuaded to visit the Ffestiniog, by taxi to Blaenau Ffestiniog.
It would have been costly, but what a rave report BR will be getting in the States about the quality of its service to customers!