

House of Commons
Tuesday 5 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HEALTH
Trafford AHA (Expenditure)
Mr. Churchill
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what was the average capital expenditure within Trafford area health authority at constant prices (a) in the period 1974-79 and (b) 1979-1991.
The Minister for Health (Mrs. Virginia Bottomley)
Using 1990-91 prices, average capital spending between 1974-75 and 1978-79 was £2, 526,000 a year.
Between 1979-80 and 1990-91 spending was £3,083,000 — a real increase of 22 per cent.
Mr. Churchill
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
Is not it clear from those figures and from many others that it takes a Conservative Government to deliver the goods to NHS patients and that all the Opposition have to offer are promises which more often than not prove false?
Will my hon. Friend congratulate Trafford area health authority and everyone involved in the hospitals there on the excellent job that they are doing and especially on the way in which they have brought down waiting lists?
Mrs. Bottomley
I certainly endorse my hon. Friend's remarks.
All that the Labour party offers is promises and rhetoric; we have delivered an improved health service.
My hon. Friend will know in his part of the world of the £2 million new maternity unit, the £2 million mental illness unit and the £4 million geriatric and physio unit — all practical achievements.
As my hon. Friend rightly pointed out, no patient in his area waits for more than two years and there has been a dramatic fall in the number of those who have to wait a year.
That, too, is a practical achievement in the health service.
It is high time that the Opposition gave recognition to all in the service who have achieved these excellent results.
Mr. Skinner
When I hear Tory Members speaking about the health service, in Trafford or anywhere else, I am bound to come to the conclusion that they are after family jobs.
Why does not the Minister condemn the appointments of spouses of Tory Members and of Members of the House of Lords who pick up more than £5,000 a year for doing a day's work?
It is time this scandal was put to an end.
Mrs. Bottomley
That is a slightly strange remark to make to me.
The hon. Gentleman, who is always well informed, may be aware that I have an uncle who was a Labour Member of Parliament and in the Cabinet.
His wife was the chairman of a health authority and she performed that job excellently for many years.
I urge the hon. Gentleman to go to Friern hospital.
The reason why I feel so strongly about the care of the mentally ill is because of all that my aunt, Peggy Jay, taught me.
No one ever cast smears at her on account of her excellent achievements.
Those whom we have appointed were chosen on their merits and because of their strong and unequivocal commitment to our national health service.
Sir Fergus Montgomery
Is my hon. Friend aware that she has just scored a marvellous bull's eye?
Does she agree that the Trafford figures show a dramatic fall in waiting lists and that that is a tribute to the efficient way in which the health authority has managed its operating theatres?
Does not it also prove, as my hon. Friend the Member for Davyhulme (Mr. Churchill) said, that the Conservative Government are spending more on the health service and does not it nail the falsehoods repeatedly advanced by the Opposition?
We have to go back a little way to remember that in 1976 they presided over the most savage cuts ever imposed on the national health service.
Mrs. Bottomley
The only time spending on the national health service has been cut was when the Labour party was in power.
My hon. Friend is right that management as well as money is what counts.
The achievements of his health authority are remarkable.
It has one of the lowest rates of cancelled operations in the country.
It is organising the service, delivering high-quality care and using manpower and finance to the best possible effect.
Cornwall Air Ambulance
Mr. Matthew Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will reconsider making a Government contribution to the costs of the Cornwall air ambulance in view of its contribution to meeting the target for emergency ambulance call-out times.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
No, Sir.
It is for the local management of the service to determine the most effective deployment of resources to meet performance targets.
Mr. Taylor
The Minister will know that those targets can be met only by the air ambulance in my area.
Without that ambulance the target set out in the patients charter would not be achievable.
Will the patients charter be guaranteed by public funds or is it to depend in future on private charity?
Mr. Dorrell
The patients charter sets out standards which ambulance services are expected to match.
It is for the chief ambulance officer of each area ambulance service to decide how best to match those standards.
The hon. Gentleman should note that although the Cornish air ambulance makes a valaable contribution in the county, it has not produced a measured improvement in response times for ambulances in Cornwall.
Sir Gerrard Neale
May I ask my hon. Friend nevertheless to keep in touch with the health authority in Cornwall?
The county is 100 miles long and my constituency is the most sparsely populated area of Cornwall.
Many of my constituents live 50 miles from the nearest district general hospital.
I urge my hon. Friend to keep in close touch to make sure that response times are up to the charter.
Mr. Dorrell
We shall certainly keep in close touch with the Cornish ambulance service and, of course, with every other ambulance service to ensure that they match response times and put to good use our investment in the ambulance service.
That investment has provided defibrillators for more than 2,300 front-line ambulances across the country and carries through the commitment to provide a trained paramedic on each front-line ambulance by 1996.
Those improvements in the ambulance service will apply in Cornwall as they apply in the rest of the country.
NHS Spending
Mr. Thurnham
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what is the projected capital spending in the NHS in the next three years; and if he will make a statement.
The Secretary of State for Health (Mr. William Waldegrave)
For the future, my hon. Friend will have to await the autumn statement by my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer which I understand will be made tomorrow.
Since 1979 we have increased capital spending on average by 4.3 per cent.
per year.
Labour when in office cut it by an average of 6.7 per cent.
per year.
Mr. Thurnham
Is my right hon. Friend aware that that means that since 1979 there has been a two thirds increase in capital spending compared with a cut of one third when Labour was in power?
Is he aware that the North Western regional health authority has a record capital spending programme for next year of more than £100 million and that it includes Bolton's new hospital?
Mr. Waldegrave
Those dramatic figures are correct.
Labour's record on capital spending was lamentable.
It was about a one third cut in real terms in capital spending in Labour's last period in office.
The North Western regional health authority has a magnificent capital programme for new projects beginning next year and at the head of that programme is Bolton general hospital.
That will cost about £37 million in bricks and mortar and another £10 million for equipment.
There are also major new projects at Chorley and South Ribble, Lancaster, Central Manchester, Salford, Tameside and Glossop.
As I say, the total is about £100 million for next year.
Ms. Hoey
As the Secretary of State is aware, Westminster hospital is due to close and the accident and emergency department is to move to St. Thomas's hospital.
Will the right hon. Gentleman give a commitment that capital will be made available in time for the accident and emergency unit to be completed and ready to receive patients when Westminster hospital closes?
Mr. Waldegrave
As the hon. Lady knows, the commitment to the new Westminster hospital on the old St. Stephen's site is one of the biggest of all the projects in the national health service.
The change will need careful management to ensure that the major gains for patients that will come from it are properly realised.
I shall look into the specific matter that the hon. Lady raised.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that those figures sit ill with the, I am sure honourable, argument of the Opposition that we are trying to close the health service?
How can we be spending two thirds more on capital equipment?
My right hon. Friend must be wrong when he says that we are spending 4.3 per cent.
more in real terms on the health service than when we came to office.
The Opposition tell half-truths because Labour is the only party which when in office cut national health expenditure.
Mr. Waldegrave
The previous Labour Government started off with their normal irresponsible pledges which produced enormous inflation and catastrophic cuts to all public service capital programmes.
Nowhere did those cuts hit harder than in the health service.
Many of those who are now on the Opposition Front Bench were deeply ashamed of that at the time and remain deeply ashamed of it.
They are right to be so ashamed.
NHS Trusts
Mr. Kennedy
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the operation of hospital trusts.
Mr. Waldegrave
There is increasing independent evidence that the first trusts are proving that bringing management back into the hospitals is already bringing benefits to patients and staff.
Waiting times are coming down in most places and staff report improved management and job satisfaction.
Mr. Kennedy
When the Secretary of State made his recent announcement in the House of the second wave of trust applications and approved in principle applications for the four London teaching hospitals he said that, in the interim, until the review was completed, they would benefit from the advantages that could flow from greater local hospital management devolution.
If that is a benefit short of trust status, why is it necessary to force through trust status while encouraging local hospital management and in so doing to bring the assets, the buildings and the personnel out of local health service management?
Why is that superior simply to having better efficiency through greater local management?
Mr. Waldegrave
It is not difficult to explain.
Some of the benefits of devolved management can be achieved without full trust status, but, for local management, one of the major gains of full trust status is full control of capital.
That is one reason why hospitals seek it.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman is clear on that matter.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is significant that the two major hospitals in Kidderminster district health authority have increased the number of in-patients treated over the past eight years by 14 per cent?
The health authority, one of the 30 most efficient in the country, is consulting on third-wave trust status because it believes that it can give a better service to patients and local people on that basis.
Does not that contrast with the recent comment by the general secretary of the Institute of Health Service Managers on the Labour party's plans for the health service?
She said that they were an unworkable mess.
Mr. Waldegrave
I agree with my hon. Friend.
Labour's role in all this is somewhat disreputable.
I draw the attention of my hon. Friend to the recent threats issued by the Labour party candidate in Orkney and Shetland, who said that, by doing this,’ it could certainly be argued by an incoming Labour Administration that you had contributed to your own redundancy.’
As my hon. Friend pointed out, Labour played a disreputable role in relation to trusts.
When I drew the attention of the Leader of the Opposition to a previous threat of this kind, made by the hon. Member for Coventry, South-East (Mr. Nellist), the right hon. Gentleman withdrew it at once.
I hope that the Opposition chief spokesman on health matters will withdraw this similar threat today.
Mr. Corbyn
Will the Secretary of State think for a moment about the effects of NHS trusts on the low-paid hospital staff, who are just as essential as medical staff in the running of the hospital?
I am thinking of domestics, porters and maintenance staff, who are grossly underpaid and who are suffering badly as a result of administration of hospital trusts and the attempts to break away from the national negotiating machinery.
Mr. Waldegrave
I would strongly argue that the national negotiating machinery has, over the years, delivered low pay to such people.
The increased flexibility of NHS trusts will allow them to pay more where the local markets can afford it and I predict that this will increase the pay of the lower-paid staff in such hospitals.
That is why, to the embarrassment of the Labour party, some of the local branches of those unions are beginning to support trusts.
Mr. Oppenheim
When it comes to Opposition claims about NHS trusts, should not we bear in mind that, two years ago, the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) was telling everyone that general practitioner contracts would result in less time being spent with patients?
That turned out to be untrue, so why should we now believe these spurious scares about NHS trusts leading to privatisation?
Is not the truth of the matter that the hon. Gentleman is interested only in using his spurious scares to frighten the sick and the vulnerable for his own party ends?
Mr. Waldegrave
The scares that the Labour party tried to run on these matters have rebounded on it.
I remind the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook)— he seems not to wish to rise on these matters — that the letter from the Labour party candidate to the trust applicant reads:’ Were you to do this’— continue with the trust —’in the face of so much opposition, it could certainly be argued by an incoming Labour Administration that you had contributed to your own redundancy.’
When I drew the attention of the Leader of the Opposition to previous threats of that sort, he wrote as follows:’ Of course I can confirm that there will be absolutely no action of this kind.’
The hon. Member for Livingston must respond to these scares.
Indeed, they are worse than scares, they are threats.
Ms. Harman
Will the Secretary of State confirm
Hon. Members
’ Answer!’
Ms. Harman
If Conservative Members paid attention to the issue they would know that my hon. Friend the Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) repudiated the threat last week.
Will the right hon. Gentleman confirm that the majority of first-wave trusts face serious financial problems?
How much will he spend to bail out the first-wave trusts so that they do not end the first financial year in deficit?
Mr. Waldegrave
I am sorry that the Labour party's chief spokesman on health did not rise to respond to these matters.
He should stand up and repudiate the threat in the House.
The hon. Member for Peckham (Ms. Harman) is completely wrong on the facts.
If she wishes to attach herself to the scare, I am delighted.
As I have said, she will find that she is completely wrong.
Rugby NHS Trust
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many additional patients are now being seen by the Rugby NHS Trust as against last year; and what percentage increase that represents.
Mr. Dorrell
In the period April to September 1991 6,715 in-patients were seen at Rugby NHS Trust — an increase of 3.7 per cent.
over the same period last year.
Mr. Pawsey
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that helpful and cheering response.
Clearly it is good news for the people of Rugby and especially for patients attending St. Cross hospital.
It represents a fine effort by the management and workers of the hospital.
Does my hon. Friend agree that the way forward is signposted to other improvements in the health service?
Will he therefore redouble his efforts to promote NHS trusts while ignoring the ill-founded criticism of Opposition Members, who are prepared to argue more for party dogma than for patient care?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
He chose a good day to raise the matter, because only yesterday the hospital opened a new out-patients department.
The hospital's track record on waiting lists bears comparison with any in the country, with the number of those waiting for more than two years for in-patient treatment having decreased since June 1990 from 137 to 18.
Since the trust has been established we have seen the appointment of new paediatricians, the introduction of new laser technology, a commitment to new surgeons in the general surgery and accident and emergency departments and the continued development of improved accident and emergency facilities in the hospital.
Patients Charter
Mr. Gregory
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the patients charter.
Mr. Waldegrave
The patients charter demonstrates our commitment to providing high-quality services within the NHS which are responsive to people's views and needs.
It has been widely welcomed, for example, by the Consumers Association, which said that’ it is a golden opportunity to put patients first.’
Mr. Gregory
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that this is the first time that any Government have introduced a genuine patients charter of rights?
Secondly, does he agree that the quickest way to ensure longer waiting lists, unreasonable behaviour and hospitals again being run by unions rather than by consultants is for power to be given to the Labour party?
Mr. Waldegrave
That is correct.
The structure of open agreements between district health authorities and hospitals gives us, for the first time, a clear way of setting standards, monitoring them and enforcing them.
That is a great gain from the reforms.
The first step to patient responsiveness is encapsulated in the patients charter.
Mr. Ashton
Did not the patients charter cost £2 million to publicise and launch and was it not £2 million worth of Conservative propaganda?
Have not we heard planted questions this afternoon that have contained carefully worked-out statistic after statistic?
It has been a public relations exercise for this week's by-elections.
We are in the run-up to a general election and every figure that the Secretary of State has produced today has been carefully worked out and planted among Conservative Back-Bench Members as a publicity stunt, just like the patients charter.
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman fails to understand the importance of the patients charter, as he fails to understand the reforms.
It is vital that we get across the fact that under the reforms in the NHS we can now set proper standards of care throughout the country.
It is vital that, in the agreements reached next year, we set out what is to be done nationally and locally.
That is inherent in the reforms.
It is right that every household should know its rights under the NHS.
The whole operation on the patients charter — the printing and so on— has cost about £2 million.
That expenditure is well worth while if it gets across to people the facts about what their rights really are.
Mr. Cormack
As the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) and his Front-Bench team are so singularly ill-informed, why does not my right hon. Friend invite them to the Department for a teach-in, when they could be given the true facts and figures?
Let them then spread all these lies.
Mr. Waldegrave
We have been trying to brief some Labour Members, especially the London Members.
Some of them have been invited again and again to meet the London ambulance service for a briefing other than that which they get from the trade union.
They refused to come.
Mr. Alton
Following the disclosure during the past 24 hours of the outbreak of legionnaire's disease at two Liverpool hospitals, does the right hon. Gentleman accept that an essential part of a patients charter should be the right to know when such outbreaks have occurred?
Can he explain why that information was concealed for some weeks in one case?
Does he accept that another element of the patients charter in this day and age should be that hospitals are constructed in a way that shows that we have learnt the lessons of the past?
Equipment should not be installed if it is likely to give rise to legionnaire's disease.
Mr. Waldegrave
I agree that one benefit of the patients charter and, indeed, of the reforms will be the greater availability of information.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman will want to be very careful not to scare people unecessarily.
In the first incident, it still has not been shown that the infection derived from inside the hospital.
All the necessary investigative and follow-up actions were taken and as soon as the problem was known local general practitioners were informed.
I have considered the matter and I shall continue to do so, but I do not believe that there has been any dereliction of duty in this important matter.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman, who is a responsible Member of Parliament, would not want to mislead people in this matter.
Dame Jill Knight
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the West Midlands regional health authority has just issued a special paper welcoming the patients charter and agreeing to do everything possible to turn rights into realities?
Will he add one more right to the patients charter — that of peace and quiet for sick people in hospital?
Is he aware that there is a growing practice of allowing unlimited numbers of people, for unlimited hours, to visit patients in wards?
That is not conducive to recovery and nor is the practice of children running up and down wards for hours on end.
I hope that my right hon. Friend will add that right to his patients charter.
Mr. Waldegrave
I welcome the steps taken by the West Midlands regional health authority.
The issues to which my hon. Friend referred are just those where the health service needs to do a little better on listening to patients' needs.
We often receive letters about relatively minor matters that can easily be put right after discussion with patients.
I am sure that the hospital that my hon. Friend has in mind will wish to take account of her comments.
Mr. Robin Cook
Can the Secretary of State explain why the words’ patient choice’do not appear in his patients charter?
Is it because he knows that his new contract system has reduced patient choice?
What does his patients charter offer to the thousands of patients who, through the College of Health helpline, have chosen a hospital with a shorter waiting list, but cannot get into that hospital because their health authorities will not pay for them to be treated there?
What does the patients charter offer to the woman in Wandsworth who last month found that she could not have her second child in the hospital that she chose for her first child because her health authority has no contract with that hospital?
Why should the House take seriously any patients charter that does not give back to those patients the right to choose their hospital — a right that they had until the Government took it away?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman is wrong.
Under the old system — the system to which the modern Labour party characteristically wishes to return — there was the freedom of the right to refer to any hospital and that right remains.
However, that sort of reference was nugatory because the money did not follow the patient.
We are moving towards a system where a choice will be made and that choice will become reality because the money will follow the patient and so enable that patient to be treated.
That is what the hon. Gentleman still has not grasped.
On the matter of choice, the patients charter draws attention to new freedoms and the ease with which people can change their general practitioners, which is a fundamental improvement in freedom.
I am sorry that the hon. Gentleman still does not understand that the whole drive behind the reforms is to back the general practitioner's decision with money so that choice becomes reality.
Menopause Research
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the amount of NHS money applied to menopause research.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
I regret that it is not possible separately to identify the money devoted to the range of conditions associated with the menopause from the £225 million spent on medical research last year.
However, my hon. Friend will be aware of the current work which includes a review of screening techniques for post-menopausal osteoporosis and an economic evaluation of the benefits of hormone replacement therapy.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my hon. Friend for her reply.
I understand that the Government are spending somewhat less than £500,000 in that area.
Is my hon. Friend aware of the proceedings of the international menopause conference which point out that the number of deaths of women in the post-50 age group from heart attack and particularly stroke is twice as great as the number dying from osteoporosis and 10 times as great as the number of deaths from breast cancer?
Does not that mean that we should be putting a great deal more money into such research or is it to remain the Cinderella of medicine for ever?
Mrs. Bottomley
My hon. Friend identifies why it is difficult separately to identify the sums of money.
As she says, associated conditions are heart attacks, strokes and cancer.
About £1.5 billion is spent on health research each year.
Our new research strategy ensures that we get the best possible value from that and, above all, apply the lessons.
However, I can give my hon. Friend the undertaking that as long as she remains in the House such research will not be the Cinderella of the health service.
There are a great number of excellent projects.
Should my hon. Friend happen to be in the Cleveland area, I strongly urge her to go to the South Cleveland hospital to see the excellent work being undertaken there with a bone densitometer.
Mr. Cousins
Is not the Minister aware that it has been known for some time that four times as many women as men suffer the chronic pain that comes from the loss of movement in and the fracture of hip joints?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I am not an expert, but does that question have something to do with the menopause?
Mr. Cousins
You, Mr. Speaker, betray the ignorance of men if you do not understand the relevance of my question.
The research has been done for some time and the results have been known for some time, yet still the Government do nothing.
Mrs. Bottomley
I am pleased that there has been a threefold increase in, for example, HRT prescriptions during the past 10 years.
We fund to the tune of £1.9 million about 40 voluntary organisations which help spread the message about the importance of HRT and the prevention of osteoporosis.
Our recent leaflet on women's health, which has been a remarkable success, also provides information.
However, the hon. Gentleman is right.
When the research has been evaluated and the screening survey has been completed we will be able to make even further progress in ensuring that the health service is dedicated to prevention as well as cure.
Income Generation Unit
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what are the latest figures for the full cost, and staffing details, of the income generation unit; and what are its aims.
Mr. Dorrell
The income generation unit is no longer a separate entity within the Department.
Mr. Barnes
Has the income generation unit given advice to trust hospitals and health authorities on the building of private wings?
Was such advice given to the Chesterfield and North Derbyshire Royal hospital?
What is the difference between building private wings and privatisation?
Mr. Dorrell
During its existence the income generation union gave a wide range of advice to NHS units.
For the expenditure of little more than £250,000 per year we have been able to generate extra funds to support and improve patient care within the NHS rising from £9 million in 1988-89 to £50 million last year.
Part of those resources were raised from the sale of NHS facilities for the treatment of private patients.
I cannot understand why some Opposition Members — we do not know whether this is the official Opposition Front-Bench policy — appear to believe that profits from private medicine must be preserved for private companies and not made available to the NHS to improve care for NHS patients.
Mr. John Greenway
Is my hon. Friend aware that with the help and advice of the income generation unit, a business man in my constituency has successfully installed private telephones in hospitals in the north-east, paid for by advertising?
The only loser from that practice is British Telecom.
Some of the profits made from BT telephones in hospitals, which Labour Members appear to think are excessive, can be recouped by the hospital and used to benefit patients.
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Not only does that initiative produce a wider range of services to benefit patients and extra resources for the health service but an improved range of hospital facilities, so that services previously available only to private patients in private hospitals are increasingly available to all patients in NHS hospitals.
Mr. Rooker
Was the income generation unit responsible for the policy adopted by New Cross hospital in Wolverhampton and the Mayday hospital in Croydon, whereby bedridden patients must hire a television for a minimum of three days at a cost of £1.95 a day — which is about twice the rate charged by high street television rental companies?
Is it not scandalous that ministerial offices and the House have televisions provided by the taxpayer, yet bedridden patients who want to watch television to help them to relax must pay?
Mr. Dorrell
Hospital managers are responsible for providing such services, not any unit of the Department of Health.
If the result of the income generation approach is that more resources are released to treat more patients and provide additional resources for their medical care, it does not seem that anyone should have to apologise for that policy.
Child Welfare
Mr. French
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the aims of the Children Act 1989 with regard to improving the welfare of children.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
The Children Act 1989 incorporates most private and public law relating to children.
It sets out clearly principles for their care and upbringing, and is in effect a charter for children.
Mr. French
Will my hon. Friend firmly rebut the criticisms made by those who continue to argue that although the aims of that Act are excellent, the funding arrangements to support it are not?
Mrs. Bottomley
The Act was implemented with an unprecedented level of co-operation and collaboration between central and local government and I pay a warm tribute to all those who helped with the delivery of guidance and the legislation's careful framing.
The Lord Chancellor's Department and social services departments were involved in the training of 140,000 social service staff last year, when the social service standard spending assessment increased more than at any time over the past 15 years.
Mr. Tom Clarke
Is the Minister aware that the Act cannot be fully effective unless the provision of child psychiatric services is improved?
Does she acknowledge the concern that exists about that aspect and can she explain what action the Government intend to take?
Mrs. Bottomley
There will be an announcement in the relatively near future about the results of the review that we are conducting into arrangements for child psychiatric services.
I announced such a review at a conference that I addressed the other day.
The traditional pattern of child guidance services is not always adhered to and we must ensure proper integration in hospitals and the community.
There has been a substantial increase in the number of child psychiatrists, a great increase in clinical psychologists and an increase in child psychiatric nurses.
We must ensure that all staff with considerable expertise work to best effect in collaborating not only with the health services but with social and education services.
Hospitals, Wanstead and Woodford
Mr. Arbuthnot
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what new hospital facilities are available to the residents of Wanstead and Woodford; and if he will make a statement about the funding of further phases of building at Whipps Cross hospital.
Mr. Dorrell
Phase 1 of the redevelopment of Whipps Cross hospital cost £18 million.
It includes a new out-patient department, four operating theatres, a hydrotherapy pool, a new pharmacy, improved sterilisation facilities and three new wards.
The Forest Healthcare trust is committed to start phase 2 of the redevelopment of the hospital in the next financial year.
This will include a dedicated day surgery unit, further expansion of out-patient facilities and two more new wards.
In addition, the capital loans fund is financing the development of new facilities for physiotherapy, occupational therapy and other day services for people with a learning disability.
And finally, the Government's quality initiative is providing £384,000 to finance a new medical day unit at Whipps Cross hospital.
Mr. Arbuthnot
Having given us that excellent news, can my hon. Friend confirm that the commitment to spend £2.5 million on the start of phase 2 of the Whipps Cross hospital development will continue under the new trust arrangements?
Can he give any indication about the further funding of phase 2 that will be needed, beyond that £2.5 million?
Mr. Dorrell
On the establishment of the Forest Healthcare trust, responsibility for allocating capital to the trust passes from the region to the Department.
I can assure my hon. Friend that the Department will honour the commitment given by the region to provide £2.5 million to get phase 2 under way.
For the remaining resources that will be needed, the trust will be competing in the national pool of capital resources that are available to NHS trusts.
NHS Consultants
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many NHS consultants are on maximum part-time contracts; and if he has any plans to end this practice.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
A total of 5,172 hospital consultants in England were on maximum part-time contracts on 30 September 1990.
There are no plans to end the maximum part-time option, which has existed since the early days of the NHS.
Mr. Mullin
On the day on which the Secretary of State gave a pledge to his party conference that everyone would have equal access to free health care, I was contacted by a constituent, Mr. Ronnie Watson, who had been waiting since September 1990 for an appointment with a consultant to discuss a possible hip operation and had just been told that he would have to wait until some unspecified date in 1992.
Mr. Watson had then telephoned the same consultant in the same hospital and had asked how long he would have to wait to be seen privately.
The reply was that he could be seen the following Wednesday for a fee of £45.
How can the Secretary of State reconcile that experience, which is being replicated all over the country, with the experience of Mr. Watson?
Mrs. Bottomley
Even Barbara Castle did not outlaw the arrangement whereby consultants are able to conduct their private practices.
The private practice must not in any way impinge on national health service commitments.
The patients charter makes it clear that there will be local standards for out-patient appointments, as well as the national standards for general appointments.
We are seeing steady improvements.
I very much hope that the hospital to which the hon. Gentleman referred will be able to consolidate further the remarkable progress that it has made over the past couple of years — a 56 per cent.
fall in the number of two-year waiters and a 35 per cent.
fall in the number of one-year waiters.
Pay Beds
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what were the revenues for pay beds in the NHS in 1990-91.
Mr. Waldegrave
Total private patient income for 1989-90 was £92 million.
Information for 1990-91 is not yet available.
Mr. Dunn
As the provision of day beds ought to be the responsibility of the trusts, will the Secretary of State take time today to condemn Labour's vicious attacks on those individuals who have been selected to help run the trusts?
Mr. Waldegrave
I join my hon. Friend in deprecating the attacks made by the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) on Anne Parkinson and Sheila Taylor, who have rightly been appointed to serve on trusts.
I also join him in deprecating the attack on my noble Friend Lord Jenkin, who has accepted an appointment on a trust.
I find it surprising that Opposition Front-Bench spokesmen wish to exclude spouses because of whom they happen to be married to when they have good records of public service.
The hon. Member for Livingston drew attention to the behaviour of previous Secretaries of State in this regard.
Would he now like to condemn the behaviour of the last — and I mean last — Labour Secretary of State, Lord Ennals?
At the same time as his hon. Friend the Member for Monklands, West (Mr. Clarke) is saying that pay beds are to be driven from the health service and given to private companies, Lord Ennals has taken a leading position as a director of a private healthcare company — while remaining a Front-Bench spokesman on health for the Labour party.
Mrs. Heal
Is the Minister aware that an Essex GP is calling on national health service hospitals in the Mid-Essex health authority to boost incomes by carrying out privately, in pay beds, procedures that they have effectively banned from the NHS?
Does the Minister agree that to increase income from patients excluded from free treatment is not only an abuse of the founding principles of the NHS but a classic illustration of the two-tier health service that his Government are introducing?
Mr. Waldegrave
I welcome the hon. Lady to the Opposition Front-Bench team.
I remember that when she came to the House she was, like her leader, a passionate supporter of CND.
Their principles have gone by the board.
As for the matter that she raises, I welcome the fact that GP fund holders, and all GPs, are doing more in their own surgeries, which cuts waiting lists and speeds patient care.
I regret the fact that the hon. Member for Livingston saw fit not to answer the challenge that I laid down to him, just as he has not answered any of the challenges that I have laid down to him today, and that he has also seen fit to put the hon. Lady, on her first outing today, into a rather difficult position.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Hinchliffe
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 5 November.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Hinchliffe
Is the Prime Minister personally in favour of a single European currency — yes or no?
The Prime Minister
At this moment, in these circumstances, no.
Mr. Onslow
Is my right hon. Friend aware that there is general support for the emphasis that the Foreign Secretary has placed on the importance of keeping the European Commission out of the nooks and crannies of our national life?
Will he, in any negotiations with our European partners, give the highest priority to getting the European Commission under some sort of genuine parliamentary control?
The Prime Minister
I share the views expressed by my right hon. Friend yesterday.
One of the things that we shall be seeking to do in the negotiations on the political union treaty is to try to ensure that the Commission — at present under no effective control — increasingly comes under the control of the most appropriate Parliament, in this case the European Parliament.
Mr. Kinnock
Since the Prime Minister acknowledges convergence to be a matter of considerable importance in the development of the European Community, why is it, now that the Engineering Employers Federation, the Confederation of British Industry and his noble Friends in the House of Lords have all made cause for new investment incentives for British industry, that he and the remainder of the Government refuse to take such initiatives in order to support this very best way of securing recovery?
The Prime Minister
On the right hon. Gentleman's first point, convergence is not just important; it is absolutely vital if there is to be any success whatsoever, or any prospect of a single currency that would not damage the whole of Europe.
The most effective way of ensuring that there is investment in this or any other country is to ensure that we have low inflation and the right economic environment.
Mr. Kinnock
When unemployment has risen by 800,000 in Britain during the last year, when 50 per cent.
more companies are in receivership and when manufacturing investment is down by 19 per cent., how can the Government justify taking such a listless attitude to the needs of British industry?
Why do the Government refuse to give the same backing to British industry as our European Community competitors give to theirs?
The Prime Minister
It is not all that many months ago that the right hon. Gentleman was saying to the House and to people beyond it that the most important thing was to get inflation down from its then level of 10.9 per cent.
and to recreate the conditions in which people would feel secure to invest.
I agreed with the points that he made then and that is precisely what we have done.
We are now reaching a position in which growth and investment will reoccur and, as we saw throughout the complete period of the 1980s, there will be a growth in the absolute number of jobs.
Mr. Kinnock
Since the Prime Minister said that it is important to create the conditions for economic and industrial success, will he listen to the CBI which, in its report asks the Government to take proper account of the interests of manufacturing industry instead of pursuing the policies that they are pursuing?
After 12 years, is there any hope of the Government ever taking the interests of manufacturing industry properly into account?
The Prime Minister
If the right hon. Gentleman had paid more attention to the CBI yesterday, he would have heard the director general say that since the crash of October 1987, real take-home pay is up by 11 per cent., manufacturing productivity is up by 20 per cent .
and manufacturing exports have increased by £76 million for each and every working day.
Mr. Sayeed
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the two essential components for a policy of nuclear deterrence are that one possesses the capability and that a potential enemy does not doubt one's willingness to use it in order to defend oneself?
Does he agree that a few weasel words in a newspaper do not constitute a policy of nuclear deterrence, particularly when the leader of that party has stated clearly that he would never use nuclear weapons, even if Britain were under nuclear attack?
The Prime Minister
I share the view expressed by my hon. Friend.
The fact that we have had a nuclear deterrent for a number of years has added materially to our security and I believe that we should continue to sustain that deterrent.
It is a matter of regret that the Opposition's commitment to that deterrent is not generally accepted.
The words of the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn),’ If we change to win, we could change when we have won’, show that British people will not trust the Opposition with defence policy.
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 5 November?
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Flynn
Why is the Prime Minister trying to turn the national health service into a family business for card-carrying Conservatives?
Why did he appoint two Tory ex-Ministers, the sister of a Tory Minister, the wives of two Tory Members of Parliament and the husband of a Tory Member of Parliament to run opted-out hospitals?
Is that what the Prime Minister means when he says that he believes that Conservatives want to use the national health service?
They are using it — milking it for their own financial gain.
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman has clearly forgotten that, for example, Lady Callaghan was an excellent chairman of Great Ormond Street hospital and a number of other wives of eminent people in public life have held that position.
It is extremely odd that the Labour party should propose that women should be barred from jobs because of their husband's position in public life.
Among those whom the hon. Gentleman has maligned is someone who has a decade's experience of working in the NHS.
If the hon. Gentleman does not think that that is a proper contribution to the health service or a proper qualification for the job that she holds, I am very surprised indeed.
Mr. Viggers
To ask the Prime Minister to list his official engagements for Tuesday 5 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Viggers
Will my right hon. Friend anticipate the Chancellor's statement tomorrow to the extent of confirming that funds will be made available to ensure that our armed forces, although smaller, are even better equipped?
In particular, will he confirm that conventional submarines will continue to play an important role and that the story broadcast by the BBC last night as a hard fact — that the HMS Upholder class of submarines is to be sold — is completely untrue and without foundation?
The Prime Minister
I can confirm my hon. Friend's last point.
We have shown our commitment to better equipment by our recent purchase of the Westland helicopter and our decision to re-equip the Army with the Challenger II tank.
Both were expensive but necessary purchases to ensure that our armed forces have the best possible equipment.
That is our policy and will remain so.
I am bound to say that that does not seem to be the policy of the Opposition.
The principal Opposition party is committed to cutting defence expenditure by a quarter, and the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown) is committed to cutting it by a half.
Mr. Ashdown
The Prime Minister insists that even if the other 11 go ahead he is prepared to reject an agreement on Europe at Maastricht.
Will he describe how he sees the future of this country, should he allow that to happen?
The Prime Minister
I have repeatedly made it clear in the House and beyond that I am working to seek an agreement at Maastricht that will be acceptable to the House and this country.
That remains the position.
I have set out our determination to work for that agreement and the principles on which the agreement will need to be based.
I have arranged a two-day debate in the House so that I may express that clearly and listen to the views of the House.
If I judge that the agreement is in the interests of this country I will sign it.
If I judge that the agreement is not in the interests of this country, it would not be right for me to sign it and I will not sign it.
Mr. Paice
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 5 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Paice
As this is the first Prime Minister's Question Time since the Commonwealth conference, may I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his constructive and positive approach to the issues?
Will he confirm that he was not detained or locked up and was widely recognised as the leader of this party — unlike the experience of the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) after four years as Leader of the Opposition?
The Prime Minister
I can confirm that it was an excellent Commonwealth conference.
The Commonwealth came closer together than it has been for a long time.
There was substantial agreement on changing policies on South Africa, which I much welcome, and there was a warm welcome for our decision to implement the Trinidad terms arrangement, which, if fully implemented by every member, will relieve the poorest countries in the world of $17,000 million of debt.
Mr. Harry Ewing
Is the Prime Minister aware that just over an hour ago I received a letter from British Alcan, which has a factory in my constituency at Falkirk, informing me that 169 of the work force will lose their jobs, not because they are inefficient but because the machinery on which they work is 50 years old?
If that is not proof of lack of investment, what is?
Is the Prime Minister further aware that those men like their jobs and that, with his help, they would be able to keep them, but he is not prepared to help them?
Try telling men in Falkirk that the economy is on an upturn.
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is clearly under the misapprehension that I have been Prime Minister for 50 years — not yet.
Mr. Hannam
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 5 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Hannam
When my right hon. Friend next meets the British Medical Association, will he raise the success of the first wave of national health service trusts, particularly the success story of the South Devon Healthcare trust?
In the past year, it has increased the number of patients by 10 per cent., the number of doctors and nurses by more than 50 and reopened two wards.
Will he congratulate the BMA on its wholesale condemnation of the latest Labour party smear leaflet that has been distributed at the Langbaurgh by-election?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to join my hon. Friend in those remarks and to join the BMA in its scathing remarks about the Labour leaflet.
The BMA said that the leaflet was in bad taste, and it must be very frightening to the people of Langbaurgh.
Like my hon. Friend, I read the report of Labour's latest scare story about the NHS.
I hope that people will realise that what Labour is saying is inaccurate.
It is a tissue of falsehoods.
I hope that people will look at the real record of improvement in the NHS, not the misrepresentations that they get from the Labour party.
Mr. Strang
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 5 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Strang
Has the Prime Minister noticed that the major issue in the Kincardine and Deeside by-election is the widespread public opposition to the application by Foresterhill hospital in Aberdeen to become a self-governing trust?
As the Minister with responsibility for health in Scotland clearly favours trust status and as the Conservative candidate has come out publicly against it, will the Prime Minister tell the House who he agrees with — his Health Minister or the candidate?
The Prime Minister
As the hon. Gentleman knows, the application for that hospital to have self-governing status has been submitted to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
He has an obligation to study that application and to determine whether it is in order.
That is what he is doing.
When he has done that, he will announce his decision.
House of Commons
Thursday 7 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HOME DEPARTMENT
Special Constables
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what impact recent changes to the conditions of special constables have had on recruiting; and what plans he has further to increase numbers of specials.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
We are taking a series of measures to increase the strength of the special constabulary with the aim of recruiting an additional 10,000 special constables.
We launched a national recruiting campaign at the beginning of this year and are shortly introducing a pilot scheme to pay a bounty to specials, as a further boost to recruitment.
The latest information, from a sample of forces, suggests that strength increased by up to 6 per cent.
in the first half of this year.
Mr. Pawsey
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that exceedingly full and comprehensive reply — the type of reply that we have come to expect from this Minister.
Does he agree that more special constables would do a great deal to reduce levels of crime, particularly if they were better trained and more adequately remunerated?
Will he redouble his efforts to establish a corps of special constables who would play the same part as the Territorial Army vis-a -vis the regular Army?
Mr. Lloyd
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his opening remarks, after which perhaps I should be brief in answering his supplementary question.
The specials certainly show the kind of public spirit and professionalism of the Territorials.
The difference, of course, is that the specials are not preparing for a conflict that we hope will never happen.
They are already directly and effectively involved in the fight against crime — which, alas, is all too real — and are performing the role that my hon. Friend wants them to perform.
Work Camps
Mr. Speller
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will provide open air work camps for younger offenders serving custodial sentences.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mrs. Angela Rumbold)
Purposeful work is an important part of the regime for young offenders.
There are at present opportunities to undertake agricultural and horticultural work in the open air at 23 young offender institutions.
Mr. Speller
Is my right hon. Friend aware that her Department may to some extent be missing the point?
There is general disgust at the short non-custodial sentences that are being passed because of the absence of space in prisons of various sorts.
In view of the number of military establishments underused and basically secure, should not we use those — and, if need be, make use of military personnel, too — to enable us to stop the amazing amount of re-offending by those on non-custodial sentences?
Mrs. Rumbold
There are tough and dirty jobs for youngsters who are on probation and in non-custodial care, so I would not necessarily accept my hon. Friend's strictures on that point.
I repeat what my right hon. Friend told the House on Tuesday: if the prison population continues to rise, he will consider calling on the assistance of the military and, possibly, calling for the use of military accommodation.
Mr. Fraser
Has it occurred to the Minister that the problem is that there are plenty of young people camped out in the open air, but that they do not have any work?
Mrs. Rumbold
The question refers to young offenders.
Those in young offender institutions are occupied satisfactorily, to a certain extent, in open air work.
Mr. Marlow rose
Mr. Speaker
Mr. Mellor.
No, Mr. Marlow.
Mr. Marlow
I am very flattered, Mr. Speaker.
What are we going to do about those young thugs and hooligans who have no respect for authority, no respect for law and order, no respect for property, no respect for elderly people and who terrorise communities?
Is it not time that instead of having open air imprisonment we had an open air thrashing or open air stocks to stick them in?
Mrs. Rumbold
I well understand my hon. Friend's outrage at the behaviour of some youngsters today.
Had he been in his place on Tuesday, when my right hon. Friend made the opening speech on the Loyal Address, he would have heard him say that the Government would introduce a measure to deal with the young thugs, as my hon. Friend calls them, who indulge in joyriding, a practice which hon. Members in all parts of the House deplore; those young people will, therefore, be offending.
Mr. Sheerman
Is not it time that the Minister ignored some of the siren voices behind her?
She knows that the peak age for offending is 18.
The 16 to 18-year-old group is the very group that has been punished by the Government.
They have been punished by being stripped of their ability to claim benefit and by the pushing down of the real value of their training allowance.
They have been punished in terms of unemployment and homelessness.
Is not it about time that we had some more positive policies?
Then young people would respect the Government.
Mrs. Rumbold
Is not it time that Opposition Members realised that there is an absolute necessity for young people to grow up with respect for the law, property and persons?
There is absolutely no need for young people to commit crimes when they have available to them perfectly good training courses that have been provided by the Government and with Government money.
Mr. Shersby
Does my right hon. Friend recall that until the Criminal Justice Act 1988 amended the law, the penalty for taking away a vehicle without consent was up to three years' custodial sentence?
That penalty was reduced at the time to six months.
Is it my right hon. Friend's intention to restore a custodial sentence of up to two years for that offence?
Mrs. Rumbold
Yes, Sir.
Policing, Cumbria
Mr. Campbell-Savours
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what representations he has received from Cumbria county council on the question of policing in the county.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Kenneth Baker)
I am considering the police authority's application for an additional 24 police posts for 1992-93.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Has the Home Secretary noted the dramatic 52 per cent.
increase in crime in west Cumbria, which is reflected in vandalism, violence, intimidation of the elderly, intimidation of shopkeepers, ram-raiding and burglary?
Does he regard those figures as appalling?
When he talks about appointing 1,000 police officers nationally, does he understand that that means only 1.5 additional police officers per constituency, which does not begin to meet the problem?
We need 30 police officers immediately.
The people of Workington demand those appointments.
Mr. Baker
The hon. Gentleman will recall that since we have been in office, there has been an increase in the strength of the Cumbrian police of 110 uniformed officers and 144 civilians, making a total increase of 254.
There were eight extra police officers this year, seven of them on patrol duties.
I understand the hon. Gentleman's concern, because I have seen the reports of the increase in vandalism and hooliganism in Workington.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that since we have been in office we have increased expenditure for the Cumbrian police authority by 80 per cent.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
It is not enough.
Mr. Baker
When Labour were in office they cut police expenditure by 2 per cent.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Do something.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Favell
My right hon. Friend may have read reports in the newspapers today that the European Commission wants to abolish newspaper boys and girls in Cumbria and elsewhere in the United Kingdom.
Are the police likely to be involved in that?
Mr. Baker
Not as far as I know.
Mr. Hattersley
Is the problem to which the Home Secretary referred special to Cumbria or is it a general one?
Can he tell us of one chief officer of police in Britain who believes that he has sufficient police officers to perform the duties imposed upon him?
Mr. Baker
About eight or 10 chief constables are not asking for an increase in police forces for next year —— and I shall be glad to send the right hon. Gentleman a list.
If he is so proud of police numbers, he should recall that when he was a member of the Labour Cabinet he cut police expenditure and left our police 8,000 under establishment.
He is the guilty one.
Interruption
Mr. Paice
I am sure that the public in Cumbria and elsewhere realise that no other Government would allocate these extra resources for the police.
When my right hon. Friend is considering Cumbria's representations, will he also consider the position of Cambridgeshire, where the number of police per thousand population is the lowest in the country?
Mr. Baker
I shall certainly consider that.
As I said, I have secured increased expenditure next year for another 1,000 uniformed police officers, in addition to the further 600 this year.
Since 1979, there has been an increase of 15,000 uniformed officers, whereas their numbers were cut under the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley).
Mr. Campbell-Savours
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
No point of order arises from this.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
I wish to raise the matter on Adjournment.
Mr. Speaker
On the Adjournment.
Yes, all right.
Child Molesters
Mr. Cryer
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on sentencing policy towards sex offenders who have molested children.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
This is a serious issue.
The Criminal Justice Act 1991 endorses the severity with which the courts view these offences and strengthens their powers to protect the public from offenders.
Courts will be able to impose on a sexual offender who poses a serious risk to the public a longer custodial sentence than would be justified solely by the seriousness of the offence.
The courts will be able to order longer and more intensive supervision and treatment for sex offenders.
Mr. Cryer
What does the Minister say to my constituents who, following abuse by their father for many years, summoned up enough courage to give evidence in court after he attacked the 10-year-old granddaughter of the family?
After they had gone through the ordeal of giving evidence, their father, who was found guilty of eight serious charges with nine being left on the file, was put on probation and allocated to a hostel not two miles from where his last victim lives and where he can be seen by the family as they pass through the town centre.
Does the Minister realise that that is deeply upsetting to the family, who have been devastated by the experience?
Some form of custody — whether in hospital or in prison is a moot point — is required to give peace of mind to the people who gave evidence and who displayed much courage and fortitude in so doing.
Mr. Patten
I entirely understand the strong feelings of the hon. Gentleman's constituents and I sympathise with them.
He will appreciate that I am not aware of the details of the case.
The hon. Gentleman is concerned about the placement of this convicted person in a nearby hostel, so if he will give me the details of the case I shall have it investigated by Her Majesty's inspectorate of probation.
Rev. Martin Smyth
The Minister has shown concern about sentencing patterns, but does his concern extend beyond that to cases where the prosecution service has not been prepared to prosecute an accused person?
Does not that leave others open to molestation as well?
Mr. Patten
The Crown prosecution service always faces the difficult task of obtaining adequate evidence to secure a conviction in court.
However, it should be some consolation to the hon. Gentleman and the hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) that in the past five years the average sentence for rape has increased by 70 per cent.
The Criminal Justice Act will allow for much longer supervision of sex offenders after they are released from gaol.
My opinion is that sex offending cannot be cured, but it can and should be better supervised and controlled.
Mr. Dickens
Does my right hon. Friend agree that many of the views that I have expressed in the House, which at times have been received with ridicule and dismay, have become law subsequently?
If the Home Office really wants to stop the abuse of children and the rape of women, it must pass a law allowing the castration of the perpetrators, not for a first offence, in case there is a mistake, but for a second offence — unless people are unfit to plead.
That is the way to stop it and that sanction would hardly ever have to be used because it would be the ultimate deterrent for men.
Mr. Patten
My hon. Friend's suggestion is not the present intention of Her Majesty's Government.
We intend to reinforce the courts, as we have done in the Criminal Justice Act 1991, by sustaining their powers to sentence convicted sex offenders to life imprisonment.
The reforms introduced by my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary will mean two things: first, convicted sex offenders will, rightly, spend much longer in prison; and, secondly, they will be supervised when they are released.
Racist Attacks
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what recent representations he has received urging him to take new action to combat racist attacks.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
In the new year I will publish a progress report on the work of the police service and other agencies in tackling the problem of racially motivated attacks.
I make it clear that there should be no place for racially motivated attacks in our country.
Mr. Cohen
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that it has been calculated that there is one racial attack every 30 minutes and that the savagery of such attacks has increased?
With racism on the increase in Europe and in this country because of high unemployment, is not there a danger that there could be yet more racial assaults in Britain?
Have not calls for action by organisations such as the Society for Black Lawyers been met by Government intransigence?
Is not it time to have a specific crime of racial harassment, as I proposed in my 1985 Racial Harassment Bill?
Mr. Baker
I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman's latter point.
I recognise that there has been an increase in racially motivated attacks — there was a rise in 1990.
As the hon. Gentleman knows from a debate on London which he attended, last year nearly 3,000 attacks were reported in London — an increase of 8 per cent.
The clear-up rate is about 30 per cent.
I assure the House that, in all the speeches that I have made at police meetings and conferences this year, I have repeatedly stressed to the police that I want them to give this type of crime high priority.
Mr. Janman
Clearly the tributary of the River Tiber that runs through Leyton is already foaming.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the best and most subtle way to prevent such attacks is to ensure that the British people know that they have a Government who are taking the steps necessary to keep firm control of immigration and particularly to prevent people from abusing our immigration rules by entering this country under the bogus concept of being political refugees?
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on the steps that he has taken to do just that.
Mr. Baker
We have followed a policy of keeping tight control of immigration.
As my hon. Friend knows, I shall introduce the Asylum Bill to deal with that problem.
Over the years, successive Governments of all complexions have worked to improve race relations and Britain probably has the best record in Europe for harmonious race relations.
Asylum
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what representations he has received concerning the access to advice of asylum seekers.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
Following my right hon. Friend's statement about asylum on 2 July, we have received about 100 letters from hon. Members and about 750 from members of the public and interested organisations.
Most have included comments on the availability of advice for asylum seekers.
Mr. Corbyn
Will the Minister concede that the proposal in the Asylum Bill removes the right of people seeking political asylum to have access to green form advice?
Is he aware that that proposal has been met with horror by advice agencies, legal aid practices and members of the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service?
Should not he announce that he will withdraw those parts of the Bill and give people seeking political asylum the same rights to legal advice as anyone else would have, rather than introduce this appalling system under which they will not have the same equality before the law?
Mr. Lloyd
The hon. Gentleman is quite mistaken.
There are no such proposals in the Bill and we never suggested that there should be.
We have said that immigration and asylum cases are unique in that the Government and the United Nations fund a free, professional legal advice and representation service in the shape of UKIAS and the Government fund free solicitors' advice through the green form.
With the extension of appeal rights to all asylum seekers, it is not unreasonable to propose — as the Lord Chancellor and my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary propose — that this anomalous double provision should end and that increased resources for advice should be concentrated on UKIAS, especially as the service has a better record of winning cases than solicitors and is more cost effective.
Mr. Nicholls
It is clear to solicitors and to many other people that our present asylum procedures are being abused.
That should stop.
Does my hon. Friend agree that it does the cause of racial integration no good at all that our procedures should be abused?
Does he reject the comments that we have heard from the Opposition which have much more to do with their courting votes than with human rights?
Mr. Lloyd
Of course asylum procedures should not be abused.
Those who are making asylum claims should have access to free professional legal advice, as they want it.
We propose to deal with abuses and to ensure that asylum seekers have the free legal advice that they need.
Mr. Darling
Does the Minister accept that UKIAS is not capable of providing the same level of professional advice as can presently be provided under the legal aid system?
Does he accept that individuals should have the right to choose representation which represents the best value for money and that there is no saving to the Treasury under his proposals?
Will he explain why he wrote to UKIAS on 7 October threatening that unless it accepted the Government's proposals he would withdraw its funding or curtail it completely?
Mr. Lloyd
What I said to UKIAS — I have had two meetings with the organisation and written to it — is that the availability of green form aid is finally a matter for the Government and Parliament, not for UKIAS.
I also said that as we are increasing UKIAS's funding and its ability to represent and advise, if it was unwilling to advise those seeking advice on asylum, it called into question whether the funding for advice, not representation, should go to UKIAS.
There is an alternative.
We could fund all advice through the green form, but that would not be especially helpful to asylum seekers, as UKIAS has a better record of success in giving advice and making representations to adjudicators and tribunals.
Mr. Lawrence
What proportion of asylum seekers come into this country on visitors' permits and then decide that they are in fear of persecution just as their permits come to an end?
Is not it easy to give those people advice?
Mr. Lloyd
Yes.
About three quarters of asylum claimants are already in the country, many of them legitimately as students or visitors and some of them illegitimately, as they have entered the country illegally.
Each case needs to be considered on its merits.
There can be reasons why people make a claim for asylum after they have been here for some time and we consider all cases properly.
We believe that every asylum seeker, whether in-country or arriving at the ports, should have access to good free legal advice.
Free Television Licences
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether he will now introduce free television licences for pensioners; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
As I have made clear to the hon. Member on the many previous occasions on which he has asked this question, we have no plans to introduce free or concessionary television licences for all pensioners.
That would be a crude and non-selective instrument of social policy costing £470 million a year.
It would benefit many pensioners who can well afford the fee and would mean that other licence holders would have to pay £116 for their colour licence.
Mr. Skinner
This Tory Government are a hard-hearted bunch.
Have not we reached a pathetic state of affairs when, as a result of the 1988 decision, 75-year-old widows in warden accommodation cannot have a free television licence, yet others who are younger might receive it because they qualified before 1988?
Now, with all their claptrap about citizens charters, the Government have had the BBC send to every Member of Parliament letters carrying the Tory party propaganda that they cannot allow pensioners to have a free television licence.
They should be ashamed of themselves.
Mr. Lloyd
Not merely does the hon. Gentleman ask the same question each time; he asks the same supplementary.
The only difference this time is that arrangements have been made for the BBC to collect the licence fee, but the rules are precisely the same as they were when they were collected by the Government.
The hon. Gentleman ought to bear it in mind that the rules are very clear.
It is possible for local authorities to organise their elderly people's accommodation provision in such a way as to gain the concessionary licence.
The benefit should be given to those who are most in need of it.
We have concentrated the money that the hon. Gentleman would give to pensioners, whether they need it or not, into the income support rates of those who are worst off.
That is the correct, fair and just way to do it.
Mr. Hind
Does my hon. Friend accept, however, that among pensioners, particularly those who took up residence in sheltered accommodation after 1988, there is a real fear of injustice, in that some of them have to pay the full licence and some of them do not?
I hope that my hon. Friend will look at that problem, together with the BBC licence as a whole.
Pensioners are aware that they do not have to pay for ITV or any other channels but that they are called upon to pay for BBC television programmes.
My hon. Friend should look at the licence as a whole.
Mr. Lloyd
We are going to look at the whole question of BBC financing and the licence fee in the run-up to the renewal of the charter.
Mr. Salmond
Will the Minister reconsider the point made by the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner)?
Is the Minister aware that Members of Parliament, and anybody else with two homes, need only one television licence to cover both homes, the assumption being that they are not watching television simultaneously in both homes.
Will the Minister therefore announce a concession: that all old age pensioners should be given the right to watch television without having to pay for a television licence?
Mr. Lloyd
I do not believe that the hon. Gentleman correctly states the law.
No doubt a BBC inspection van will be visiting him.
Television Franchises
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the recent allocation of regional television franchises by the Independent Television Commission.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
The commission was carrying out the responsibilities laid on it by Parliament in the Broadcasting Act 1990.
The decisions on channel 3, and other licences, are a matter for the commission.
Mr. Coombs
In view of the widespread and sometimes ill-founded criticism of the recent franchise round and despite the uniform excellence of the successful tenders, will my right hon. Friend nevertheless consider the possibility of providing a review system so as either to show up ways in which it could be improved in future or to demonstrate that an extremely good job has been done by the Independent Television Commission?
Mr. Baker
I think that a good job has been done by the ITC, but I am prepared to consider any representations that are made to me about the future determination of licences.
The situation will change in the 1990s and beyond.
There will be a greater proliferation of services, well beyond these licences, and at least one other channel, channel 5.
Mr. Maclennan
Does the Home Secretary share the view of the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) in her letter to the outgoing chairman of TV-am?
Does he feel like offering a similar apology?
Mr. Baker
When there are 40 bids for 16 licences, some companies will lose out.
The system has resulted in new blood coming into the television industry.
Some of the companies that have been displaced have, in their time, displaced others.
The opportunity that they now have is to become independent production companies, an opportunity that they did not have in the last round of licence decisions.
Dame Janet Fookes
Can my right hon. Friend answer a riddle for me?
How is it that Television South West passed the quality threshold, offered by far the most money but still lost?
Mr. Baker
That is a riddle for the ITC, not me, to answer.
The ITC made the determination and it would be inappropriate for me to comment upon the matter, especially as I believe that it is now sub judice, because the company has applied for judicial review.
Mr. Corbett
Does the Home Secretary, in common with his right hon. Friend the former Prime Minister, now feel too painfully aware that the franchise round has ended in farce, with some companies losing their licences for offering too much and others failing because they offered too little?
Will the right hon. Gentleman now acknowledge that a system based on the highest bid was always likely to undermine the quality and variety of British television?
What message has he for the 2,000 television staff who lost their jobs in the run-up to the franchise round, and the similar number who will now be put out of work?
Mr. Baker
I do not agree at all.
New blood has come into the industry, and many of the companies now have the opportunity to become independent production companies.
I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman's assertion that the franchise round has been unsuccessful.
On the contrary, we have always sought to increase viewer choise.
We introduced Independent Television; the Labour party was against it.
We have introduced new opportunities for television, and we will introduce a new channel — Channel 5.
We believe in more viewer choice and more competition.
That will improve quality, and the Labour party has always resisted that.
Mr. John Greenway
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Broadcasting Act 1990 placed on the ITC the requirement to ensure that all bids were sustainable and stable for the whole 10 years of the franchise?
Is not the ITC's judgment that that is the case both with the existing franchisees who have retained their licences and with some of the newer companies?
At the press conference at which the ITC announced the licences Mr. Simon Albery, who ran the campaign for quality television, said to me,’ Quality has won’.
Mr. Baker
I am sure that that will prove the case.
Whenever there has been a change within television in this country there has always been the accusation that quality would suffer.
That has not happened.
Over the past 30 years, as choice and competition have worked their way through, variety and quality have improved.
Political Asylum
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what is the present level of those seeking political asylum; and what were the comparable figures in 1989.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
Between January and September this year the average monthly total of those seeking political refugee status in this country has been about 3,800.
The monthly average in 1989 was 950.
These figures exclude dependants.
Mr. King
Is my right hon. Friend aware of the widespread concern at the large number of people seeking political asylum?
Is he further aware that in a city such as Birmingham, where problems arise over bringing families into the United Kingdom, there is widespread disgust and dismay at the high number of bogus asylum applications?
Is he also aware that he has the united resolve of Conservative Members for the speedy passage of his Bill?
Mr. Baker
I thank my hon. Friend.
I said that the average number was 3,800.
The actual figure for applications in October was 4,400 and the number is likely to reach between 45,000 and 50,000 this year, whereas we used to receive 2,000 or 3,000 applications.
This is a serious and important problem which has to be tackled.
That is why we shall introduce the Asylum Bill, which will be debated next week.
I am surprised that the Labour party has decided to oppose it.
Mr. Madden
Is the Home Secretary aware of the legal opinion that to restrict access to legal advice and representation in asylum and immigration matters may be a breach of the law?
Will he instruct his Ministers to stop trying to bribe and blackmail the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service, which does not wish to collude in the Government's plans to pander to Essex man by restricting the longstanding traditional rights of people fleeing violence and persecution to seek refuge in this country?
Mr. Baker
This country has a long tradition of accepting genuine political refugees, but there is no doubt that the fact that three quarters of all applications are made by people who have been living in this country for weeks, months and, in some cases, years, is tantamount to an abuse of the system.
What we must do is to distinguish between bogus and genuine refugees.
That is what we will do, and we will do it fairly.
Not only that — we intend to increase and extend the right of access to an appellate system, which does not exist at the moment.
Mr. Ashby
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the greatest injustice to genuine asylum seekers is to be found in the enormously long delays that occur in the processing of applications?
What steps has my right hon. Friend taken to reduce those delays?
Mr. Baker
In May of this year, we were pressed by Amnesty International and other refugee groups to speed up the process of determination, and the Bill before the House, which will be debated next week, sets out a scheme that will allow determination to be decided within a period of three months.
That applies not only to a decision but to appearing under an appellate process.
That will speed up the existing time, which can be anything up to two to three years.
It is important that we decide the matter quickly because, if we do so, the bogus applicants can be returned to the countries from which they came.
Rural Magistrates Courts
Mr. Ieuan Wyn Jones
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether he has any plans to close or amalgamate rural magistrates courts in England and Wales during the next 12 months.
Mr. John Patten
No, Sir.
Proposals for the closure of magistrates courthouses or the amalgamation of petty sessional divisions are the responsibility of magistrates courts committees after consulting those concerned.
Mr. Jones
What guidelines does the Home Department give to magistrates courts committees on how they should approach the closure and amalgamation of rural magistrates courts?
I am sure that the Minister will be aware — representing a rural area, as I also do — that there is considerable concern about closures and amalgamations that lead to both defendants and witnesses having to travel vast distances.
Does he agree that access to justice is more important than administrative convenience?
Mr. Patten
I entirely agree with the hon. Gentleman.
That is an extremely important point, and access to justice in rural areas is, indeed, subject to guidance from the Home Office.
Let me add that, in taking recent decisions concerning rural areas, the Home Office has almost invariably supported those who have felt that rural courthouses should be kept open.
I have looked up my own record over the past six months, and I find that the only courthouse whose closure I approved was in Leicestershire and was precisely 500 yd from a new courthouse costing £8 million which we had erected to take its place.
Mr. Bellingham
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, if justice is to be seen to be done, it is far better for it to be dispensed closer to the community in which the crime took place?
Will he join me in saluting the work done by some of the small magistrates courts in west Norfolk, such as those in Hunstanton and Fakenham, and does he agree that every effort should be made to ensure that they stay open?
Mr. Patten
It is extremely important that small rural benches — provided that they are large enough to provide the necessary range of skills and an adequate number of people to dispense rural justice — are kept.
But it is also the case that suggestions for amalgamation of rural — or, indeed, urban — benches come not from my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary but from the magistrates courts committees in the areas concerned.
Mr. Randall
Is the Minister aware that the Opposition approve in principle of measures to enhance the cost effectiveness of our magistrates courts system?
Is he also aware, however, that the Government's policy of strict cash limits can in some cases be seen as a blunt instrument whose use could result in closures of courts in many local communities?
Will the Minister now tell the House how many local magistrates courts he estimates are likely to close as a result of the Government's new funding policy?
Or has he not bothered to work it out?
Mr. Patten
The Government's new funding policy — which was supported by the Labour party during the passage of the Criminal Justice Act 1991, so the hon. Gentleman cannot complain about that — is aimed at ensuring that the workload is taken into account in allocating resources while encouraging the management of magistrates courts to improve the efficiency of local justice so that it is better carried out.
Suggestions for closures and amalgamations come from the individual magistrates courts committees in the areas in question.
Sir Anthony Grant
Is my right hon. Friend aware that I am extremely grateful to him for the wise decision to retain the St.
Neots and Huntingdon courthouses?
Is he also aware that there has been considerable disquiet over the proposed amalgamation of the St.
Neots and Huntingdon bench?
Will he carefully consider the representations that I have sent to him on that subject?
Mr. Patten
I am glad that my hon. Friend believes that I took a wise decision over those courthouse closures and they remain open.
I will of course carefully consider any correspondence that my hon. Friend has sent to me.
Electoral Register
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what are his Department's plans to maximise the number of people on the 1992-93 electoral register; and if he will make a statement.
Mrs. Rumbold
As in previous years we shall conduct a nationwide advertising campaign in the early autumn to encourage people to complete and return the electoral registration form.
We shall also continue our annual research into the working methods of electoral registration officers, and produce updated best practice notes to assist them in compiling an accurate register.
Mr. Barnes
The current electoral register is a mess.
One million people are missing from it according to the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys.
There is to be a new register on which the general election could be fought.
There is time to put the register right.
Will the Government spend advertising money to achieve that?
Only 0.3 per cent.
of the advertising budget is spent on electoral registration.
We have time to put things democratically right if the Government will act now.
Mrs. Rumbold
The hon. Gentleman should know that advertising money is being spent and electoral registration officers are working hard to ensure that their electoral registers are up to date and accurate.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Jessel
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 7 November.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
I have been asked to reply
Hon. Members
Where is he?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I call the Leader of the House.
Mr. MacGregor
This morning my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister had a bilateral with President Bush in Rome.
He is currently attending the NATO summit now under way there.
That summit will set the future course for NATO to ensure that it remains as it has been — a bedrock of stability in a still uncertain world.
The fact that Opposition Members should regret the fact that my right hon. Friend is in Rome, shows how little attention they pay to defence and NATO matters.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This kind of thing gives a very bad impression elsewhere.
Mr. Jessel
On Europe, to put it beyond all doubt in this House, in the country, and on the continent, will my right hon. Friend reaffirm that it is the policy of Her Majesty's Government that Britain shall not go down the route of a federal Europe and that it is for Britain to decide on the future of her own currency?
Mr. MacGregor
I am happy to give my hon. Friend the assurance that we are not going down the route of a federal Europe.
With regard to a single currency and economic and monetary union, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has made it clear that the Government are not prepared to commit Britain now to a single currency.
We will be able shortly to debate those matters more fully in the House, but we have on many occasions made it clear that this Parliament will decide on the single currency issue at some date well into the future if and when it should arise.
Mr. Kinnock
Is the —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I call Mr. Kinnock.
Hon. Members
Where is he?
Mr. Kinnock
All present and correct, Sir.
Is the Leader of the House aware that three times in the past 24 hours the Chancellor of the Exchequer has refused to answer direct questions about the Government's plans for further increases in VAT?
Is that not surprising because the Chancellor has repeatedly been eager to make precise pledges of cuts in income tax to 20p in the medium term?
Will the right hon. Gentleman tell us now, in precise terms, what are the Government's plans for making further increases in VAT?
Mr. MacGregor
The right hon. Gentleman will be all present on the Opposition Benches for some time to come and will not be leading for Britain at future NATO summits.
In answer to his question, the right hon. Gentleman knows very well that the commitment to income tax is one that would extend over the lifetime of the future Parliament and perhaps beyond that.
That is a general commitment for some time to come.
No precise dates have been given.
It is not for the right hon. Gentleman to ask questions about tax, given the very high public spending commitments to which his party is committed.
Mr. Kinnock
The Leader of the House has even changed the line on what the Chancellor said on income tax this morning.
As far as talking about tax is concerned, I realise the right hon. Gentleman's sensitivity.
His Government have, after all, lifted the tax burden on the British people to the highest of any Government in history.
The right hon. Gentleman is wriggling.
Since the Prime Minister has announced the target rate for income tax, surely he can announce the target rate for VAT.
If he can tell us the one, surely he can tell us the other.
Why are the Government so specific on income tax and so shifty on VAT?
Mr. MacGregor
The right hon. Gentleman knows perfectly well that the commitment on income tax is a longer-term one and that we hope to achieve it as and when conditions permit and when it is prudent to do so.
We have made that clear on many occasions.
But it is really not for him to argue the case about taxes because, as we well know — Opposition Members do not like that.
The reason they do not like it is that they are so sensitive about it.
We know perfectly well that the Labour party has committed itself to an additional £35,000 million of public spending and no capping on local authority expenditure.
The two combined would mean a very high increase in the tax and community charge burden on all people.
Interruption
Mr. Kinnock
The longer that the right hon. Gentleman speaks, the less he convinces.
Will he tell us now?
After making huge rises in VAT in the past 12 years, what are the Government's plans to make further increases in VAT?
Mr. MacGregor
The Government have made their public expenditure plans absolutely clear, and they are clear on the normal basis.
It is equally clear — the right hon. Gentleman has not refuted this — that, in fact, the £35 billion spending commitment of the Labour party would mean either a very big increase in income tax and/or a very big increase in VAT, and it would be likely to be both.
Mr. Michael Brown
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Government's proposals to introduce powers to prevent local authorities from excessive spending by means of capping will be very well received by all those in Labour-controlled authorities who have to put up with excessive tax bills?
Does my right hon. Friend agree also that those people will not welcome the pledge that was given from the Opposition Benches yesterday to ensure that high-spending Labour authorities can go with gay abandon to yet higher spending?
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
It is a point that will have to be stressed again and again.
On top of the increased taxes — direct and indirect taxes that would come from their spending pledges — the Opposition have now committed themselves to no capping on high-spending local authorities.
That can mean only higher community charge and council tax bills as well.
Sir David Steel
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 7 November.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the right hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Sir David Steel
Is the Lord President aware that, at the end of last week, the Secretary of State for the Environment and the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry warmly welcomed the Government committee report recommending, among other environmental measures, an increase in petrol tax?
They have referred that recommendation to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Will he ensure before the Budget that, in any such conservation measure, account is taken of the needs of rural areas where —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Interruptions take a lot of time.
Sir David Steel
Admittedly including the area that we will represent after today, in rural areas in which the car is a necessity and in which the cost of petrol is alreay high, what compensatory measures are the Government prepared to support?
Mr. MacGregor
My right hon. Friends have not committed the Government to any position on tax, but I notice that, as usual, the right hon. Gentleman wants to have it both ways.
As it would put it, the Liberal Democratic party claims to make people face up to hard decisions by increasing pricing and taxes.
However, because some of its Members of Parliament come from rural areas, they want those rural areas to be protected.
It is typical of the right hon. Gentleman and his party to make different noises in different places.
Mr. Lord
Does my right hon. Friend agree that nothing is more damaging to the fabric of a nation than the failure properly to educate its children?
May I urge him to press for a return to traditional standards of teaching in our primary schools as soon as possible?
Mr. MacGregor
I am sure that my hon. Friend will agree that what we are doing through the national curriculum, and especially in the testing of seven, 11, 14 and 16-year-olds, will ensure not only that we can monitor progress on standards, but that pupils who are falling behind will be given the assistance that they need to improve.
The point of our educational reforms is to improve standards.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 7 November.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. and learned Gentleman to the reply that I gave a few moments ago.
Mr. Campbell
The right hon. Gentleman will be aware that 22 November is the first anniversary of the sinking of the fishing vessel Antares in the Firth of Clyde as a result of its gear being snagged by the submarine HMS Trenchant.
However, is he aware that the Royal Navy is proposing to hold a similar exercise in the same waters on the day immediately following that anniversary?
Is not the timing of that exercise particularly insensitive, and is there any reason why it should not be postponed for a period of, say, a week as a mark of respect to the crew of the Antares, all of whom perished when the vessel was sunk?
Mr. MacGregor
I am sure that the hon. and learned Gentleman knows the considerable steps that have been taken by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Defence and by the Minister of State for the Armed Forces to deal with the aftermath of that tragic incident.
I shall draw the hon. and learned Gentleman's particular point to my right hon. Friend's attention.
Mr. Rathbone
As our Prime Minister is away at such an important summit conference — important for the security of the whole of the western world — does my right hon. Friend think it appropriate at this moment to reaffirm the Government's commitment to that European pillar, the Western European Union?
Mr. MacGregor
Yes, I agree with my hon. Friend.
We have made it absolutely clear that, in our view, that body will play an important part in our future defence position.
I am sure that that will be discussed today at the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation.
Mr. Gareth Wardell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 7 November.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave a few moments ago.
Mr. Wardell
In view of his admission some weeks ago that this Government have imposed the heaviest tax burden in British history, will the right hon. Gentleman now apologise for the Chancellor's wholly inaccurate statement to the House yesterday that the Government have been cutting taxes ever since 1979?
Mr. MacGregor
The truth of the matter is that we have seen a substantial reduction in direct tax rates, a substantial improvement in standards of living and, as a result of the reduction in tax rates, an improvement in the tax base, which has enabled us not only to achieve increased public spending on a large scale in our key priority areas, especially health, but to achieve a reduction in direct income tax and, overall, considerably to improve our public sector borrowing requirement.
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 7 November.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave a few moments ago.
Mr. Mitchell
Does my right hon. Friend accept that there is widespread support among parents for the Government's proposal that schools should make their public examination results available for publication in common form?
Does he agree that that would give parents an objective answer to the question,’ How is my child's school doing?’, as well as further pressing back the frontiers of choice in education?
Mr. MacGregor
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
He refers to an important part of the reforms that we are undertaking.
I pay tribute to him for first raising the subject of league tables for schools' performances in the Bill that he introduced earlier in the year.
League tables of examination results, destinations of school leavers, truancy rates and all the other items that we are suggesting will be an important aid towards improving parental choice.
I was glad to note that that was endorsed by the chairman of the Audit Commission this morning.
Ms. Primarolo
Will the Leader of the House explain why the Government voted against the EC directive on maternity leave which would have given women a minimum of 16 weeks of maternity leave and protection from being sacked because they are pregnant?
This is the second time in less than two weeks that the Government have failed to respond to the Prime Minister's so-called commitment to women's equality.
Why should women believe anything that the Government say?
Mr. MacGregor
The hon. Lady is wrong.
An agreement was reached yesterday which represents a sensible balance on maternity pay.
It carries forward the interests of women without imposing an undue burden on employers.
The Government abstained on a different aspect relating to the treaty of Rome basis.
We did not believe that the issue should have come within that particular article.
That is why we abstained.
The political agreement was reached clearly.
Under our policies more than one in three of the jobs created in the European Community for women were created during the past eight years in Britain.
That is a clear indication of the opportunity and choice that we give.
Mr. Thorne
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 7 November.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Thorne
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the figures given yesterday for expenditure on the national health service, education and transport show our clear commitment to expenditure on those items?
Does he agree that those people in the House who advocate expenditure without saying how much they are prepared to spend are entirely unconvincing?
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend is right.
The autumn statement yesterday demonstrated that we have substantially increased in real terms — after inflation — the spending in each of the three areas that my hon. Friend mentioned.
Indeed, in health the additions announced yesterday represent £50 more for every man, woman and child in Britain.
That means that the increase in health spending since we took office is 55 per cent.
in real terms.
My hon. Friend is also right to draw attention to the high additional spending programmes of some £35 billion advocated by the Labour party, which would put a crippling tax burden on so many families in Britain.
House of Commons
Tuesday 12 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
MESSAGE FROM THE QUEEN
Queen's Speech (Answer to Address)
The Vice-Chamberlain of the Household reported Her Majesty's Answer to the Address, as follows:
I have received with great satisfaction the loyal and dutiful expression of your thanks for the Speech with which I opened the present Session of Parliament.
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
Student Loans
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he has any plans to change the student loans scheme.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Kenneth Clarke)
No, Sir
Mr. Bennett
Does the Minister agree that the loans scheme has turned out to be an administrative nightmare and that it has caused a great deal of bureaucracy and hardship to students, especially since they have been removed from the safety net of social security?
Is not it hard that all those measures have been placed on students at a time when they find it particularly difficult to get vacation jobs or part-time jobs in term time and when those who graduate find it increasingly difficult to get jobs to pay off the overdrafts that they have had to incur as students?
Mr. Clarke
I do not agree with any of those premises.
First, the scheme has been extremely well run and the loans company has met its target of getting the loans to those who have applied within 21 days in almost all cases.
The majority of students have not felt obliged to take out loans as they have not thought it necessary.
Those who have done so have enjoyed the benefit.
The loan plus the grant is 30 per cent.
higher than the grant alone two years ago.
There is no evidence of significant student hardship, despite a somewhat half-baked campaign by the National Union of Students to try to suggest that there is.
We have provided an access fund to the institutions to enable them to deal with the few cases of hardship that genuinely occur.
Mr. Pawsey
If the situation is as the hon. Member for Denton and Reddish (Mr. Bennett) describes it, why has the number of applicants to advanced education increased and why does the number of admissions to universities and polytechnics show a substantial increase?
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that student support in the United Kingdom continues to be the most generous in the western world?
Mr. Clarke
I am unable to answer my hon. Friend's first question; it puzzles me, too.
We had been told that the loans system would deter people who might otherwise have gone into higher education because of the so-called financial hardship that they would face.
In fact, since it has been introduced, the rate at which student numbers have increased has been unprecedented and we expect it to increase by 10 per cent.
again this year.
All the evidence refutes the nonsense that we have heard about the impact of the student loans scheme.
My hon. Friend is right that we have the most generous system in the developed world for supporting students.
I make no apology for that.
It is Government policy to continue to extend opportunity for students in that way.
Mr. Straw
Why is the Secretary of State so contemptuous of the evidence about student hardship when it comes from sources such as the citizens advice bureaux and from scores of cases sent to him by hon. Members on both sides of the House?
Does the Secretary of State recognise that the access funds are in no sense a substitute for student eligibility for social security and for vacation hardship allowance and that mature students in particular have been plunged into severe hardship by the Government's policies?
In the light of that, will he reconsider the abolition of vacation hardship allowance, especially as it was abolished in clear breach of undertakings given in the House that it would remain as a safety net following the abolition of social security provision?
Mr. Clarke
I have looked at the evidence of so-called student hardship and I do not accept that the’ scores’of cases stand up to examination.
There have always been some students in serious difficulties.
Mature students and those who do not receive the parental contribution towards their grant have always been a problem.
It is somewhat eased for some by the student loans system.
It can also be addressed by using the access funds provided by the Government.
The average student is much better off under our arrangements of a combined grant and loan scheme than previously.
The few that are not — those with high housing benefit — can be helped through the access funds.
The vacation hardship allowance was almost unheard of and was not being demanded.
When we abolished it there was scarcely any take-up.
Grant-maintained Schools
Mr. Colvin
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how many schools in Hampshire have now applied for and achieved grant-maintained status; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister of State, Department of Education and Science (Mr. Tim Eggar)
Four schools in Hampshire have applied for and achieved grant-maintained status.
I am pleased that the parents of pupils at those schools have voted to take up this option for their schools.
I hope that many more in Hampshire and, indeed, throughout the country will follow their example.
Mr. Colvin
May I take this opportunity to congratulate Hardley school in my constituency which was the first in Hampshire to achieve grant-maintained status?
Does my hon. Friend accept that opting out, as it is called, is a misnomer because schools which achieve grant-maintained status are opting into a new educational regime of higher morale, better educational opportunities and more money?
What percentage of schools in Hampshire will have to achieve grant-maintained status for the local education authority to become redundant?
Mr. Eggar
I hope that the local education authority will encourage schools to go grant maintained.
There is much evidence from a recent survey that that is beneficial to schools and pupils.
For example, of the schools replying to the survey, 90 per cent .
reported an increase in the number of pupils applying, 65 per cent.
reported more teachers in the schools and 75 per cent.
reported an improved teacher-pupil ratio.
That is evidence of the success of the GM policy.
Mr. Hardy rose
Mr. Speaker
The question is about Hampshire.
Mr. Hardy
I know that it is about Hampshire, Mr. Speaker.
Will the Minister offer the House any justification for the provision of more money to schools in Hampshire because they happen to serve the current dogma of the present Government?
Mr. Eggar
The money is allocated to Hampshire on the normal standard spending assessment basis.
Grant-maintained schools rightly get money which would otherwise be spent on administration costs by Hampshire.
Those grant-maintained schools are using that money effectively for the benefit of the school and, more importantly, of improving education for the pupils attending those schools.
Foundation for Sport and the Arts
Mr. Mans
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what responsibilities he has for the sports and arts foundation.
The Minister for Sports (Mr. Robert Atkins)
The Foundation for Sport and the Arts is an independent trust which decides the allocation of its own funds.
Under the trust deed I appoint a Government observer and am consulted on the appointment of the chairman.
In practice, I keep in close touch with the work of the foundation.
Mr. Mans
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the Football Trust gets an extra £20 million from the 2.5 per cent.
reduction in the betting levy which goes towards the safety and improvement of football grounds?
Mr. Atkins
That is certainly part of the money that is made available as a result of the far-sighted decision of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer.
When one adds to that the £40 million or so from the trust, my hon. Friends at least will recognise that the Government can lay claim to spending more money on sport than any party has done for many years.
Mr. Pendry
Is not the Minister somewhat ashamed of himself?
Despite the various amounts that come from the Foundation for Sports and the Arts — given at the whim of the trustees in a haphazard fashion — they do not compensate in any way for the £60 million cut in real grant from the Government since 1986.
What answer will the Minister give to the chairman of the Sports Council, who described the recent cuts as a kick in the teeth?
Mr. Atkins
I am delighted to see the hon. Gentleman in the Chamber; he should be on the Opposition Front Bench as their spokesman for sport, as my shadow is not here.
Perhaps something should be read into that.
This year the increase in grant to the Sports Council is 4.4 per cent., which is more than the rate of inflation and equivalent year on year to what we have pledged ourselves to provide.
I repeat that if one adds to that the £40 million from the foundation, the £20 million a year for football and the £1 million that I found for the champion coaching scheme, it is clear that our commitment to sport is greater than anyone's.
I spoke to the chairman of the Sports Council this morning and pointed out that the increase in grant is in excess of inflation.
Therefore, his comment was wrong.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
Does the Minister understand that, despite what he has just said, there is still considerable apprehension that the Government will use the existence of the foundation as an excuse for not funding sport properly?
The Minister is aware that the Sports Council's plan did not represent a standstill, but involved the development and expansion of all its activities.
That is why the settlement of 4.4 per cent.
is rightly described as a kick in the teeth.
Mr. Atkins
It is extraordinary that even though the Government found an extra £40 million for sport in the last Budget, which is near enough double the expenditure on sport year on year, Opposition Members criticise us and suggest that we are not providing the necessary resources for sport.
The first tranche of money from the foundation of £3.7 million — Do stop interrupting.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I am supposed to say that.
Can we get on?
Mr. Atkins
I was referring to the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw).
He is supposed to believe in discipline in our schools, but his behaviour is singularly ill-disciplined.
As a public school boy, he should know better.
I have sought to demonstrate that the claim of the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East (Mr. Campbell) is fatuous, because we are spending much more money on sport than in the past.
Mr. David Evans
Does my hon. Friend agree that Labour's charter for sport is about more interference, more committees, more regional committees and, most of all, more costs?
Will sport be subject to Beckett's law?
Will it be a top priority, a priority, or what?
Does not that contrast with the Conservative policy of reducing the betting levy by 2.5 per cent., which has given £100 million to sport and increased the Sports Council grant to £50 million —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us have a question please.
Mr. Evans
Does not it mean that we are the party of hot money, not hot air?
Mr. Atkins
I can do no better than to draw the attention of the House to this statement in Labour's charter for sport:’ We will review the composition and powers of the Sports Council to free them from political bias’.
However, the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Small Heath (Mr. Howell), who is supposed to be the shadow spokesman on this subject, suggested that Labour would encourage a greater ministerial role in the Sports Council.
May we know which is which?
Mr. Cormack
Does my hon. Friend accept that much as many of us welcome the sports and arts foundation, we would infinitely prefer to have a national lottery, which would produce far more money for sport and the arts?
Mr. Atkins
I am sure that my hon. Friend recognises that there are a number of views on this subject.
My views are well known, but it is a matter for my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Derbyshire County Council (Funding)
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science whether he will increase the educational funding for Derbyshire county council.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Michael Fallon)
Councils' current spending on all services next year should be 7.2 per cent.
higher than this year, but it is for Derbyshire to decide its level of spending and priorities between services.
Capital spending in schools, supported by annual guidelines, is set to rise from £472 million this year to £524 million next year, an increase of 11 per cent.
Derbyshire's allocation will be announced before Christmas.
Mr. Skinner
Will the Minister confirm that in the summer he met a group from Derbyshire county council who asked for £140 million, spread over the next three years, to get rid of all outstanding repairs and make necessary improvements?
After 12 years of Tory rule, little toddlers must still run across playgrounds to get to outside toilets.
We have the citizens charter, the parents charter and every charter under the sun.
When will the Government put their money where their mouth is?
Mr. Fallon
I confirm that Councillor Young came to the Department in July with five hours' worth of videos showing how Derbyshire had been running down its schools.
I allocated Derbyshire £21 million this year, the fourth highest allocation of any education authority in England.
I now understand that Derbyshire is planning to siphon off £5.5 million of capital spending to pay for extra redundancy and personnel costs at county hall.
Mrs. Currie
Might the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) want more money for Derbyshire so that it can employ more people such as his brother, who is employed as a personnel liaison officer for Toyota, his sister-in-law, who is employed in the county publicity department —— and such as another sister-in-law, who is employed in the education department?
The hon. Gentleman is always talking about jobs for the boys.
Should not that include brothers and sisters as well?
Interruption
Mr. Fallon
Derbyshire not only employs some pretty odd people, but it makes some rather odd choices.
This year, Derbyshire has chosen to cut music and swimming while spending over £5 million keeping school meals at 1981 prices.
Greater Manchester Schools
Mr. Tony Lloyd
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the staffing levels and the conditions of schools in Greater Manchester.
Mr. Fallon
In January 1991, the 10 local education authorities in Greater Manchester reported 230 full-time permanent posts unfilled, a vacancy rate of 1 per cent.
below the national vacancy rate of 1.5 per cent.
Vacancy figures in September showed a significant improvement, with only 15 vacancies reported for the whole of Greater Manchester at the start of the school year.
Mr. Lloyd
I am not surprised that the Minister failed to mention the condition of schools in Greater Manchester.
Will he confirm that in every year and for every authority recently in Greater Manchester, the amount of money that the Government have allowed them to spend on capital projects has been way behind what they have needed, with the result that there is now a backlog of repairs and maintenance?
Is he aware that one head teacher recently told me that not only do they have to teach in unsavoury conditions, but they are now having to teach in unsafe conditions?
The Government are putting the health and safety of children at school at risk.
What will the Minister do to make sure that that state of affairs does not continue?
Mr. Fallon
For the 10 councils in the Greater Manchester area, I increased capital guidelines from £32.6 million last year to £41.6 million this year.
I shall be announcing the individual allocations for next year before Christmas.
Sir Fergus Montgomery
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the worst-ever cuts in education took place in 1976 under a Labour Government?
Will he further confirm that the 11 per cent.
increase in the autumn statement is bound to be helpful?
Mr. Fallon
Yes, the 11 per cent.
increase for school buildings next year is a good outcome, given that the level of inflation is only about 4 per cent.
and given the drop in construction prices.
Trafford education authority has received about £13 million in the past two years to help it reorganise and improve its schools.
Higher Education
Mr. Battle
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science when he next expects to visit Leeds university and Leeds polytechnic to discuss funding for higher education.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Alan Howarth)
I will be visiting Leeds polytechnic to open the Higher Education for Capability office on 27 November.
This is a joint project of the polytechnic and the university.
Mr. Battle
Is the Minister aware that at Leeds university top-quality alpha-grade research in technical and scientific subjects can no longer be funded?
Will he give an assurance that in future research at Leeds polytechnic will be funded under the new joint proposals?
Is he aware that such cuts in academic research will prove to be economic short termism with vengeance?
Mr. Howarth
Our policy is that high-quality research should be supported in departments of universities and polytechnics, wherever they may be.
The Universities Funding Council and the Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council will embark jointly on a new research and assessment exercise next year.
As a consequence, up-to-date ratings of quality will be made, department by department, across the spectrum of higher education.
Every department that scores highly in those assessments will benefit accordingly.
That is a thoroughly fair system.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Will the Minister make absolutely certain that the funding councils use up-to-date figures?
Universities such as Lancaster are going steadily and rapidly up the poll and are doing very well indeed.
However, the 1988 criteria are not as good as current ideas, so it is important that the universities that are forging ahead should be encouraged.
Mr. Howarth
As always, my hon. Friend is eloquent in championing the university in her constituency — and rightly so.
The new research assessment exercise has been brought forward in anticipation of ending the binary line and bringing together the polytechnics and universities in one sector.
As a result of the exercise to be carried out during 1992, the assessments of research quality will be based on the most up-to-date data.
Mr. Andrew Smith
When the Minister discusses higher education funding at Leeds, will he confirm that it is Government policy to increase basic funding in line with the increase in student numbers?
Given the pressures on laboratories, libraries, teaching and student accommodation, and the real cut in capital funding in this year's autumn statement, what is the Government's policy on capital expenditure?
Mr. Howarth
I am delighted to be able to tell the hon. Gentleman that our policy on capital expenditure is to encourage and enable higher education institutions to invest, as they need to do, to accommodate the dramatic increase in student numbers as well as provide facilities for the research of remarkable quality which takes place in so many of our universities.
Capital funding available from the polytechnics has increased by 50 per cent.
since 1989-90, when the PCFC sector was established.
I am pleased that, in the new settlement that has just been announced, we have secured an extra £9 million of capital funding for the higher education institutions.
School Inspectors
Mr. Spearing
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science when he next expects to receive a report from Her Majesty's chief inspector of schools.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
The senior chief inspector's annual report is being prepared now and will be submitted to me on completion.
Mr. Spearing
Does the Secretary of State agree that, whatever the merits of Her Majesty's inspectors being involved in the advocacy of method, their function of providing independent and publicised reports on the quality of education has never been in question?
If he wishes to make an adjustment, would not it be more sensible to detach their role from advocacy of method and confine it solely to inspection?
Is not his solution of private consultants to be engaged by competitive schools asking for trouble, because it creates an automatic conflict of interest and renders their reports suspect by definition?
Mr. Clarke
With respect, the hon. Gentleman appears to be slightly confused about what we are doing.
First, I accept that the inspectors' production of an annual report and other reports on our schools is extremely valuable, as they base their advice on the inspections that they carry out.
The Education (Schools) Bill will continue that.
Indeed, we strengthen the independence of Her Majesty's chief inspector of schools in producing those reports by detaching him, to a much greater degree than in the past, from my Department.
Secondly, the new role for HMI will be to monitor the quality of all those inspectors who will carry out the new inspections in individual schools throughout the country and to give, for the first time, reports to every parent about those schools.
Mr. Spearing indicated dissent.
Mr. Clarke
The hon. Gentleman dismisses that.
Does he think that we should employ 5,000 HMIs to carry out inspections, or does he prefer the Labour party's solution — that only local councils should be allowed to inspect schools?
We are giving Her Majesty's inspectorate a key role in monitoring the quality of those permitted to carry out that public service.
Mr. Amos
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the whole purpose of the reforms is to increase the number of inspections in schools, not reduce them, and that the monitoring and regulation of the new system will be such that it would not be in the professional interest of any inspector to try to fiddle a report?
Mr. Clarke
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
Last year Her Majesty's inspectors produced and published about 150 reports on individual schools and, usually, no parent saw the reports.
Our arrangements will lead to about 6,000 inspections each year, and each parent will receive, without requesting it, a straightforward description of the inspection.
We state that the teams of inspectors should be monitored and approved by Her Majesty's inspectorate.
The new, independent Her Majesty's inspectorate will have the duty of giving a little lion stamp to those inspectors and ensuring that they are up to the mark.
Mr. Straw
How can the Secretary of State conceivably claim that Her Majesty's inspectorate is to be strengthened when its numbers are to be cut by two thirds and it is to be subject to clear and specific direction from the Secretary of State?
Will the Secretary of State confirm that the privatisation of the inspectorate inherent in the Education (Schools) Bill goes far further than that presaged in the schools charter and includes, under the guise of additional inspectors, the substitution of private money-making firms to do the work currently carried out, not just by local inspectors but by the chief inspector of schools?
Mr. Clarke
I have carried out several privatisations in my time in commercial and industrial departments, and my understanding of the word privatisation is that one takes something currently managed in the public sector and transfers it to the private sector — the last such transfer in which I was engaged involved British Steel.
In this case, Her Majesty's inspectorate is not being transferred and its role will remain the same except that as a public organisation it will be made more independent of the Secretary of State.
The hon. Gentleman's complaints are based solely on the fact that the total number of staff in the inspectorate are to be reduced.
The Labour party judges such matters only on the number of employees and trade union members on the books, which is not the test that we shall apply.
We shall give Her Majesty's inspectorate powers and duties and the number of staff that the chief inspector and I think are required to fulfil those roles.
Mr. John Browne
Will Her Majesty's chief inspector report on the case of Kings school, Winchester, which was denied grant-maintained status as a direct result of the local authority using public funds to wage a campaign against it?
Mr. Clarke
I do not think that Her Majesty's inspectorate can look at that case.
A parental ballot was carried out on grant-maintained status and the parents decided to vote against the application for that status.
I agree with my hon. Friend that Hampshire county council waged an extremely vigorous campaign against the proposal.
I do not agree that Hampshire presented the case fairly, and I keep trying to obtain undertakings from Hampshire county council that, even if it cannot support Government policy, it might at least present a more detached account of the case to parents when grant-maintained options are on the table.
Gateshead CTC
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what is the proposed per capita capital spending per pupil in 1991-92 at (a) Gateshead city technology college and (b) all secondary schools in the borough of Sunderland.
Mr. Eggar
My right hon. and learned Friend's planned capital contribution to Emmanuel college, Gateshead in 1991-92 is £259,000.
The funding agreement with the CTC allows for 300 pupils in 1991-92.
The Department does not hold figures for the proposed capital expenditure on secondary schools in the borough of Sunderland in 1991-92.
Mr. Mullin
I am not surprised that the Minister declines to give us the figures because is not the truth that about 60 to 80 times the amount of money is being spent per capita on students at the city technology college than is spent on pupils at secondary schools in Sunderland and surrounding boroughs?
Can the Minister point to any country apart from South Africa where such large sums are spent on a small elite group at the expense of the majority?
Mr. Eggar
I am not sure where the hon. Gentleman gets his figures from — perhaps from the same Labour party briefing on which the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) relies.
The hon. Member for Blackburn produces wholly fictitious figures which compare the new building costs for new schools or for the conversion of schools to CTCs over a period of three years with the capital expenditure borrowing guidelines for 14 authorities in one year.
That shows that he has not reached level 1 in mathematics, and nor has the hon. Gentleman.
Student Grants
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will review the criteria for student grant eligibility.
Mr. Alan Howarth
The Education (Mandatory Awards) Regulations are reviewed annually.
Extending them to a substantially wider range of courses or students would, however, require primary legislation.
We have no present plans for that.
Mr. Bowis
Is my hon. Friend aware that in many local education authorities, not least in London, it is a prerequisite for a discretionary award that a student lives for at least three years within the borough concerned?
Will he give at least gentle guidance to LEAs suggesting that it is not reasonable for students to be excluded from discretionary grants merely because their parents have moved home?
Or will he try to find some other way of funding such students?
Mr. Howarth
The regulations do not impose any specific requirements on how local education authorities should treat people ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom when considering their applications for discretionary awards.
It is for each LEA to construct its own policies in respect of discretionary awards.
’ Discretionary’means what it says: it is not our policy to intervene or even to lean gently on authorities in this matter.
Mr. Simon Hughes
Does the Minister accept that it is no good being eligible for a mandatory award if it is then not paid?
What steps is he taking to ensure that this year local authorities such as Southwark, which a week or two ago had paid less than one fifth of its mandatory grant cheques to eligible students, pay up, so as to minimise student hardship?
And what will he do to ensure that in future years the system pays up at the beginning of the year, not a third of the way through it or later?
Mr. Howarth
We have a student support system as generous as any in the world, but under long-established arrangements local education authorities administer the award system, and students depend absolutely on those authorities playing their part.
We have substantially increased resources for students, providing more money for more of them.
It is a disgrace if students are in difficulty on account of administrative failures by local education authorities.
I have already made my views clear: officials have written to every education authority about which we have received evidence of a failure to carry out its statutory duties — and we will continue to pursue the matter vigorously.
Mr. Hannam
Is my hon. Friend aware of the problem that some mature students, particularly women with home commitments, have to take their degree courses in the form of part-time courses and that they are therefore not eligible for mandatory grant?
Will he look into that?
Mr. Howarth
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the changing pattern of higher education.
There has been a dramatic expansion of participation, and there are more mature and part-time students and more people working their way towards qualifications on the basis of credit accumulation and transfer.
We shall keep our administrative and financial systems under review in the light of these trends.
Mr. Cryer
Does the Minister accept that a local authority such as Bradford, which tries to provide a wide range of discretionary awards, is inevitably limited by the amount of money that it can give?
If central Government provided more assistance, the Minister may rest assured that such LEAs would provide more students with the opportunity of further and higher education through the application of discretionary awards.
Mr. Howarth
The hon. Gentleman would do well to go back to Bradford and ask the authority one or two questions.
The assumption on education spending that underlies the revenue support grant to local authorities this year allowed for increased spending on discretionary awards of 15 per cent.
in 1991-92.
If authorities are failing to increase their spending on discretionary awards commensurately, that is their decision.
Primary Schools (Funding)
Mr. Robert Hicks
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what steps he is taking to assure himself of the adequacy of the funding arrangements for local management of smaller primary schools; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Fallon
Local education authorities have considerable flexibility to provide additional assistance to small primary schools, through the small school protection factor, but it is for each authority to devise its own scheme and to choose its priorities within that scheme in the light of local needs.
Mr. Hicks
Does my hon. Friend agree that it would be regrettable if the objectives of local school management could not be met because of inadequate funding?
Is he aware that there are problems not only in respect of teachers' salaries, actual as opposed to average, but in respect of responsibility for the funding of the older village primary schools which predominate in rural areas?
There is a clash here between the local authority and the governors.
Mr. Fallon
Yes, that is an important point which was impressed on me when I recently visited Cornwall.
The Cornwall scheme protects small primary schools with fewer than 12 staff by paying most of the difference between average salary costs at the school and the average salary costs across the local education authority area.
Ms. Armstrong
Does the Minister realise that many small primary schools are now under enormous pressure in terms of delivering the full curriculum because they do not have the additional resources to enable them to employ the staff to teach it?
Will the Government stop pressurising authorities to cease supporting small primary schools through additional support across the county?
That pressure is making the future of many rural primary schools very unpredictable.
Mr. Fallon
There is no such pressure.
Three years after the Act was passed, the hon. Lady still does not seem to understand that local management of schools funds the pupils and not the teachers.
It is open to any local education authority to tilt its scheme towards primary schools and I have been encouraging local education authorities, where appropriate, to revise their schemes with precisely that aim.
Mr. Allason
Is my hon. Friend aware that despite the success of local management of schools, staff are still very worried that experienced older teachers who qualify for the higher salary scales will be discarded in favour of less experienced younger staff?
Mr. Fallon
That is precisely why we allow local education authorities the flexibility to devise schemes to accommodate the particular circumstances of small schools and those with very high inherited salary costs.
Mr. Matthew Taylor
The Minister is right to commend Cornwall county council for its efforts to help small primary schools.
Nevertheless, the problem of average teacher costs strikes hard in rural areas that have many small schools.
That problem will increase, thereby penalising schools with the most experienced and loyal teaching staffs.
Will he go some way towards reviewing the process?
Mr. Fallon
Yes, we shall be reviewing the teaching cost issue in 1993.
Cornwall still has much to do to meet our requirement of 85 per cent.
delegation to school budgets.
It has not yet reached that target and I urge it to re-examine its spending allocations to make sure that it does.
I was struck by the fact that Cornwall seems to be overspending on roads and underspending on its schools.
Adult Education
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he has any plans to expand the adult education service; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Eggar
The Government's proposals for transferring further education colleges to a new independent sector are designed to increase the number of people studying at those colleges and to improve opportunities for all in further education.
Mr. Greenway
Will my hon. Friend confirm the Government's total commitment to adult education and its comparative cheapness in providing excellent courses for so many people?
In particular, will he confirm that the Government see leisure courses and non-vocational courses as being equal in value to vocational courses and will they ensure funding for all?
Mr. Eggar
I can readily confirm to my hon. Friend, to whose long-held interest in education I pay tribute, that we are committed to continuing to fund adult education of all kinds — vocational, leisure, basic education and English as a second language.
The increased recent trend of more adults studying in their own community is greatly welcomed and is exactly what the White Paper seeks to underline.
Mr. Fatchett
Is it not clear from Government statements that the future of the adult education service is at great risk?
Will the Minister give a commitment that the present adult education programme will be built upon and secured, or are the Government pulling the ladder away from thousands of our fellow citizens who have prospered from adult education in the past?
Mr. Eggar
What is becoming increasingly clear is that the Labour party is trying to do nothing other than promote scare stories so as deliberately to frighten people who have traditionally relied on adult education courses.
The hon. Gentleman knows that we are determined to sustain adult education, to extend it and to ensure that it is properly based in the local community.
The hon. Gentleman should admit that.
Local Management of Schools
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what is the average amount of money being held back by local education authorities in England and Wales, per pupil, under the system of local management of schools.
Mr. Fallon
Across the 97 local education authorities operating local management of schools, the average amount of the potential schools budget retained centrally is £260 per pupil.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Is my hon. Friend aware that the tyranny that controls education in Nottinghamshire holds back £10 or more for each and every child above that national average, that it is somewhere around two thirds of the way down the merit table for putting resources where they belong — at the school — and sits on about £3 million at the centre, which is the same as holding back £5,000 for every school in the county?
Does that not prove that we need the parents charter?
Will my hon. Friend ensure that every parent in the county gets one?
Mr. Fallon
Yes, Sir.
My hon. Friend will be interested to know that Nottinghamshire holds back nearly £43 million and that its total administrative costs are 4.4 per cent.
of the schools' budget — twice as high, for example, as those in Northamptonshire.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Trimble
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Trimble
Now that the by-election in Kincardine and Deeside has focused attention on the issue of Scotland once again, and with the continuing difficulties in establishing a democratic local administration in Ulster, will the Prime Minister consider initiating consultations with other parliamentary parties with a view to reaching agreement on common structures of government throughout the United Kingdom?
The Prime Minister
I understand why the hon. Gentleman makes that point, given all the difficulties in Northern Ireland and the historical perspective there.
It is precisely to deal with those problems that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has been having so many discussions over the past year.
Mr. Ashby
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Ashby
Has my right hon. Friend seen the good producer price figures issued today?
Do not these support the contention of my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer that the economy is beginning to turn around?
The Prime Minister
I saw the producer price figures issued this morning, and they are good news.
They show a continuing collapse in inflation and that can only help the competitiveness of industry and thereafter the growth of the economy and the creation of jobs.
Mr. Kinnock
Given that the Prime Minister correctly said last night that Maastricht will be an important stage on the road to even closer European union, what does he say today to those of his right hon. Friends who say that he has already gone far enough down the road to political and monetary union and, in their words, we should stay where we are?
The Prime Minister
I have made it clear over recent months, and am happy to repeat today, that we are seeking an agreement at Maastricht that will be acceptable to the House and will enable Europe to move forward together.
That is true on economic and monetary union and on political union.
There is some way to go before I could sign the political union treaty that is before us.
There are still matters to be agreed on the monetary union treaty, but in both cases we are making progress.
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister says that he recognises, in his words, the’ potential impact on our influence and prosperity were we to take a different decision from our principal competitors’.
In saying that, is he recognising that isolation would mean the sacrifice of influence that is essential to the vital interests of the British people —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The Leader of the Opposition.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister take this advice:’ We have nothing to gain by sitting on the margins while others frame new structures without us’?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, this Conservative Government have been the leader in Europe for the past 12 years.
The single market would not have come about but for this Conservative Government.
The change in rebates would not have come about without the Conservative Government.
The Fontainebleau abatement would not have come about without the Conservative Government.
We propose to remain within the centre of the Community, framing the future of the Community in the interests of the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe.
Mr. Kinnock
So now perhaps the right hon. Gentleman will answer my first question; what does he have to say to those of his right hon. Friends who say that he has gone far enough and should stay where he is?
The Prime Minister
I answered that question some moments ago.
Mr. Day
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Day
Will my right hon. Friend accept my congratulations and those of my right hon. and hon. Friends for the massive increase in health spending that the Government recently announced, which shows beyond doubt the Government's commitment to the principles of the national health service?
Does he agree that that is in stark contrast to the contributions that have been made by Opposition Members, who have nothing to offer the NHS but smears and attacks on staff and patients, and on the care that patients receive?
Will he give the House some positive information about the success of the reforms that the Government are making, which will save the NHS for the year 2000?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his remarks.
There has been yet another substantial increase in resources for the NHS, and that will enable a continuing reduction in waiting lists and better service for all those who use the NHS.
Trusts are effective and efficient and they are the future.
Increasingly, they are proving that.
Mr. Ashdown
Will the Prime Minister take the opportunity of the vote that will take place on Thursday to think again about Scotland?
Does he realise that the real potential danger to the Union of Scotland with Britain lies not with the separatists but with his Government's refusal to listen to the voice of the people of Scotland?
So I ask him again: will he listen and will he think again?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman sounds from what he has just said as though he is a separatist.
I can tell him frankly that the Government are not separatist.
The Government remain fully committed to the Union between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom.
Mrs. Roe
Will my right hon. Friend join me in welcoming the £24 billion programme for public housing over the next three years detailed by the Department of the Environment yesterday?
Will he join me also in condemning the inefficiency of Labour councils, whose failure to collect rents and fill empty properties is a major barrier to the provision of homes for the homeless?
The Prime Minister
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
As people can see throughout the country, the reality is that Labour authorities leave houses empty even when people are in need of them.
Mr. Andrew Smith
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Smith
Will the Prime Minister join me in congratulating the Cowley workers, the trade unions and the management on the launch today of the excellent and new Cowley-designed and Cowley-built Rover 800?
Will he explain why, at the hands of his high-tax Government, the car will face total sales taxation of 27.3 per cent., when its BMW competitor faces tax in its domestic market of only 14 per cent ?
Is it not time that he started backing the British car industry in the way that the Germans support theirs?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman can certainly be certain that I congratulate Rover on its splendid new product, and I hope that it will be immensely successful.
As an owner of Rover cars for many years, I am sure that it will be.
Rover and other car manufacturers are now so successful that they are exporting to Japan and elsewhere.
Sir Gerrard Neale
Can my right hon. Friend find time during his busy day to congratulate the management and staff of Rover on the fact that over the past 12 months not one single minute of production time has been lost through industrial disputes?
Will he contrast that excellent achievement under Conservative trade union law with the undoubted industrial chaos that would result in the unlikely event of the Labour party's returning to government?
The Prime Minister
What my hon. Friend has said is certainly the case at Rover, but it has also been the case throughout industry during the past year, when there was the lowest number of strikes for more than 45 years.
I welcome that very much.
Of course, if we were to revert to legalising secondary action, flying pickets and the other actions that the Opposition propose, I do not doubt that strikes would return.
Ms. Hoey
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Ms. Hoey
What has the Prime Minister to say about the comments of the last Conservative leader of Lambeth council, who in a letter published in The Guardian on Saturday said — I want to quote it, and he said,’ The Government is failing in its treatment of the mentally ill’
Interruption
Hon. Members
—’ No quoting.’
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Lady can paraphrase, and she is doing so.
Ms. Hoey
Conservative Members do not want to hear what a former Conservative leader has to say.
He said that the Government were out of touch with homelessness and with the hopelessness of large sections of society, and that they had forfeited their right to govern.
The Prime Minister
I have not seen the remarks quoted by the hon. Lady, and neither have I seen the context in which they were put or what else was said.
However, I say to the hon. Lady and to the alleged author of that statement that, frankly, I disagree.
As a former Minister with responsibility for the disabled, I am well aware of the immense amount of work and care that has gone into the care of the disabled.
As a former Lambeth housing chairman, I do not take lectures from anyone in Lambeth about housing.
Mr. Burt
Is my right hon. Friend aware that he carries the support of the vast majority in this House and in the country in his refusal to rule out a single currency on our terms at some future time?
In displaying the consistency of involvement and leadership in the Conservative party with regard to Europe, is he not finally giving this country the role that it lost with the empire?
The Prime Minister
We must consider the long-standing interests of this country when we make decisions on the treaties, and that is what I will do.
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagement for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the rely that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Cohen
As crime in London increased yet again last year — by 13 per cent.
— has the Prime Minister read the comment by police commander David Stevens that the police are not responsible for crime any more than doctors are responsible for disease, and that crime is an indicator of economic and social malaise?
As the Conservative party has been in power for 12 years, who does the Prime Minister think is responsible for the economic and social malaise?
The Prime Minister
Crime prevention begins in the home and in the treatment of people from an early age.
On the questions of prevention and punishment of crime, the Government have taken committed and sustained action for more than a decade.
That includes providing a strong and effective police force.
We are spending 67 per cent.
more, over and above inflation, than in 1979.
No Government could have done more against crime than we have, and no future Government would be able to do more than we will.
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 12 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bowis
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the level of community charge or council tax depends partly on the efficiency of the local council and partly on the proportion of local government spending which is required to be raised by local taxation?
Does he further agree that if that proportion were to be raised to 20 per cent., overnight every household bill would rise by 50 per cent ?
Is he not astonished that that is the Labour party's proposal?
The Prime Minister
No, I am not astonished because, two years after announcing its local government plans, the Labour party still does not know how they would work.
My hon. Friend makes some pertinent points.
We will make sure that local tax bills are restrained and, where councils are extravagant, unlike the Labour party, which would let extravagance run wild to the cost of the local taxpayer with no let or hindrance, we will cap them.
Mr. Speaker
Mr. Sillars — question 9.
Hon. Members
Where is he?
Mr. Speaker
I call Mr. Dennis Turner.
Mr. Turner
Has the Prime Minister one shred of sympathy for Britain's beer drinkers?
Prices have increased way beyond the rate of inflation and the Government's legislation to check monopolies is a complete fiasco.
When will the Government do something to protect the British beer drinker?
The Prime Minister
With regard to having sympathy for them, I would say to the hon. Gentleman that I am one of them.
House of Commons
Wednesday 13 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
SCOTLAND
Defence-related Employment
Mr. Home Robertson
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement on the level of defence-related employment in Scotland.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Allan Stewart)
Direct employment in Scotland associated with Ministry of Defence expenditure on equipment stood at around 14,000 in 1989-90.
This was the equivalent of 9.5 per cent.
of such employment in the United Kingdom, a proportion which has been constant since 1987-1988.
In addition, at 1 July 1990, a total of 19,300 service personnel and 12,300 Ministry of Defence civilian employees were deployed in Scotland.
Mr. Home Robertson
How does the Minister intend to protect employment and help diversification at GEC-Ferranti and Yarrow?
Will he focus on the Ministry of Defence decision to do away with 2,000 infantry soldiers' jobs in Scotland?
In particular, will he reflect on assurances given by the Secretaries of State for Scotland and for Transport that the amalgamations of the King's Own Scottish Borderers, the Royal Scots, the Gordon Highlanders and the Queen's Own Highlanders will be further reviewed?
Now that both the Secretary of State for Defence and the Prime Minister have comprehensively rubbished those assurances, will the Secretary of State for Scotland have to eat humble pie again or will he stand up for Scotland and make this a resignation issue?
Mr. Stewart
My right hon. Friends the Secretaries of State for Scotland and for Defence have spoken in complete unison on this.
The position is perfectly clear.
There is no intention to review the proposals that have been announced, but there are at least two years before the first amalgamations and if military circumstances change, there is time for a reassessment of present plans.
Interruption
On the hon. Gentleman's other point, it is worth saying that with 9 per cent.
of the United Kingdom population, Scotland will retain 15.8 per cent.
of the infantry, 13.6 per cent.
of the armoured forces and 18.8 per cent.
of the artillery.
On the readjustment of industry, at my right hon. Friend's request Scottish Enterprise has established a defence industries initiative to help businesses and local enterprise companies exploit existing defence markets and develop diversification strategies.
I hope that that move will be welcomed by the entire House.
Mr. Bill Walker
My hon. Friend will be aware of the concern of my constituents who work at the Royal Navy workshop at Almondbank because of the present review of helicopter servicing.
Will my hon. Friend assure my constituents and the House that the Conservative party and Ministers in Scotland are fighting to ensure that that workshop, which has a record of excellence and can carry out plating work which saves the Government millions of pounds on buying replacement parts, will continue because of its record and not for sentimental reasons?
Mr. Stewart
I am aware of my hon. Friend's expertise on this subject and his concern about it.
My hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence Procurement is present on the Front Bench and will have noted what my hon. Friend has said.
Almondbank is one of a number of helicopter facilities.
A Cabinet Office efficiency scrutiny team is examining the structure of those facilities and will report early in the new year.
I can assure my hon. Friend that I shall take a close interest in this matter.
I shall also ensure that the merits and advantages of Almondbank, to which my hon. Friend rightly referred are taken fully into account.
Mr. Dewar
I thank the Minister for clarifying the Scottish Office position.
I now understand that there will be no review of the future of the Scottish regiments unless there is a dramatic change in circumstances or a change in the strategic requirements of the country.
How does he reconcile that with the rather desperate hints given by the Secretary of State in recent weeks as he vainly tried to rally his troops in the recent by-election?
Is it not the case that after all the hype and hopes that were insinuated in the debate, the Scottish Office is toeing the Ministry of Defence line?
Does the Minister accept that there is an atmosphere of crisis within the defence contracting industry in Scotland?
Does he accept the make-or-break significance of the next round of type 23 frigate orders for Yarrow and the central importance of GEC-Ferranti?
Will we have regular reports of what the diversification unit set up by Scottish Enterprise is doing, its remit and the kind of results it is recommending?
Mr. Stewart
First, as I understand Labour party policy, which is a matter of some difficulty, the hon. Gentleman's party would cut defence expenditure by about £5 billion per year.
On the hon. Gentleman's first question, I am not responsible for what the press say about particular matters.
I repeat our position, which has been made absolutely clear by my right hon. Friends.
There is no intention to review the announcement on the Scottish regiments, but there is at least two years until the first amalgamations and the hon. Gentleman will be aware that the Scottish ones will take place at the end of the process.
If military circumstances change, there is time for a reassessment of the present plans.
I fully appreciate the importance of GEC-Ferranti as an employer in Edinburgh and Lothian.
Yarrow is also a major employer, not only in the constituency of the hon. Gentleman but throughout the west of Scotland.
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that I have discussed the frigate orders with the shop stewards.
I believe that a meeting has been arranged between the hon. Gentleman and the Secretary of State.
Mr. Speaker
I realise the importance of such matters in Scotland, but may I ask for crisper questions?
Hon. Members
And answers.
Mr. Speaker
And answers.
Clydeside Against Pollution
Mrs. Irene Adams
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he plans to meet a delegation of members of the campaign for Clydeside against pollution.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland (Lord James Douglas-Hamilton)
Neither my right hon. Friend nor I have any plan to meet a delegation of members of the campaign for Clydeside against pollution.
Mrs. Adams
The Minister may recall that it is almost a year since I first raised in the House the matter of the proposed incinerator in Renfrew.
Since then the community of Renfrew — and, in fact, the entire Clyde valley community — have had the prospect of a toxic waste incinerator hanging over their heads like a black cloud.
Will the Minister now come to my constituency and meet representatives of this responsible campaign group to discuss the prospect of a full public inquiry into the matter?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton: The Secretary of State has a quasi-judicial role, as planning matters may be involved and there could be a planning appeal to the Secretary of State.
Mr. Dewar
They should be involved.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
The hon. Gentleman says that they should be involved.
I am saying that there could be an appeal to the Secretary of State and that therefore it is not appropriate to have a meeting.
However, as I am conscious of the strong feeling that the hon. Lady has registered on behalf of her constituents, I assure her that before a plant can be registered for an incinerator it must comply with the emissions standards enforced by Her Majesty's industrial pollution inspectorate.
Those standards must be in accordance with the Health and Safety at Work, etc.
Act 1974 and the Alkali, etc.
Works Regulation Act 1906.
Over and above that, the Environmental Protection Act 1990 brings more stringent procedures into force in 1992 and will apply to the subject.
The hon. Lady also asked about a public inquiry.
At this stage I can only say that, as the statutory procedures are being correctly followed in all respects, a public inquiry would not be appropriate.
Fish Conservation
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland when he next expects to meet representatives of the Scottish fishing industry to discuss the conservation of fishing stocks.
The Minister of State, Scottish Office (Mr. Michael Forsyth)
My noble Friend the Scottish Fisheries Minister will meet the Scottish Fishermen's Federation on 18 November.
Mrs. Ewing
At the meeting on 18 November, will there be a clear discussion about the eight-day tie-up regulations which, one year on, are now seen as the most hated and despised aspect of the conservation policy, bringing financial hardship, fear and life-threatening situations to our coastal communities?
If the Government are not prepared to abolish that most ineffective policy, will they at least consider flexibility in the application of the rules, taking particular account of men who are kept on shore because of bad weather or boat maintenance?
Mr. Forsyth
There will be a discussion at the December Fisheries Council about the best means of reducing fishing effort in 1992.
The eight-day tie-up has been an agreed method within the Community during the current year.
If the hon. Lady has any proposals, I am sure that my noble Friend would be interested to hear them.
We are not absolutely committed to the eight-day tie-up rule and would be prepared to discuss other means of reducing fishing effort, but they would have to be agreed with our European Community partners.
Sir Hector Monro
I am glad that we are concentrating on conservation.
Will my hon. Friend consider, in the light of our efforts on set-aside in agriculture, that the principle of decommissioning is very similar?
I thank my hon. Friend for the Government's efforts to reduce the pressure on drift netting in the North sea, which will have a good impact on salmon fishing in Scotland.
That will help our tourist industry and many other rural economies in Scotland.
Mr. Forsyth
I am grateful to my hon. Friend and agree that the measures taken in respect of drift netting will boost salmon interests in Scotland.
We remain open to suggestions on decommissioning.
It need not necessarily reduce fishing effort, but it is about making people in the fishing industry unemployed.
Our objectives are to secure the long-term interests of the fishing industry by ensuring effective measures to secure stocks.
Mr. Macdonald
A radical conservation measure which would enjoy the full support of the fishermen affected would be a weekend ban on prawn fisheries on the west coast.
It would not cost the Government money, would have the support of fishermen and would be extremely effective in terms of conservation.
Mr. Forsyth
I shall ensure that my noble Friend the Scottish Fisheries Minister is aware of the hon. Gentleman's suggestion.
I am sure that he will consider the hon. Gentleman's representations, which are always carefully put and taken seriously.
Ayrshire South Hospital
Mr. McKelvey
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what was the total number of responses to the consultation process regarding the application for trust status for Ayrshire South hospital; and how many were for or against.
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
Eight hundred and five written responses, including 579 pre-printed slips from local newspapers, were received.
A petition was also submitted.
Opinions ranged from outright support to outright opposition, with many respondents expressing concern or seeking information about particular aspects of the application.
Mr. McKelvey
That answer is a disgrace.
I asked how many responses had been received because we knew, from the responses that we had received, that the vast majority of the people of Ayrshire are totally opposed to the opting out of Ayrshire South hospital.
That opinion is absolutely in line with that expressed by the people of Kincardine and Deeside who thoroughly rejected opting out at the ballot box.
If the Secretary of State is able to give an honest answer at the Dispatch Box, will he tell us that if he genuinely surveys the objections and sees that the vast majority of the people of Ayrshire object to opting out, he will give democratic and fair-minded consideration to the consultative process and, at best, abandon the idea of opting out or at least postpone it for the foreseeable future?
Mr. Lang
I do not doubt that the majority of opinion as expressed in the submissions was opposed to the opting out process, although it is impossible to categorise opinions in the way that the hon. Gentleman would wish.
Much though I understand the worries expressed by residents of the district to be served by the hospital, one must also take account of the basis of their concern, and the misinformation which has caused their alarm.
I must take account of the quality of representations as well as the sheer quantity.
The application is measured against four clearly published criteria which include patient care, the competence of the management, the involvement of professional and clinical staff and the financial viability of the application.
That is the basis on which I shall consider the application, and I will do so carefully.
Mr. Galbraith
Will the Secretary of State confirm that he has already decided to refuse the trust application from the Royal Scottish National hospital at Larbert and to suspend the applications from Foresterhill and Ayrshire South hospitals, designating them as shadow trusts, whatever that means?
When will the Secretary of State make a decision and give us an answer on that most important issue?
Rather than procrastinating with shadow trusts, why does he not do what the incoming Labour Government will do and abandon the ill-conceived, ill-considered, useless and unwanted ideas about trust hospitals?
Mr. Lang
I have not reached a conclusion on any of the applications before me.
I am giving them the most careful and thorough consideration, and I shall reach a decision and announce it as soon as I can.
I certainly shall not follow the example of the last Labour Government's handling of the health service.
We have achieved a dramatic improvement as a result of the extra funding that we have put into the health service in the past 12 years.
Mr. Foulkes
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
No, I did not call the hon. Member for Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley (Mr. Foulkes) and I know that the hospital is in his constituency, but perhaps he will be patient.
Tourism
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what is his estimate of the value of grants under section 4 of the Development of Tourism Act 1969 in the current year; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Allan Stewart
The Scottish tourist board estimates that in 1991-92 payments under the section 4 scheme of capital assistance will total £3.5 million.
I am satisfied, and this has been confirmed by a recent independent review, that that support is effective in generating investment and jobs.
Mr. Coombs
My hon. Friend's answer will be widely welcomed by the tourist industry not just in Scotland, but throughout the United Kingdom, but will he say a little more about the results of the independent review to which he referred?
Can he assure me that, if he has not already done so, he will send a copy of that report to our right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Employment?
Mr. Stewart
Yes, I can confirm that that review showed that there was a clear need for section 4 support in Scotland.
During the period 1983-84 to 1989-90, the scheme assisted 902 projects, disbursed £31.6 million of board funds at constant 1990 prices, and produced total tourism investment of £197.2 million at 1990 prices.
I know of my hon. Friend's interest in the matter, following the report of the Select Committee on Employment, and I can give an assurance that if the consultants' report to which I referred has not yet reached the Department of Employment, it will do so as soon as possible.
Mr. McAllion
Has the Minister read the reports in today's press of record numbers of passengers passing through Scottish airports?
Will he confirm that most of them are tourists, many of whom are travelling north for a last glimpse of a rare species on the point of extinction in Scotland — Scottish Tory Members?
Will he further confirm that he and his right hon. and hon. Friends in the Scottish Office have been recommended for a Scottish tourism award for their determination to self-destruct in Scotland?
Mr. Stewart
I have been described as many things, but that is the first time I have been described as a tourist attraction.
The hon. Gentleman is absolutely right to refer to the increased numbers of passengers going through Scottish airports — especially Glasgow airport, following the Government's excellent decision to allow transatlantic flights from that airport.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn
Will my hon. and attractive Friend congratulate Perth and Kinross district council on the dynamic quality of its work in attracting vast benefits to Scotland and Scottish industry by means of its policy of twinning with Pskov in Russia and Haikou on Hainan island in China, this year bringing to Perth the most valuable exhibition of icons in the world?
I should tell Opposition Members who are giggling, and who will also benefit from this, that the council is also twinning with Cognac.
Interruption
Mr. Stewart
I am sure that my hon. and learned Friend is right to praise Perth and Kinross district council.
Perth has many colourful attractions for tourists, it enjoys a high quality of life and I am sure that it will continue successfully to attract national and international tourists.
Patients Charter
Mrs. Ray Michie
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what is the total cost of the launch of the patients charter in Scotland.
Mr. Lang
The cost of the production and launch of the patients charter to date is £29,316.
We expect to stimulate significant improvements in NHS performance, particularly on waiting times, as a result.
Mrs. Michie
Does the Secretary of State agree that the staff of the national health service are dedicated and caring and have achieved many of the aims spelt out in that glossy document?
Does he agree that what they need is support and proper resources so that they can carry out their work, not what has been happening over the past 12 years — continual restructuring and reforms which do the service no good and break up the comprehensive national health service that we all know?
Mr. Lang
I entirely agree with the hon. Lady's complimentary remarks about the quality of the staff in the health service.
That is why I particularly welcome the enthusiastic way in which they have embraced the patients charter and the accompanying document on internal management in the health service,’ Framework for Action’.
As for resources, the hon. Lady will know that we spent about £3 billion on the health service in Scotland last year, which is more than £600 per head for every man, woman and child in the country and represents an increase of about 38 per cent.
over and above the cost of living in the past 12 years.
Resources are there in plenty; what we are now achieving is an improved application of those resources.
That is what the patients charter is about, and that is why it is so warmly welcomed.
Mr. Favell
To an Englishman like me, it is a source of astonishment that Scots should intransigently oppose any kind of change in the health service.
No one has done more to advance the frontiers of medicine than the Scots, yet the Opposition oppose any sort of change.
Do not the Scots realise that with better techniques, new medical discoveries and more efficacious drugs many more people would be treated if only the health service were to change?
Mr. Lang
There is a great deal in what my hon. Friend says, and the pride which I and my fellow Scots have in the health service in Scotland is a reflection of the achievements of the past 12 years and the resources that we have put into it.
As a result, 900,000 more patients were treated last year than in 1979, and that has resulted in in-patient waiting lists being 21 per cent.
lower than in 1979.
Mr. Wilson
In total, how much does the Scottish Office intend to spend this year on thinly disguised party political propaganda, including vacuous glossy charters?
Will he confirm that last year the Scottish Office spent £2.6 million on advertising alone, which is 10 times the figure for 1979?
Why should the Tory party not pay for its own advertising out of party political funds rather than constantly using taxpayers' money to try to get its message across?
The figure of £2.6 million is equal to almost £300,000 per Tory MP in Scotland.
Is the taxpayer getting value for money?
Mr. Lang
There is no question of the Government using public funds for party political purposes, and I am astonished that the hon. Gentleman should suggest that.
Of course, the Scottish Office runs a number of public information campaigns and I am quite sure that the hon. Gentleman would want us to do that to encourage the improvement of health in various ways.
The patients charter is aimed at improving the quality of the delivery of health care in Scotland and at making patients aware of their rights, thereby helping to improve even more the delivery of the health service.
Heart Specialists
Mr. Michael J. Martin
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what plans he has to increase the number of heart specialists working in national health service hospitals in Scotland.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
We have increased funding for the cardiac services this year by a quarter bringing the total to £20 million.
Mr. Martin
Physicians are concerned at the fact that heart patients sometimes have to wait between three months and a year for surgery.
Some patients do not even get the chance of surgery because they have waited too long.
There is great concern that in a hospital such as Stobhill a patient with heart warning signs can receive angiography examinations within a week, but in places such as Ayrshire and Argyllshire physicians have to keep patients waiting longer on medication.
Surely that is unfair.
If we had more specialists and more facilities, heart patients could be dealt with in a proper manner.
Mr. Forsyth
Half the patients who require heart surgery are dealt with immediately, but the hon. Gentleman is right to say that some patients have to wait.
Whether a patient needs to be admitted immediately is a clinical decision.
The number of patients being treated has risen enormously, and 3,000 heart patients are now receiving surgery.
We have expanded the programme in terms of the number of centres where treatment is provided, and at the beginning of next year we shall carry out the first heart transplant operations in Scotland.
Therefore, there has been a major expansion.
We are also expanding capacity, especially through Greater Glasgow health board which is using the private sector so that an extra 120 patients may be treated.
I am acutely aware of the importance of what the hon. Gentleman says and I hope that it may be possible to make further progress in expanding the programme.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman recognises that there has been a major expansion.
Mr. McMaster
Is the Minister aware that over the past year some Scottish health boards have issued letters to general practitioners instructing them to refer only urgent cases for essential treatments such as physiotherapy and to hold the rest on file?
Does that mean that there is now a waiting list to go on to the waiting list?
Mr. Forsyth
I am not aware of that, but if the hon. Gentleman would like to provide me with details I shall certainly look into the matter.
The hon. Gentleman has clearly studied this issue and will know that three quarters of all patients in Scotland are dealt with within four weeks and that half are dealt with immediately.
The record of the health service is improving dramatically and waiting lists are now very much shorter than they were when the Government first took office.
Every Labour Government has left office with longer waiting lists.
RENAVAL Programme
Dr. Godman
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what recent discussions he has held with representatives of district councils and European Commission officials concerning the implementation of the RENAVAL programme; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Allan Stewart
There have been a number of discussions about the implementation of the RENAVAL programme between Scottish Office officials, representatives of the local partnerships, which include district councils, and officials of the European Commission.
Dr. Godman
Why has there been such a lamentable delay in the implementation of the RENAVAL programme?
Is it not the case that those responsible for the disgraceful delay are to be found in St.
Andrew's house?
Many projects and organisations, such as the Clyde ports authority, Inverclyde district council and community groups, are seeking assistance in developing economic and community projects.
The Auch mountain glen project, which would restore a local beauty spot, has remarkable local support, but it is being thwarted by the obduracy of the Minister and his officials.
They should play the game by my constituency.
Mr. Stewart
I reject the hon. Gentleman's criticism, and I can reassure him on the present position.
The revised projects for the RENAVAL programme for Fife and Strathclyde were recently agreed.
The European Commission has said that it hopes that the projects will receive formal approval by the end of the year.
I will send the hon. Gentleman a copy of the Strathclyde programme, which will be worth some £20 million ecu, which is £15 million.
Ardrossan-Saltcoats-Stevenston Bypass
Mr. Lambie
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland when he is going to announce the start of the Ardrossan-Saltcoats-Stevenston bypass; and if he will make a statement.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
The preparation of the Ardrossan-Saltcoats-Stevenston bypass scheme is continuing.
A public local inquiry may be required to consider the remaining objections to the scheme.
Negotiations are however continuing with the affected parties.
Once the scheme is fully prepared it will be considered for a construction start in the light of the competing priorities and level of available resources.
Mr. Lambie
I suppose that I should be happy with that response.
I have waited 20 years for a decision on the Ardrossan-Saltcoats-Stevenston bypass, and I am sure that the Minister will give me a favourable result before I retire at the next election.
Will the Minister confirm that he has received the results of the review of the trunk road system in Scotland and that the bypass, once it has been approved, will be given first priority in this list of trunk roads?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
I can tell the hon. Gentleman about the review, which was commissioned in 1989.
The results of the study are being analysed and will assist in the development of our policy for the management and improvement of all Scotland's trunk road network.
Once the results of the review have been analysed, an executive summary will be produced, setting out the key strategic results.
This will be available on request and is expected to be completed in the next few months.
As to negotiations with the statutory objector, these are being pursued and we shall do our best to reach a satisfactory conclusion on the hon. Gentleman's constituency project.
Youth Unemployment
Mr. Norman Hogg
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement about the level of youth unemployment in Scotland.
Mr. Allan Stewart
In July 1991, the latest date for which information is available, there were 73,887 people aged under 25 years unemployed in Scotland.
This represents 10 per cent.
of the United Kingdom total compared with 14 per cent.
in July 1989.
Mr. Hogg
Is the Minister aware that I have been asking this question, mostly of him, for the past 13 years and that that reply reflects how serious is youth unemployment in Scotland?
Much of the real figure is concealed by half-baked schemes concocted by his Department, which do not reveal the real position.
Do we not need to have real training for real jobs on the same basis as our major European competitors, notably the Germans?
If we do not have that, we shall not be in a competitive position in the future.
Mr. Stewart
The hon. Gentleman will no doubt welcome the fact that unemployment in his constituency fell last month, as it did throughout Scotland.
The hon. Gentleman should wait to see the figures.
As to the general point, we give a guarantee of a training place for all 16 or 17-year-olds who are not in full-time employment or education.
As far as I know, that guarantee is given by no other European country.
The current 300,000 youth training places in the United Kingdom compare with the lamentable 7,000 or so under the last Labour Government.
Interruption
Mr. Ian Bruce
Opposition Members are always doughty fighters when claiming that they wish to preserve youth employment.
Has my hon. Friend reflected on the likely effect of Labour's policy to establish a minimum wage of £3.20 per hour for every 16-year-old — and, indeed, on the effect on recruitment to the armed forces if defence spending were reduced by 50 per cent?
That seems to be what Opposition parties want.
Mr. Stewart
I believe that, in that last instance, my hon. Friend is referring to the policy of the Liberal Democrats.
He is, however, entirely right about the effect that a national minimum wage would have on jobs, especially jobs for young people.
According to a number of independent commentators, up to 1.2 million jobs could be lost.
Mr. Worthington
Opposition Members are tired of the current complacency about youth unemployment.
A guarantee is of value only if it is honoured.
In Tayside, 533 young people are now unemployed; in Central region, 500 are unemployed.
These are the 16 to 18-year-olds to whom the Government have given a guarantee.
The shortage of jobs is especially bad in traditional craft apprenticeships, in which many young people wish to work.
Lothian now has 3,000 unemployed youngsters; that is 22 per cent.
up on last year's figure.
Strathclyde has a shortage of more than 3,000 opportunities.
All that is concealed beneath a cloak of commercial confidentiality.
The Minister is walking away from the problem, and he must stop doing so.
Let us have a full independent review of the extent of youth unemployment in Scotland, and end the Government's complacency.
Hon. Members
Answer.
Mr. Stewart
I am going to answer.
Today I checked the position in every local enterprise company.
The hon. Gentleman mentioned Central region.
It is clear that Forth Valley Enterprise is well on schedule towards ensuring that its end-of-year target is achieved.
The hon. Gentleman also referred to Lothian; there are sufficient places on Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Ltd. to meet demand.
Scottish Enterprise Tayside currently has 2,800 young people in training, and nearly 1,500 have entered the scheme since 1 April.
The guarantees will be met by local enterprise companies throughout Scotland.
What the hon. Gentleman says about me does not concern me; but, if he is calling the local enterprise companies liars, I suggest that he repeat that outside the House.
NHS Trusts
Mr. Malcolm Bruce
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement on the future of NHS trusts.
15
Mr. McAvoy
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what representations he has had supporting the principle of hospitals becoming trusts outside the national health service; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Lang
NHS trusts form an important part of the national health service, providing services to patients free at the point of delivery.
I am at present considering applications for trust status from three Scottish hospitals.
Mr. Bruce
Does the Secretary of State accept that, as my hon. Friend the Member for Kincardine and Deeside (Mr. Stephen)— whom I am pleased to welcome to the House — will confirm, 100 per cent.
of those who voted in the Kincardine and Deeside by-election voted against the opt-out of Foresterhill?
Does the right hon. Gentleman accept that it would be contrary to the interests of patient care to force through a proposal that is opposed by consultants, nursing staff, general practitioners, patients and the general public?
Will he now listen to the people of Scotland, abandon the current policy and pursue policies that have the support of the people?
Mr. Lang
On behalf of my hon. Friends, I am happy to welcome the hon. Member for Kincardine and Deeside (Mr. Stephen) to the House, and to congratulate him on his success in the by-election.
We look forward to his participation in our affairs, and wish him a fulfilling time during his time in the House — however long or short that may be.
I have already spelt out in great detail the criteria that I shall apply when considering Foresterhill's application for trust status.
It is a complex and detailed process, which deserves such treatment.
Of course I take account of feeling in the area; but, as I said earlier, I also take account of the way in which feeling has been influenced by the misleading statements that have been put about over recent months.
I have no doubt that trust status for hospitals can be an enormous success, as it has proved to be south of the border.
It can create the opportunity for local management to bring the delivery of health care closer to the people whom it serves, and give it freedom to run its own affairs.
I shall take careful account of all aspects of the application before reaching a decision.
Mr. McAvoy
I am surprised at the remarks of the hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce).
In my constituency the Rutherglen Liberal Democrats supported the privatisation of care for the elderly.
When will the dogmatic Secretary of State for Scotland realise that the people of Scotland see NHS trusts as the thin edge of the wedge for privatisation of the health service, and that they do not want them?
Mr. Lang
Far from being dogmatic, our objective is to achieve the best possible delivery of health care through a health service that continues to be free at the point of delivery to patients.
There is mounting evidence from south of the border that trust status has helped the hospitals that have achieved it to improve their delivery of health care and to expand the services that they can offer.
If that is the case I imagine that more Scots will wish to take advantage of trust status.
I read with interest in today's edition of The Courier and Advertiser, Dundee that the Dundee royal infirmary and Kings Cross hospital are beginning to consider the possibility of applying.
Mr. John Marshall
Will my right hon. Friend confirm to those who indulge in unnecessary and unwarranted smear campaigns that NHS trust hospitals are treating 10 per cent.
more patients than were being treated a year ago?
Will not people in Scotland quickly benefit from having several NHS trust hospitals?
Mr. Lang
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his view of the position south of the border.
I was interested to see that the mid-Cheshire hospitals are increasing their eye services by up to 50 per cent., that for Manchester central hospitals a day-care centre for cataract surgery has opened, and that in south Devon 67 new posts are to be created.
Plainly, many of the hospitals south of the border that have applied for trust status are making considerable advances in the delivery of patient care.
Mr. Dewar
The right hon. Gentleman has said that in reaching his decision he would have to take account of the quality of the representations.
Does he think that such an argument will help him, given that the objections come from the doctors, nurses and auxiliaries, who are themselves the health of the hospital, and who will be responsible for its continuing health?
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware of the theory that he would be happy to drop the whole unhappy business, but that his Minister responsible for health takes a different view?
Is it right that the future of the hospitals should depend on an undignified ideological tug-of-war in the Scottish Office bunker?
When will the right hon. Gentleman summon up the courage to make a decision on the applications?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman overlooks the fact that the applications originate from the people who run the hospitals, because of the advantages that are to be had, through local management, for local people.
That must be borne in mind.
There is nothing doctrinaire about our approach to the matter.
We are concerned to continue to build on our magnificent record in improving the delivery of health care.
As I have said, I shall consider each application on its merits and according to the criteria.
I shall make an announcement as soon as I reach a decision.
Tower Blocks
Mr. Sillars
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what proposals he has for assisting councils to increase security in high tower block housing.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
My right hon. Friend takes the question of security in high-rise housing very seriously.
Expenditure needs, including measures to improve security in high-rise tower blocks, are taken fully into account in the distribution of housing revenue account capital allocations and housing support grant.
Mr. Sillars
Is the Minister aware that most people who live in that type of accommodation do not believe that the Government take the problem seriously enough, and that we now urgently require either a direct grant or an allowance for capital borrowing to provide concierge-type services in high tower blocks in Glasgow and other parts of Scotland?
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that old people in places such as Ibroxholm Oval are now sitting in their houses paralysed with fear, because they are the targets of the criminal element in our communities?
They are the most vulnerable people.
They are afraid to stay in in case their doors are kicked in, but they are also afraid to go out in case their homes are done in while they are out.
Will the Minister pay more urgent attention to the problem?
It now requires Government action.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
I am well aware that two of the three tower blocks in Ibrox in the hon. Gentleman's constituency — Iona court and Broomloan court — have concierge services that are working extremely well.
The further expansion of that excellent scheme has a great deal to recommend it, but the hon. Gentleman must make representations to Glasgow district council, which has been allocated more than £101 million this year in respect of housing revenue account for capital investment.
I should also make it clear that, in recent days, we have allocated further sums of more than £9 million for Scotland, in addition to the £4 million allocated for specific projects for homelessness, which we think will also assist.
I recommend that the hon. Gentleman take the matter up with his council.
Mr. Maxton
Does the Minister agree, therefore, that the concierge scheme introduced by Glasgow district council, involving controlled entry and video surveillance, is proving successful in the 80 blocks in which it has so far been operated?
Is not it a disgrace, however, that the concierge service has been developed entirely out of Glasgow district council resources and that no money for it has come from the Scottish Office?
Is not it also true that, next year, its further development will be restricted to three more blocks, whereas there are 170 tower blocks in Glasgow in which it has not yet been developed?
Is not it now time that the Minister acted to solve the problems of high-rise blocks?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
We shall, of course, take these matters into account before making the provisional allocations in December.The hon. Gentleman is absolutely right to say that the schemes have been highly successful, but I take issue with him on his assertion that the matter should be taken out of the hands of the district council and placed in the hands of the Scottish Office.
It is much better that the district council should have the responsibility for choosing its own priorities.
I repeat that I shall bear in mind the hon. Gentleman's remarks before we make our allocations.
Nurses
Mr. Ron Brown
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland how many student nurses qualified in Scotland last year; and how many secured permanent employment within the national health service.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
In the year ending March 1991, 2,917 students in Scotland qualified for registration as first level nurses.
Approximately 4,500 qualified nurses have secured employment in the national health service in Scotland during that period.
Mr. Brown
Is not it clear that many qualified nurses are not getting jobs in the health service?
That is disgraceful because we know that, if resources were made available to extend the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh and provide the promised new hospital in Leith, many more nurses and other medics could be employed to provide the service that they are trained to provide.
If the Government claim that the health service is safe in their hands, will they do something about it and provide the resources, so that hospitals — particularly in the Edinburgh area — are given the back-up that they deserve?
Mr. Forsyth
I suspect that the hon. Gentleman had framed his supplementary before hearing my answer to his question, in which I made it clear that the number of nurses who were employed during that period was far greater than the number who qualified.
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that, under this Government, the number of nurses employed in Scotland has increased by one third.
That is a magnificent record.
Moreover, their pay has increased by 40 per cent., whereas it went down by 25 per cent .
when the Labour Government were in office.
National Health Service Trusts
Mr. Foulkes
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what meetings he has had with hon. Members on each of the proposals for setting up national health service trusts.
Mr. Lang
There have been no formal meetings with hon. Members on proposals for setting up national health service trusts.
Mr. Foulkes
Why is the Secretary of State afraid to meet Ayrshire Labour MPs?
Is it because we will point out that the consultants, general practitioners, radiographers, physiotherapists, occupational therapists, the Ayrshire local health council, all four district councils and the four Members of Parliament who bothered to make a submission were against the proposal to opt out — that all those 200 submissions were against it?
It is an insult to all the people who made the submissions for the Secretary of State to suggest that all those professionals are accepting misleading statements and that the quality of their submissions is not as good as those of the handful of people in favour.
Will the right hon. Gentleman now throw off the veto of his Minister of State and have the courage to meet us to argue and discuss the case?
Mr. Lang
Neither I nor my colleagues are afraid of the hon. Member for Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley (Mr. Foulkes) or his hon. Friends who represent Ayrshire, however much they may frighten each other.
There is a statutory procedure laid down for the consultation process.
I am in no doubt about the hon. Gentleman's views as he has tabled parliamentary questions on the matter, he took part in the debate on the regulations on 1 May, he spoke in the Scottish Grand Committee on 9 July and he submitted his views in the consultation process.
It would be inequitable to those who take a contrary view to that of the hon. Gentleman if I were to see him exceptionally, in addition to all the other representations that I have received from him, now that the consultation period is over and I am reaching a conclusion on the matter.
Hypothermia
Mr. Dunnachie
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what assessment he has made of the resource implications for the health service in Scotland of the incidence of hypothermia in the winter months.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
The NHS is very conscious of the potential for an increased incidence of hypothermia in the winter months and health board plans take account of the need to provide a higher level of services in winter.
Mr. Dunnachie
I thank the Minister for his reply, but is it not about time that something was done to help senior citizens and the long-term sick?
Every year we read about people who have died as a result of hypothermia or from a disease caused by hypothermia, but nothing is done.
Every year people are asked to write in and beg for money.
Is it not time that the Government got off their behinds and made it compulsory for a payment to be made every year to every senior citizen in this land?
Mr. Forsyth
The Labour party cannot hold a candle to the Government's record in terms of helping elderly people with the costs of heating.
The hon. Gentleman would do well to familiarise himself with the keep warm this winter campaign run by the Scottish Office which has received every support from local authorities the length and breadth of Scotland.
NHS Trusts
Mr. Darling
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will list the hospitals in respect of which he has received an expression of interest in opting out or establishing a national health service trust.
Mr. Forsyth
Three hospital units have applied for NHS trust status — South Ayrshire, the Royal Scottish national hospital and the Foresterhill hospitals group.
In addition, formal expressions of interest have been received from the Victoria infirmary, Glasgow, the West Grampian hospitals unit, the Princess Margaret Rose hospital in Edinburgh, and Lothian college of nursing and midwifery.
Mr. Darling
Can the Minister justify the payment of more than £234,000 of public money to accountants, bureaucrats and consultants to prepare opting-out submissions when that money can be better used to reduce waiting lists or to make a donation to the appeal for the Royal hospital for sick children in Edinburgh instead of being used to propagate Tory party propaganda which is not wanted by the people of Scotland and which would damage the health service in Scotland?
What possible justification can the Minister have for that other than his trying to pursue a policy which is completely discredited north and south of the border?
Mr. Forsyth
The moneys provided for the preparation of NHS trust proposals are in addition to the moneys provided for patient care.
If the hon. Gentleman were interested in patient care, instead of opposing NHS trust proposals in principle, he would look at the merits of the proposals and decide whether they should go ahead on the basis of the interests of patient care — and that is precisely what my right hon. Friend will do.
If the hon. Gentleman cares to consider examples from south of the border, he will see that trusts there are cutting waiting lists, employing more doctors, treating more patients and providing a wider range of services at times convenient to patients.
It is sheer dogma by the Labour party to reject them out of hand without even considering individual applications.
Mr. Gerald Howarth
May I endorse most vigorously what my hon. Friend has just said about the benefits of NHS trusts operating within the health service.
There are two trusts in my constituency that offer improved patient care and have taken on more staff.
Is it not time that Scotland was able to enjoy the benefits of improved patient care that NHS trusts offer patients in England and Wales?
Mr. Forsyth
My hon. Friend is right.
I hope everyone in Scotland understands the position of all the Opposition parties.
Even if an NHS trust can be demonstrated to be in the interests of patients to reduce waiting lists and provide a better quality of service, they would reject it because they put politics before patients.
Scottish Government
Mr. Galloway
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what recent representations he has received on the subject of Scottish government; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Allan Stewart
A range of representations has been received on the subject of Scottish government.
Mr. Galloway
Now that the Government's risible rump of 10
Scottish Members of Parliament has been reduced to the nefarious nine, and now that the Secretary of State for Scotland and virtually every one of that nefarious nine trembles on the edge of the abyss of a total political wipeout in Scotland, will the Government finally see the sense of coming to the negotiating table and talking about Scottish government?
If not, how few Tory Members do there need to be in Scotland before it is accepted that the status quo is no longer tenable?
Mr. Stewart
This Government will fight the next general election as a Conservative and Unionist Government.
On the by-elections, Langbaurgh strongly suggests that the Labour party will not have the chance to implement its half-baked proposals for a Scottish Assembly, as proposed by the Scottish Constitutional Convention — it would increase taxes, be a constitutional impossibility and lead to constant feuding between Westminster and Edinburgh.
That is no answer to Scotland's problems or opportunities.
Of course, there is a constitutional choice for the people of Scotland — it is between the Union and independence.
House of Commons
Thursday 14 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NORTHERN IRELAND
Constitutional Reform
Dr. Godman
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what proposals concerning constitutional reform he plans to discuss with representatives of the Irish Government and the political parties of Northern Ireland; and if he will make a statement.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Peter Brooke)
It remains our objective to transfer substantial power and responsibility to locally elected politicians on a widely acceptable basis within a framework of stable relationships.
To this end, the talks held earlier this year were constructive and valuable and, I believe, laid a useful foundation for further developments.
I am currently in contact with the four main constitutional parties and with the Irish Government to establish whether a basis for fresh political talks can be found.
Dr. Godman
Will you allow me, Mr. Speaker, briefly to offer my deepest sympathy, by way of a supplementary question, to the families of those who were so horrifically murdered or injured both yesterday and today in Belfast?
Do not these apparently daily murders make plain and stark the need for political developments to take place?
In the short run, however, will the Secretary of State tell the House whether it is his intention to set a time limit beyond which talks will not be pursued by Her Majesty's Government until after the next general election?
Mr. Brooke
I am sure that the whole House will welcome the sympathy, which I endorse, that has been expressed by the hon. Gentleman to the families concerned.
I share the hon. Gentleman's view that talks on political development constitute a contribution to moving towards stabilisation and peace in the Province.
We are continuing to explore with the parties.
I have not yet concluded the exploration, and I think that it would be a mistake for me to make any premature statement about our next intentions, but I shall keep the House informed.
Rev. Ian Paisley
Will the Secretary of State take it from me that the people of Northern Ireland will appreciate his expressions of sympathy and those of the hon. Member for Greenock and Port Glasgow (Dr. Godman), directed to those who suffered in the terrible massacre that took place last night and to the relatives of the person who was murdered this morning?
When the Secretary of State sees the Republican representatives again, will he put to them the revulsion that was felt by the Unionist community and by a large section of the Roman Catholic community in Northern Ireland when Mr. Haughey attempted to foist into the Anglo-Irish Conference a new Minister for Defence?
It is clear from the man's record that he was an ally of a man who escaped from Northern Ireland and who is wanted in Northern Ireland to pay part of the price for the crime that he committed.
He was found guilty of attempting to murder an Ulster Defence Regiment man.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his opening expression of sympathy.
I should say in the context of the working of the Anglo-Irish Agreement that at no stage during the time that I have been Secretary of State has the Minister for Defence for the Republic of Ireland taken part in the conference.
Mr. William Ross
What protest did the Government make to the Dublin authorities about the attempt to get Dr. James McDaid into such a key position?
Would the Secretary of State have been prepared to sit at the same table — I repeat, would the Secretary of State and his colleagues have been prepared to sit at the same table with that man, within the confines of the Anglo-Irish Agreement?
If not, how could they have avoided it?
Interruption
Mr. Brooke
I shall first answer the second part of the hon. Gentleman's question.
I have just said that at no stage during the time that I have been Secretary of State has the Irish Defence Minister taken part in any conference talks.
On the first part of the question, events moved so rapidly in Dublin last night that by the time that I had heard that the Minister had been appointed, I gather that he had also resigned.
Mr. Kilfedder
Devolution may in due course come to Northern Ireland, but before it arrives do not the Government have it in their power, at a stroke, to restore some degree of democracy to the people of Ulster by establishing a Select Committee?
I appeal to the Secretary of State not to deny the people of Ireland the basic and fundamental right of full democracy.
Mr. Brooke
Later I will have the privilege of answering a question from my hon. Friend the Member for Orpington (Mr. Stanbrook) on that matter.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that it is a subject in which I take the keenest interest.
Mr. Hume
Does the Secretary of State agree that it is quite outrageous that people should stand up in this Chamber and attack the character of someone who is not here to defend himself?
I am the only Member of this House who knows Dr. James McDaid —
Interruption
Hon. Members should listen for a change.
Dr. McDaid's constituency and mine are separated by the border, so we work together on common issues.
I categorically state that that man in no way supports the IRA or any paramilitary organisation.
Given the stark position on the streets of Northern Ireland, is it not the right hon. Gentleman's responsibility to set a date for the reconvening of talks, so that they can begin where they ended?
Whatever difficulties individual parties may have with resuming talks, are they not put well into the shade by the stark reality of events on the streets?
Mr. Brooke
The House will have heard what the hon. Gentleman said about his parliamentary neighbour.
On the question of reconvening the talks, I said consistently in the summer that our talks had concluded and that we would need to re-examine the basis for fresh talks.
I think that the hon. Gentleman will know what I mean when I say that in the context of coming towards the end of a particular available time, whether it is the time for talks or the time for a general election, there is reluctance among certain parties — and I make this remark generally — to turn their cards face upwards if there is any danger that other people will not have turned their cards face upwards by the time the whistle blows.
Mr. Adley
Does my right hon. Friend accept that as time moves so does opinion on this matter in England, Scotland and Wales?
If there is to be detailed discussion of constitutional change, does he accept that the politicians who represent constituencies in England and Scotland and Wales will need to be consulted, and that he may well find that opinions have shifted substantially since the House last discussed the issue?
Mr. Brooke
I know that my hon. Friend will understand if I say that I had some difficulty in persuading everybody to come round a table when I was talking only to the parties in Northern Ireland.
If I were to bring in everybody else within the United Kingdom, it might be some time before we foregathered.
Mr. McNamara
Does the Secretary of State agree that there is no romanticism or glory in shooting babies — or, indeed, shooting and murdering anyone?
As the whole House has shown this afternoon, recent events in Belfast have considerably underlined the need for the political leaders within the Province to come together to find some solution to the problems that is acceptable throughout both communities and within the island of Ireland?
The right hon. Gentleman said that the previous set of talks had concluded, and that we were looking at the new basis for talks.
Will he take this opportunity to confirm that it is the three strands that will form the basis of any future talks, and that against that background there will always be the Anglo-Irish Agreement, until the two Governments feel that they have something that transcends it?
Mr. Brooke
I share the hon. Gentleman's views in the context of the six-week-old baby, just as I do in the context of the children in the school playground who were under threat this morning when the attack was made on the taxi driver.
As to coming together for further talks, I think that I speak for all those who were involved in the talks in the summer, which we concluded, when I say that those who took part in them felt that they were valuable and looked forward to the possibility of being able to hold talks again.
It was further agreed that their structure, and the basis on which we conducted them, was a sensible way of covering all the questions which are at issue.
Transport Workers (Security)
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what steps he has taken to enhance the security of taxi drivers and other transport workers in the Province.
Mr. Brooke
My hon. Friend the Member for Wiltshire, North (Mr. Needham) has recently announced changes in the regulations and administrative arrangements governing taxis.
Those are aimed at reducing the risk of terrorist attack to both drivers and passengers while, in the public interest, continuing to allow the easy identification of legitimate taxis and drivers.
Mr. Barnes
The terrible attack on a taxi driver in St. Mary's primary school yard today, which also affected the school children within that area, must be condemned and sympathy should be expressed to everyone who has been affected by this terrible act.
Representations have been made to the Secretary of State via the Amalgamated Transport and General Workers Union on behalf of taxi drivers.
There might be no ready and easy solution to the problems that taxi drivers face, but there are those, such as the Peace Train organisation, who have taken up the taxi drivers' case and are concerned to alter public opinion and attitudes generally in Northern Ireland.
It is that, along with political and economic change which, in the long run, will bring about a change in the situation.
Mr. Brooke
With regard to the incident this morning, we do not know at this stage whether the injured man was operating a taxi or not.
However, it is clear that he was not displaying a taxi roof sign.
In any event, the new regulations cannot eliminate the risk to taxi drivers.
They may reduce the risk of attack, but they cannot prevent random sectarian murders.
On the hon. Gentleman's further point, although we have conducted an interim review of the regulations we shall be conducting a wider one.
I pay tribute to him for his support for the Peace Train.
Mr. Molyneaux
As the Secretary of State rightly said, it is pretty well impossible to protect people in a particular occupation.
With a view to improving the security of all occupations, does the Secretary of State agree that there is an urgent need to aim for a common sentencing policy throughout the United Kingdom?
Given the reluctance of some courts to convict on forensic evidence and the fact that terrorists do not usually leave a signed visiting card at the scene of the crime, will it not become more and more difficult to obtain convictions?
Mr. Brooke
I agree with the right hon. Gentleman on the importance of forensic evidence in cases in Northern Ireland about which we are all aware.
However, I assure him that the resources of the Government forensic services are being increased and streamlined to meet that need.
I am not precisely sure that I know what the right hon. Gentleman had in mind on sentencing policy, but I am happy to engage in exchanges outside.
Mr. Stanbrook
All terrorist crime is detestable, whoever the victims, but does not my right hon. Friend agree that the recent upsurge of violence has made more urgent the granting of the Chief Constable's request for at least 400 additional men in his establishment?
Mr. Brooke
I share my hon. Friend's analysis of the issue and later this afternoon I shall be announcing in a more detailed answer an increase in the RUC manpower establishment of 441 extra policemen.
Rev. Martin Smyth
Does the Secretary of State agree that most politicians and Church leaders have asked that there should be no tit-for-tat shootings?
However, will the right hon. Gentleman accept from me, speaking as the Member of Parliament for Belfast, South, that those engaged in terrorism are not inclined to listen to such appeals, and that the security situation must be dealt with?
We sympathise with victims in north Belfast, with those in south Belfast last evening, and with the driver of the car who was attacked this morning.
Does the Secretary of State accept that even the 400 new officers that he has announced will not be deployed primarily in countering terrorism?
The Chief Constable's earlier statement that he was deploying a special search squad to deal with loyalist terrorism is itself not very helpful, when the whole of the city of Belfast is left wide open to roaming terrorists from both sides.
Mr. Brooke
I received an assurance today from police and Army commanders that there will be an enhanced security presence in those areas thought to be most at risk in the light of last night's attacks in Belfast.
There will be increased RUC patrolling, and two further incident rooms have been established in addition to the special measures introduced by the Chief Constable in north Belfast last month.
All possible lines of inquiry are being pursued.
The unit to which the hon. Gentleman referred will of course be deployed in the situation that we are now considering.
General Practitioner Budgets
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will consider extending the opportunity for general practitioners in Northern Ireland to manage their own budgets immediately.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Jeremy Hanley)
I will be issuing next month to every general practitioner in Northern Ireland a prospectus about general practice funds.
It will invite expressions of interest in fund holding, which will be available from April 1993.
Mrs. Gorman
Is my hon. Friend aware that there are already 1,700 fund holders in Britain, and that a great many more are in the pipeline?
That points to the great success of Conservative health service policies.
Does my hon. Friend agree that, now that the Conservative party is formally represented in Northern Ireland and will have candidates in the next general election there, we should remove the anomaly whereby Northern Ireland citizens — who are of course British subjects — have to follow the rest of the United Kingdom?
Can he give an assurance that that anomaly will be removed as soon as possible?
Mr. Hanley
Northern Ireland enjoys an integrated system of health and social services care, and therefore there are far greater demands on its health boards in dealing with reforms, which do of course bring massive benefits.
The boards have to deal both with health reforms themselves and community care reforms.
We are just as determined that people in Northern Ireland should benefit from the Government's reforms, including fund-holding practices, and therefore they will be introduced at the earliest possible date.
Mr. Flannery
I hope that both communities in Northern Ireland will unite against any extension of the Government's desire and mania to privatise the health service.
I know that Conservative Memberts get upset when that is said, but that is the fact of the matter.
We can see that the Government's action is another nasty step towards privatisation, and I hope that both sides in Northern Ireland will unite against it.
Mr. Hanley
I want to make it absolutely clear that general practitioners voluntarily choose to run fund-holding practices and are not forced by the Government to do so — and GPs will take that step only if they can see benefits for their patients.
Last year, 300 practices in Britain decided that was the way forward, and another 300 have done so this year.
Fund-holding practices are gaining ground in popularity, and patients are certainly enjoying the extra benefits that flow from the GPs' scheme.
Prevention of Terrorism Act
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what are the total number of residents of Northern Ireland who have been questioned under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and (a) subsequently charged and (b) convicted or had an exclusion order placed upon them since 1974.
The Minister of State, Northern Ireland Office (Dr. Brian Mawhinney)
I regret that it is not possible to provide that information in the form requested.
Mr. Corbyn
It is highly regrettable that the Minister cannot provide information that must be available to the police and to the Northern Ireland Office about the number of people in Northern Ireland who have been questioned under the Prevention of Terrorism Act and subsequently charged and convicted.
If the pattern in Northern Ireland is the same as in the rest of the United Kingdom, the Minister will know that the number of persons there subsequently convicted under the Act is very small.
Many of us would like to know what happens to the information that is collected during questioning when there is no subsequent conviction.
There is clearly a civil liberties aspect to what happens to that information.
Dr. Mawhinney
If the information had been available in the form requested, I should have given it.
Mr. Dickens
Does my hon. Friend agree — unlike the hon. Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn)— that the Prevention of Terrorism Act is exactly that: a measure to prevent terrorism?
Its success is not necessarily based on the number of convictions; often, it is based on the number of assaults and atrocities that are prevented by the questioning of certain people.
That is terribly important.
The police, the Royal Ulster Constabulary and the Army save many lives by means of the Act.
It is not necessary to bring convictions every time, but it is necessary to prevent terrorism.
Has the hon. Gentleman not got the message yet?
Dr. Mawhinney
I have certainly got the message.
I entirely agree that the Act forms a vital part of the resources needed by the security forces to combat terrorism.
I also share my hon. Friend's regret that not every hon. Member appears to understand that.
Mr. Mallon
Despite — or, perhaps, even because of— the horror of terrorism, we must protect and defend the integrity of the law and its enforcement.
The Minister will be aware that, in 1989 and 1990, 726 complaints of ill treatment were made.
I am allowing for the fact that, in a substantial number of cases, investigations could not be concluded, and many complaints were withdrawn.
In some instances, I believe, spurious cases were cobbled together for propaganda purposes.
Is the Minister satisfied that not a single case was substantiated by the independent Police Complaints Commission, or does he share the scepticism of Lord Colville and others, who feel that nought out of 726 does not reflect the world that we in Northern Ireland inhabit?
Dr. Mawhinney
The hon. Gentleman has considerably broadened the original question.
He knows — not least because he and I have discussed the matter on a number of occasions — that we take seriously people's right to register a complaint, and that complaints are investigated seriously.
He also knows that the Government set considerable store by having in hand arrangements that will inspire confidence across the face of the community in the activities of the security forces and the RUC.
We are constantly examining policy in that light.
Mr. John Marshall
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the Prevention of Terrorism Act was introduced by a Government led by Lord Wilson?
Is it not unfortunate that, since that time, some members of the Labour party have gone soft on terrorism?
Dr. Mawhinney
My hon. Friend has made his own point with extreme clarity.
Mr. Trimble
I, too, must express slight surprise at the Minister's inability to give the figures that were requested in the original question.
Surely it would have been possible at least to give the number of people who had been arrested under the Prevention of Terrorism Act, and the number of people subsequently charged.
If the Minister had given those figures, would they not have shown — especially those relating to the number convicted of terrorist offences — that, over the past decade, there has been a consistent and significant decline in the number of people convicted?
Is not that a consequence of the increasing sophistication of terrorist ant-interrogation techniques, such as the ability to destroy forensic evidence?
Does not that point to the need to give serious consideration to other methods of dealing with terrorism?
Dr. Mawhinney
I understand the hon. Gentleman's point.
I must repeat, however, that, if I had had the information in the form in which it was requested, I would have given it.
Mr. McNamara
The House will welcome the Minister's assurance about the protection of people when they are in custody, but unfortunately the Minister's perception is completely different from that of the community as a whole.
Yesterday, when the Government were defending their postition at the United Nations in Geneva on interrogation procedures and denying that anything untoward was happening, settlements were being awarded in Belfast courts to people who had claimed that they had been assaulted in just those circumstances.
Should not the Minister introduce video recording of all interrogations?
Dr. Mawhinney
The hon. Gentleman, uncharacteristically, made a statement which, on reflection, I think he will want to amend.
It is not the perception of the whole community in Northern Ireland that the security forces behave in a way that is deliberately detrimental to the rights or interests of various people in the Province.
It is important to get that correction — if he will allow me to use that word — on the record.
Of course, it is necessary constantly to review policy and constantly to keep in the forefront of our thinking the need for the security forces and the police to have all the resources necessary to do the job that they do on behalf of all of us, the need for which has been so tragically illustrated again in the last 24 hours.
At the same time, we must keep in mind the need for the security forces to do that job in a way which not only remains within the law but inspires confidence in the whole community.
Agriculture Ministers
Mr. Amess
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if the Agriculture Minister in his Department has any proposals to meet the Agriculture Minister of the Republic of Ireland to discuss co-operation.
Mr. Hanley
I regularly met Mr. O'Kennedy, the Republic of Ireland's former Minister of Agriculture and Food, and his Minister of State, Mr. Walsh, to exchange views on a broad range of topics of mutual interest and concern.
I look forward to meeting Mr. O'Kennedy's successor, Dr. Woods, so that we can continue this co-operation in the future.
Mr. Amess
I trust that my hon. Friend will agree that co-operation between member states of the European Community is particularly desirable when considering the provision of help to those most in need.
To what extent is there co-operation with the Replublic of Ireland to help our rural communities?
Mr. Hanley
In view of the similar social and economic conditions in the border areas of the Republic of Ireland and Northern Ireland, the potential for co-operation between the two Administrations is considerable.
Having established our respective rural development frameworks, we have now set up the cross-border steering committee, which comprises officials of the two Departments responsible for rural development.
That committee, which had its first meeting last month, will examine progress on local programmes and will co-ordinate action in response to joint plans developed by the two cross-border communities.
I have every confidence, therefore, that Dr. Woods and I will be able to co-operate in resolving the issues referred to us by that committee.
Mr. John D. Taylor
In view of the call by the farmers unions in Scotland and Wales for a ban on the importation of Irish beef, has the Minister made any representations to Republican Ministers about the widespread use of clenbuterol, or angel dust, in the Republic?
Mr. Hanley
I am grateful for the right hon. Gentleman's question.
He is absolutely right that putting clenbuterol into animals for slaughter is bad for the reputation of people in general, bad for the reputation of the Republic of Ireland and particularly bad for the reputation of Northern Ireland.
We have a clean and green image and produce the healthiest meat possible for consumption and we must do nothing to harm that image.
We regularly discuss this matter with the Republic of Ireland, as any deficiency on its part would hurt us, too.
Tourism
Mr. Ian Bruce
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on tourism in the Province.
Mr. Brooke
Very encouraging progress is being made in promoting Northern Ireland as a serious holiday destination, improving the quality of the overall tourist product and increasing the contribution of tourism to economic development.
In 1990, a record year, over 1.1 million visitors spent £153 million in Northern Ireland and there was a 40 per cent.
increase over 1989 in the number of pure holiday visitors.
Projects to increase and improve tourist accommodation and amenities are being developed with assistance from Government, the International Fund for Ireland and the European Community.
Mr. Bruce
I thank my right hon. Friend for that excellent news.
Can he comment on the co-operation between the Province and the Republic in marketing the whole island of Ireland to ensure that even more overseas visitors come to that beautiful country?
Mr. Brooke
The number of pure holiday visitors from the Republic increased by over 50 per cent.
last year, but the Northern Ireland tourist board is working with Bord Failte on a joint marketing programme designed to increase the number of visitors to the island of Ireland as a whole.
With the help of the International Fund for Ireland, the two boards operate a joint Ireland desk in the British Tourist Authority office in London and undertake joint marketing programmes in north America and Europe.
Facilities are being developed to exploit the potential in genealogy-based tourism throughout Ireland.
Mr. Beggs
I welcome the Secretary of State's statement and congratulate all those involved in promoting tourism in Northern Ireland.
I should like it to be understood that we in Northern Ireland do not expect our tourism promotion to be taken over by Bord Failte.
If district councils in Northern Ireland are to have a meaningful role in promoting tourism and job creation within their areas, can the Secretary of State give us an assurance that he will ask the planners to deal more sympathetically with applications that have district council approval for facilities to cater for the tourists who are coming now and the many more that we expect in the future?
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his support for the efforts of those involved and his endorsement of them.
It is gratifying that, whereas 10 years ago only one in nine of visitors to Northern Ireland was a pure holiday visitor, the figure is now one in five.
I shall draw to the attention of my hon. Friend the Member for Wiltshire, North (Mr. Needham) when he returns from America the matters concerning district councils and planning.
Rev. Ian Paisley
Further to that supplementary question, will the Minister also have a word with the planners about hotel accommodation, especially in the County Antrim area, and find out why so many obstacles are being put in the way of hoteliers who want to improve their facilities?
Mr. Brooke
I know that my hon. Friend the Member for Wiltshire, North is concerned to improve hotel accommodation throughout the Province, so I shall draw the hon. Gentleman's remarks to his attention.
Mr. Jim Marshall
Does the Secretary of State have any further plans for undertaking joint initiatives between the Province and the Republic?
Does the Secretary of State accept that the tourist industry in the island as a whole was affected adversely by British Airways' decision to stop the London-Dublin link?
Will he give an undertaking to the House that he will have discussions with the chair of British Airways to try to reintroduce that important link between London and Dublin?
Mr. Brooke
I was asked specifically about tourism in Northern Ireland.
My understanding is that the decision by British Airways was a commercial one based on the traffic, but I shall discuss that, too, with my hon. Friend the Member for Wiltshire, North when he returns.
Cross-border Security
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on cross-border security co-operation between the United Kingdom and the Irish Republic.
Dr. Mawhinney
Measures to improve security co-operation, particularly in the border area, are regularly discussed at Anglo-Irish Conference meetings, most recently on 17 October.
At that meeting both Governments reaffirmed their determination to work together to enhance security co-operation in every way possible.
Close and active security co-operation remains a major objective of the British Government in their discussions with the Irish Government and both Governments are fully committed to achieving further progress.
Mr. Townsend
Will my hon. Friend make sure that close co-operation with the politicians in the south, whoever they may be, remains the keystone of the Government's security policy?
Can he confirm that relations between the Chief Constable of the RUC and the Commissioner of the Garda are good and that they meet frequently?
Is he satisfied with the present arrangements for hot pursuit?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
He is right to stress the importance of close security co-operation between the two Governments.
Relations between the Chief Constable and the Commissioner of the Garda are very good, as are relations between their respective forces.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Has the Minister noticed the press reports that a member of the Ulster Defence Association inner council has claimed that there could be further cross-border attacks by loyalist paramilitaries — a report that was echoed recently by the Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary?
Will the Minister therefore continue to give the highest priority to the cross-border security co-operation mentioned in the question?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman and I certainly give him the assurance that he seeks.
As he will be aware, for the most part attacks have been going in the direction opposite to that to which he drew attention.
We deplore attacks in either direction across the border.
Citizens Charter
Mr. Hayward
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the application of the citizens charter to Northern Ireland.
Dr. Mawhinney
Although the principles set out in the citizens charter White Paper apply throughout the United Kingdom, the structures for the administration of public services in Northern Ireland are different from those in Great Britain.
Accordingly, when the White Paper was launched in July, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State announced that he would publish a separate Northern Ireland charter.
It will usefully reinforce the important principles contained in the White Paper as they will be applied in the Province.
The Northern Ireland charter will be launched shortly.
Mr. Hayward
I thank my hon. Friend for that answer.
Will he confirm that his answer does not imply that the standards applied in Northern Ireland will be different from those in the rest of the United Kingdom?
Dr. Mawhinney
I can certainly offer my hon. Friend and the people of Northern Ireland that assurance.
Mr. Alton
Given the creditable support that the Minister has previously given to integrated education in Northern Ireland, will he ensure that provision is made within the citizens charter to develop integrated education and to facilitate the opportunity for children in Northern Ireland to enter such education?
Is not that the best investment that we can make in the long-term future for that troubled area?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's kind personal comment and for his continuing support over many years for the policy of integrated education.
The best possible defence of that policy is that it is now available in statute as a third option which the parents of Northern Ireland can exercise.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that the citizens charter and the parents charter which will follow from it in Northern Ireland will not undermine that policy initiative.
Rev. William McCrea
Does the Minister agree that the best right for the people of the United Kingdom under any citizens charter would be the right to live and to go about their daily work without the continual threat of terrorism?
We have had 20 long years of murder and destruction in the Province.
What can the Minister tell the people of Northern Ireland after a night of carnage in the city of Belfast?
Dr. Mawhinney
The hon. Gentleman is absolutely right to say that the right to life and to not being molested or attacked is fundamental.
He will also know of the bravery and dedication of the security forces and the Royal Ulster Constabulary as they have sought to pursue terrorists and those who wantonly break the law.
He should also be in no doubt of the effectiveness of that policy bearing in mind the fact that the Chief Constable said recently that more than four out of five terrorist incidents are thwarted and never take place.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman agrees that that is a commendable advance by the RUC and the security forces, although it should not lead to complacency, because we shall not be satisfied until five out of five incidents are thwarted.
Training
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what was the level of expenditure on training in Northern Ireland in 1978-79; what is the figure for the current financial year; and what is the percentage increase in real terms.
Mr. Hanley
Public expenditure on training was £23.4 million in 1978-79 and £90 million in the current financial year, an increase in real terms of 45 per cent.
There is also substantial private investment by employers in training for their staff which the Government encourage through the manpower training scheme.
Mr. Coombs
Does my hon. Friend agree that the people of Ulster can only benefit in future from a more highly skilled work force?
In that context, are not the figures excellent?
Do the figures include expenditure on work experience and, if so, what is that figure?
Mr. Hanley
I thoroughly agree with my hon. Friend that peace in Northern Ireland will be hastened by a healthy economy and by a well-trained work force.
As for work experience, I am grateful for the reminder.
Action for Community Employment — ACE — is providing an extra £50 million in 1991-92 and 9,850 places of work experience.
Mr. Clifford Forsythe
Does the Minister agree that it is rather pointless to train individuals in any field if, when they are qualified, their qualifications are not properly recognised?
For example, when will the Minister reintroduce plumbers' registration in Northern Ireland so that consumers are properly protected?
Mr. Hanley
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his comments.
He is one of the greatest plumbers ever elected to the House.
I shall raise the issue with my hon. Friend the Member for Wiltshire, North (Mr. Needham), who is currently trying to drum up inward investment into Northern Ireland from north America.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. French
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. French
Has my right hon. Friend seen the opinion poll in The Guardian this morning which shows very strong support for his stand on Europe, with the vast majority of people having confidence in the benefits for business purposes of a single market, but showing understandable scepticism about the implications of a single currency?
Did he also notice that twice as many people would trust him to negotiate on Europe for this country as would trust the Leader of the Opposition?
The Prime Minister
I did notice with some interest that particular survey.
I believe that a majority of people in this country want to make a success of our membership of the Community.
There have been many positive developments, a large number of them led by this country such as the introduction of the single market.
I see no reason for us to be fearful of developments in the Community — it is often an opportunity, not a risk.
Mr. Kinnock rose —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This takes a lot of time out of Question Time.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister take this opportunity to tell us why over the last year the unemployment record of his Government is by far the worst of any in the European Commuity?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, unemployment is rising right across the industrial world almost without exception — in the United States, Japan, Italy, France and Canada.
What we are beginning to see in this country — and I welcome it very much — is a sharp slowdown in the rise in unemployment.
This is the third successive month that that has happened.
I very much hope that that trend will be continued.
It is too early to be entirely sure, but it looks as though the tide may well have turned.
Mr. Kinnock
In the last 12 months net unemployment in the whole of the European Community has gone up by 940,000.
Of that total, 768,000 — 80 per cent.
— has been in this country.
Is not it clear from those figures that the unique disadvantage suffered by the people of Britain is that they have this Government with the right hon. Gentleman's policies, which depend on putting people out of work?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman might look close to home before he makes that general assertion.
Unemployment in his constituency has fallen by 37 per cent.
since the last general election.
The number of new vacancies notified to jobcentres is now beginning to rise.
That is a welcome sign.
The change in the unemployment position is welcome and I very much hope that it will continue.
I thought that the right hon. Gentleman would have welcomed that and not tried to isolate the problems of this country as he is well aware that they are occurring everywhere else.
Mr. Kinnock
My reference arose because the Prime Minister was trying to obscure his record.
If he is interested in looking close to home, he should note the fact that while unemployment in my constituency has, tragically, gone up by the figure he mentioned in the course of the past 12 months, it has gone up in his constituency by 110 per cent.
That is very close to home.
Will he now answer the question why in the other 11 countries of the European Community the total rise in unemployment in the past 12 months has been 130,000, while in this country, for which the right hon. Gentleman is responsible, unemployment has risen by nearly 800,000?
Hon. Members
Answer!
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Shouting of that kind does not help.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman mentioned his constituency and mine, but he neglected to mention that in both constituencies the latest figures show a fall in unemployment.
If the right hon. Gentleman was genuinely concerned about unemployment, he would now withdraw from the table his minimum wage policy — a policy which would increase unemployment dramatically.
Mr. Butcher
Given the opinion poll results in The Guardian today, which show that a clear and growing majority of people are against further moves towards European monetary and political union, does my right hon. Friend find it rather curious that both the Liberal Democrats and the Labour party favour unilateral disarmament on the question of federalism?
To what does he attribute their unaccustomed bravery on that issue?
The Prime Minister
I find Opposition Members' position on Europe curious.
They appear to be prepared to sign up indiscriminately to anything — to a federal Europe, to huge extensions in competence and to control over foreign policy, defence and immigration.
There is no sign from either the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown) or the Leader of the Opposition that they would draw the line anywhere on transfer of authority to Brussels.
Mr. Beith
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Beith
Does the Prime Minister agree that although there is scope for compromise on many matters at Maastricht, the one issue on which it is impossible to compromise is the difference between those who believe that Britain could and should join in a single currency and those who believe that we should not do so at any price and that we should never even have joined the exchange rate mechanism?
Had he not better make that clear to both the Conservative and Labour Members who still believe that Britain could stay out of the developments that will take place in Europe?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman might also bear in mind the fact that his party should take account of many of the dangers of what is proposed, for at the moment the Liberal Democrats seem prepared to sign up indiscriminately to what is proposed from anywhere within Europe.
Mr. David Evans
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Conservative party is proud to have reduced the basic rate of tax from 33p in the pound to 25p and the upper rate from 98p to 40p?
Can he confirm that we shall have one Budget next year and shall not burden the British people with a massive payment of back tax, as is suggested by crackpot Opposition Members?
The Prime Minister
I can confirm that we shall have one Budget next year — and that we shall have one the year after and the year after that, as well.
Mr. Flannery
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Flannery
When will the Prime Minister apologise to the British people for the disgraceful inequities and sheer misery caused all over the country by the poll tax, which he was one of the first people to promote?
Does he realise that his failure to do so brings his integrity into severe question?
May I suggest that he apologises in a broadcast from No. 10 Downing street, which I understand he occupies temporarily, and that he should give some thought —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is taking a long time.
If that is done, I hope that it can be done here.
Mr. Flannery
He could then give some thought to the inequities of the council tax, so called, which is the nasty twin brother of the poll tax and which will leave debris — caused by the Prime Minister and the Conservative party — all over the country.
The Prime Minister
In case the hon. Gentleman has not noticed, we are in the process of replacing the poll tax.
Mr. Gwilym Jones
May I remind my right hon. Friend of today's unemployment figures for Wales, where both the actual and the seasonally adjusted rates have fallen?
Does not that confirm that what we really need is a continuation of my right hon. Friend's policies, not a regional assembly for Wales, which would be an unnecessary quango that would cost the people of Wales £1 million a week?
The Prime Minister
I entirely agree.
Unemployment has fallen not only in Wales but in Scotland and in the northern region and I hope that it will soon fall elsewhere, too.
Mr. Wigley
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Wigley
How does the Prime Minister reconcile the welcome emphasis that he placed at the Commonwealth conference on the extension of democratic government throughout the Commonwealth with the continuing reluctance of the Government to give any form of democratic control over their own lives to the people of Wales and Scotland?
The Prime Minister
As I have told the hon. Gentleman on previous occasions, I believe that union in the United Kingdom and the present system of government serve us extremely well.
There was a referendum on devolution some years ago and the people of Wales forcefully expressed their view against the principle of devolution on that occasion.
Mr. Marlow
Could my right hon. Friend reinforce the point that he has just made?
There are two alternatives.
One is the preferred alternative for Scotland and Wales: the status quo.
The other alternative for Scotland is independence.
The crackpot halfway-house idea of the Labour party, in which Scottish institutions look after Scottish affairs and Scottish Members of Parliament dabble in English affairs, would be unacceptable to the people of England.
The Prime Minister
I am in no doubt that the right future for this country is to maintain the union between the United Kingdom and Scotland.
Other proposals have no credibility.
The self-styled Scottish convention was self-appointed and is unrepresentative, and the introduction of tax-raising powers for Scotland would make it the highest-taxed part of the United Kingdom and would destroy and inward investment that has done so much for its standard of life.
Mr. Livingstone
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Livingstone
Will the Prime Minister take time this week to write to the broadcasting authorities to say that he is willing to take part in a live, televised debate between the party leaders during the next general election campaign?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman knows better than to put questions like that now.
Mr. Bill Walker
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the Scottish Conservative party has debated devolution and that the proposals now on offer from the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats are flawed and fraudulent?
Will he further confirm that they were not an issue in the recent by-election in Scotland?
The Prime Minister
As my hon. Friend knows, the Government remain fully committed to the union — a point which is well recognised in Scotland.
The reality of change is certainly understood by the Scottish business community which well knows the impact that some of the alternatives would have on Scotland — they would not have a happy impact.
Mr. Sillars
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Sillars
When will the Prime Minister of England and that lackey of his in St. Andrew's house admit that they are bereft of all moral and political authority to govern the people of Scotland?
Why will not the Prime Minister accept the challenge of a referendum?
Is he feared that he will lose and that independence will win?
The Prime Minister
The right to govern Scotland flows from general elections.
The hon. Gentleman may have noted what a Labour Member said the other day:’ The party which holds a majority in the United Kingdom Parliament has a mandate for the whole United Kingdom.’
Mr. Arbuthnot
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 14 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Arbuthnot
Can my right hon. Friend comment on the recent improvements unveiled in the Guy's hospital patients charter, with 3, 500 more patients treated in the first six months, with better staff conditions and with lower waiting lists?
Can he compare these facts about the national health service with the fictions put out by the Labour Front Bench?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes a powerful point.
Just a few months ago, Opposition Members were telling us that trust hospitals would fail and that they should be judged by the simple test of whether they do more or less work on NHS patients.
With regard to Guy's, we now know that they do more and are a success.
We will have more of them.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn (Perth and Kinross)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Later.
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES OFFICIAL REPORT IN THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE FIFTIETH PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND [WHICH OPENED 25 JUNE 1987]FORTIETH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II
SIXTH SERIES
VOLUME 199
SECOND VOLUME OF SESSION 1991-92
House of Commons
Monday 18 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
SOCIAL SECURITY
Lone Parents (Earnings Disregard)
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security if he has any plans to increase the amount of earnings disregard before benefits for lone parents are affected.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Michael Jack)
We have no plans at present to change the earnings disregard in income support, housing benefit or community charge benefit.
However, in family credit, the threshold at which earnings start to affect the maximum credit for lone parents will be increased at next April's uprating from £62.25 to £66.60.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my hon. Friend for that encouraging news.
As he will know, those in work who earn more than £15 a week lose £1 for every £1 that they earn.
That discourages people from working.
Almost 1 million lone parents are now managing on benefit.
Only 10 per cent.
work, and the number is falling.
Will my hon. Friend consider allowing working women in such circumstances a greater disregard?
Will he at least allow them the cost of paying childminders?
I am sure that he agrees that we should not dock the benefit of deserving mums.
Mr. Jack
I thank my hon. Friend for advancing, in her characteristic way, the case of women who wish to return to the labour market.
The Government have listened carefully to what my hon. Friend has said.
As she will know, from next April a £15 maintenance disregard will, for the first time, be applied to family credit.
We shall also reduce the number of hours required for people to qualify for that benefit.
Given those two improvements — together with child benefit, one-parent benefit and housing benefit — many women in my hon. Friend's constituency will find that they have enough financial room for manoeuvre, so that they can both go out to work and meet their childcare costs.
Mr. Kirkwood
The Minister will recognise that lone parents are being given some useful assistance under the’ children come first’proposals, in the form of a reduction from 24 to 16 hours in the full-time working week.
Is he aware that many people who work part time, for less than 24 hours a week, and who can currently claim income support, will lose out substantially in terms of mortgage interest relief?
Have the Government considered that and, if so, what steps is the Minister taking to mitigate the losses involved?
Mr. Jack
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for asking that question.
The Government have carefully considered the matter, and transitional arrangements will be made to safeguard those who are now receiving income support and would like to move to family credit, but may be worried for precisely the reasons that the hon. Gentleman has mentioned.
Pensioners
Mr. Andrew Hargreaves
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security how many low-income pensioners are expected to gain from the measures he announced in his uprating statement.
The Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Tony Newton)
The proposed uprating of income support by a full 7 per cent.
from next April will give increases substantially above the current level of inflation to around 3.5 million low-income pensioners where the claimant or partner is aged 60 or over.
Mr. Hargreaves
I thank my right hon. Friend for his reply.
Does he accept that many Conservative Members are anxious that any future measures should be directed specifically towards those receiving small pensions or basic pensions but no works or professional pensions?
How much danger would be posed to such pensions by some of Labour's high-inflation, high-spending policies?
Mr. Newton
It goes without saying that those on retirement incomes were among the principal sufferers under the taxation and inflation rates of the late 1970s.
It is precisely to direct extra resources to the pensioners, about whom my right hon. Friend is rightly concerned, that we have increased income support premiums for three successive years, providing more than £300 million extra in real terms.
I think that we are succeeding in that aim.
Mr. Madden
Does the Secretary of State accept that the miserly 4.1 per cent.
given to those on state pensions has been met with a resounding raspberry?
Does he refuse, even now, to double the Christmas bonus to £20, to give a little Christmas cheer to hard-up pensioners?
While he is at it, will he adopt Labour's policy and top up next year's pension increase by £5 for single pensioners and £8 for couples?
That, surely, is the least that the right hon. Gentleman could do to inject some justice and fairness into the lives of our pensioners.
Mr. Newton
I make just two points.
First, if the hon. Gentleman considers what has happened over the past two years, to the basic retirement pension, quite apart from income support premiums, he will find that they have risen by 15 per cent.
That is a very substantial increase.
Secondly, I heard what the hon. Gentleman said about the Christmas bonus, but many other people would think that if the relevant sums of money were available — and they would be quite substantial — they should be directed to the less well-off pensioners.
Mrs. Roe
My right hon. Friend knows that Opposition parties constantly carp about the level of pensions in Britain.
Will he confirm that many aspects of social security systems in other countries compare unfavourably with ours?
For example, no other European Community country pays pensions in their own right to married women with no contribution record.
Mr. Newton
It is certainly the case that in much of what is said about pension comparisons with Europe, areas that would lead to a substantial loss among some British pensioners, including those to whom my hon. Friend referred, are often overlooked.
Another fact that is also overlooked is that in most other European countries, people must make contributions, for example to health care, which do not arise here.
Mr. Allen
The Secretary of State is aware that had the Government not broken the link between the rise in pensions and the rise in earnings, the single pensioner would be receiving £14 more a week and a couple £24 more a week.
That means that more and more elderly people are being forced down to income support or poverty line levels.
The Secretary of State's last uprating statement means that another 400,000 pensioners are now eligible for income support.
That in itself is an indictment of the Government.
Will he ensure that at that poverty level, those additional 400,000 pensioners are informed of their rights to claim income support so that they can at the very least receive what little is due to them under this Government?
Mr. Newton
I have to say that I find something quite extraordinary in the spectacle of an Opposition Front-Bench spokesman apparently complaining that we are to make a potential 400,000 pensioners better off.
I hope that he will acknowledge that.
With regard to his latter point, I know that he has sought, and has rightly been provided by the Department, a copy of the circular that we have sent to local authorities precisely to enlist their assistance to ensure that pensioners who will gain from the proposals receive those gains.
Cold Weather Payments
Mr. Sayeed
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what measures he has taken to improve the working of the cold weather payments scheme.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
The cold weather payments scheme has been considerably improved for the coming winter.
Payments of £6 for every period of cold weather will be paid automatically to eligible people as soon as a seven-day period of exceptionally cold weather is forecast by the Met Office or actually occurs.
The capital rule has also been abolished, making approximately 400,000 more people eligible for payments.
In addition, some improvements have been made to weather station linkages.
Mr. Sayeed
I thank my right hon. Friend for that reply.
He knows that I have often thought that the exceptional needs payment scheme was complex, slow and did not often reach those most in need.
Is the new system speedy?
Will it reach those who are entitled to it and is it far less complex than the old system?
Mr. Scott
I would put particular emphasis on two factors.
The first is the ability of the Met Office to forecast cold weather in advance with some accuracy so that payments can be made in advance rather than in arrears.
Secondly, people will be paid automatically without having to fill in a claim form or other kind of document.
Dr. Godman
I am not going to whinge that the weather in Scotland is always colder than in England.
However, I plead with the Minister to examine the local system on the Clyde.
The weather station at Glasgow airport is too far from the homes of many of my constituents and their homes are also several hundred feet above sea level.
Will he re-examine the system and the way in which it affects people on the lower Clyde?
Mr. Scott
As the hon. Gentleman knows, in Scotland we made a number of changes to the linkages of weather stations with local areas.
If he wants me to reconsider the changes, I shall, of course, do so.
However, he will understand that in such matters I rely heavily upon the professionals at the Meteorological Office for advice.
Mr. David Nicholson
Is my right hon. Friend aware that there has already been snow in the north, the midlands, and even on Exmoor in my constituency?
Is my right hon. Friend also aware that there is concern about the efficiency of the cold weather payments system?
Will he confirm, therefore, that the present system is greatly superior to what existed under the previous Labour Government, whose supporters make such hypocritical remarks about their concern for old people?
Mr. Scott
I reiterate the point that I made to the hon. Member for Greenock and Port Glasgow (Dr. Godman).
On the advice of the Meteorological Office, I further fine-tuned the system, but I am prepared to consider individual cases again, if necessary.
Mr. Bradley
The cold weather payment scheme is still wholly inadequate, with thousands of pensioners whose incomes are just above the income support level receiving no extra help with their fuel charges.
As fuel costs are racing ahead of inflation, will the Minister enter into immediate discussions with the Secretary of State for Energy and the fuel industry to examine the standing charge, which is iniquitous and which adversely affects low-income families, and pensioners in particular?
Mr. Scott
I welcome the hon. Gentleman to the Dispatch Box and to his newly appointed position.
I look forward to doing battle with him in the coming weeks and months.
I trust that, after the next election, he will remain a Front-Bench spokesman for the Opposition.
The present scheme has, in recent years, been made substantially more generous than the previous one.
The actions of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, when he was responsible for such matters, together with our recent announcement, have made arrangements for the coming winter much more generous.
If the hon. Gentleman wishes to pursue his last point, he should do so with my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Energy.
Homeless Families (Diet)
Mr. Steen
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what account was taken in the review of the arrangements for income support of homeless families of the need of children of homeless families in bed-and-breakfast accommodation to have a balanced diet; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Scott
Since April 1989, people in board-and-lodging accommodation have been treated in the same way as most other recipients of income support.
They receive housing benefit to cover the cost of their accommodation and the standard income support personal allowances and premiums to meet their day-to-day living expenses.
Mr. Steen
I welcome the Government's initiative to help the homeless, and we are grateful for what the Department of the Environment has done.
Is my right hon. Friend aware that many bed-and-breakfast families are living below the level of subsistence and that parents go without so that children can eat?
Does he agree that, as we approach the Christmas season, it would be appropriate to have a homeless children's Christmas bonus, perhaps of £10 a week, and then longer-term arrangements through supplement for income support, so that we can guarantee that every child in bed-and-breakfast accommodation can have a hot meal every day?
Mr. Scott
My hon. Friend will recognise that, in introducing the concept of premiums into income support, we have made it possible to concentrate help on those who most need it, and not least families with young children.
They, of course, will get the appropriate premiums, whatever accommodation they are in.
I should be very reluctant to go back to anything like the old system, which gave a perverse incentive for landlords to provide board and lodging rather than other accommodation.
Mr. Wigley
Does the Minister accept that board and lodging is a second-best provision for those families?
Is he satisfied that the new system encourages local authorities to provide houses — rented accommodation — for those people and that the numbers that are dependent on board and lodging are decreasing?
Mr. Scott
As I said, that is a matter for Environment Ministers.
I, too, welcome the fact that we are trying to move away from a system that does not benefit families, local chargepayers, or anybody else.
We need as little as possible of the concept of board and lodging and bed and breakfast.
Mr. Paice
Is not every child whose parents are on income support entitled to a free school meal?
Is my right hon. Friend aware of the immense burden that is being placed on education authorities in the current year because of the increase in the numbers entitled to free school meals?
We recognise why that is, and it is a perfectly reasonable requirement that they should be given that free school meal, but it is producing a rather sudden burden for education authorities which they are finding difficult to accommodate at present .
Mr. Scott
I take my hon. Friend's point, but I must say to him that it is not a matter for me.
House of Commons
Tuesday 19 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
DEFENCE
Royal Air Force
Mrs. Mahon
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what he plans to do with the aircraft taken from the front-line strength of the Royal Air Force under’ Options for Change’.
The Minister of State for Defence Procurement (Mr. Alan Clark)
Some will be used in fleet management or as long-term reserve; others will be disposed of.
Mrs. Mahon
Will the Minister give a categorical assurance that surplus aircraft will not be supplied to the evil dictator of Indonesia?
Will the discussions between the Secretary of State and that dictator on 19 September about military co-operation now be ended in view of last week's massacre in illegally occupied East Timor?
Mr. Clark
I know that the hon. Lady would like to get rid of every aircraft in the Royal Air Force if she could.
However, that view is not shared by the House or, I believe, by the hon. Lady's management committee.
All export controls of armaments and all our customers are subject to the most rigorous control and scrutiny, as she knows.
I certainly do not intend to reveal any of the discussions between my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and the leader of another state, as they would have to be confidential.
Mr. Wilkinson
My right hon. Friend will know that reserve aeroplanes cannot simply be trundled out of a hangar and launched into the air.
What provision is my right hon. Friend making to ensure that there will be enough reserve air and ground crews to fly and maintain those aeroplanes in an emergency?
Mr. Clark
There are three categories of readiness: one month's recovery, three months' recovery and six months' recovery.
As the reduction in the strength of the Royal Air Force in terms of air frames proceeds, there will be a number of crews on whom we can call should it be necessary to reactivate those aircraft.
Trident
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will give the total estimated annual operating costs of Trident for the first five years of operation.
The Minister of State for the Armed Forces (Mr. Archie Hamilton)
We do not expect the running costs of the Trident force to be significantly different from those of Polaris.
Mr. Mullin
That is about £2 billion for the first five years.
Is not it madness to be spending billions of pounds on a missile system which does not deter and may not work — and when we have no one at whom to point it?
Cannot the Secretary of State think of better uses for the perhaps upwards of £20 billion which will be spent on the Trident missile system in capital and investments?
Mr. Hamilton
I am amazed that the hon. Gentleman should come out with those remarks about the deterrent in which we are investing just when his party is purporting to change its policy.
Presumably he is about to resign the Whip, or something of that sort, from the Labour party in this place.
The nuclear deterrent has been very effective in ensuring the security of the west over the past 40 years.
We are now left with major nuclear arsenals in Russia, the Ukraine, Byelorussia and Kazakhstan and there is great uncertainty hanging over those areas.
It is a wise precaution to ensure that we continue to have the nuclear deterrent which has served us so well in the past.
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
Does my right hon. Friend agree that Trident really is the queen of the defence chessboard and that many of us believe that the price that we have to pay for it is well worth paying?
Will he confirm that there is a good argument for at least one European country having nuclear weapons?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, indeed.
Spending on defence is a way of reducing the chances of war.
To that extent, the nuclear deterrent is very good value for money.
I hope that the day when European defence does not rely solely on British and French deterrents will not come to pass, but there is clearly a risk that it could happen some time.
Mr. Douglas
Having made a comparison with Polaris, how does the Minister reconcile having a strategic deterrent which is primarily devoted to NATO purposes when NATO is abandoning nuclear weapons to a considerable degree and when NATO per se would have no Soviet target for Trident?
Mr. Hamilton
As the hon. Gentleman will know, NATO is not abandoning nuclear deterrents.
Some ranges of nuclear weapons are being eliminated and we totally support that.
All the pronouncements from NATO of late have been to the effect that we regard nuclear deterrents as an important part of the armoury of NATO forces generally.
Helicopters
Mr. Speller
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence when he intends to replace the Wessex helicopter used for search and rescue work with Sea King or other 24-hour capability helicopters.
Mr. Alan Clark
I hope to be in a position to make an announcement early next year.
Mr. Speller
I thank my right hon. Friend for anticipating an announcement some time next year.
Is he aware that, off the north Devon coast, our search and rescue capacity is 30 minutes away at RAF
Brawdy?
Excellent though that capacity is, on a cold wintry night it is too far away.
I hope that my right hon. Friend will be able to provide not only the extra helicopters that are needed but the extra security that is desperately needed all the way across the Bristol channel.
Mr. Clark
My hon. Friend poses several questions on the subject.
I hope that they will not be interpreted as questioning the adequacy of existing services.
The House will be interested to know that, in the six months since my hon. Friend last questioned me on the subject, there have been 992 call-outs from RAF Chivenor and 591 people have been assisted.
I pay tribute to the RAF crews concerned and to their skill, dedication and courage, often in very difficult circumstances.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
Does the Minister understand that what he has just said underlines the public's high regard for search and rescue services provided by the Royal Air Force, particularly in a constituency such as mine, where RAF Leuchars is situated?
It is well known that the Government have received an offer to privatise search and rescue services.
In the light of what the Minister said and the undoubted expertise of the Royal Air Force in such matters, will he undertake that that expertise and high public regard will not be lightly thrown away?
Mr. Clark
I am grateful for what the hon. and learned Gentleman has said.
Our commitment in air-sea rescue is to those at risk.
We shall continue to meet the criteria laid down by the Department of Transport.
What is the most cost-effective and efficient way of achieving those ends remains to be decided after proper examination.
Mr. Ian Bruce
What plans does my right hon. Friend have to continue air-sea rescue from Portland in my constituency?
Does he have plans to extend operations during night time as well as day time?
When is it envisaged that the new Merlin helicopter will be on site in Portland?
Mr. Clark
I have nothing to add to the present state of knowledge on plans for Portland and I have no knowledge that the EH101 utility variant is to be used in the air-sea rescue role, at least in the predictable future.
Mr. Rogers
Does the Minister accept that the almost 1,000 call-outs in the past six months reinforce the need to keep open all our bases on the western coast and that the proposed closures of RAF
Brawdy, or Chivenor in north Devon, will leave part of our western coast vulnerable during dangerous times, particularly if there is no 24-hour operability?
Will the Minister look yet again at the proposed closures, especially RAF Brawdy?
If that versatile base is closed there will be an enormous impact on the local economy, especially when combined with the closure of the Royal Navy base at Trecwn.
Mr. Clark
It is all very well for the hon. Gentleman to make such comments.
We are all used to the hypocrisy and double standards of the Labour party, whose representatives hang around every factory gate and base saying what terrible things will happen locally.
Yet nationally, as we know, it is committed — indeed, it is under instructions from its confereence — to cut defence spending by £6 billion.
There will be no announcement about the bases until the new year.
I repeat the undertaking that I gave to the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East (Mr. Campbell) a moment ago.
We shall at all times continue to meet the criteria laid down by the Department of Transport.
Trident
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what is the expected date of commissioning of the first Trident nuclear submarine and the expected date of completion of the programme; and if he will make a statement.
6
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement about the progress with the Trident programme.
Mr. Alan Clark
The overall Trident programme continues to progress to time and within budget towards an in-service date of the mid-1990s.
It is not our practice to make public the precise dates of submarine construction or related programmes.
Mr. Corbyn
Will the Minister confirm that the total cost of the Trident programme is likely to be over £23 billion, that it is a monstrous waste of money, that to hold nuclear weapons is immoral and that in the interests of world peace he should cancel the programme and provide useful work for the highly skilled people who have manufactured those awful weapons of mass destruction?
Mr. Clark
I am sure that it is perfectly possible for the hon. Gentleman to make a trip to Barrow-in-Furness and explain to the work force there what useful work is available for them.
I welcome what he said.
He articulates a view which is widely shared on the Opposition Benches, although the Labour party finds it seemly to repress it at present.
Certainly, it does no harm to ventilate that view in this place.
I always welcome hearing it when it is delivered so lucidly from the mouth of the hon. Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn).
I would correct the hon. Gentleman on one point of fact.
The cost of the system is already £1.8 billion less than the original estimate announced in the House in 1982.
Mr. John Marshall
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his commitment to the Trident programme.
Does he believe that it would be safe in the hands of Members of Parliament who continually carp and criticise?
Would it be safe in the hands of a party two thirds of whose members are committed to one-sided nuclear disarmament?
Mr. Clark
This question is best answered by the remarks of the hon. Member for Islington, North, who courageously and clearly articulated the views of, I suspect, more than half the Members on the Opposition Benches.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
Why did the Minister's Department authorise Admiral Sir Julian Oswald to give information to the press on the specific question put by my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn), when Ministers continually refuse to answer that question in the House?
Is not it reasonable that the House of Commons should be given the same information as is made available to the press in briefings?
Does the Minister accept that it is entirely unsatisfactory to continue stonewalling on those questions while answering them in the press?
Mr. Clark
The boat will be launched early next year, but I must maintain the position that I and my predecessors have always maintained — that we do not disclose any further details in the House.
Mr. Franks
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the Government have only one policy on Trident — to build the fourth boat and complete the programme?
That is unlike the Opposition, who have at least three conflicting policies — one for the Front Bench, a second for Back-Bench CND Members and, most disgraceful of all, a third for the electorate in Barrow.
Mr. Clark
That is absolutely right.
I confirm what my hon. Friend says.
We are interested in receiving a report of what took place when the Leader of the Oppositon went to Barrow and had a chat with the work force.
He gave them several assurances, with which, apparently, they were satisfied, but the right hon. Gentleman will not give details of the assurances.
That is certainly a subject on which the House would welcome further enlightenment.
Mr. Boyes
Will the Minister now acknowledge that Labour party policy is to deploy the Trident system?
When will the Government place an order for the fourth Trident boat and how much money have the Government already spent on it?
Does he realise that his policy of drip-feeding the yard with funding for the fourth boat is unnecessarily extending the lives of the Polaris boats and jeopardising the employment of thousands of workers at Barrow, simply to safeguard the seat of the hon. Member for Barrow and Furness (Mr. Franks)?
Mr. Clark
I did not entirely follow the hon. Gentleman's question.
In so far as I did understand it, I welcome his commitment of the Labour party to the Trident programme.
I understood him to reproach us for being slow in commissioning the fourth vessel.
If so, that is an instructive and important addition to the Labour party's nuclear policy and, as my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State reminds me, is a fourth arm in such a policy.
Infantry Regiments
Mr. Colvin
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what is the difference in cost to the Ministry of Defence of one infrantry regiment with two infantry battalions and two regiments of one battalion each.
The Secretary of State for Defence (Mr. Tom King)
The average cost of an infantry battalion is £12.5 million to £15million in the United Kingdom and £17 million in Germany, irrespective of how it is organised regimentally.
Mr. Colvin
I expected a reply somewhat like that.
What my right hon. Friend said makes it clear that there will not be a great saving to the Ministry of Defence.
If the amalgamation of the Royal Hampshire Regiment with the Queen's Regiment is part of the price of a reorganised and more efficient Army, the retention of the Royal Hampshires' name within the title of the new regiment must be part of the price of the amalgamation.
Will he confirm that that would be possible?
Mr. King
I know that my hon. Friend will be fair and will recognise that the Queen's Regiment is an amalgamation of the Queen's Royal West Surrey Regiment, the East Surrey Regiment, the Royal Sussex Regiment, the Queen's Own Royal West Kent Regiment and the Middlesex Regiment.
I remember seeing those regimental names on the cemetery wall at Kranji in Singapore a month ago.
They were all fine regiments which had to suffer the disappointment of amalgamation.
Now the Royal Hampshire Regiment faces the same challenge and I know that it and the Queen's Regiment will wish to approach amalgamation in the most sensible and realistic way in the interests of both regiments.
Mr. Kirkwood
Will the Secretary of State confirm that whatever savings the Ministry of Defence may make by the regimental amalgamations proposed in’ Options for Change’, there will be considerable on-costs to the public purse, through expenditure on unemployment and housing benefits?
What are the Ministry of Defence estimates of the costs of that and what attempts are his Department making to cover some of those costs?
Mr. King
That is the most amazing question that I have heard in the House.
The hon. Gentleman knows that the Chancellor of the Exchequer has just announced that our plans for defence expenditure involve a cut of 6 per cent.
in real terms during the next three to four years.
The hon. Gentleman represents a party that has called for a 50 per cent.
cut in defence expenditure in real terms by the end of the decade.
What impact will that have on unemployment and housing benefits and every other consideration?
Mrs. Ann Winterton
Who bears the cost of the new uniforms in any amalgamated regiment?
Is it true that the Army will contribute £10 to each uniform and that officers and others will have to pay any further costs?
Secondly, what redundancy arrangements are being made for members of the amalgamated regiments who will not be needed for the defence of the nation?
Mr. King
On the first point, the usual uniform arrangements will apply as on previous occasions.
I shall look into the matter that my hon. Friend has raised, because it covers a whole range of issues — resettlements and redundancy arrangements — and we are anxious that the fairest arrangements should be made.
There was a misunderstanding in my hon. Friend's question.
There will be redundancies in the Army, as in every armed force of any significance in the western world, but the Army Board intends that redundancies should be spread evenly throughout the Army and that people in the regiments facing amalgamation will not be discriminated against or at a disadvantage, compared with those whose regiments may not be so affected.
I hope that that is understood, because it is a very important point.
Mr. O'Neill
Now that the Secretary of State has issued the timetable for the mergers of the regiments, can he confirm that, in the unlikely event of a Conservative victory, there is no prospect of the Scottish regiments' future being reviewed?
Mr. King
I have made it clear that the decisions have been taken.
We have set out the timetable.
The assessments made by the defence staff establish the right shape for our defences for the 1990s.
The only real risk to regiments, as against the programme that we have set out, is a change of Government.
If either of the Opposition parties was elected, many of the regiments that face amalgamation now would face certain disbandment.
Mr. Mans
When my right hon. Friend considers how different regiments have merged, will he take into account, rather than discourage, the concept of the big regiment and ensure that in future the Army is organised in big regiments?
Mr. King
As my hon. Friend knows, that was considered carefully by the Army when it looked into the best way to approach the reorganisation.
I cannot go further.
Obviously, the Army has recognised the role of the big regiment, but the role of other regiments with a particularly strong and well-established tradition was recognised and the Army Board also took account of those sensitivities.
Arms Trade
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what new initiatives he has to further policies of achieving transparency in the world arms trade.
Mr. Alan Clark
Following the initiative of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, the first committee of the United Nations General Assembly has adopted a resolution recommending to the assembly the establishment of a universal and non-discriminatory register of arms transfers.
Mr. Flynn
Is the Minister alarmed by the news that appeared in the New York Times last Friday of the help that China has given to Algeria and North Korea in the advanced development of their nuclear weapons and by the fact that a new arms race for conventional and nuclear weapons is roaring ahead at an unprecedented rate?
Would not the best way to advance transparency in world arms sales and achieve a United Nations register be for Britain now to declare that we shall have transparency and a register of Britain's arms sales?
Mr. Clark
I make allowances for the fact that the hon. Gentleman clearly prepared his supplementary before the news was announced.
It might have been slightly more gracious of him to pay tribute to the work of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister in getting this universal and non-discriminatory register of arms transfers recom-mended to the Assembly.
I pay tribute to the work of the United Kingdom delegation.
One of my officials chairs the experts committee that laid the groundwork for this achievement.
On reflection, the hon. Gentleman will agree that it is far better for all nuclear powers and principal arms manufacturers to move forward together, rather than for any one to break ranks and anticipate matters.
I entirely agree that China's transfer of technology to other aspirant nuclear powers is deplorable.
We must all do our best to make the non-proliferation treaty work effectively and, if necessary, give it more teeth.
Mr. Batiste
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that our friends and allies round the world who may be faced with potentially aggressive neighbours are entitled to look to us for support in arms sales, for example, of the Challenger tank which is made in Leeds, and that nothing proposed on restricting arms sales generally in the interests of world peace will prevent us from supporting our allies in circumstances where that is necessary?
Mr. Clark
Yes, of course.
It is a cardinal principle of free determination that independent states have the right to determine their spending priorities.
Unilateral action by the United Kingdom to stop defence sales would not stop the arms trade or bring about peace and security.
Departmental Properties
Mr. Ashton
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence how many houses currently owned by his Department and defence establishments are standing empty.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
As at 30 September 1991, the latest date for which figures are available, 9,966 Ministry of Defence owned houses and flats were vacant of which 9,834 were service married quarters.
Many of those properties were either undergoing or awaiting major maintenance work or modernisation, some were already allotted to service families who were due to move in shortly and others were being considered for disposal.
In addition, some 1,700 dwellings were in the process of being sold.
Mr. Ashton
In view of that enormous number of empty dwellings, will the Minister give an assurance that none of the 1,600 wives — and their children — whose husbands have left them will be evicted?
What will happen when another 40,000 military personnel are made redundant as a result of the White Paper proposals?
Will there be any evictions?
Will the Minister assure the House that empty houses will be handed over to local councils or housing associations for rent either to redundant service men or to others?
Will he assure the House that the empty properties will not be sold off and service personnel and their families turned onto the street?
Mr. Hamilton
We attempt to treat the wives and ex-wives of service men living illegally in some of our properties as sympathetically as we can and that is why the 1,600 to whom the hon. Gentleman referred live in service accommodation.
The figure of 40,000 redundancies is not right.
For the Army we are talking about in excess of 10,000 redundancies and much of the other reductions will occur through natural wastage.
A housing task force has been set up under my noble Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Armed Forces and he is considering how we can use the existing housing stock to alleviate problems.
In particular, he will consider the problems faced by those who come back from Germany who may be made redundant and ensure that they have somewhere to live while they are looking for a job.
We are addressing that issue now.
However, the number of vacant dwellings will probably increase while the running down of the Army continues.
Dame Janet Fookes
What consideration is my hon. Friend giving to the scheme put forward by the services charity, SSAFA — the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association — to deal with redundant housing stock?
Mr. Hamilton
The SSAFA is in close touch with the Department at all times and we listen to what it has to say about problems associated with housing and everything else.
We are listening hard to its recommendations and we take seriously the points that it makes to us.
Mr. O'Neill
We welcome the working party that has been established to deal with the housing issue.
However, does the Minister recognise that there is an increasing problem of homelessness and squatting among ex-service personnel?
Since the MOD housing stock is being sold off and other houses are being renovated and improved slowly, does the hon. Gentleman accept that the situation will not get better in the foreseeable future unless far greater urgency is given to the problem of properly housing and properly treating our service personnel and those whom we consider are no longer needed in our forces?
Mr. Hamilton
We are well aware of this problem and the last thing we want is ex-service men having to live in temporary accommodation.
For that reason, we are making the best use of married quarters to ensure that people are not forced into such temporary accommodation.
Sir Giles Shaw
Does my hon. Friend accept that the problem raised by the hon. Member for Bassetlaw (Mr. Ashton) is probably the most crucial element in the redundancy programme to which my hon. Friend has referred?
The priority given to resettlement through access to housing will probably be the greatest determinant of the fairness of Government policy on redundancy.
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, indeed, I accept what my hon. Friend says.
There is a difficult Catch-22 situation because people cannot get a job until they have housing and they cannot get a mortgage until they have a job.
Therefore, it is important that we solve the problem of where redundant people live so that they are able to get jobs, raise a mortgage and buy their own homes.
At that stage they will no longer need the married quarters that we make available to them.
Low Flying
Mr. Beith
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what recent representations he has received from farmers about compensation for the effects of low flying on livestock.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence Procurement (Mr. Kenneth Carlisle)
The Ministry of Defence continues to receiv representations from farmers about compensation for the effects of low flying on livestock.
No more representations have been made recently than is usual.
Mr. Beith
Is the Minister aware that there is a feeling among farmers that the Ministry is being less helpful than it used to be in dealing with compensation claims arising from low flying by jets or helicopters?
Does he recognise, for example, that insisting on veterinary reports may cause problems in that the examinations may cause distress to animals as well as additional cost to the farmer, who may not be compensated?
Mr. Carlisle
We try to be as helpful as possible, and I am aware of the case of Mr. Johnson in the hon. Gentleman's constituency.
We require some evidence of loss, either from a vet or an accountant, and as soon as we receive the reports we look at them speedily and with sympathy.
Indeed, we always try to give the benefit of the doubt, and the hon. Gentleman may be interested to know that in the last three years we have received 577 claims and have settled 372 of them.
Gulf War
Mr. Tim Smith
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what was the total cost to the United Kingdom of the Gulf war; how much has been recovered from allied nations; and what will be final net cost to the taxpayer.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
The additional defence costs of the Gulf conflict, to be spread over several years, are currently estimated to be about £2.5 billion.
The bulk of the costs are offset by cash contributions from other Governments, totalling some £2 billion.
Mr. Smith
Is it not clear from that information that not only was the Gulf war a great success in military terms, but that the financial outcome was also most satisfactory from the point of view of the United Kingdom?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, and I suspect that it has been an almost unique experience in that so much of the cost has been provided by other Governments.
We are grateful to all Governments who came forward with cash for the war.
Mr. Harry Ewing
Apart from the fact that we made a profit from the Gulf war, may I ask the Minister to say what else was achieved by it, with Saddam Hussein still in power and carrying out his evil acts and with the dictatorship still in power in Kuwait?
Why were our young men sent to their deaths in such a meaningless cause?
Mr. Hamilton
I find that, from start to finish, a most incredible contribution.
I thought that I had made it clear that we did not make a profit on the war.
It cost £2.5 billion and we got back £2 billion, which means that it cost us £500 million, which does not look to me like a profit.
The hon. Gentleman will remember — indeed, his party purported to support the action of the coalition forces — that the objective was to liberate Kuwait.
That is precisely what we did.
Mr. Conway
Does the Minister accept that, from the point of view of cost effectiveness, the members of the Territorial Army and the reserve forces who served in the Gulf war were remarkably cost effective?
Does he agree that that bodes well for the TA review now under way in ensuring that the TA continues to give value for money and is geographically well balanced?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes.
Clearly, in the current review of the Territorial Army, we are paying great attention to the need to continue to have a good geographical spread across the country.
We pay tribute to the cost effectiveness of the Territorials.
Dr. Reid
If, as the Minister says, we recouped so much money on the Gulf war, may I ask him to explain why the Ministry of Defence is being so mean and tight-fisted towards some of those who were prepared to make the ultimate sacrifice during that war?
Is the Minister aware, for example, of the considerable number of Territorial Army members who served in the Gulf, including over 20 from the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Kilmarnock and Loudoun (Mr. McKelvey), who have been refused their bounty because they did not serve their annual camp — precisely because they were in the Gulf for over 51 days?
That is a scandalous way to treat people who risked their lives and came under repeated Scud attacks for the sake of their country.
Will he order an immediate review of those cases with a view to ensuring that nobody is penalised financially purely because of the bravery that they showed and the sacrifice that they were prepared to make for their country?
Mr. Hamilton
What the hon. Gentleman says about members of the Territorial Army being refused their bounty is news to me, so I should be grateful if he would write to me.
Of course we shall investigate such cases.
As for our being mean and tight-fisted — the hon Gentleman's words — that is certainly not the case.
There were very large claims from members of the Territorial Army for loss of earnings and most of them were met in full.
Merchant Shipping
Sir John Farr
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what progress he has made in making available a pool of British-registered merchant ships for emergency defence use.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
The need for Government action to ensure that sufficient ships remain on the British register to meet defence needs is under consideration.
Sir John Farr
Will my right hon. Friend assure the House that at least one of the lessons that we learnt in the Gulf war will be put into effect so that, should a similar international crisis occur again, more than one in five of those support vessels will fly the red ensign, as was the case in the Gulf war?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, I hear what my hon. Friend says.
However, Operation Granby proved that it is possible to go out onto the charter market for ships and find ships from many different nations to perform the tasks that we wanted of them.
Although not as many red ensign ships supported our troops in the Gulf as might have, the task was carried out economically by other nations.
Mr. Wilson
Does the Minister accept that the virtual destruction of the British Merchant Navy in the past 12 years has been one of the most severe crimes committed against this country by the present Government?
Does he accept that the Government are reducing to fewer than 300 ships the number of vessels that now sail under the red ensign and that they have treated with utter contempt the red ensign, which has served this country well in times of peace and war?
Will the Government, extremely belatedly, redress their policies, adopt some of the measures that other western Governments take to defend their merchant fleets, and accept the absurdity of an island state devoid of a merchant navy?
Mr. Hamilton
It is emotional language to talk about the virtual destruction of the British Merchant Navy.
Several British shipping companies have chosen to opt out — to flag out — and to run their ships under another organisation.
In the circumstances, we are talking about a vast subsidy from taxpayers' money in some form to stop that flagging out taking place.
We must discuss carefully whether that is the best way that money should be spent.
Nuclear Weapons Testing
Mr. McAvoy
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on his Department's policy of testing nuclear weapons at the Nevada test site.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
The United Kingdom carries out such tests of nuclear warheads as are necessary to maintain the effectiveness and safety of our nuclear deterrent.
Tests are carried out at the United States Department of Energy's site in Nevada under the terms of the 1958 agreement between the United Kingdom and the United States.
We conform to all relevant international treaties related to nuclear testing.
Mr. McAvoy
Will the Minister confirm or deny that a British nuclear test, code-named Bristol, is due to take place soon in Nevada?
The House will find it difficult to understand why the country needs another nuclear test, especially when the basic technology has been tested countless times before.
Does the Minister recall that last year's EC conference on those issues ended in disagreement over nuclear testing?
Which is more valuable — a few more British nuclear tests or a worldwide agreement on stopping all nuclear tests?
Mr. Hamilton
As the hon. Gentleman knows, it is not general practice to confirm or deny that nuclear tests are about to take place.
As for the validity of those tests, I remind him that it is important to have effective nuclear warheads, and testing is the only way to establish whether warheads are effective.
Whatever the hon. Gentleman's position on nuclear weapons — like many Opposition Back Benchers, he is probably totally against them — he will agree that if we are to have them, they should operate safely.
That is one of the benefits of nuclear testing.
Scottish Regiments
Mr. Salmond
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what recent representations he has received on the future of the Scottish regiments and battalions; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Tom King
I have received many such representations and I well understand the depth of feeling on the part of those expressing their concern.
However, as my right hon. Friend the Minister of State for the Armed Forces said in the recent defence debate, under our restructuring proposals, the proportion of Scottish units in the Army overall will increase rather than decrease.
Mr. Salmond
Will the Secretary of State specify the exact circumstances that led the Secretary of State for Transport and the Secretary of State for Scotland to give the clear impression during the Kincardine and Deeside by-election that a review of that decision was possible?
Was that a collective decision by the Tory party or the Cabinet to raise false expectations or were the Ministers acting in a freelance capacity?
Mr. King
The position is precisely clear and has been confirmed.
I have made it clear that we have made decisions for the future structure of the Army that will result in a higher proportion of the Army overall being drawn from Scotland — I imagine that the hon. Gentleman will welcome that.
Since then we have published the timetable for the amalgamation of regiments, and it was to that fact that my right hon. Friends were perfectly fairly drawing attention.
Princess of Wales RAF Hospital
Mr. Paice
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence when he expects to conclude a sale of the Princess of Wales RAF hospital, Ely.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
We expect to conclude a sale of the Princess of Wales hospital at RAF Ely at the earliest opportunity commensurate with our responsibility to maximise disposal receipts.
Mr. Paice
I thank my right hon. Friend for his reply.
Does he accept the view of the local district health authority that it is absolutely essential that the core facility of the hospital should be available for the district health authority to provide treatment through the NHS?
Will he ensure that when considering any bids, any prospective purchases for the hospital, the needs of the health authority will be borne in mind?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, of course, I can give my hon. Friend that undertaking.
We shall continue to confer with the local health authority.
We have been in touch with it about the proposed sale of the site and will continue to be.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Has my right hon. Friend seen the excellent report of Lancaster health authority, a copy of which I sent him, showing the immense progress that it has made during the past year — all within its budget?
Is he aware of the vast increase since 1979 in the number of hip operations — from 60 to 197 — in knee operations — from 16 to 90 — and in cataracts of 216 to 685.
Is he aware that when the hospital becomes a trust it will make even more rapid progress being run by local people for local people?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for drawing that excellent report to my attention.
I think that patients can see that the reforms are working — there are better clinic hours, with evening and out-of-hours clinics, and improvements in service and the patients' environment.
Such improvements are taking place in Lancaster and elsewhere, and I have no doubt that they will continue to take place everywhere.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister take this opportunity to join me in expressing joy at the release of Terry Waite and Tom Sutherland from their long and terrible captivity?
May I also express — as I am sure he will — boundless admiration for the great courage and inner strength shown by the two men and all the other released hostages.
Those qualities were brilliantly manifested yet again in the remarkable speech by Terry Waite at RAF Lyneham at lunchtime today.
Will the Prime Minister join me in thanking everyone, including the service given by the British Government, who have worked and still work to secure the release of hostages?
I particularly thank the United Nations Secretary-General and his envoy, Mr. Picco.
Does the Prime Minister agree that the statement by Terry Waite's captors that they now recognise that they did wrong and that what they did has served no useful purpose should be understood by all those who engage in the vile practice of taking hostages, anywhere?
The Prime Minister
I agree unreservedly with the right hon. Gentleman's comments and believe that they will be echoed throughout the country.
This morning I spoke briefly to Terry Waite while he was on board the aircraft returning home and was able to express the delight that I and the whole country felt at his safe return and at Mr. Sutherland's release.
We owe a great deal to the United Nations Secretary-General and to Mr. Picco who have worked tirelessly with others to secure the release of the hostages.
In welcoming the release of Mr. Waite and Mr. Sutherland, may I express the hope that none of us forget that there are still more hostages whom we wish to see speedily returned to their homes.
The developments that we have seen vindicate the policy of not doing deals with hostage takers.
I share the right hon. Gentleman's view about the remarks by the hostage takers.
Let us hope that the lesson has been learnt and that never again shall we see this vile practice recur.
Mr. Colin Shepherd
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Shepherd
During his busy day, will my right hon. Friend take time to look at the Harris poll in last Sunday's issue of The Observer which clearly showed that two thirds of the people of this country, including 60 per cent.
of Labour voters, support my right hon. Friend's policy of reducing the standard rate of tax from 25p to 20p in the pound?
Is it not clear that at the next general election the public will face a clear choice between lower personal taxes under a Conservative Government or swingeing increased taxes under Labour?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend certainly puts the point crisply, and I entirely agree with him.
Conservatives believe that people should be left with as much as possible of their own money to spend in their own interests, in the clear belief that they will spend it better in their interests than any Government will do for them.
We leave it to the Opposition to advocate higher taxes.
That is not our view.
Mr. Watson
Is the Prime Minister aware that under the 1951 United Nations convention on refugees, to which this country is a signatory, all Governments are obliged to provide asylum to those fleeing from serious human rights violations?
Given that the Asylum Bill will deny genuine asylum seekers entry to this country,
Hon. Members
No.
Mr. Watson
Yes it will, and the few who slip through the net will be denied legal aid to argue their case.
Will the Prime Minister tell us how his Government will meet their obligations under the convention?
The Prime Minister
The Bill introduced by my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary will not deter genuine asylum seekers.
It will prevent the misuse of asylum procedures while protecting the position of genuine refugees.
It seeks to accelerate decision making, and it will find strong support in the House and in the country.
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Evennett
Will my right hon. Friend assure the House that he will not agree to binding minimum rates of income tax in Europe, which have been advocated by the Socialist Confederation in Europe and are supported by the Labour party in this country?
The Prime Minister
I can certainly give my hon. Friend that assurance.
If the Labour party has signed European documents to that effect, I hope that it will have the courtesy to place them in the Library so that we may all see them.
It is clearly Labour's vision to have high tax rates, but it is the hope of the people of this country to have the lowest possible tax rates, and that is what we shall offer.
Mr. Matthew Taylor
Does the Prime Minister agree that the draft proposals on economic and monetary union and on political union involve far-reaching constitutional change to our present arrangements?
If he does, why does he reject the sovereignty of the British people in taking the final decision on the matter in a post-legislative referendum?
The Prime Minister
Because we are a parliamentary democracy.
Mr. Gregory
Will my right hon. Friend acknowledge the importance of the popular music industry and its contribution to overseas earnings?
Would he echo the view of music lovers everywhere about the release of a certain rap record which shows the statesmanlike approach of the Leader of the Opposition?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend's suggestion is tempting, but I have not heard the record and I am not sure whether it ought to be released.
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Skinner
Does the Prime Minister recall that, in 1962, when he packed up work to look after his parents, he received unemployment benefit under the terms of the legislation introduced by the Labour Government of 1945-50?
Is he aware that anyone placed in that predicament today, and who decided to go on the dole so as to look after his sick parents, would not receive a single penny piece?
Who is the person responsible for that change?
It is none other than the Prime Minister who, as Minister for Social Security, introduced measures to prevent people from receiving benefit in those circumstances.
Coming from a man who claims to be in favour of the classless society, is that not hypocrisy?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman should, for once, get his facts straight and stick to them.
I remind him that great improvements have been made not only in the amount of assistance that is available to people who are unemployed, but in the amount of assistance to ensure that people receive training so that they can get back into work.
When the last Labour Government left office there were 6,000 training jobs.
There are now 350,000.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us settle down.
Mr. Gale
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, in sharp contrast to the open-door policy apparently espoused by the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) and his party, the measures contained in the Asylum Bill will be fair and of great benefit to genuine asylum seekers?
The Prime Minister
Yes, I am happy to confirm that.
It is necessary to provide a proper asylum law to make sure that genuine refugees can be dealt with speedily and adequately.
Without the Asylum Bill, that would no longer be the case.
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Barnes
Why is it that £22.50 is spent on advertising and publicity for each expatriate voter who chooses to record his vote in this country, while only one tenth of a penny is spent in the United Kingdom encouraging people to vote?
Is this one of the reasons why 1 million people are missing off the electoral register?
What does the Prime Minister intend to do between now and a general election to put those 1 million people back on the register?
The Prime Minister
Both at home and abroad, the intention is to ensure that the people who are entitled to vote are aware of that fact.
The hon. Gentleman should ask himself why he is so keen to see people who are entitled to vote not able to do so.
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Arnold
Has my right hon. Friend noted the vote of parents in Gravesham, in the case of one school by a margin of nine to one, to take control over the management of their schools through grant-maintained status?
Has he also noted the Labour party's policy proposal to reverse the decision of the parents and to claw back the education funds concerned to a centralised bureaucracy?
The Prime Minister
There is nothing surprising in the Labour party's policies on that.
It dislikes choice and parents having authority and power.
We are determined to give both choice and power back to parents and that is why more schools are becoming grant maintained.
After the general election, an avalanche of schools will seek to become grant maintained.
Mr. Dunnachie
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Dunnachie
In what circumstances would the Prime Minister contemplate using nuclear weapons?
The Prime Minister
The Government's position has always been clear — nuclear weapons are there as a deterrent.
The difference between our position and that of the Labour party is that people accept that we would be prepared to use nuclear weapons and know that Labour Members would not be, so they would not have a deterrent.
That is why the Opposition's defence policy is incredible.
Sir Anthony Durant
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 19 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer I gave some moments ago.
Sir Anthony Durant
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the reduction of the inflation rate to 3.7 per cent.
is extremely good news for business, for householders and for those on a fixed income, and will he continue the policy of reducing the inflation rate?
The Prime Minister
I can certainly give my hon. Friend the assurance that that is our intention.
The present inflation rate is, of course, precisely one half of the inflation rate when it was at its very lowest — just briefly — under the previous Labour Government.
Rev. Martin Smyth
This nation has been a nation of volunteers.
How can we encourage volunteering if we cut community volunteering and the numbers engaged in the territorial volunteer reserves?
The Prime Minister
We are examining and consulting on the particular position of the Territorial Army.
As for volunteering generally, the hon. Gentleman will know that there has been a vast increase in volunteering in the whole range of voluntary services in the last decade.
That has been a continuing trend.
I welcome that and we encourage it.
Statutory Instruments, & c .
Mr. Speaker
With permission, I will put together the next eight motions on the Order Paper.
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 101(3) (Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Judges (Scotland)
That the draft Maximum Number of Judges (Scotland) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Isle of Man)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Isle of Man) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Morocco)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Morocco)
Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Papua New Guinea)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Papua New Guinea) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Czechoslovakia)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Czechoslovakia) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Iceland)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Iceland)
Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Finland)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Finland)
Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Double Taxation Relief (Denmark)
That the draft Double Taxation Relief (Taxes on Income)(Denmark)
Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
Question agreed to.
House of Commons
Wednesday 20 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS
Middle East
Mr. Ron Brown
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs which middle east countries have no diplomatic links with Britain; and if he will make a statement.
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Douglas Hurd)
We do not have diplomatic relations with the Republi of Iraq or with Libya.
Mr. Brown
Obviously, both countries deserve to be recognised.
Having said that, is not it clear that there can be no peace in the middle east until the Palestinian question is resolved?
Will the Secretary of State set an example to his Israeli friends and recognise the Palestine Liberation Organisation as a Government in exile?
Will he also allow it to set up an embassy in London?
These questions are important.
Mr. Hurd
The answer is no to both halves of the hon. Gentleman's question.
We have not changed the basis on which we keep in touch with Palestinians.
Sir Michael Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend agree that there is a place for parliamentary contacts where we have no diplomatic relations?
Does not the record in recent years show that such contacts can facilitate the resumption of diplomatic relations, especially if tackled on an all-party basis by Members of this House?
Mr. Hurd
I agree with that in particular cases, but perhaps not in all cases.
I congratulate my hon. Friend on his recent success in the Inter-Parliamentary Union.
Under his leadership there can be new opportunities for that organisation.
Sir David Steel
In view of the constructive contribution which the Palestinian delegation, among others, made to the Madrid peace talks, does the Foreign Secretary believe that it is any longer sensible for Ministers to continue to refuse even to talk to the PLO?
Mr. Hurd
The right hon. Gentleman is confusing two matters.
It is certainly important for us to keep in touch with the Palestinians, which is why I answered the original supplementary question carefully.
We keep in touch.
I saw Mr. Faisal Husseini earlier in the year and the Minister of State, my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Grantham (Mr. Hogg), has met other Palestinians.
I have already answered the question about contacts with the PLO.
Sir Robert Rhodes James
Although there is strong and real appreciation in the middle east of the British involvement in the Madrid peace process — not least among the Palestinians, as well as the Israelis — will my right hon. Friend confirm that there are no ministerial contacts with the PLO?
Mr. Hurd
That is the position.
The Palestinian part of the peace process is extremely important.
By general agreement, the Palestinian component of the joint Jordanian-Palestinian delegation handled itself extremely well — indeed, with distinction — at the Madrid conference.
There is a balance within the Palestinian group.
We want to act carefully in order not to disturb that balance.
It is important for us to keep in touch with the Palestinians.
We shall continue to do so on the basis that I have described.
Mr. Kaufman
Will the right hon. Gentleman join me once again in congratulating Mr. James Baker on the notable and indispensable part that he played in bringing about the Madrid conference?
Will he pay tribute to all who participated in that conference, including the Palestinian representatives?
Does he agree that if the Israeli authorities prosecuted Hannan Ashrawi, it would be an act of folly which would be destructive in further stages of the middle east peace process?
Mr. Hurd
I agree with the right hon. Gentleman's first remark.
I have encouraged Secretary Baker to continue to give his personal impact to those negotiations because that is essential, and he is clearly willing to do so.
As I said, the Palestinian delegation distinguished themselves in Madrid.
I could see no advantage, and considerable disadvantage, if Hannan Ashrawi were to be prosecuted in the way that the right hon. Gentleman described.
Know-how Fund
Mr. Rathbone
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what consideration he is giving to additional know-how support for central and eastern European countries.
The Minister for Overseas Development (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
By 1992-93, we will have more than tripled the original £15 million budget allocation for the know-how fund.
At this stage we have no plans for further increases.
Mr. Rathbone
I welcome that positive action by the Government.
Will representations to other Governments be as strong as possible to encourage them to make the sort of contributions to the know-how fund and to know-how activity that is absolutely crucial for the developing economies in central and eastern Europe, and without which they will never develop democratic politics as well?
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend knows that the know-how fund is greatly admired by other donors and is very much appreciated in eastern Europe.
We are told that it is the most flexible and fast-reacting source of aid, and that is exactly why we have pursued that route.
We agree that it is the best way to help those countries to establish sound democracies and a sound economy.
Dr. Kim Howells
The Minister will be aware that one of the most serious problems affecting the economies of central and eastern Europe is an energy shortage, which is mainly due to the destruction of hydrocarbon supplies from the Soviet Union.
Will she ensure that all encouragement is given to the undoubted expertise in oil and gas exploration and technology in this country to aid the Romanians to revive their ailing oil and gas industries?
Mrs. Chalker
I am aware that a number of United Kingdom oil and gas companies are extremely interested.
They have not come to us for specific assistance under the know-how fund.
Should they do so, we shall obviously consider it sympathetically in line with the priorities that we have set.
Romania has a slightly smaller programme than the other countries, but we wish it to return to the path of good government and sound economics, and the fund is part of that.
Mr. Atkinson
Is my right hon. Friend aware that during a recent visit I made to Albania on behalf of the Council of Europe, politicians of all parties expressed a keen interest in receiving British know-how, but were disappointed that we have yet to establish a British embassy in Tirane?
When does she anticipate that that can be resolved?
Mrs. Chalker
We must keep the matter under review.
The economic and political position is very confused in Tirane.
We understand Albania's anxiety for British representation, and I shall keep that very much in the forefront of our consideration.
Mr. Robertson
May I associate myself with the praise that has been heaped on the know-how fund?
It has been an enormous success in central and eastern Europe.
Throughout most of those countries the universal view is that Britain should do more to enhance its reputation through the fund.
Will the Minister ensure that pressure is put on the Treasury, and kept on, to ensure that appropriate resources are made available?
Will he further ensure that there is no inflexibility in the criteria, so that British know-how in areas such as local government and social services can also be exported?
Mrs. Chalker
I thank the hon. Gentleman for his remarks.
We are grateful to him and to all the other people who serve on the advisory board of the know-how fund.
We should concentrate our help on banking and financial services.
They are not the only priority, but they are the highest.
The banking system and the economic reforms must work in those countries before anything else can happen.
It is a crucial part of their economic regeneration, and it is on that basis that other services can follow.
I very much hope that the work that we are already doing will lead to initiatives being taken by those countries as a result of the guidance that we have given at local government, as well as national, level.
Nepal
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on developments in United Kingdom-Nepalese relations since the general election there earlier this year.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Mark Lennox-Boyd)
I recently visited Nepal and was greatly impressed by the commitment of the Nepalese people to the multi-party democratic system of government under a constitutional monarchy.
I was also gratified by the immense good will and friendship towards Britain which I encountered on all sides.
Mr. Pawsey
I thank my hon. Friend for another illuminating and helpful reply.
I believe that he has just returned from his second visit to Nepal — a country with which this country has had good relations for about 175 years.
Can he say what further action we may take to establish democracy firmly there?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
We are immensely keen to help consolidate democracy in Nepal.
We provide a substantial amount of aid, and £1 million of our aid money is committed for good government projects.
Those projects are still to be selected.
Following the imaginative suggestion of my hon. Friend the Member for Ilford, South (Mr. Thorne), in recognition of Nepal's return to democracy we are presenting to the Nepalese Parliament a throne for its Speaker.
Rev. Martin Smyth
We welcome the positive response from the Minister.
Will he tell us whether it is intended to give help for water projects, sanitation or afforestation?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
Yes, certainly those are all included in our aid programme which, as I have said, is substantial, amounting to some £17 million a year.
That is nearly double what it was four years ago.
Mr. Thorne
I thank my hon. Friend for his kind remarks.
Bearing in mind that 500,000 Nepalese soldiers served with the British forces in the two world wars, that no fewer than 50,000 were either killed or seriously wounded, that 13 won Victoria Crosses, that 13 British officers serving with the Gurkhas also won Victoria Crosses, and that under’ Options for Change’we are proposing to reduce the number of Gurkhas from 8,000 to 2,500, can my hon. Friend assure the House that the Foreign Office will take into account the reduction in what amounts to aid, currently provided through pay and pensions, in its future plans for aid to Nepal?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
We are all impressed by the Gurkhas, and anyone who has visited Nepal and seen them in operation is even more impressed.
We are helping with some specific problems that will occur in the run-down, such as the expansion of the former military hospital at Dharan.
My hon. Friend will be aware that the terms of redundancy that are to be provided will be a significant improvement on previous terms.
There is also a significant programme to help with the resettlement of former Gurkha soldiers.
Croatia
Mr. Alton
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will now recognise the Government of Croatia.
Mr. Hurd
This question is constantly reviewed.
Those Yugoslav republics which want independence will get it, but recognition now would not stop the fighting.
We have to judge whether recognition of two republics now would increase the very real danger of civil war in other republics.
Mr. Alton
Now that the German Government have signalled their intention in the foreseeable future to recognise Croatia, would not it be a morally important statement for the British Government to do likewise and stand alongside this cruelly treated people?
Now that humanitarian sea lanes are to be open, does the Foreign Secretary accept that there may also be merit in the British Government promoting the idea of an internationally enforced sky protection zone over Croatia to prevent incursions and the further bombardment of Croatian cities?
Such a sky shield would protect people from further massacre and the destruction of Croatia's heritage.
Mr. Hurd
European Community Governments will probably continue to act together on this matter.
As I have said before, my worry is that if we recognise the two republics that the hon. Gentleman mentions, we may force the pace and create an explosion in Kosovo, Bosnia and Macedonia, where there are tensions and possibilities of bloodshed and civil war that go beyond anything that we have seen even in Croatia.
There is another possibility, to which the hon. Gentleman alluded.
There is now a chance of progress via measures such as those that the EC has taken, and via the possibility of a United Nations peacekeeping force.
We are pressing forward examination of those in the Security Council.
The new element is that both the Serbs and the Croats have, for the first time, shown a general willingness to accept such a force.
Mr. Aitken
Will my right hon. Friend make it clear whether his answer, which displayed an understandable degree of elegant procrastination, will lead to the Government saying that the Yugoslav federation as we know it has no diplomatic future?
Mr. Hurd
I think that Yugoslavia as we know it has come to an end.
It is not yet clear what kind of agreements the six republics might be able to reach about future co-operation, but they will certainly not be on the old basis.
Mr. Kaufman
As the right hon. Gentleman referred to action in the Security Council, and in the light of the fall of Vukovar and the continuing horrendous threat to Dubrovnik, will he seek to obtain agreement for a Security Council resolution imposing comprehensive sanctions, including an international oil ban, on the whole area, as a way of exerting pressure to bring the fighting to an end?
Mr. Hurd
The three EC members of the Security Council — Britain, France and Belgium — have reached agreement on what we want the Security Council to do.
Our representatives are now canvassing support for that.
I am not sure whether we shall get the support, but the plan includes the elements mentioned by the right hon. Gentleman, and encouragement for the concept of a United Nations peacekeeping force once the appropriate conditions exist.
Baltic States
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on Britain's relations with the Baltic states.
11
Mr. Barry Field
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what importance he attaches to developing relations with the newly independent Baltic states.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Garel-Jones)
Our relations with the Baltic states are good.
We welcomed their independence in August.
We now are offering them help in consolidating their independence and rebuilding their economies.
We are already backing projects in three states through the know-how fund.
My hon. and learned Friend the Minister of State visited the states in September immediately after we re-established diplomatic relations with them to underline our support.
British ambassadors are now operating in all three Baltic capitals.
They are doing a good job under difficult circumstances.
Mr. Coombs
Does my hon. Friend think that the Labour party was acting in the best interests of Britain and of our Baltic friends when, in 1969, it did a deal with Brezhnev and handed over the Baltic gold?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The hon. Member for Swansea, East (Mr. Anderson) looks anxious, as indeed he might, because one of the current concerns of the Baltic states is the return of their gold.
That matter is high on their agenda, and the hon. Gentleman may recall that the Labour party has distinguished itself over the past 40 years by being wrong about practically every foreign policy and defence issue that has come before it.
On few occasions has it shown less moral scruple than when it made a deal with Brezhnev to dispose of the Soviet gold.
The Conservative party opposed that agreement — my hon. Friend the Member for Tiverton (Mr. Maxwell-Hyslop) was one of those who voted against it.
We thought it wrong then and we still think so.
We do not know what legal or moral basis there was for it.
My hon. Friend will be relieved to know that my hon. and learned Friend, my fellow Minister of State, is having constructive discussions with our friends in the Baltic states on the matter.
Mr. Field
Will my hon. Friend confirm that as part of that remarkable deal the then Labour Government paid a £500,000 sweetener to the Soviet Government?
Can he give a categorical assurance to the House that none of that money was used by the Soviet Communist party to try to destabilise this country and foment industrial disputes, as it has now admitted that it did?
Mr. Garel-Jones
I can give the House no assurance about what the Soviet —
Mr. Anderson
That is an own gold.
Mr. Garel-Jones
The hon. Gentleman voted for the Bill.
He was in the House at the time, so he should hang his head in shame.
He voted for the Bill, as did two of the Liberals here, the right hon. Member for Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale (Sir D. Steel) and the hon. Member for Inverness, Nairn and Lochaber (Sir R. Johnston).
I can give my hon. Friend the Member for Isle of Wight (Mr. Field) no assurance about the eventual destiny of that money.
At that time the Conservative party voted against the Bill because we thought that it was entirely wrong.
The discussions that the Minister of State, my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Grantham (Mr. Hogg) is now having with the Baltic states are taking place in a constructive atmosphere.
We hope to reach a satisfactory solution to this matter.
Mr. Galloway
Coming from the party that went to Munich to betray Czechoslovakia — I find the recourse to a 20-year-old smear by the Foreign Office Minister most unseemly.
It might have something to do with the forthcoming general election when any smear will do.
Interruption
Since the Minister is so concerned about the gold belonging to the Baltic states, will he see justice done for the poorest country in Europe, Albania, whose gold is in the Bank of England and was stolen from that country four decades ago?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This question was supposed to be about the Baltic states, but as we have become hooked on gold, I think that we had better have the answer.
Mr. Garel-Jones
Moral indignation sits rather uneasily on the hon. Gentleman's shoulders, particularly on this matter.
The question refers to the Baltic states, not Albania.
Mr. Flynn
The people of the Baltic states will be baffled at the petty party points that Conservative Members have tried to make out of the great victory that was achieved by those people.
I have a serious question.
What representations have the Government made about the new proposal, particularly in Latvia, to restrict citizenship to those whose descendants came from the Baltic states and to those who speak the Baltic languages?
Are we making representations to widen the terms of citizenship in those three states to avoid their being turned into three Ulsters?
Mr. Garel-Jones
Certainly, the hon. Gentleman has made an important point.
Respect for human rights and minorities and, in particular, respect for those who speak minority languages or come from a minority ethnic group is an important matter.
We have, of course, stressed to our friends in the Baltic states that their membership of the CSCE — Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe — process and their aspirations to join the Council of Europe will naturally depend to a great extent upon their ability to meet international standards in such matters.
Cyprus
Mr. Squire
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what is the Government's attitude to an international conference on Cyprus early next year.
Mr. Hurd
Britain supported Security Council resolution 716, which endorsed the aim of an international meeting.
We hope that enough progress can be made for that objective to be accomplished, and shall continue to give the Secretary-General of the United Nations our full support.
Mr. Squire
With the tragedy that is Cyprus today and the role that we have as a guarantor power, will my right hon. Friend confirm that he is prepared to use the framework of the Western European Union to press for an acceptable solution — acceptable to all sides in Cyprus?
Will he bear in mind in particular that many Greek Cypriots are concerned about the Turkish guarantee that overhangs all the proceedings?
Mr. Hurd
The best instrument for reaching agreement in Cyprus remains the United Nations.
My hon. Friend rightly referred to our job as a guarantor power and, in that respect, we must do everything we can with the Turks, the Greeks and the Cypriots to help Secretary-General Perez De Cuellar to make some progress in his remaining weeks of office.
I had hoped that some progress would be made in the autumn and I am disappointed that that has not happened.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and I have tried, together with all those I have described, to put impetus behind the process.
I hope that the new Turkish Government will pay full and constructive attention to what the Secretary General is trying to do.
Mr. Faulds
As British Governments of both colours have failed the Turkish Cypriot community in Cyprus, to whom they undertook certain responsibilities under the constitution of 1960 and the treaty of guarantee, would not it be advisable for the Government to be a bit more sensitive to the concerns of the Turkish Cypriots who do not want to see — under whatever agreement, which may be too favourable to the Greek Cypriots — a return to the situation in the 1960s?
In 1963, Makarios aborted the constitution and totally destroyed Turkish Cypriot rights.
Mr. Hurd
There is much more to the history of Cyprus than that.
A heavy responsibility falls on Mr. Denktash, who is the acknowledged leader of the Turkish community in Cyprus.
He has a strong responsibility not to be content with the status quo, but to exert himself to try to find an answer, community to community, to settle the dispute.
Mr. Tredinnick
Is my right hon. Friend aware that some British companies have not received the compensation due to them from the Turkish authorities controlling northern Cyprus?
Does he agree that steps must be taken to persuade the Turkish authorities to give such compensation, because it is causing great hardship?
A company in my constituency is in that position.
Will my right hon. Friend undertake to look at the question afresh, please?
Mr. Hurd
Yes, I shall certainly do that.
If my hon. Friend has not yet sent me details of the company in his constituency, I hope that he will do so.
Sir Russell Johnston
Does the Foreign Secretary agree that an international conference as proposed simply would not succeed unless Greek and Turkish Cypriot communities admit that they have both been responsible for atrocities and extremism?
Mr. Hurd
I do not know whether admissions about the past are as important as agreement about the future.
I had hoped for a conference with the Turkish and Greek Governments and representatives of the two communities.
There seemed to be the prospect of such a conference in the late summer and autumn and the chance that it might make progress.
That chance has faded, but we must try to recreate it.
Mr. Anderson
Will the Secretary of State lay aside diplomatic niceties for a moment and say that that hope has receded since July as a direct result of the intransigence of Mr. Denktash, who has made no move despite the fact that concessions have been made by the other side?
Is it not now time to say that clearly and to work with, we hope, the new Turkish Government, to bring pressure on Mr. Denktash to show some realism in the matter?
Mr. Hurd
I answered the hon. Member for Warley, East (Mr. Faulds) with my view about Mr. Denktash's responsibilities.
I agree that the reaction and response of Mr. Denktash is an important part of unlocking the position.
Mr. Day
Does my right hon. Friend agree that one of the difficulties of the tragic situation in Cyprus is that the Greek Cypriot Government are recognised as the Government of the whole island, whereas the Turkish invasion was precipitated by the Greek Cypriot coup, which destroyed the 1960 constitution?
The Government recognise that constitution as giving the present Greek Cypriot Government legitimacy.
Mr. Hurd
There is a lot of history to Cyprus.
That is part of it, as is the Turkish invasion of 1974.
We recognise the Government of the Republic of Cyprus as the Government of the whole of Cyprus.
We recognise that it is crucial for any settlement that there be agreement between the two communities, as communities.
That was all set out in the recent Security Council resolution to which I referred in my reply and for which we voted.
East Timor
Mr. Dunnachie
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs whether Her Majesty's Government support the United Nations-led efforts to send a Portuguese parliamentary mission to East Timor.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
The Government support the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General to encourage moves by Indonesia and Portugal to resolve their differences over East Timor.
Mr. Dunnachie
In view of the appalling massacre that took place last week in East Timor, will the Government call on the United Nations Security Council to discuss East Timor?
Will they press the Security Council to send monitoring teams to East Timor?
What action, other than bland expressions of concern, will they take against Indonesia?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
We are not in the business of making bland expressions of concern.
I was answering precisely the hon. Gentleman's question.
The developments that have taken place led to my right hon. Friend the Minister of State expressing the Government's worry to the Indonesian ambassador on 13 November.
Ministers are following developments most closely.
The Indonesian Government have announced a commission of inquiry into the events in East Timor.
We shall consider the position further in the light of that report.
Mr. Couchman
When my right hon. Friend the Minister of State next has contact with the Indonesian ambassador, will he express the abhorrence of the House at the indiscriminate shooting of men, women and children in Dili, which I visited three years ago with other hon. Members?
Will my right hon. Friend stress that, if this country is to develop further productive relations with Indonesia, a most important country, such outrageous behaviour must cease?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
I can certainly agree with my hon. Friend — that incident was most regrettable, particularly in light of the fact that the human rights record of Indonesia had been improving in recent years.
Mr. Foulkes
The Minister's complacency is appalling.
Is he aware that the massacre in Indonesia was as intensive as that of the killing fields of Cambodia and took place in a country that Indonesia occupied illegally?
As the Government are allegedly concerned about the appalling human rights record, why do they sell frigates, aircraft, missiles and armoured cars to Indonesia and provide military training for Indonesian troops?
That position was intensified in September, when the Secretary of State for Defence visited Indonesia to seek out more military contracts.
Is it not time that the Government stopped selling arms to a country with such a brutal regime?
If they do not, they will be guilty of the worst sort of hypocrisy.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
We do not allow the export of arms and equipment likely to be used against the civil population.
Let me indicate the European Community declaration of 13 November, of which our support was at the forefront.
The declaration vehemently condemned the violence and urged the Indonesian Government to ensure that members of the Indonesian armed forces and police in East Timor refrained immediately from using violence, and that members of the armed forces and police who were responsible should be brought to trial.
We welcomed the news that the Indonesian authorities were mounting an investigation, which would have to be carried out promptly, fully and fairly.
Interruption
European Foreign Ministers
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on co-operation and co-ordination between Foreign Ministers of the European Community.
Mr. Hurd
I meet my European Community colleagues often.
We have increasingly developed the habit of co-operation and common action among the Twelve.
The system has worked flexibly and effectively to Britain's advantage.
Mr. Arnold
Given the record of the European Commission to interfere in every nook and cranny in this country and others throughout Europe, is it not clear that the foreign policy of this country and the European Community should continue to be developed by the Foreign Ministries of the Twelve?
Should not our efforts be put into improving the mechanisms and practices of co-operation between the Twelve?
Mr. Hurd
There is a lot in that.
The Commission is present at the political co-operation meetings, which proves useful and important, but it does not have the monopoly of initiative, as it would have if the meetings took place under the treaty of Rome.
Mr. Ernie Ross
While we have co-operation and co-ordination, will the Secretary of State encourage our European partners to start a true dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organisation?
The Secretary of State will know that it was one of his predecessors, Lord Carrington, who was instructed by the former Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), not to have formal contacts with the PLO in 1980.
Given the success in getting the Israelis and Palestinians round the table, would it not make more sense for the Government to right that wrong and ensure that, during our presidency from July onwards, we talk directly to the PLO?
Mr. Hurd
I had three questions on this point a few minutes ago.
I tried to explain then the basis on which we maintain contacts with the Palestinians.
I hope that I chose my words with some care; I do not want to add to them.
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
In considering what possible action to take against Libya in future, will my right hon. Friend work extremely closely with his European Community opposite numbers?
Will he take note of the number of Arab countries that have been strongly opposed to many Libyan terrorist activities over the years?
Mr. Hurd
I agree that, in handling the present situation after the issue of the Lockerbie warrants, we need to keep in close touch both with Arab friends and European partners, and that is what we are doing.
I should have thought that the present requirement of the whole civilised world is relatively simple.
It is that the Libyans should hand over to the United States or British jurisdiction the two named officials against whom the crime of mass murder is alleged in the warrants issued by the Advocate-General.
Democratic Accountability
Mr. Beith
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what recent meetings he has had with his EC counterparts to discuss the development of democratic accountability in the European Community.
Mr. Garel-Jones
My right hon. Friend met our colleagues from the other member states of the Community for two days last week at Noordwijk.
Strengthening democratic accountability in the Community was one of the issues discussed.
Mr. Beith
If Ministers are serious about wanting us not to be governed by unaccountable bureaucrats, why are they not leading in the argument that those decisions that have to be taken at European level are fully accountable to a stronger European Parliament that is elected by a fair system?
Why are they resisting those arguments, or seeing them as concessions that might be made during negotiations?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The Liberal party persists in referring to proportional representation as a fairer system.
It is not fairer, it is different.
One of the differences, in my view, is that it provides a foot in the door for extremist parties of the sort that we do not want in Britain.
Sir Peter Hordern
Is it not time to put an end to the fraud and corruption that go on within the European Community, as evidenced by the continual reports of the European Court of Auditors?
Surely the European Parliament should be given powers to summon Commissioners and permanent secretaries of different countries to put those abuses to them.
Mr. Garel-Jones
My hon. Friend is right: he has raised one of the areas in which Britain has tried to take a lead in the discussions in the Community.
We have advocated a considerable extension of the powers of the European Parliament in its work in scrutinising the Commission and ensuring that proper financial accountability is introduced.
We hope that there will be new articles in the treaty to strengthen the role of the European Parliament in the area to which my hon. Friend has referred.
Mr. O'Hara
Will the Foreign Secretary enlist the co-operation of his partners in the European Community to address their attention to some of the living features of the history of Cyprus, to insist that every one of the 35,000 Turkish troops that occupy the northern part of Cyprus shall be withdrawn, and to send a message to the families of the 6,000 Greek Cypriots who were killed in 1974 and the sixteen hundred and —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is a bit wide.
The question is all about Europe.
Mr. O'Hara
— who are still debarred from returning to their homes?
In their language:’ Then xehna me’—’we forget not.’
Mr. Garel-Jones
If I can try to link the hon. Gentleman's supplementary question to the Community, the fact is that Cyprus has applied for membership of the European Economic Community.
That membership, along with others, will not be considered until 1993.
When the Community came to consider the application, one of the things that it would wish to ensure was that the benefit of the membership would be available to the whole community.
Croatia
Mr. Butler
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will take measures to assist in the preservation of the integrity of Croatia.
Mr. Hurd
We and our EC partners have repeatedly made it clear that we will not recognise changes in Yugoslavia's internal borders unless they are brought about by peaceful negotiation.
They cannot be brought about by force.
Mr. Butler
Why has the United Nations been so slow to act effectively to stop the Serb-led aggression reminiscent of the worst of communist thuggery?
Mr. Hurd
As I have said before, the focus is now on United Nations intervention.
I do not think that any member of the United Nations, any more than Her Majesty's Government, would want to send their forces to fight their way into the situation.
But the new factor is that both the Serbian and the Croatian leadership have said that they are willing in principle to accept a United Nations peacekeeping force.
I accept that that puts the responsibility on the United Nations secretariat and on the Security Council.
Mr. Tony Banks
Will the Foreign Secretary go a bit further and say what the attitude is of the British Government?
If the matter is being considered by the United Nations and a peacekeeping force is mounted, surely British and French troops, Western European Union troops, will be in the front line.
What plans are being made to dispatch British troops to Yugoslavia?
Mr. Hurd
No such plans are being made.
Mr. Fry
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the best way to preserve the integrity of Croatia is to work for a permanent settlement after a lasting ceasefire, and that recognition is just one of the issues that has to be sorted out before there can be a successful conclusion?
Others include dealing with the disputed areas, the resettlement of the dispossessed and, and a very important point, adequate rights for the minorities in Yugoslavia.
Mr. Hurd
My hon. Friend is right.
Those are all matters that we are trying to persuade the different leaders in Yugoslavia to discuss.
That is the purpose of the peace conference in The Hague, which they frequently attend and where they issue declarations and undertakings which they do not always respect when they get home.
But we have to continue with that.
My hon. Friend is right: if one tries to pick out one element and not the others, the result may not be beneficial.
Germany
Mr. Winnick
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs how many British diplomatic staff are stationed in Germany; and what their responsibilities are with regard to human rights issues.
Mr. Garel-Jones
The number is 81.
The embassy and or consulates-general have a responsibility for providing regular reporting and analysis of issues in Germany, including human rights, relevant to United Kingdom interests.
Mr. Winnick
Has the British embassy in Germany made it clear to the German authorities how deeply shocking and despicable have been the racist attacks by Nazi thugs there?
Is the Minister aware that it is extremely unfortunate that once again Labour Members of Parliament in the House of Commons have to protest against racism, Nazi hooliganism and Nazi thugs operating on German soil?
We do not require lectures from Germany about federalism and union and so on; we require Germany to put its own house in order.
Mr. Garel-Jones
I do not think that there is a question of lecturing either of Germany by us or of us by Germany.
Our distaste and disgust at the events in Germany are shared 100 per cent.
by the German Administration and, as every opinion poll shows, by the vast majority of decent German people.
Therefore, we do not have to make any firm representations to the German Government in such matters; they feel exactly as we do about them.
Hong Kong
Mr. David Young
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what legal advice is available to Vietnamese boat people during the screening process when they claim refugee status; what is done to inform applicants for refugee status of their rights; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Hurd
Under the comprehensive plan of action, responsibility for advice about screening falls to the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, which briefs all Vietnamese migrants on arrival.
The Hong Kong authorities also provide a pamphlet in Vietnamese to all migrants explaining the screening procedures in detail.
The UNHCR also provides legal advice and help to migrants at all stages of the screening and review process.
Mr. Young
How many of the boat people have been granted refugee status?
Has any pressure been brought on Her Majesty's Government by the Chinese, the butchers of Tiananmen square, to expedite the return of, or to remove any rights from, those refugees?
Mr. Hurd
I can write to the hon. Gentleman with the figures, but the majority of arrivals from Vietnam who are screened are found not to be refugees.
Only those who are screened out — who are found by that procedure not to be refugees — are sent back to Vietnam.
That matter is one on which the people of Hong Kong feel very strongly.
We have made repeated statements on our policy to the House, and it is not a matter on which we need to take advice or instructions from the People's Republic of China.
Mr. Harris
Does my right hon. Friend accept that those of us who have observed the screening process in the camps in Hong Kong have been greatly impressed by its thoroughness and fairness?
Will my right hon. Friend and others involved in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office accept congratulations on the patience with which that huge problem has been tackled?
Most of us are pleased that those people who are not political refugees are sent back to Vietnam.
Mr. Hurd
I am very grateful to my hon. Friend, who has put his finger on the real point.
It is not reasonable to expect Hong Kong to continue to accept, year in, year out, large numbers of people coming from Vietnam — not because they have a well founded fear of persecution, but because they want to better the economic lot of themselves and their families.
Hong Kong cannot continue to accept that situation.
EC Commissioners
Mr. Cryer
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on the accountability of Commissioners of the EC to the Council of Ministers.
Mr. Garel-Jones
European Community Commissioners are appointed by common accord of the member states, but the main responsibility for ensuring the accountability of the Commission rests with the European Parliament.
We believe that that role should be strengthened.
We have put forward a number of proposals to this effect in the political union intergovernmental conference.
They have received a broad measure of support.
Mr. Cryer
Is the Minister not concerned about the Commission's power to investigate various nooks and crannies of our national life?
Does he agree that, if the Dutch treaty and article 103A are adopted by a qualified majority of the Council of Ministers — which is a procedure that the Government apparently accept — the Commissioners will have the power to issue secret instructions commanding the economy of another member state?
Does the Minister oppose that, or will the road to Maastricht be littered with hypocrisy?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The hon. Gentleman is of course a great expert in hypocrisy, and in the Community too — because he served as a European Member of Parliament when he was last defeated as a Member of the House of Commons; no doubt he will have to return there after the next general election.
The hon. Gentleman referred to the nooks and crannies of the Dutch text.
It may have escaped his notice that that text was removed from the negotiations about two months ago.
Mr. Lawrence
Is my hon. Friend aware that many of us believe that there must be no further transfer of accountability from the Westminster Government or Westminster Parliament to any institutions in Europe, unless that is approved by the British people in a referendum?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The views of this Government and of previous Governments on referendums are well known.
We held a referendum on Britain's membership of the Community in order to extract the Labour party from the difficulty that it was in at the time.
The result was overwhelming.
I see no purpose in a further referendum on that matter — we are a parliamentary democracy.
Mr. Beggs rose
Mr. Cryer
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of the Government's unsatisfactory reply, I intend to raise that matter again on the Adjournment.
Mr. Speaker
That loses the opportunity for the hon. Member for Antrim, East (Mr. Beggs) to ask a supplementary question.
Africa
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what progress is being made towards multi-party democracy in Africa.
Mrs. Chalker
We welcome the fact that most countries in Africa practise, or are moving towards, multi-party democracy.
We shall encourage all of them to do so, and to start and maintain good government practices.
Mr. Bottomley
Given the British Government's determination to provide official aid to democratic countries — we are seeing the emergence of a growing number of them — does my hon. Friend agree that it would be proper and popular over the next five years to halve the gap between our official aid and the United Nations target?
Should not we include such a policy in our manifesto for the next general election?
Mrs. Chalker
I do not think that that is a question for me to answer from the Dispatch Box.
I will say, however, that I expect all the countries that we assist to make further progress towards democracy and increased accountability: we consider that vital.
Countries must also be willing to move towards multi-party democracy, and to ensure that there is a chance for dialogue to take place.
When those goals are respected, we may have the opportunity to spend increasing amounts.
Mr. Corbett
Will the Minister confirm that Kenya and Malawi are the largest African recipients of British aid, and that both are one-party states which show no signs of progress towards multi-party democracy?
In the light of that, will she review the aid programme?
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman may not have noted the fact that we continue to encourage the Malawian Government to apply the principles of accountable government that they endorsed at the Harare Heads of Government meeting.
Following their failure to do so, we have already cut balance of payments support for Malawi.
We have constantly stressed to the Kenyan Government the need to respect freedom of expression and the important outlets for legitimate dissent.
We hope that those who have been arrested will be released immediately.
We have told them that the suppression of opposing views is not the way forward, and have called for further progress towards democracy and greater public accountability.
I am encouraged by the fact that President Moi has expressed his willingness to move towards multi-party democracy, and by the recent indications that fresh general elections may be held early next year.
We shall urge the continuation of all the recent moves to root out corruption in that and every other recipient of our aid.
Miss Emma Nicholson
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on the carefully targeted aid that she has given to Zambia in recent years.
It has led to the election of President Chiluba, leader of the country's multi-party democracy movement.
Does my right hon. Friend believe that, as a result, multi-party democracy will be adopted in Kenya at an early opportunity?
Mrs. Chalker
I cannot really add to the answer that I gave the hon. Member for Birmingham, Erdington (Mr. Corbett).
However, I pay tribute to all Zambians for the peaceful conduct of the recent multi-party election.
The Zambians have chosen their President and their Government.
President Chiluba has our best wishes to help him get on with the job; we shall do our best to assist him, because the election was a fine example of the principles that we endorsed at the recent Heads of Government meeting in Harare.
We hope that there will soon be great progress in Zambia.
Indonesia
Mr. David Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on relations with the Government of Indonesia.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
As I have already said, the Government are seriously concerned about the shootings in East Timor on 12 November.
My noble Friend the Minister of State expressed that concern to the Indonesian ambassador on 13 November.
We are urgently seeking clarification of the reports of further shootings on 15 November.
Mr. Marshall
Further to the very unsatisfactory replies that the Minister has given not only to me but, earlier, to my hon. Friends the Members for Glasgow, Pollok (Mr. Dunnachie) and for Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley (Mr. Foulkes), may I ask whether the Government consider the Indonesian occupation of East Timor to be illegal?
Regardless of the Indonesian investigation, will the Minister tell us exactly what the Government intend to do to convey to Indonesia the message that the international community simply will not tolerate outrages such as last week's massacre of innocent mourners in East Timor?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
Her Majesty's Government most certainly do not recognise the incorporation of East Timor into Indonesia.
As I have said, we have expressed our grave concern.
Mr. Lester
My hon. Friend will know that many of us were awaiting a visit by a Portuguese parliamentary delegation to East Timor to analyse the situation there.
We know now from the Portuguese Government that that delegation has been called off because of the recent tragic events in East Timor.
Does my hon. Friend agree that what has happened in East Timor is the very opposite of good governance and that that ought to influence our aid programme to Indonesia?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
I have no doubt that, in the light of developments, the Government and our Community partners will be looking at the very matters to which my hon. Friend has drawn attention.
Mr. Jacques Delors
Mr. McWilliam
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he intends to arrange a meeting with the President of the European Commission to discuss recent comments on his views.
Mr. Hurd
No need.
The President of the Commission and I hear each others views directly, across the table in EC meetings, several times a month and always, I hope, with benefit.
Mr. McWilliam
When the Secretary of State next meets the President, will he tell him why he alone, of all the Foreign Secretaries, left or right, within the European Community rejects the social charter?
What is he afraid of?
Mr. Hurd
I have already explained, I think three times, in the hearing of President Delors why this Government are not prepared to put at risk the striking progress that has been made in industrial relations in this country since 1979.
Mr. Beggs
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
As I was called by you on Question 16, only to be discourteously interrupted by the hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer), will you refer to the Procedure Committee whether or not such an interruption should be permitted as a means of closing a question, or whether Members should be afforded the courtesy of asking their question, after such an interruption, when Question Time ends?
Mr. Speaker
It is not for me to refer that matter to the Select Committee.
If the hon. Gentleman wishes to do so, he should do that himself.
May I draw to his attention, and to the attention of the whole House, page 296 of’ Erskine May’?
It is clearly stated there that, if the hon. Member who originated the question rises and states that he intends to seek to raise the matter on the Adjournment, that is the end of that particular question.
House of Commons
Tuesday 26 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
EMPLOYMENT
Mature Women
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what measures his Department has introduced to help mature women get back into the work force.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Robert Jackson)
Some 2.5 million more women are now in work than i 1983.
That encouraging development has been assisted by a wide range of measures undertaken by the Government.
They include the deregulation of labour markets, where there has been a 29 per cent.
increase in female part-time employment and an almost threefold real-terms increase in Government-funded training programmes, in which women participate extensively.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply and understand the Government's appreciation of the need for mature women in the labour market.
Will he find time to consider the plight of my constituent, Mrs. Christine Williamson, who, after 25 years at home nursing a severely disabled child is now able to go back into the labour market, but finds herself in a Catch-22 situation?
She cannot get a job without training and she cannot get training from the Basildon authorities so as to make herself available for work.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That would make a good Adjournment debate.
Mrs. Gorman
That, she tells me, is because the training is given to school leavers.
Mr. Jackson
I shall be happy to talk to my hon. Friend about her constituent's case.
On the face of it, my immediate response is that, first, she should contact the local training and enterprise council, which will do its best to help.
Secondly, I draw her attention to the career development loan scheme which the Government are funding.
That is a helpful and positive scheme which has been developing successfully in recent years.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
Is the Minister aware that the occupational apartheid that exists in this country is clearly the result of over-costly and inadequate child care facilities and inflexible and unsatisfactory training provision?
Precisely what do the Government intend to do to ensure that mature women have access to the proper sort of training and the necessary child care to allow them to play their full role in the labour market?
Mr. Jackson
I know that the Labour party is likely to conduct a vendetta against part-time workers, many of whom are women, although when women are asked what they think about part-time work, they reply that they very much appreciate it.
We are doing more for training than any previous Government and the Labour party is in no position to lecture us on that subject.
EC Social Charter
Mr. Michael Brown
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what assessment he has made of the effect implementation of the EC social charter would have on unemployment in the United Kingdom.
The Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Michael Howard)
Much of the proposed legislation under the European Commission's social action programme would be very damaging for the United Kingdom.
The working time directive alone would impose crippling costs of more than £5 billion on United Kingdom employers.
That assessment is confirmed by analysis from business and independent academic organisations.
Mr. Brown
In view of my right hon. and learned Friend's comments about the £5 billion cost of implementing that programme, will he give a categorical assurance that there is no way, in any circumstances, in which the present Government — or any Government if they were acting responsibly — could possibly accept the social charter?
Would not it be a recipe for disaster in the offshore oil industry, in agriculture and in the hotel and catering industry?
Would not it be a disaster for part-time workers, women workers and, indeed, all workers in Britain?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is right.
I assure him that the Government will do all that they can to resist the imposition of such measures on this country.
However, I must tell him that it is a draft directive, which has been brought forward by the Commission, utterly spuriously, on grounds of health and safety.
As such, it is alleged that it is appropriate to be dealt with on the basis of qualified majority voting.
Although we shall do our utmost to resist it, I cannot give my hon. Friend a guarantee that we will be successful in that endeavour.
Ms. Quin
Is the Secretary of State concerned that some workers in Britain get such low wages that they are forced to apply for social security benefit?
Does he believe that bad employers should be subsidised by the state in that way?
If not, why will not he accept the provisions of the social charter which would attack the problem of low pay?
Mr. Howard
In fact, the social action programme does not contain proposals related to low pay, as the hon. Lady suggested.
Family credit is one of the great advances of social legislation.
It is one of the ways in which we ensure that, so far as possible, people are better off in work than out of work.
If the hon. Lady would read some of the reports from the OECD and other reputable organisations, she would see the extent to which those organisations commend our practices in those matters.
Mr. Irvine
My right hon. and learned Friend said that he would do all that he could to resist those directives.
In view of his assessment of the damage that they are likely to cause to employment in this country, will he say under which article of the treaty of Rome they have been proposed?
If the Government do not have the power of veto and we risk having those directives imposed on us, it is an extremely serious matter.
Mr. Howard
I agree that it is a serious matter.
The directives are proposed under article 118A, which is subject to qualified majority voting.
I am doing my utmost to persuade my colleagues in the Council of Ministers that it would make no sense, for the European Community as well as this country, if the directives were promulgated in their present form.
Mr. Blair
Is not the real reason why the Secretary of State makes those absurd and fictitious claims about the effect of the social charter, which bears no resemblance to the reality of the proposals, that he dare not admit that the Government are opposed, not just in detail but in principle, to the idea of binding employment standards across the Community?
Will he now answer the question of the hon. Member for Brigg and Cleethorpes (Mr. Brown) and confirm that when the Prime Minister goes to Maastricht he will sign no treaty that allows qualified majority voting on any aspect of employment law?
Mr. Howard
What the hon. Gentleman said at the beginning of his question was entirely wrong.
I refer him to the independent Centre for Economic Policy Research, where Professor Denis Snower recently published a document saying:’ Implementing the social charter may be expected to hurt precisely those workers it seeks to help, in addition to raising unemployment and reducing investment’.
This year's Employment Institute economic report on the social charter found that’ attempts by the Government to foster labour market flexibility will be undermined by the directives presently contained within the Social Action Programme.’
As for the hon. Gentleman's question, the Prime Minister made the Government's position entirely clear in a debate on that matter in the House last week.
Training and Enterprise Councils
Mr. Andy Stewart
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what representations he has received from the Transport and General Workers Union about training and enterprise councils.
Mr. Howard
None, Sir.
Mr. Stewart
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the Transport and General Workers Union has been wrong on all the major issues facing the country in the past 12 years?
It has been wrong on unilateralism and trade union legislation and wrong about the man whom it picked to lead the Labour party.
Will not it be wrong yet again on the training and enterprise councils?
Mr. Howard
I agree with my hon. Friend.
It is noteworthy that, last July, the TGWU voted to boycott youth training, employment training and the training and enterprise councils on the day before the Leader of the Opposition went to its conference and said that, in so many ways, that union was the Labour party.
I hope that the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) will, in the House this afternoon, condemn the antediluvian attitudes of the TGWU, which sponsors him, and which turns its back on help for the unemployed made available by the Government.
Mr. Strang
Does not the Secretary of State understand that it is precisely because the TGWU is so committed to effective training and the future expansion of British industry that it is not prepared to give credence to the Government's sham arrangements?
When will the Government provide effective training with effective allowances?
Do not the Secretary of State's earlier answers make it clear that his vision of Britain in the future is a low-wage economy with the worst employment conditions in Europe?
Mr. Howard
That is an interesting question.
The hon. Gentleman obviously does not think that training and enterprise councils should be supported.
I shall be interested to discover whether that view is shared by the Labour spokesmen who trail round the country assuring training and enterprise councils of their support.
Which is the true view of the Labour party?
The hon. Gentleman criticised youth training, when almost 90 per cent.
of those who complete youth training go on to a job or further education and two thirds of them obtain a qualification.
How dare the hon. Gentleman cast a slur on the training arrangements currently in place in this country?
Mr. Peter Bottomley
Is not the problem with the TGWU the fact that the only objective that it regards as important in the House is to support the Labour party?
That is why the TGWU will not invite to any of its meetings in the House any Member of Parliament who is not also a Labour party member.
That shows how biased the TGWU has become in its policies.
Mr. Howard
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that example, which I had not previously come across.
It demonstrates that there is no limit to the idiocy of the TGWU in such matters.
Bank Holidays
Mr. Grocott
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will list the total number of bank holidays in each of the EC countries.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Eric Forth)
Only the United Kingdom and Ireland have bank holidays as such.
A detailed list is available in the Library, but the number of public holidays varies between seven in the Netherlands and 14 in Spain.
Most countries have nine.
Mr. Grocott
The Minister has different figures from the official figures in the Library.
Will he confirm that Britain, with eight bank holidays, has fewer national public holidays than any other European Community country?
Given that we hear so much from the Government about level playing fields, is not it time that we had a level playing field in employment conditions?
Will the Minister introduce in the near future proposals enabling us to have at least as many national holidays as other European countries?
Mr. Forth
It is interesting that the hon. Gentleman is anxious to bribe the electorate with yet another promise.
He was incorrect to say that we have fewer national holidays than any other European country — the Netherlands has fewer than us.
He also ignored the fact that the majority of other European Community members do not give a compensatory day off when a national holiday falls at a weekend, as is normal practice in the United Kingdom.
I wonder whether the hon. Gentleman has made an estimate of the cost impact on British business or the United Kingdom economy of the proposal that he apparently makes so glibly.
If his suggestion is yet another example of the well-thought-out policies of the Labour party, we should be given a carefully calculated costing of such a proposal before it is introduced in such a casual manner.
Mr. Madel
Is not there a case for introducing a statutory bank holiday between the August bank holiday and Christmas, which is a long period?
Should not there also be a statutory holiday to coincide with half-term?
Mr. Forth
I am aware of a wide body of opinion that exactly supports my hon. Friend's proposal.
However, there is an equally wide body of opinion, expressed mainly by manufacturing industries, which oppose such a move because it believes that it would disrupt the long period of uninterrupted production between the August holiday and the Christmas break.
It is a finely balanced argument and so far we have not been persuaded by my hon. Friend's case.
Unemployment
Mr. Flannery
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is the total increase in uneployment throughout the countries of the Common Market during the past year; and what was the percentage of that increase in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Howard
No comparable estimates are available on the numbers unemployed in European Community countries or on the proportion of the increase in European Community unemployment resulting from rises in unemployment in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Flannery
The right hon. and learned Gentleman knows that he is avoiding the reality because it is so embarrassing.
We had a slump in 1981 — long before anyone else — which was when our unemployment problem began.
We are now in a second slump, which will continue for a long time yet, and unemployment is rising.
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman admit that more than 80 per cent.
of unemployment in the whole of Europe during the past year was in this country?
Mr. Howard
That is a misleading statistic.
Far from avoiding reality, I was merely seeking to answer the hon. Gentleman's question.
If he is interested in what is happening in the European Community, he could do no better than cast his eyes across to France where a socialist Government have just announced that country's highest-ever unemployment level.
Mr. Watts
Can my right hon. and learned Friend tell the House of any European Community country with a higher proportion of its adult population in work than the United Kingdom?
Will he tell us which European country enjoyed the greatest growth in the number of jobs during the 1980s?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is right.
Between 1983 and 1989, the latest period for which comparable figures are available, more than twice as many jobs were created in Britain compared with the rest of the EC.
Mr. McLeish
Why is it that in the 12 months to September this year unemployment in Europe rose by 7 per cent., but in the United Kingdom it rose by 40 per cent ?
Why is it that among men in the 11 other EC countries unemployment rose by 86,000, but in the United Kingdom it rose by 609,000?
Why is it that among women in the 11 other EC countries unemployment fell by 32 per cent., but in Britain it rose by 172,000?
Is not that the result of the Government's characteristic incompetence?
Does not that show that on the European front we are moving towards not convergence, but divergence?
We have supplied the answers that the Minister refused to give to my hon. Friend the Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Mr. Flannery) this afternoon.
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman is wrong.
If he wants to make European comparisons, I refer him, as I referred the hon. Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Mr. Flannery), to what is happening in France.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman recognises that the increase in unemployment last month was the lowest for almost a year, that it was the third successive fall in the rate of increase and that it shows that the rate of increase in unemployment in Britain is now coming down fast.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will welcome that development.
Mr. Marlow
Would it not be reasonable to be a little more objective?
I think that it is an open secret that if the misfortune of a Labour Government being returned at the next election were to befall Britain there would be the mother and father of financial crises, which would lead to an increase in interest rates of at least 2 per cent.
What effect would that have on employment in the United Kingdom?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is right, but he is characteristically modest in his assessment.
He referred to only one of the Opposition's policies that would wreak havoc on the British economy.
In addition, there are the policies that they have been advocating from the Front Bench this afternoon on the European social action programme, a national statutory minimum wage and trade union law reform, which would make it easier to strike and to have more frequent and more damaging strikes.
All that would reinforce the particular policy to which my hon. Friend referred and would damage tremendously the prospects of the British people and destroy countless jobs.
Rev. Martin Smyth
Does the Secretary of State agree that the recent announcement of 300 pay-offs in Harland and Wolff, which has just had an increase in its order book does not augur well for the economy?
Do not the Government need to give more attention to devising a regional strategy within Europe?
Mr. Howard
I especially regret those redundancies, as I regret all redundancies.
However, the hon. Gentleman will know that the Government have gone to great lengths to help the Northern Ireland economy and I am sure that the measures that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is taking will continue to alleviate the situation in the Province.
Small Businesses
Mr. Bellingham
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment when he next plans to meet representatives of the small firms sector to discuss the problem of small businesses.
Mr. Forth
My right hon. and learned Friend and I have frequent meetings with representatives of the small firms sector and will continue to do so.
Mr. Bellingham
Can my hon. Friend confirm that it is the Government's intention to continue to reduce taxes and deregulate, both of which will help small businesses?
Is he aware that the Opposition claim to be the friend of the small business man?
How does my hon. Friend think that they square that with their policies of imposing a payroll tax on small businesses and of gaoling small business men who fail to pay a socialist minimum wage?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend has made some important points.
It is correct that Britain has one of the lowest rates of corporate tax in the developed world, something from which our businesses, large and small, have benefited enormously over the years.
The Government are committed, when possible, to continue to drive down burdens on industry and rates of tax.
It is equally true that Opposition Members seem obsessed with pursuing the business community with prosecutions and they frequently question me about that across a wide range of Government policies — something which I regret, but with which I have become rather familiar.
The Government are committed to increasing the possibilities for businesses, large and small, and to encouraging the growth of businesses and self-employment.
Our policies have been a huge success up to now and we are determined to ensure that they will continue to be so.
Mr. Wallace
Does the Minister accept that in a recession in which many small businesses have gone to the wall, their failure is often identified with the late payment by large companies of their debts?
What steps, other than expressing sympathy and exhortation, will the Minister and the Government take to enforce interest payments on debt and to streamline court procedures, so that it will not be too burdensome for small businesses to pursue their creditors?
Mr. Forth
There have been a number of business failures over the past, very difficult, few months, but I hasten to add that the level of new business start-ups remains resilient and robust.
Under the national enterprise allowance scheme administered by the new training and enterprise councils, 1,000 new businesses have been coming into existence every week this year.
I am conscious of the late payment problem, which is something to which we are devoting great attention.
Recently, we issued a new package of measures,’ Making the Cash Flow’, in consultation with the Institute of Credit Management and the Confederation of British Industry.
I have personally written to the chairmen of the country's 100 largest companies urging them to regard prompt payment as a matter of best practice.
However, I remain to be convinced that legislation would be beneficial.
As yet, the bulk of the country's small business organisations are not persuaded either, but I will keep a close eye on that matter.
Sir Anthony Grant
Does my hon. Friend recall that I was the first Minister to have responsibility for small businesses — even before the hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer)?
Will my hon. Friend do as I did and haul the leading debtors among large firms before him, to tell them that unless they jolly well pay their debts, Government legislation to force them to do so will follow?
Will my hon. Friend also bear in mind —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
One question, please.
Sir Anthony Grant
In his discussions, will my hon. Friend bear in mind the fact that small firms want, more than anything, a reduction in interest rates?
Mr. Forth
I am constantly conscious of my illustrious predecessors and daily find it difficult to fill their shoes.
As I said when answering the hon. Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace) I have written individually to the chairmen of the 100 largest companies urging them to pay close attention to settling their debts on time.
I have received personal replies from most of them, giving me assurances that that will be done.
I extend a standing invitation to any firm that is not being paid on time by any of the country's 100 largest companies or Government Departments to allow me to take up its case individually.
I have already done so with some success in a number of instances and I hope to continue doing so.
Mr. Cryer
The Government are supposed to support small firms, but is not the reality that they have been betraying them?
High interest rates have driven hundreds of thousands of small firms out of business over the past 10 years and the loss of more than 2 million jobs in manufacturing industry has carried with it, to their doom, many small firms that depended on larger businesses.
Is not it the case that the sooner the Government face a general election and are defeated, the sooner small firms will have a decent chance in the economy?
Mr. Forth
I am surprised that another of my predecessors — I choose my words very carefully — should show such ignorance about the small business sector.
My figures show that although there were 34,000 business failures in the first nine months of this year, every week 1,000 new businesses have come into existence under the enterprise allowance scheme alone.
The National Westminster bank, for example, opened 76,000 new small business accounts in the first six months of this year, which suggests a robust small firms sector.
Although I would be the last to claim that small businesses are without their problems, it is a great tribute to the entrepreneurs and to the small business men of this country that they can deal with difficult circumstances in such a way.
We pledge to continue to support them in that.
I invite them to examine the Opposition's policies to see how they would fare under a Labour Government.
Mr. Butterfill
Is not it true that a large number of small firms are in the tourism sector?
Will my hon. Friend confirm that he received representations from both the British Tourist Authority and the English tourist board about the damage that would be done to the industry by the restrictions on part-time working and on working hours which are so beloved of Labour?
Mr. Forth
Only yesterday, my hon. Friend and I met a number of eminent representatives of the tourist industry from across the European Community.
They expressed the unanimous view that the proposals contained in the working time directive, which is to be considered by the Council of Ministers next week, would be extremely damaging to the tourist industry throughout the Community.
We in this country are very much aware of the problem.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State will take the case to his colleagues in the Council of Ministers and ask them to look again at the proposals, which would be damaging not only to British industry but to industries — including tourism — right across the Community.
We hope that we shall be able to make sense prevail.
Employment Statistics
Mr. Battle
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many people are in employment in Leeds, West.
Mr. Jackson
The most recent estimates of employment by parliamentary constituency are from the September 1989 census of employment, when there were 25,100 employees in employment in the Leeds, West constituency.
Mr. Battle
Unemployment in my constituency has risen by 43 per cent.
in the past year, and there has been a marked increase in temporary and part-time working.
Is the Minister aware that the cracker he pulls this Christmas will probably have been packaged by a home worker, as will the Christmas cards and gift tags?
Does he realise that home workers in my constituency receive as little as 40p an hour?
What action will the Government take to ensure that home workers obtain well-paid, reasonable employment — or does the Minister intend to revel in the Christmas season while home workers cannot afford to do so?
Mr. Jackson
Yet again, Labour is demonstrating that it is engaged in a vendetta against part-time workers.
I hope that part-time workers will take note of that.
Labour's policies would eliminate the part-time and home-working jobs that are available.
I wonder whether the hon. Gentleman really appreciates the consequences of the policies that he supports.
Catrine and Dalmellington Offices
Mr. Foulkes
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what representations he has received regarding the proposal by the Employment Service Agency to close the offices at Catrine and Dalmellington.
Mr. Jackson
I have had three representations, including the hon. Gentleman's own.
Mr. Foulkes
Cumnock and Doon Valley district council was grateful to the Minister for holding a meeting with the council and with me.
Does he recall, however, that at that meeting we pointed out that unemployment in Catrine and Dalmellington is about 14 and 15 per cent.
respectively, and that male unemployment is about 18 and 19 per cent.
respectively?
Is this not a strange time to close offices which provide assistance for so many unemployed people?
Will the Minister think again?
Mr. Jackson
I very much appreciated the opportunity to meet some of the hon. Gentleman's constituents in a delegation.
We had a very useful discussion, as a result of which steps have been taken — particularly in Dalmellington, where there is an asbestos problem, making it unfeasible for the building to be reopened, but we are extending the outreach facilities there following the meeting, and I think that the hon. Gentleman is making progress.
We are improving what the employment service has to offer in the new integrated offices, as all hon. Members who have been to see them will know.
That includes offices in the hon. Gentleman's constituency.
Unemployment
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what was the level of unemployment in 1979, 1983 and 1987; and what it is now.
Mr. Howard
On the consistent seasonally adjusted basis, United Kingdom unemployment was 1,052,500 in October 1979, 2,819,200 in October 1983, 2,641,900 in October 1987 and 2,472,900 in October 1991.
Mr. Wareing
Does the Secretary of State imagine that such figures could have been given to any other Parliament in the European Community — especially in a country that had enjoyed a North sea oil bonanza over the years?
Is this not utterly disgusting?
Can the Secretary of State tell us the real social cost to our country of the devastation of our manufacturing industry and our economy?
When will the Government retire from office so that something can be done?
Mr. Howard
Unemployment is higher in a number of other European countries.
In socialist France, it is now higher than it has ever been in that country's history.
Unemployment is rising in every European country except Spain, where it is nearly twice as high as it is here, and in every European Free Trade Association country, and in every G7 country it is higher than it was a year ago.
Those are the facts which the hon. Gentleman should remember when supporting his own party's policies, which would destroy countless jobs in this country.
Mr. Dunn
Is the Secretary of State aware that every Labour Government since 1929, bar one, has doubled unemployment?
Has he any evidence that Opposition policies could convince us that a future Labour Government would be any different from past ones?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is entirely correct.
The one exception to that doleful list of Labour Governments who doubled unemployment during their term of office saw unemployment increase by 50 per cent.
The raft of policies that the Opposition are putting before the British people would be devastating to job prospects, and so ashamed are they of the consequences of their policies that four Labour members of the Select Committee on Employment last week voted down a proposal to hold an inquiry into the effects of national statutory minimum wage because they wanted to hide the truth about that policy from the British people.
Mr. Blair
As the Secretary of State introduced employment action as an emergency programme for the jobless almost six months ago, since when unemployment has risen by several hundred thousand, can he tell us precisely how many people are on employment action?
Mr. Howard
Employment action is making excellent progress.
The last time the hon. Gentleman raised the subject of employment action in the House, he criticised the Government for providing funding for only one year.
The funding is now secure for three years.
Mr. Blair
But how many people are on it?
Mr. Howard
If the hon. Gentleman is seriously concerned about unemployment —— he ought to have a word with his hon. Friends on the Select Committee who tried to cover up the consequences of his policy.
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Noises of this kind are very unseemly.
Mr. Ashby
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that in 1983 unemployment in my Leicestershire, North-West constituency was 14 per cent.
and that now it is 6 per cent?
Is he also aware that we lost 6, 500 jobs due to mine closures and that 1,000 additional jobs have been created — a total of 7,500 extra jobs since 1983?
Does that not show that the Government's policies over the years have been courageous?
Mr. Howard
The experience in my hon. Friend's constituency is typical of the experience across the country.
There are more than 2.5 million additional jobs now, compared with 1983.
That is the result of the policies that have consistently been followed by this Government.
A large number of those jobs would be destroyed if the Labour party were ever in a position to put its policies into practice.
London Weighting
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is the average level of London weighting allowance paid to employees in (a) inner London and (b) outer London at the latest date of which figures are available.
Mr. Forth
The Department does not collect data on London weighting allowances.
Mr. Hughes
The Minister is probably aware that the additional cost of living in inner London is more than £4,000 per year and in outer London more than £3,500 per year.
Given that the private sector median allowance is £1,500 extra in inner London and £1,000 extra in outer London, will the Government ensure that their public sector pay policy follows the private sector and that they compensate people who work in London for the substantial additional cost of living in London?
Mr. Forth
It would be fascinating to speculate on why the cost of living in inner London is so high.
The hon. Gentleman and I might be able to agree that it is not unadjacent to the fact that so many inner London authorities are controlled by the Labour party.
The hon. Gentleman knows that questions relating to civil service pay determination and detailed pay arrangements are a matter for my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
I am therefore unable to answer this question today, but I will bring the hon. Gentleman's point to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Chancellor.
Mr. Brazier
Does my hon. Friend agree that London is only one of several areas where costs are wildly out of line with the national average — sometimes higher and sometimes lower?
It would be healthy for public services and for dole queues if we could move away from national wage bargaining in a variety of areas.
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend makes an important point.
Average earnings in London are about £100 per week higher than in regions outside London.
The marketplace has, therefore, already taken some account of the differentials.
My hon. Friend is correct — it must make sense to have pay bargaining as near as possible to the point and location of work so as to make the labour market work as efficiently as possible and to reward people as fairly as possible.
Small Businesses
Mr. David Nicholson
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will make a statement on the economic prospects for the small business sector.
Mr. Forth
There are now unmistakable signs of the end of the recession.
Business starts continue at a high rate, with more than 1,000 per week throughout the spring and summer under enterprise allowance alone.
Interest rates have been cut eight times since last October.
Inflation is at its lowest level for three and a half years.
The Government's past success in transforming the economic environment for small firms has been further reinforced through the efforts of employer-led, locally based training and enterprise councils and by the recently announced seven-point package of measures to help small firms and enterprise.
Mr. Nicholson
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that good news and for the justifiable concern that he expressed earlier about late payment of debt.
He will be aware that there is still a problem in my constituency and the south-west with the burden of the business rate, but is not the last thing that small businesses want the layers of bureaucracy that would result from 10 new regional assemblies, new sex and race discrimination legislation and the hundreds of new quangos that Labour would put into practice in its first year of office?
Mr. Forth
We shall draw the attention of the business community, especially small businesses, which are such an important part of the economy in my hon. Friend's part of the world, to the policies being espoused by the Labour party and make some estimate — if the Labour party will not do so, we certainly will — of the real burdens that they would place on business and the devastating impact that they would have on self-employment and employment throughout the country.
Mr. Haynes
Mr. Speaker, Sir, ever since this Minister filled his predecessor's boots, he has been talking a load of rubbish.
His party and that lot behind him have crucified small businesses, and the end result is the loss of many jobs.
He wants to get out of that office, get out into the areas, find out what is going on and do something about the problem, or I will kick his backside for him.
Mr. Forth
One of the great regrets, I am sure, of all hon. Members is that because the hon. Gentleman has chosen to leave us at the next election he will never have the opportunity to be a junior Minister.
Had he been one, he would know that a large part of the duties of anyone holding my office is to meet business men and their representatives to discuss their problems and concerns.
My colleagues and I spend much time doing that.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that we are fully aware of the difficulties of the business community and that we shall continue to listen carefully and to tailor our policies to its needs.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman could persuade his colleagues on the Opposition Front Bench to do the same.
Wage Levels
Mr. Lord
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment whether he has received any representations from the Confederation of British Industry concerning wage levels.
Mr. Howard
I have received no formal representations from the CBI, but I am aware of its view that pay settlements need to be more realistic if competitiveness is not to be damaged.
Mr. Lord
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that Labour's proposals for a national minimum wage may seem superficially attractive but would be deeply damaging to business, particularly small business, and to job prospects?
Mr. Howard
I agree entirely with my hon. Friend, and so does every independent study and assessment that has been made of this matter.
As the Leader of the Opposition has joined us, perhaps he will use his influence on the four members of his party who voted last week to cover up the truth by refusing to permit the Select Committee on Employment to conduct an investigation into the true consequences of a national minimum wage.
Mr. Leighton
Is it not the case that although the wage increases of British workers have come down the benefits of that have been dissipated, and that due to the recession induced by the Government productivity has gone down although it has gone up in Germany and as a result unit labour costs in the year to the second quarter of 1991 went up by 3 per cent.
in Germany but by 11 per cent.
in this country?
With a fixed exchange rate, has not this country badly lost competitiveness?
Mr. Howard
It was the hon. Gentleman's casting vote as Chairman of the Select Committee on Employment which last week prevented that Committee from looking into the truth of these matters.
If he had been seriously concerned about the competitiveness of British industry, he would have welcomed that inquiry and not blocked it.
Autumn Statement
Mr. Hind
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will make a statement on how he proposes to spend the additional resources announced in the autumn statement.
Mr. Howard
The additional resources planned will be directed towards helping unemployed people, improving the skills of the work force and assisting small businesses and enterprise.
Mr. Hind
Will my right hon. and learned Friend contrast the £500 million that he has added to his Department's budget and last month's fall in unemployment in Merseyside, Lancashire and Cheshire with the squabbling of the Opposition Front Bench, which cannot decide whether employment and training are priorities in their programme?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is absolutely right to raise that matter.
The last time the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) expressed his concerns, he gave a list of our programmes which he said were to be destroyed and eliminated.
In fact, they will all be maintained and will play an increasingly important role in helping unemployed people.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Robert Hughes
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 26 November.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Hughes
Can the Prime Minister remember those heady, happy days a year ago when his predecessor was tossed out of office?
Now that his policies, the economy and everything around is in disarray, and with the right hon. Lady making a comeback, who will be the first to put him out of his misery in Downing street — the people at the election or his right hon. Friend?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman has clearly not observed that in the last year inflation has fallen to 4 per cent.
and the interest rate to 10.5 per cent., the tax burden on business has been lightened, there is a pay review body for teachers and better standards and choice for parents — all of which were opposed by the Labour party.
When the time comes, the hon. Gentleman will have the pleasure — if he holds his seat — of staying on the Opposition Benches.
Mr. Haselhurst
Does my right hon. Friend agree with the comment made on Sunday that we should not commit ourselves now in advance of 1997 to a single currency as a point of agreement that all sensible people could hold?
Will he contrast that with the words of the Leader of the Opposition to the effect that Labour would sign up to a single currency now, irrevocably?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes a pertinent point.
That was certainly the view of the right hon. Gentleman in the debate last week, but it was flatly contradicted by his right hon. and learned Friend the shadow Chancellor on television at the weekend.
Of course, he did say that not committing ourselves to a single currency was the point of agreement that’ all sensible people’would have.
Mr. Kinnock
Does the Prime Minister still take the view, as he told the House last Thursday, that he has the full support of his predecessor?
The Prime Minister
My predecessor supported me in the Lobby last week, as did the vast majority of the House.
Mr. Kinnock
That answer demonstrates just how hollow was the vote for the right hon. Gentleman last Thursday night.
Does the Prime Minister not remember saying just a year ago on the steps of Downing street that the Conservative party was’ fully united for the future’and is that not patently false now when, in the approach to the vital meeting at Maastricht, the Tory party is in a state of open warfare?
The Prime Minister
It is within the recollection of the House that there were around 28 Labour abstentions in the Division last week.
We also know from the honest remarks of the right hon. Member for Bethnal Green and Stepney (Mr. Shore) that around two fifths of the Labour party opposed its Front Bench's policy on Europe.
Sir John Stokes
Is my right hon. Friend aware that this is the first time that I have asked him a question since his appointment, and I intend to enjoy it?
Is he further aware that he carries the good wishes of the party behind him in the difficult few months to come and should go to the talks in great confidence, knowing of the great contribution that this country has made to Europe since the days of William Pitt?
Mr. Speaker
Will the hon. Gentleman get on with it, please?
Sir John Stokes
Does my right hon. Friend realise that in dealing with things that we hold so dear we want to make sure that the European Community gives us a good bargain and that what we give to it will be given back to us?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend and I am pleased to be in a position to answer his question.
He is entirely right about the British contribution to Europe, both in the long term and in the past few years when much of the present shape of the Community has arisen from initiatives by this country.
We can play a role in developing Europe or we can turn our backs on the Community.
By turning our backs, we would forfeit our right to influence what happens in the Community and I am not prepared to do that.
Mr. Ashdown
As the Prime Minister approaches the first anniversary of his move into his new home, will he spare a thought for the tens of thousands who, because of his policies, are now losing theirs?
Does he realise that mortgage repossessions were 16,000 in 1989 and 44,000 last year, and that this year they are predicted to rise to 120,000, or 1 per cent.
of all mortgage holders?
Does he realise that he cannot sit on the fence on this one, and what does he intend to do about it?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman should have noticed, a few days ago my right hon. Friend the Minister for Social Security and Disabled People announced further steps to help all those in receipt of income support who have mortgages.
The right hon. Gentleman says that that helps nobody, but it costs £400 million a year, so it must help rather a lot of people.
Mr. Soames
Will my right hon. Friend contrast the judicious, prudent and honourable way in which he and his right hon. Friends are negotiating in the European talks with the cynical sell-out proposed by the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock)?
The Prime Minister
It is the case that we have set out our position perfectly clearly so that our European partners know what is acceptable to the House and what is not.
The Labour party's position is now perfectly clear.
If somebody else in Europe wants it, it will sign up to it.
Mr. Eadie
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 26 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Eadie
Will the Prime Minister consider the abolition of standing charges to pensioners by the private monopolies?
Does he agree that with the massive increases in salaries for those bodies' chairmen and the ridiculous spend on advertising that we are witnessing, those companies can well afford to drop the standing charges?
Why does not the Prime Minister arrange to meet pensioners' representatives at No. 10 Downing street and listen to their powerful case on the matter?
The Prime Minister
The abolition of one or other of the energy standing charges has been a popular mission for many people for many years, but abolition would undoubtedly lead to a higher unit cost and as many of the most vulnerable people use the most electricity or the most fuel generally, they would in fact be net losers and not net beneficiaries.
Mr. Thornton
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating the chairman, trustees and staff of the Aintree national health service hospital trust on the establishment of a new £7 million project that will give it the largest accident and emergency unit in Europe?
Is that not the best possible example of how the Government's commitment to the NHS is working?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
I was not aware of that investment, but I very much welcome it.
It shows the huge investment currently being made in the national health service and the excellent way in which many trusts are using the resources available to them.
Mr. Turner
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 26 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Turner
How does the Prime Minister justify sending his son to a private school where nearly £4,000 a year is spent on each child when at present half the children in Tory-run Cambridgeshire's secondary schools receive only half that amount and when that authority is currently reducing its budget by almost £2 million?
I ask that question in terms not of choice, but of equity for all children.
The Prime Minister
Our party believes in choice.
I note yet again the Labour party's hostility to any persons exercising any choice in the interests of their family.
I believe that millions of people in this country will acknowledge that there would be no choice for them if there were a Labour Government.
Miss Emma Nicholson
Will my right hon. Friend remind the House that the 1992 legislation does not come into force until 31 December 1992 and that the same is true of the 1986 Single European Act?
Will he confirm to the House, the country and the international community that he will then be in his second term as Prime Minister of the United Kingdom?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to confirm that to my hon. Friend.
One reason why that will be so is that we have a coherent approach to Europe, not one that changes every weekend.
Cyprus
Mr. Cox (Tooting)
To ask the Prime Minister what plans he has to visit Cyprus.
The Prime Minister
I next plan to visit Cyprus for the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in 1993.
Mr. Cox
As Cyprus is a Commonwealth country and we are one of the guarantor powers for that island, how does the Prime Minister justify the ongoing occupation of much of that island by the Turkish army?
Against that background and the highly critical comments of the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 8 October about the attitude and behaviour of Mr. Denktash, when will the Government — and the Prime Minister in particular— show some evidence of active involvement in the affairs of Cyprus for the benefit of both communities, Greek and Turkish?
When does he intend to do that?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to tell the hon. Gentleman that I have had a number of meetings with President Vassiliou during the year and that I have already met Turkish Ministers, as has my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary.
We continue to give support to the United Nations Secretary-General's efforts to promote a comprehensive, just and lasting settlement.
The United Nations is soon to resume discussions with both sides.
I hope that sufficient progress can be made for the Secretary-General to convene an international meeting soon, as endorsed by a number of Security Council resolutions.
We shall continue to do all that we can to resolve the problem.
Mr. Nelson
Will my right hon. Friend confirm today that the Conservative Government are planning to spend more next year on local —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The question is about Cyprus.
Engagements
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 26 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Mullin
Does the Prime Minister agree with his right hon. Friend the Member for Sutton Coldfield (Sir N. Fowler), who said on Friday’ We are not accepting the principle of a single currency’— yes or no, please?
The Prime Minister
It is entirely clear from the documents in front of us in the treaty that we are enabling ourselves to have the option to opt in.
We are not committed to opting in by anything in either clause 2 or any later part of the treaty.
Mr. Gill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 26 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Gill
Does my right hon. Friend agree that any proposal to double the European Community structural funds will inevitably result in higher tax bills for the British taxpayer?
Will he therefore assure the House that that proposal, which is supported by the Labour party, will be resisted most strenuously at Maastricht on the basis that one man's subsidy is another man's tax bill?
The Prime Minister
I can give my hon. Friend that assurance, although the issue is not directly on the table at Maastricht.
We have made it clear that we see no case for a further massive increase in the structural funds.
They are already substantial.
They were doubled in real terms in 1987 over a five-year period.
The contribution from some member states represents as large a share of gross domestic products as Marshall aid did after world war two.
Mr. Ernie Ross
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 26 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Ross
Has the Prime Minister had time to study the excellent article in the Glasgow Herald yesterday by the last Conservative leader of Glasgow district council, reflecting on the problems facing the Tory party in coming to terms with the need to give Scotland its own Parliament?
If the Prime Minister gets a chance to read it, will he accept that it more accurately reflects the views of the people of Scotland than his Front Bench team does?
The Prime Minister
The strict answer is no, Sir, I have not yet studied that article, but in view of what the hon. Gentleman says I will most certainly do so.
I do not believe that people in Scotland wish to break the Union.
That is the direction in which the Labour party's policies are going.
House of Commons
Wednesday 27 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
TRADE AND INDUSTRY
Investment
Mr. Alan Williams
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what plans he has to combat short-termism among investors in British industry.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and President of the Board of Trade (Mr. Peter Lilley)
The most effective way of avoiding short-termism is to defeat inflation, a task which this Government are well on the way to achieving.
Mr. Williams
Does the Minister recall that, after collapsing by 30 per cent.
at the start of the last decade, manufacturing investment took the rest of the decade to return to its starting point?
Now it has collapsed by 20 per cent.
again.
Will he explain to industralists why they should risk their long-term capital on economic forecasts from Ministers who cannot get them right even three months ahead?
Mr. Lilley
The right hon. Gentleman forgets that manufacturing output fell under the last Labour Government and has risen under this Government.
Figures in the CBI report show that manufacturing output in the past decade, at precisely the same point in the economic cycle, is up by a quarter, investment is up by a third, productivity is up by a half and manufactured exports are up by nearly three quarters.
Mr. Norris
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the key to short-termism can often be found in the contracts which senior executives and directors write for themselves, concentrating on achieving short-term profit objectives to sustain a share price?
Does he agree that there is an important role in publicly quoted company board rooms for non-executive directors to ensure that companies' long-term interests are reflected in management agreements with senior executives?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend makes an important point.
Shareholders should certainly take that factor into account when considering the performance of managers.
In the long run, most shareholders, which are institutions investing on our behalf, must take a long-term view because they invest for our pensions and life assurance policies over the long term.
Their interest, therefore, relies on long-term investments for long-term success, just as industry does.
Mr. Gordon Brown
Will the Minister confirm that in the Prime Minister's first year, far from escaping from short-termism, 45,000 businesses have gone under, 70,000 homes have been repossessed, 700,000 more people have lost their jobs and manufacturing investment has fallen by £2 billion this year and, according to the CBI, will fall by another £400 million even in 1992?
Is not the ultimate in short-termism the Government's failure to listen to the widespread demand from industry for a long-term industrial policy for Britain?
As the Prime Minister has done nothing to change that policy in his first year, is not Majorism simply Thatcherism without the courage of her convictions?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman illustrates perfectly the short-termism of the Labour Front Bench.
His question was based on a 12-month view.
Mr. Charles Wardle
Why should businesses want the Government to dictate industrial policy?
Why should short-termism be a feature of investment which the Government can influence?
Surely it is up to boards of directors, executives and investment managers to decide whether they wish to invest in the short or long term.
Is not the Government's only contribution to provide a stable economy with low inflation?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
It is the responsibility and duty of investors and businesses to take a long-term view and they increasingly do so.
It is the Government's job to provide a stable framework and reduce inflation.
The Labour party's policies would re-ignite inflation and exacerbate short-term pressures.
Mr. Salmond
Would the Secretary of State consider short-termism among investors as a suitable excuse for the rocky position of sterling on the foreign exchange markets?
Does he accept that the position of sterling is a verdict on industrial performance and, if so, is the verdict guilty or not guilty?
Mr. Lilley
That is another example of someone criticising short-termism by taking the shortest possible short-term view.
Does the hon. Gentleman believe that when he has created an independent Scottish state it will have a separate currency, or would he go for the ecu?
Mr. Donald Thompson
Will my right hon. Friend take no lectures from the Labour party on short-termism, as its short-term policies will last only as long as the election and change for every by-election —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Is this about export credit guarantees?
Mr. Thompson
— especially in this field?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
One of the great problems that industry would face under a Labour Government would be knowing how long their policies would last before being reversed, not least on Europe.
The Labour party seems to reverse its policies on that issue twice every decade.
Export Credit Guarantees
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement about export credit guarantees to eastern Europe and the USSR.
The Minister for Trade (Mr. Tim Sainsbury)
Export Credits Guarantee Department short-term export credit cover is available, subject to certain conditions, for the USSR and all the countries in eastern Europe.
The availability of medium-term cover varies from country to country.
Mr. Bennett
The Minister will be aware of Oldham Batteries in my constituency, which has an excellent reputation for making mining batteries.
He will also be aware that the British market for such products is steadily declining and there is considerable scope for the company to sell batteries to eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Is he aware that that firm and many other people feel that the Governments of other countries in Europe give more assistance to manufacturers to sell to eastern Europe and the Soviet Union than do the British Government?
Will the Minister give an assurance that the jobs of my constituents will be helped by the Government's provision of credit?
Mr. Sainsbury
The Export Credits Guarantee Department has assisted an enormous volume of exports and will continue to do so.
I am sure that the factory in the hon. Gentleman's constituency would like to be paid for its exports.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman is aware that the economy of the Soviet Union is in a confused state and that some of the other countries have heavy debt burdens.
Those matters will have to be taken into account when we consider whether to allow credit for exports to those countries.
Mr. Knapman
After the long bout of socialism there is bound to be economic instability in Russia and perhaps the way forward would be for those who do not trust the rouble to use barter deals.
Will my hon. Friend pay particular attention to the application of a company in my constituency which requires a small amount of insurance cover that could lead to tens of millions of pounds' worth of business?
Mr. Sainsbury
My hon. Friend takes a close interest in the prosperity of companies in his constituency and has written to me about that case.
I am happy to say that my officials will be meeting representatives from the company tomorrow to see what ECGD can do to help in the present confused economic position in the Soviet Union.
Ms. Quin
Will the Minister confirm that we have stopped medium-term cover for the Soviet Union longer than any other OECD country?
Does the Department of Trade and Industry accept that, while there may be no short-term commercial interest in giving export credit cover, there is a case for doing so in the national and long-term commercial interest?
Such a case should be made out.
What is the Treasury's attitude to providing cover?
Is it simply intent on killing off ECGD altogether?
Mr. Sainsbury
All the major export credit agencies are reviewing cover for the Soviet Union.
Exports
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the level of the United Kingdom's exports in 1990-91 to (a) the United States of America and (b) Japan.
Mr. Sainsbury
In the year to September 1991, the value of United Kingdom visible exports to the United States of America was almost double the level of a decade earlier, while exports to Japan had nearly quadrupled.
Mr. Taylor
My hon. Friend gives impressive figures which underline the importance of a successful outcome to the GATT talks.
Will he give the House more information on the Priority Japan campaign which is being run with British industry?
I understand that it has already achieved positive results and it shows just what British industry can do.
Mr. Sainsbury
I agree entirely with my hon. Friend about the importance of a successful outcome to the Uruguay round of GATT.
As a result of the Priority Japan campaign, which my Department launched with British industry, British exports to Japan have risen by no less than 80 per cent.
since 1988.
Mr. Beggs
Does the Minister agree that we shouldall congratulate those British companies that have contributed to the success in export achievements?
Does he further agree that the levels achieved have been assisted by investment in the United Kingdom, including Northern Ireland, by American and Japanese companies?
Will he continue to encourage further investment, which will lead automatically to further increases in exports?
Mr. Sainsbury
The hon. Gentleman is right to recognise the importance of inward investment in contributing to export success.
For example, our exports of television sets substantially exceed imports.
Investment in Northern Ireland, as in other parts of the United Kingdom, is important.
That is why I am so concerned about the hostile attitude to inward investment taken by the Trades Union Congress and the failure of the Opposition to repudiate the TUC view.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
Will my hon. Friend confirm that exports have increased by 70 per cent.
over the past 10 years and that this country now exports more per head than even the Japanese?
Over the past three months Bristol Babcock in my constituency has received export orders of £10 million.
Mr. Sainsbury
My hon. Friend is right.
The success of our manufactured exports gives the lie to the Opposition's portrayal of manufacturing.
British exporters have been extremely successful and that is because the Government have provided them with the right framework for success.
Airlines (Purchasing Decisions)
Mr. Flannery
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will meet representatives of British airlines to discuss the consequences for the British aircraft engineering industry of their recent decisions on purchasing aircraft and engines.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Industry and Consumer Affairs (Mr. Edward Leigh)
No, Sir
Mr. Flannery
Has not the Minister discussed with the chairman of British Airways the very large order for American planes with American engines?
Does not he understand the impact that that will have on British Aerospace and Rolls-Royce?
It would have been possible for British Aerospace to manufacture the wings and for Rolls-Royce to manufacture the engines.
British manufacturing is taking a blow and all that the Minister can do is to give a monosyllabic, negative answer without any explanation.
Mr. Leigh
Naturally, I understand Rolls-Royce's disappointment, but we must put the matter in perspective.
Rolls-Royce's order book stands at a record £7 billion.
Some two thirds of the turnover of the British aerospace industry is exported.
It would be against our interests to adopt a more protectionist and interventionist policy in aerospace, because it could lead to other countries adopting the same approach.
That would be against the interests of our industry.
Mr. Hayward
Does my hon. Friend recognise that there is disappointment on both sides of the Chamber at the recent decision by British Airways?
Although we recognise that it was a business decision, there are substantial implications, particularly for Rolls-Royce.
I reiterate what the Minister said: the aerospace industry in general is exporting more than ever before in the face of substantial competition from abroad.
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend is right.
Rolls-Royce is having success with its excellent new Trent engines and has succeeded in getting an order for the Airbus A330.
We wish the company every success for the future.
My hon. Friend is right to pinpoint the fact that it would be against the interests of British Airways and Rolls-Royce for politicians to second-guess the commercial decision making of private companies.
Mr. Hoyle
Does not the Minister realise that nobody is asking the Government to second-guess?
He is merely being asked why he did not discuss the matter with Lord King.
Further, does he realise that Rolls-Royce now has very little chance of being specified as the lead engine on the 777?
The fact that the alternative was a stretch version of the A330 would have meant, as my hon. Friend the Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Mr. Flannery) said, that both the wings and the aero engines would have been manufactured in Britain.
That would have been good for Britain, for employment, for British Airways, for British Aerospace and for Rolls-Royce.
Mr. Leigh
There was a time when Ministers in the Department of Trade and Industry not only discussed these matters with the industries but directed them.
I remind the Opposition that in those days, when British Airways was still in state ownership, it made a loss of £140 million before tax.
By contrast, in 1990 the airline posted a profit of £130 million.
The question is really an attack on the privatisation of British Airways, which is a successful company operating in a highly competitive marketplace.
Nothing would be more disastrous for the future of British Airways than for it to be summoned to my right hon. Friend's office and told how to run its affairs.
We used to do things that way and British Airways made a thumping loss as a result.
Inflation
Mr. Burns
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received from business men about the importance of controlling inflation.
The Minister for Corporate Affairs (Mr. John Redwood)
Many business men have stressed the importance of controlling inflation.
I am sure that the House will welcome the fact that it is down to 3.7 per cent.
and below the EC average, as that provides the sort of background against which businesses can expand and export abroad.
Mr. Burns
Does my hon. Friend agree that, at 3.7 per cent., the rate of inflation is half the lowest level that it was under the last Labour Government?
Does he accept that small business organisations are extraordinarily worried by the interview given by the Leader of the Opposition to the Evening Standard?
When tackled on how the Labour party would deal with inflation, the right hon. Gentleman said,’ To cut a story short, we do not know.’
Mr. Redwood
That was a rare moment of honesty and brevity from the Leader of the Opposition.
We all welcome his precision in noting the fact that the Opposition do not have a proper policy.
How right my hon. Friend is to point out that our rate of inflation is less than half the best rate ever achieved by the 1974-79 Labour and Labour-Liberal Administration.
We do not intend to repeat their experience and we have the policies to make sure that we do not.
Mr. Alton
Notwithstanding the importance of trying to reduce inflation, does the Minister agree that increasing unemployment — 8,000 more jobless people in the city of Liverpool alone since January this year — and the effect on the telecommunications industry of the recent GEC announcements mean that he should look especially at ECGD funding?
I commend to him early-day motion 209, tabled by the hon. Member for Cambridgeshire, South-West (Sir A. Grant), which calls on the Government to take a more realistic view of the help that they can give to telecommunications if those important jobs are to be safeguarded.
Mr. Redwood
That information is vital to the creation of new jobs.
A former Labour Prime Minister got that far in his thinking in the 1970s when he pointed out that one could not have high inflation and lots of employment and that high inflation would reduce rather than increase the number of jobs.
The best way to create jobs in the telecommunications industry is through liberalisation, our duopoly review, opening up the market, allowing the new products to come through and allowing customers to make their decisions in the marketplace.
I promise the hon. Gentleman that jobs will follow from those decisions.
Trade and Tariff Barriers
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on progress in lowering trade and tariff barriers; and what progress is being made in the GATT negotiations.
Mr. Lilley
We believe that a successful conclusion of the GATT
Uruguay round before the end of the year is vital for Britain, essential for the world economy and still within our grasp.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my right hon. Friend for his interesting reply.
Could not the European Community learn something from north America, where a tariff-free trade area, consisting of Canada and the United States and soon to be joined by Mexico, has been created?
That has been achieved without the need for massive bureaucracy or supranational government or any loss of sovereignty.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that free markets need only a system of laws and not all that bureaucracy?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend makes a telling case.
It is indeed a fact that the greatest prize in Europe is the completion of the single market.
The Government are single-minded about the single market.
It is a British idea, introduced by a British Commissioner and it will be brought to a conclusion under a British presidency.
We believe that that is of supreme importance to Europe and we want to extend the benefits wider through agreements with the European Free Trade Association.
Mr. James Lamond
Although both the successful conclusion of the GATT negotiations and the temporary extension of the multi-fibre arrangement are welcome, can the Secretary of State assure us that there will be some mechanism to control the expansion of imports of textiles and footwear into this country after the MFA finishes?
Will he bear in mind the fact that many eastern European countries are looking to this country as a possible dumping ground and they produce their goods with wages of about 20p an hour?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman, who follows these matters closely, will know that an outline agreement affecting textiles is on the table which, I hope, given the completion of the whole GATT round, will come into force.
That will mean that the gradual integration of textiles into the usual GATT arrangements over 10 years will be accompanied and, in most cases, preceded by a strengthening of the rules and discipline of GATT which, among other things, apply to surges of imports, dumping and so on.
I hope that that is a reassurance.
It has been taken as a reassurance by the British textile industry.
Mr. Grylls
Will my right hon. Friend use his considerable influence to ensure that the problems outstanding on the GATT negotiations are discussed at the Maastricht summit?
Many people rightly think that they are far more important than many of the items currently on the agenda which are causing problems.
Let us get down to tackling practical matters such as getting those trade negotiations tied up.
I hope that my right hon. Friend uses his influence.
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is right to emphasise the great importance that we attach to a successful GATT round.
There is nothing more important for the world economy.
At the G7 Heads of Government meeting, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister obtained the personal commitment of the round before the end of the year and it was partly as a result of that that the valuable meeting took place between President Bush and Mr. Lubbers, on behalf of the Community, which I hope has moved matters towards a conclusion.
Whether there will be enough time at the Maastricht summit to discuss those matters as well remains to be seen.
Mr. Ron Brown
If the Secretary of State believes that he can get rid of tariffs, why does he support the Common Market, now known as the European Community — that big business club which is essentially a conspiracy against the working class and is certainly not wholeheartedly supported on this side of the House?
Will he explain his philosophy?
If he really accepts that, somehow or other, the Common Market is a panacea and if the British people have no say about whether we should continue our membership of that club, which does not have the interests of the common people at heart, how can it be justified?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman goes on about conspiracies against the working class, but I gather that in his constituency the working class conspired against him.
We have abolished tariffs within the single market and the level of tariffs outside the Community is on average, 4 or 5 per cent.
— much lower than it used to be.
We are determined to resist calls for a fortress Europe, which would be damaging to world trade.
One reason why we are determined not to have a Labour Government is that they might tip the balance in the Community towards a fortress Europe and against the forces of free trade which we have successfully orchestrated so far.
Industry (Support)
Mr. Andrew MacKay
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what discussions he has had with the Confederation of British Industry to discuss Government support for industry.
Mr. Lilley
I regularly meet representatives of the CBI to discuss all matters affecting industry.
This month I was the first Secretary of State for Trade and Industry to be invited to address its conference since it began 15 years ago.
Mr. MacKay
When my right hon. Friend last met the CBI, did he have an opportunity to discuss its recent report on manufacturing industry in which it said that the Government should have no role in backing winners, which is precisely the Opposition's policy?
Mr. Lilley
I discussed it with the CBI and congratulated the CBI on it.
It was an excellent report.
It endorsed British industry's achievements under the policies that we have been pursuing for the past 12 years, urged us to continue and build upon them in future and condemned utterly the sort of policies still advocated by the Labour party, which is stuck in a mind-set of the 1960s and 1970s.
Mr. Alex Carlile
The CBI, in its cogently argued annual report, argues for a more involved, better-funded Department of Trade and Industry doing more to help British industry.
The Secretary of State, with the Chancellor, argues for a less well-funded, less involved Department of Trade and Industry.
Will the right hon. Gentleman explain why the CBI is wrong and he is right?
Mr. Lilley
I can tell the House why the hon. and learned Gentleman is wrong.
First, it was not an annual report but a one-off; secondly, it did not call for more funding —
Mr. Carlile
It did.
Mr. Lilley
It did not.
Thirdly, it specifically ruled out more funding and subsidies and a return to the policies pursued by the last Labour Government, with the support of the Liberal party.
The CBI rejected all that.
It said that it did not want the Government to channel funds in the direction of strategically selected industries.
Mr. Nicholls
Does my right hon. Friend recall the CBI's estimate that a 1 per cent.
rise in inflation costs industry some £5 billion?
Does not that show that the Government could best serve the CBI by running the economy in such a way that inflation is kept down and does not reach the levels that it reached under the last Labour Government?
Mr. Lilley
That is absolutely right.
That is why the CBI has warned against policies — advocated by Labour — that would re-ignite inflation.
Premature cuts in interest rates, £35 billion of extra public spending, and increased public borrowing and taxation would all set fire to inflation.
To put Labour in charge would be like trying to douse a fire with kerosene.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
If the Government's record is so good, why has the CBI just reported that investment in manufacturing has fallen by 18.8 per cent.
in the past year, and that it will fall by 4.4 per cent.
next year?
Is not the estimate of a fall of 22.2 per cent.
in two years a damning verdict on the Government?
Mr. Lilley
On the contrary, the CBI takes a long-term view — unlike Opposition Members, who rarely take a view longer than 12 months — and it commends the fact that manufacturing investment is now a third up on the level of 10 years ago.
It says that recent years have seen a transformation in Britain's manufacturing base, and it condemns those who do not recognise it and continue to run down the achievements of British industry.
That, I think, is a pretty clear coded reference to Opposition Members.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the Department of Trade and Industry has an important role to play in creating the right climate for manufacturing industry?
I know that a question has already been asked about export credit guarantees, but does not my right hon. Friend feel that the Government could be more pragmatic, constructive and helpful in assisting manufacturing industry to gain the many orders for capital equipment in the Soviet Union and eastern European countries that cannot proceed because of the Department's failure to grant export credit cover?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely right to refer to the Government's role in setting the right climate and environment and providing the right services for industry.
My hon. Friend asked about the Export Credits Guarantee Department.
We have paid out eight times as much in funds to industry as we have taken in premiums since 1984.
Over that period there has been only a 10 per cent.
increase in the average premium — some premiums have risen while others have fallen.
Naturally, companies trading in the more risky markets, for which premiums have been increased somewhat to reflect the risks, are less than enthusiastic.
Overall, however, I think that the comparatively small increase in premiums demonstrates a pragmatic response, given the huge losses incurred over past years.
Motor Industry
Mr. Martyn Jones
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next expects to meet representatives of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders to discuss the effects of the recession on the motor industry.
Mr. Leigh
My right hon. Friend met representatives of the Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders on 11 November to discuss various motor industry issues.
While no further meeting is planned for the immediate future, the Department maintains regular contact with the SMMT at all levels.
Mr. Jones
Is the Minister aware that car sales have fallen every month for the past two years and that, as a consequence, domestic production fell by 27 per cent.
last month alone?
Will he offer any hope for the future of the industry and its employees when he next meets the SMMT?
Mr. Leigh
What the hon. Gentleman fails to mention is that the industry has shown enormous flexibility in increasing exports by a massive 78 per cent.
in the first nine months of this year.
Contrary to what he said, that has enabled the industry to maintain production at much the same levels as those of 1990.
Mr. Roger King
My hon. Friend has just referred to the car industry's exports during the past few years, and especially this year, which reflect the quality of the product and the improvements in manufacturing technology.
Does he agree that to stimulate demand within the United Kingdom home market, where problems exist on the retail side, the industry is entitled to expect some special attention from the Chancellor of the Exchequer at the next Budget, which could include a reduction in or the total elimination of the appalling 10 per cent.
special car tax?
Mr. Leigh
I am sure that my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer will note with great interest my hon. Friend's comments.
If he does not do so, I shall draw them to his attention.
Mr. Geoffrey Robinson
Is the Minister aware of the very serious position that faces the Jaguar car company in my constituency?
Is he aware that the effect of the special car tax and of the vicious recession in the United Kingdom and the USA has led to the sacking of more than one third of Jaguar car workers this year?
Does he realise that we need to deal urgently with the special car tax and to review the punitive arrangements affecting company cars that have so badly hit the Jaguar car company in my constituency?
Mr. Leigh
The luxury car companies are restructuring, especially Rolls-Royce and Jaguar.
We wish them success in the future.
The hon. Gentleman will know that I cannot comment on what he said about taxation.
I shall ensure, however, that my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer is made aware of his comments.
Mr. Butcher
May I press my hon. Friend a little further on the question of the special car tax, given the Government's excellent record in getting rid of idiosyncratic taxes, of which this is one?
Will my hon. Friend confirm that were he to make representations to the Chancellor of the Exchequer, there is no constitutional impediment to the Chancellor abolishing taxes before Budget day?
Mr. Leigh
I shall draw those remarks to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Chancellor.
Mr. Henderson
On a recent visit to Preston, the managing director of Leyland DAF told me that sales of trucks and buses — which I am sure the Minister agrees form an important part of the industry — in 1991 are at their lowest level since the 1930s.
Does the hon. Gentleman have the grace to accept that that is clear evidence of the damage that has been done to our economy by a Government who have no industrial policy?
Can he declare that the Government intend to produce an industrial policy?
Furthermore, what support can he give to the motor industry?
Mr. Leigh
I am sure that the House would be interested to know what the Labour party's industrial policy is for the motor industry.
British Leyland absorbed a massive £2.9 billion in state subsidies while it was nationalised.
What is the Labour party's policy?
All we have, in the Opposition's current phrase of the month, is a kneejerk reaction.
They have no policy for the future of the motor industry.
We have created a flexible motor industry that increased its exports by 78 per cent.
in the first nine months of this year.
We have every reason to suppose that as soon as there is a reverse in the current downturn in demand, we shall be able to move to even greater success in the home market.
Inward Investment
Mr. Squire
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what recent representations he has received from business men about the need for the United Kingdom to remain a receptive and attractive base for inward investment.
Mr. Redwood
The CBI has recently pointed out how important inward investment is to this country, and pointed to the success of this Government in attracting it — a success not assisted by some in the Labour movement, who call it’ alien’.
I hope that Opposition Members will dissociate themselves from that comment, because Japanese and American investment is more than welcome here.
Mr. Squire
Does my hon. Friend agree that a co-ordinated tax policy across the Community — now advocated by the Opposition — would severely damage inward investment, much of which is attracted here by our lower corporation tax and income tax rates?
The Labour party advocates that in addition to its well-known policies of intervention, control and regulation.
Mr. Redwood
I agree with my hon. Friend.
The tax on businesses is much lighter here than in France, and it is also lower than in Germany.
That is a powerful argument for companies that are thinking of locating within the Community to come to Britain.
Were we ever to have the misfortune of a Labour Government, which is unlikely in the immediate future, the British public might welcome common taxation systems.
Average taxation rates would then be lower than Labour rates, but higher than Conservative rates.
We intend to keep a Conservative Government for that and other reasons.
Mr. Ted Garrett
The Minister made great play of being single-minded.
Does he accept that that single-minded attitude about which he is boasting is the curse of British manufacturing industry?
How can one expect inward investment when no assistance is given to our existing industries?
I am referring to the machine tool industry, which is a key industry now suffering and struggling to keep seventh place in the world.
There were further redundancies last week.
I warn Ministers that if the machine tool industry goes under, it will act as a deterrent to inward investment because it will show that the Government are not committed to the principle of assistance.
Mr. Redwood
The Government have a clear industrial policy which has been set out by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
Low taxation is vital to that policy, as is the assistance given in some assisted areas by my hon. Friend the Minister responsible for regional selective assistance.
Also vital is the support that we give to exports and trade abroad when British companies are involved.
The hon. Gentleman should do his homework on those points.
We have a single-minded policy for British industrial success, but the Opposition have a feeble-minded policy which would achieve nothing for British industry.
Mr. Soames
Is my hon. Friend aware that my constituency is extremely attractive geographically for countries making inward investment in Britain and that it has prospered from such inward investment?
Does my hon. Friend agree that more than ever it is important that an agreement is reached at Maastricht in which Britain takes a whole-hearted role in the European Community, because otherwise it will cease to be so attractive for inward investment?
Mr. Redwood
We all hope that there will be a good agreement at Maastricht.
We want an agreement that promotes business and does not impose burdens or barriers upon the business community.
That is what the Government are fighting for, among other things, in those important discussions.
The success of our policy is evident in Crawley, which is well served by my hon. Friend.
It is also evident in the overall figures, which show that we have attracted almost 40 per cent.
of the total American and Japanese investment into the European Community.
Those are astonishingly good figures which show the attraction of Britain as a location for investment.
Regional Policy
Mr. Patchett
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next intends to meet representatives of the European Commission to discuss regional policy.
Mr. Leigh
I met other European Ministers responsible for regional policy and Mr. Bruce Millan, the responsible member of the Commission, at The Hague on 18 and 19 November.
Mr. Patchett
Will the Minister act immediately to unblock the RECHAR money for Britain's coalfield areas such as South Yorkshire?
Does he realise that France and Germany are already benefiting from the scheme, but that we are denied it because of the Government's obstinacy?
Mr. Leigh
The person who needs to unblock the money is not a member of the Government but Commissioner Millan.
He is blocking the money.
I remind the House that we pay £1,800 million into structural funds and receive only £900 million back.
We make clear provision for RECHAR in public spending.
We want our money and we want it now.
We want to stop Opposition Members conniving with the Commission to withhold our money.
Mr. Andy Stewart
Contrary to what the Labour party is saying, I have a letter from Commissioner Millan dated 8 November that makes his position clear.
He said that it is not about additionality, but about the way that the Government are targeting the money.
Is not it time that he stopped playing party politics and gave us our money for our constituents?
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend is right.
He speaks as a Conservative representing a coal mining area and he truly speaks up for the industry.
France, Spain and Italy have much the same system of additionality as we have.
Why is not Commissioner Millan withholding their money?
Why is he withholding our money when, although the structural funds are doubling, we are likely to receive less?
The legal position is clear.
He should stop shilly-shallying around and mucking about and ensure that that £100 million of our money is released to our coal mining areas.
Mr. Gordon Brown
Will the Minister confirm — yes or no — that it is not only the local authorities that are demanding that the money be unblocked, but the Secretary of State for the Environment?
Mr. Leigh
The hon. Gentleman knows that the constitutional position is clear.
Ministers cannot disagree with each other and, therefore, they never do so.
Sir Teddy Taylor
What on earth will the Government do about the irresponsible and scandalous actions of Commissioner Millan who is withholding money, to which we are legally entitled, on the basis of a bogus bureaucratic point?
Is not it time that the Government, who pay in a massive amount of money — equivalent to a net contribution of £3 a week per family — simply deducted £109 million from the vast amount that they send to Brussels every month?
Mr. Leigh
I cannot promise to do that immediately.
I agree that it is an absurd position for Commissioner Millan to take.
Why have not the Opposition considered the serious point that I have made — that structural funds are doubling, yet we shall receive less?
Our rules on additionality have not changed.
Opposition Members are cutting off their noses to spite their own faces by encouraging Mr. Millan to withhold our money.
We want it, and we want it now.
The legal position is clear, so can we please stop this nonsense?
I tell Opposition Members that we shall not give way; we shall retain control over public spending.
We will not tolerate a situation in which the Government are treated like a county council and a county council treated like the Government.
Guyana
Mr. Dalyell
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what discussions Ministers in his Department have had with the Government of Guyana concerning trade since 1986.
Mr. Sainsbury
My right hon. Friend the Member for Plymouth, Sutton (Mr. Clark), when Minister for Trade, met President Hoyte and Mr. Winston Murray, the then Guyanese Minister for Trade and Tourism, in 1987.
He met Mr. Murray again in 1988.
Mr. Dalyell
May I ask the Minister a question of which I have given the Department of Trade and Industry notice?
Is it true that a former DTI Minister, who happens to be the current treasurer of the Conservative party — the noble Lord Beaverbrook — in five months made a profit of £50 million by purchasing and then selling a huge tract of the fragile Guyana rain forest?
How will that square at the environment conference at Rio de Janeiro as an example of what the British do to try to save the rain forest?
Mr. Sainsbury
The financial details of the transaction to which the hon. Member referred, and which bear no resemblance to those that he described, took place two years after my noble Friend left the Government.
We all know of the hon. Gentleman's concern for environmental protection and for tropical and rain forests, but the article in The Guardian — I stress, The Guardian — drew attention to the fact that the proposal was to take only 20 cu m of wood per hectare, which is only eight trees, every 20 years.
That was the first time that there had been a programme for sustainable forestry management in Guyana.
Mr. Dickens
When my hon. Friend next meets Ministers from Guyana and other countries, will he explain that they should buy British goods because they are best?
He could remind them that since 1981, the volume of manufactured exports from the United Kingdom has outstripped that of France, Germany, Japan and the United States of America.
That is why we are a great nation and why my hon. Friend should attack the Opposition, who constantly talk it down.
We are not a small nation, but a great nation.
Mr. Sainsbury
I hope that the true and forceful points that my hon. Friend made were heard by Opposition Members and that they will take note of the success of British industry.
I assure my hon. Friend that when I meet Guyanese Ministers — or, indeed, Ministers from any country — I take every opportunity to promote British exports.
Mrs. Fyfe
Surely the Minister feels some embarrassment about the fact that a former Minister at his Department bought a Guyanese asset for £9.7 million and sold it a few months later for £62 million worth of shares?
How are Guyanese people expected to buy goods from Britain or anywhere else when they are so impoverished?
How will they repay their debt when the poorest of the poor are cheated in such a way?
Is not it frustrating for aid agencies across the globe to have their efforts swept aside by deals such as this, which cheat the people of Guyana?
Mr. Sainsbury
I have already pointed out that the financial details of the transaction were, as I understand them, nothing like those suggested by the hon. Lady or her hon. Friend the Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell).
The forest involved in the transaction had been losing substantial sums of money under Guyanese Government management.
As a result of the transaction not only will there be substantial investment and sustainable forestry, but 450 jobs that would otherwise have been lost will be preserved.
Mr. Dalyell
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of the unsatisfactory answer, I shall seek to raise the matter on the Adjournment.
Japanese Investment
Mr. William Powell
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what recent representations he has received from business men about the impact of the Trades Union Congress's attitude to Japanese inward investment into the United Kingdom.
Mr. Lilley
I recently met the Japanese Keidanren when they visited this country, and I reassured them that the Government continue to welcome and support Japanese investment in this country.
Mr. Powell
Can my right hon. Friend confirm that the level of Japanese investment in this country runs into billions of pounds and that it underpins tens of thousands of jobs directly and a great many more indirectly?
Is not my right hon. Friend absolutely astonished at the failure of the Leader of the Opposition to condemn the absurd criticisms made of that investment by the Trades Union Congress?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Japanese investment in this country has been enormously valuable to us and it is vital that it should continue.
The resolution of the Trades Union Congress, which was passed by an overwhelming majority, was damaging to that prospect.
However, most scandalous of all is the failure of the Opposition's spokesmen on industry and on employment, when given the opportunity, to dissociate themselves from it.
Even now they talk among themselves to hide their embarrassment.
I should happily give way — if it were in my power to do so — to give them the opportunity to dissociate themselves from that appalling motion.
Mr. Tom Clarke
Does the Secretary of State recall that although he gave an account of meetings with the Japanese, the question asked specifically what representations he had received from business men?
Will he reply to the question?
Mr. Lilley
When I was in the north-east, there was particular concern among business men whom I met because the north-east in particular has benefited greatly from Japanese investment and it does not want investors to be frightened off.
Many British companies, including the one that I visited yesterday, sell very satisfactorily to Japanese companies in this country and that provides a vast market for supplier companies.
They are concerned, which makes it all the more alarming that the Opposition Front-Bench spokesmen continue to sit on their backsides and endorse the TUC's policy.
EC Directives
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry how many directives under the single market programme have been implemented by the United Kingdom; and what percentage have been implemented by the other EC members.
Mr. Redwood
As a result of the United Kingdom initiative, the Internal Market Council of the European Community now receives regular updates on the implementation of single market measures.
The last meeting was given the figures up to 15 October 1991.
The United Kingdom had implemented 111 of the 137 measures required — 81 per cent.
— and we have implemented more since then.
That confirms that the United Kingdom is at the forefront in implementing single market measures.
Comparable percentage figures for other member states show that Denmark has implemented 91 per cent., France 86 per cent. , Portugal 79 per cent. , Spain, Greece and Germany 77 per cent .
each, the Netherlands and Belgium 72 per cent., Luxembourg 69 per cent. , Ireland 64 per cent .
and, I am afraid to say, Italy 54 per cent.
Mr. Bowis
Do not those excellent figures show that this party and this country are sincere and wholehearted in their activities within the European Community?
Do not they also draw attention to the willingness of some countries and some parties to sign up to measures that they have no intention of implementing?
For that reason, is not one of the most important elements of the draft treaty now under discussion the proposal to tighten penalties for nations within the Community that fail to meet their obligations?
Mr. Redwood
I agree with my hon. Friend that the Government believe in serious negotiation to get the details right before signing the directives.
Sometimes that is difficult because we will implement them and we want them to be fairly applied across the Community.
The Commission is with us on that and it was especially firm with Italy at the most recent informal Internal Market Council about its poor state of implementation.
The Italian Minister was unable to promise more than having implemented one out of two by the end of the year.
Many of the other member states agreed with the Commission that more should be done to ensure that that implementation goes ahead.
Our business men expect nothing less.
They expect good law that makes sense for business and they expect it to be applied uniformly across the Community, both by implementation and by proper enforcement.
My hon. Friend may like to know that the Government are now studying the Frankovich judgment, which may also have some bearing on speed of implementation in the Community.
Mr. Enright
Is not the social charter regarded on the continent by both right and left as an essential complement to a single trading area?
British Ministers are looked on as grubby messengers with grubby messages.
Mr. Redwood
That is quite untrue.
Many people on the continent agree with us that business must not be overburdened and that it should be allowed to make choices about how best to involve employees in the process of the business.
We want our system, just as surely as France and Germany want to be free to enjoy their systems.
They have evolved over time; one is not right and one is not wrong.
They are good for our countries.
Mr. Oppenheim
Bearing in mind the figures and the fact that French farmers regularly burn lorry loads of English lamb and Italian grapes with complete impunity and that it is not possible for an English lorry firm to go to Germany and to load up with goods to bring back to the United Kingdom, should not the European Community try to walk before it tries to run?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend has spoken for me.
We want to see full progress with the single market as the priority programme for the European Community.
As the man who has to do most of the negotiating on single market measures, I know that there is still a long way to go.
I pledge to the House that there will be no lack of effort by the Government to make a success of that programme.
Regional Policy
Mr. Pike
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next intends to meet representatives of the European Commission to discuss regional policy and the implications for the manufacturing sector of industry.
Mr. Leigh
I met other European Ministers responsible for regional policy and Mr. Bruce Millan, the responsible member of the Commission, at The Hague on 18 and 19 November.
Several of the issues discussed have implications for the manufacturing sector.
Mr. Pike
Is the Minister alarmed that reports by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development show that United Kingdom investment per person in the manufacturing sector is the lowest, apart from that of Greece, in the European Community?
Is he concerned about that?
Does he understand that our manufacturing regions, such as the north-west, believe that the Government are not interested in the regions or in manufacturing industry?
Mr. Leigh
That is absolute nonsense.
If it were true, why am I, as responsible Minister, spending £567 million of taxpayers' money over the current public expenditure survey round on regional policy?
Burdens on Business
Mr. David Martin
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received from industrialists about the importance of reducing Government burdens on business.
Mr. Redwood
The Government get frequent representations about the need to reduce burdens or to keep them light.
They also get many representations against proposals that the Labour party and, sometimes, the Commission sponsor which would burden business.
Mr. Martin
Will my hon. Friend continue not only to listen to the representations, but to act on them in every way possible?
Will he remind any business man foolish enough to think that a Labour Government would be better for business of the myriad proposals which would prove the truth to be quite the opposite, which would make life far more difficult and which would especially energise union militancy which is at the bottom of some of the proposals?
Mr. Redwood
I can promise that the Government will do no less.
We want to keep the burdens down.
Some of the burdens identified recently by business which worry it most are proposals such as the minimum wage and some elements of the social charter which would greatly increase costs and could resurrect union militancy after our years of recent success in which we have created far more harmony and success.
We have a very good strike record.
Link Projects
Mr. Wray
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what percentage of the budgeted figure has been allocated to link projects in the current financial year.
Mr. Leigh
The link scheme is organised on a five-yearly basis with a total Government budget of £210 million.
To date, 30 programme areas of research have been approved committing the Government to expenditure of £183 million or 87 per cent.
of the total.
Mr. Wray
Does the Minister agree that the system has been a total failure, which was one of the reasons why the link steering group used consultants to study the scheme?
They reported back at the end of January 1991 and commented that one of the reasons for the massive underspending was the fact that one had to have three companies before one could apply.
How can the Minister assess how much money will be needed when there has been a shortfall, as there was last year?
Mr. Leigh
If that programme has been such a failure, why do we now have 30 programmes targeting support for identifiable industrial priority areas, and why are there almost 200 collaborative research programmes?
If it is such a failure, why have we committed £183 million?
That shows that the Government are totally committed to encouraging academia and industry to work together in that excellent and successful programme.
Manufacturing Output
Mr. Strang
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has recently received about manufacturing output.
Mr. Lilley
The most valuable of the representations that I have had on manufacturing industry is the excellent report from the manufacturing advisory group of the CBI, which hails the resurgence in manufacturing that began in the 1980s and calls on us to continue and to build on the policies that brought that about.
Mr. Strang
Given that British manufacturing output for the previous quarter was 5 per cent.
down on a year ago, and is only 6 per cent.
higher that it was in 1979 while that in west Germany has risen by 26 per cent., that in the United States by 32 per cent .
and that in Japan by 36 per cent.
— is not it clear that Government policies on manufacturing industry have been little short of disastrous?
When will the Secretary of State increase investment in manufacturing industry and halt the haemorrhage of jobs?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman's primary point was the customary short-term Labour party view — a 12-month view.
He singularly ignores the performance of manufacturing under the Labour Government, when output fell.
I reiterate that, as the CBI report says, manufacturing output is now up by 25 per cent.
on that of 10 years ago, investment up by one third, productivity up by more than one half and manufactured exports up by almost three quarters.
Our share of trade in world manufactures has outstripped that of Germany, France, America and Japan.
House of Commons
Thursday 28 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NATIONAL FINANCE
Corporation Tax
Mr. Gill
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the level of corporation tax for small companies; and what it was 12 years ago.
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. Francis Maude)
The small companies rate of corporation tax is 25 per cent.
compared with 42 per cent.
at the time of the 1979 general election.
Mr. Gill
I congratulate my hon. Friend on the Government's significant progress in reducing corporate tax rates.
However, will he assure the House that the importance of retained profits is truly understood by his Department, especially in relation to unquoted companies where the profits ploughed back by those companies are often the only source of capital?
If that seedcorn is confiscated, it inevitably drives companies into the hands of their bankers, which gives rise to many of the problems that small businesses are currently experiencing.
Mr. Maude
I take my hon. Friend's question as an expression of support for our policy of increasing the amount of profit that is left with companies for them to retain or distribute as they think proper.
That is the best way of providing a good environment in which businesses can flourish.
That is the judgment not just of the Government, but of those hard-hearted characters who decide where mobile investment projecs should go in the EC.
The majority of Japanese mobile investment projects and many of the American projects are coming to Britain in preference to anywhere else because Britain has the best environment in which to do business.
Mr. Battle
Is not the uniform business rate imposed by the Government hammering small businesses which cannot pay it?
Is not that an extra tax that the Government have imposed on business?
Mr. Maude
Britain is full of small business people who are breathing a sigh of relief that their business rate is limited to an increase in the retail prices index rather than the 60 or 70 per cent.
annual increases that some irresponsible Labour-controlled councils were imposing and which had the sole effect of driving businesses out of many of our major inner-city centres.
Mr. Hill
My hon. Friend will realise that his statement on corporation tax for small companies needs slight adjustment and I am sure that he is considering a major adjustment on capital gains, which I understand is one of the taxes where the cost of collection exceeds the revenue.
Will he consider those matters before the next budget?
Mr. Maude
I treat my hon. Friend's question as an early Budget representation, which I have noted and will consider carefully.
Bank of Credit and Commerce International
Mr. Vaz
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he has had any further discussions concerning the closure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International; and if he will make a statement.
The Economic Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. John Maples)
Both I and my officials have had a number of such discussions with a variety of people.
On 6 November I saw a delegation of small business men who had been customers of BCCI, and yesterday I saw representatives of the BCCI depositors protection association.
Mr. Vaz
Will the Minister join me in welcoming the proposals put forward by the provisional liquidator and the Sheikh of Abu Dhabi as a first step towards a settlement of the problem?
Will he confirm that the Government support a further adjournment of the liquidation period on Monday to allow the negotiations to be completed?
Does he agree that the liquidators and other representatives should study every proposal and option in order to secure the best possible deal for depositors, creditors and former members of staff?
Mr. Maples
Obviously, the Government share the hon. Gentleman's pleasure at the fact that the liquidator may well be working out an arrangement with the main shareholders that would mean BCCI's creditors possibly getting a considerably greater return on what they are owed than was previously thought possible.
Those negotiations are a matter for the liquidator and shareholders, and the question of what the court should do is a matter for the court and the parties before it, not the Government.
Mr. Molyneaux
Does the Minister agree that we are long past the stage of apportioning blame?
People may have been misled, but they may not have been.
Should not we now bend our efforts to supporting the proposal that the Minister mentioned and to finding some way of compensating those who have lost dearly?
Mr. Maples
The first line of compensation is the deposit protection scheme, which needs a liquidation order to come into effect.
Whether or not that will happen on 2 December remains to be seen.
The Government will welcome any arrangement that the liquidator and the principal shareholders can make that would result in BCCI's depositors getting a considerably greater return on their investment than was previously thought possible.
Mr. Boateng
Does the Minister share the view of Sir Leon Brittan and the European Commission that there should be a Europeanwide deposit protection scheme
Hon. Members —
’ No.’
Mr. Boateng
Such is the hostility of Conservative Members to Europe that it is quite mind-boggling.
Does the Minister also share Sir Leon's view that such a scheme should include non-sterling deposits?
In the aftermath of the Bingham inquiry, will he ensure that there is a full review of the second banking directive?
Mr. Maples
Clearly, the Government will take appropriate action on any recommendations that result from the Bingham inquiry.
Early drafts of a possible EC directive on a Europeanwide deposit protection scheme are being discussed.
We think that the basis should be home country protection and that one should not be liable to pay deposits in other people's currencies.
Inflation
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the current level of retail price inflation in the United Kingdom; and what is the average within the European Community.
13
Sir Michael Neubert
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the latest annual rate of inflation.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Norman Lamont)
Headline retail prices index inflation in the United Kingdom was 3.7 per cent.
in the year to October — the lowest for three and a half years.
The latest available average for the European Community is 4.6 per cent.
in the year to September.
Mr. Greenway
Are not those figures very encouraging?
Does not the fact that our inflation rate is lower than the European Community average offer a real opportunity to British industry to improve its competitiveness?
Does my right hon. Friend by any chance recollect the average inflation rate under the last Labour Government?
What does he think about that?
Mr. Lamont
Just by chance, I do remember it.
The average inflation rate under the last Labour Government was no less than the astonishing figure of 15 per cent.
What is so interesting is that despite that disastrous performance, Labour's policies have hardly altered — and they would have the same effect again.
Sir Michael Neubert
While the reduction in price rises is very welcome — taking us back to where we were three and a half years ago — does my right hon. Friend recognise the irony that, as a result, current interest rates — the price of money — are, in real terms, at an all-time high?
Can he defy what may appear to be a paradox by both easing the burden of excessive interest rates and pressing on relentlessly until inflation is completely eradicated from the economy?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend asks me to do several things that might not be so easy to do at once.
Our first priority must be to maintain the pound's position within the exchange rate mechanism.
That is our policy for interest rates.
At the same time, we have been able to achieve a dramatic reduction in inflation — which, because it is better than the European Community average, means that there are better prospects for exporting firms and for the jobs in them.
There is no way that we can sustain high employment unless we are competitive in inflation levels.
Dr. Bray
Is the Chancellor worried that we are not sustaining high employment?
Is he worried that it has taken such a deep and prolonged recession to reduce inflation to its current level?
Does he think that he is doing a good job in alerting the country to the rapid rate of convergence at which he is aiming in the exchange rate mechanism and the possible move towards European monetary union?
Mr. Lamont
I am astonished at the hon. Gentleman's last point.
If I understood him correctly, he seemed to be saying that our inflation rate was converging too quickly, and that that was imposing costs on the economy.
That is an extraordinary contrast with the uncritical support for monetary union expressed by his right hon. and hon. Friends, who want to leap in with no conditions and to throw away the conditions that we have negotiated.
Labour Members scoff, but that is precisely what the Leader of the Opposition said in the debate the other day.
Mr. Higgins
My right hon. Friend is to be congratulated on the dramatic reduction in the inflation rate.
Is he aware that in setting standard spending assessments for prudent local authorities, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment expects them to achieve an even greater reduction in costs and prices?
In the light of that, will my right hon. Friend the Chancellor consider consulting the Secretary of State to establish whether the SSAs for prudent authorities, which demand such remarkable reductions in costs and prices, are really justified?
Mr. Lamont
That is an extremely ingenious question.
I know that my right hon. Friend has already made those points to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment.
We believe, however, that the settlement that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State announced to the House the other day is realistic and generous and that all responsible local authorities should be able to cope with it.
Mr. James Lamond
The reduction in inflation is to be welcomed; it will greatly assist in increasing the number of job opportunities.
However, does not every reduction in the inflation rate leave the real interest rate a little higher?
Surely the Chancellor now has the opportunity to announce a further cut in interest rates.
That would help every company in the country, including the small companies that were the subject of an earlier question.
Mr. Lamont
As I have already said, our first priority will be to maintain the external value of the currency — that is, to maintain its position in the exchange rate mechanism.
I dread to think where the pound would have been in the past few days if I had followed the advice of Opposition Members.
Mr. Chris Smith
The Chancellor will probably recall that his right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, when he was Chancellor, told the House on 15 February 1990 that the retail prices index was an inaccurate measure of the real rate of inflation.
He reiterated that point in June and again in July.
Is not it the case that the present underlying rate of inflation in the United Kingdom is 5.5 per cent.
if mortgage interest rates are excluded, and 7.3 per cent.
if both mortgage interest rates and poll tax are excluded?
Is it not also the case that the underlying rate was 5.9 per cent.
when the right hon. Member for Huntingdon (Mr. Major) became Chancellor, and that it is now 7.3 per cent?
A little more humility would not go amiss.
Mr. Lamont
I touched on those points yesterday when I appeared before the Treasury Select Committee.
Whether we take the retail prices index minus mortgage interest payments or producer prices, the rate of inflation has declined sharply in the past year and I suspect that the underlying measures of inflation will continue to decline in the next year — I can tell the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith), who is interrupting from a sedentary position, that the underlying rate of inflation compares extremely well with the position under the Labour Government of which he was a member.
Interruption
Manufacturing Industry
Mr. Allen McKay
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what was the average annual rate of investment in manufacturing industry (a) from 1974 to 1979 and (b) since 1979.
The Chief Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. David Mellor)
Manufacturing investment, narrowly defined, averaged £9.8 billion a year between 1974 and 1979 and £9.8 billion a year between 1979 and 1990 at constant 1985 prices.
Total capital investment in plant and machinery averaged £17.7 billion between 1974 and 1979 and £24.3 billion a year between 1979 and 1990, also at constant 1985 prices.
Mr. McKay
The Minister has chosen his statistics carefully.
Has not he forgotten to mention that between 1979 and 1981 investment fell sharply and that it was lower in the third quarter of 1991 than in any other quarter — 12 per cent.
of the 1979 level?
With all the income from oil and from selling off the family silver, is not it a disgrace that manufacturing investment is now lower than in 1979?
If the right hon. and learned Gentleman believes in that vital sector of our economy, why does not he take measures to increase investment?
Mr. Mellor
If one takes the narrow definition of manufacturing investment, which excludes a range of investment that is made by manufacturing companies in services that no longer count as manufacturing investment but which they used to do in-house, the average for the past six years was £10.9 billion — much higher than under the previous Labour Government.
I do not know what the Labour party is so proud of, because under the previous Labour Government manufacturing output fell by 2 per cent.
whereas between 1981 and 1991 it increased by 25 per cent.
Mrs. Peacock
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that in the 1980s manufacturing output rose by31 per cent?
Irrespective of what the Labour party says about what happened before 1979, if he visited various parts of Yorkshire he would see massive investment in manufacturing, including £1 million in wool textiles.
Mr. Mellor
My hon. Friend is absolutely right, but the international comparisons are even more telling.
In the 1970s — for much of which there was a Labour Government — the United Kingdom was the only Group of Seven country where average year-on-year manufacturing output fell.
In the 1980s, we ran joint third among the Group of Seven, which was a considerable improvement.
Mr. Nicholas Brown
Is the Chief Secretary aware that today 900 of our fellow citizens in Derby, Crewe and York will lose their jobs in the manufacturing sector?
Is he further aware that since 1979, 2 million of our fellow citizens have lost their jobs in the manufacturing sector?
Is it the Government's policy to arrest the accelerating decline in manufacturing — both in investment and employment — and, if so, when they will do it and how?
Mr. Mellor
There is evidence that the decline in manufacturing has been arrested, and I shall give the hon. Gentleman that evidence.
It seems clear that in 1991, as in 1990 and 1989 and after decades of decline, Britain's portion of world trade in manufacturing exports will increase.
That is a significant achievement, of which the hon. Gentleman should be aware.
Despite the Labour party's smears about what has been happening recently, manufacturing exports are up this year, notwithstanding the recession.
Mr. Alex Carlile
The latest Confederation of British Industry economic forecast shows a decline in manufacturing investment in 1991 of almost 20 per cent.
and a further decline of 4.4 per cent.
in 1992.
Is the right hon. and learned Gentleman satisfied with that performance?
Mr. Mellor
What is absolutely clear is that —
Mr. John Smith
Answer the question.
Mr. Mellor
I am about to do so.
It is not an answer that the right hon. and learned Gentleman will like.
The only basis on which criticism can be made of the inevitable decline in investment during the recession is if high praise is lavished on the Government for the three years in the last 1980s when investment touched peaks.
Even with the decline in business investment in this recession, it is about 40 per cent.
higher in real terms than in 1979.
That is the proof of our achievement in the 1980s, to which we can return.
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
Does not business investment, of which manufacturing investment is a part, remain extremely high?
Is not it higher today than throughout the 1970s and the first half of the 1980s?
Mr. Mellor
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
I am only too happy to discuss manufacturing, as it is an important sector of the economy.
However, it is 20 per cent.
of the economy and I never understand why the Labour party is not interested in the other 80 per cent.
It appears that unless people go to work in some landscape recognisable to L. S. Lowry, their jobs, conditions and efforts are not worth talking about.
Consumer Debt
Mr. Alton
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the current level of consumer debt in Britain; and what was the comparable figure in 1981.
Mr. Maples
The level of outstanding consumer debt at 30 September this year was £52.6 billion.
Because of changes in coverage, comparable figures are not available for 1981.
Mr. Alton
Those figures, which show £52 billion of personal debt excluding mortgages, surely represent personal misery and are a major cause of family and social breakdown.
Does the Minister think that it is now time to implement the proposals in the report’ Escaping the Debt Trap’to introduce social loans, to take more stringent action against loan sharks who exploit poor people by their extortionate interest rates and to encourage a more responsible lending policy by banks?
Mr. Maples
On the question of extortion and credit, the Director General of Fair Trading published a report in September which the Department of Trade and Industry is considering.
As for the proposals contained in’ Escaping the Debt Trap’— the hon. Gentleman kindly sent me a copy — it will not surprise him if I do not agree with all of them.
It is not the Government's business to start telling banks and consumers what arrangements they should make between themselves although, clearly, some people are in difficulties with consumer credit.
I do not think that the fact that consumer credit is at a high level is evidence that people are miserable — they have done things with the money that they have.
Most have either made sensible investments or have bought what they wanted and could afford.
Mr. Loyden
Does the Minister recognise that the question of loan sharks has been on the agenda for the past 12 years, but that nothing positive has occurred other than the report to which he referred?
Is not it time that the Government took on board that question and began to tackle the problem of loan sharks positively?
Such action is certainly lacking at the moment.
Mr. Maples
As I said in reply to the hon. Member for Liverpool, Mossley Hill (Mr. Alton), the Government have obtained a report from the Director General of Fair Trading, which was only published on 24 September.
It is reasonable to give the appropriate Ministers at the Department of Trade and Industry a little more time to respond to it.
Public Spending
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a further statement about public spending levels.
Mr. Mellor
The Government's plans for public spending were announced in the Chancellor's autumn statement on 6 November.
Further details were set out in the written statement published on 13 November.
Mr. Cohen
Most people who see the run-down state of schools and public transport do not think that the picture of public spending is as rosy as that set out by the Chancellor.
Does the Minister remember that before the last general election the Government promised an increase in public spending of £11.2 billion in the following three years?
In fact, it turned out to be a cut of £12.7 billion.
In those circumstances, is not the Chancellor's promise of an extra £10 billion a similar Tory election hoax?
Far from protecting public services, is not the Conservative party the party of public squalor?
Mr. Mellor
The hon. Gentleman would do me a great favour if he could kindly confirm that his party, if in power, would spend an extra £13 billion above what we are spending.
We have been trying to extract the figures from the Opposition.
If the hon. Gentleman has agreed with members of his Front Bench that that is the line to take, I should be glad of confirmation.
Mr. John Marshall
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that spending an extra £35 billion could be financed only by massive increases in taxation and higher interest rates, which would lead to a massive increase in the level of unemployment?
Mr. Mellor
This is a point to which we return time and again.
No Opposition have ever mutilated more forests in the interests of producing an endless stream of written policy documents containing come-ons and pledges of all sorts to every sectional interest, but when we add up those pledges and cost them, the Labour party becomes very coy.
We want to know — The right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) can leap up and tell me — the House would be delighted to hear from him — how he will cover the difference between the £10 billion of extra taxation to which his party has already committed itself and the £35 billion of extra spending to which it has also committed itself?
Interruption
Mrs. Beckett rose
Hon. Members
Answer!
Mrs. Beckett
When I am on the Government side of the House it will be my turn to answer questions.
Now it is my turn to ask them.
Speaking of how to meet levels of public spending, does the Chief Secretary recall the sharp increase in borrowing forecast in his public spending programmes?
Will he confirm that it would be grossly irresponsible for any Government to cut the standard rate of income tax when public borrowing is about to shoot up in that way and that consequently, if the Chancellor of the Exchequer proposes such a cut in his next Budget, he will have to make it up by increasing other taxes — perhaps VAT?
Mr. Mellor
The record shows that during the 1980s we were able both to increase public expenditure in real terms by about 20 percent.
and to cut tax rates
Hon. Members
— No!
Mr. Mellor
Oh yes — and for the decade following 1981-82, we reduced the tax burden.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
That is wrong.
Mr. Mellor
It is not wrong and I understand that next week we shall have the opportunity to debate the correctness of what I have said.
Mr. Nicholls
Given the new-found concern of the hon. Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) about public borrowing, will my right hon. and learned Friend remind her that the previous Labour Chancellor of the Exchequer managed to borrow not only more money than any previous Chancellor, but more money than all previous Chancellors added together?
What would that do for the living conditions of the poor?
Mr. Mellor
It is an interesting fact that the fastest-growing public expenditure programme under the Labour Government was not the health service, education or social services, but debt interest.
Fixed Investment
Mr. Bill Michie
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the latest International Monetary Fund forecast for growth in United Kingdom business fixed investment in 1991.
Mr. Mellor
A fall of 12 per cent.
from the historically high levels reached in 1989 and 1990 is forecast.
In 1991 business investment will still be 37 per cent.
higher in real terms than in 1979.
Mr. Michie
Is the Chief Secretary aware of the IMF prediction of a further 2 per cent.
cut in investment next year?
Is he unaware of the ever-deepening industrial crisis if such cuts were to take place next year?
Is not it time that he built the economy in a constructive way rather than just waffling about it?
Mr. Mellor
As Gavyn Davies, who may be better known to some Opposition Members than he is to us, has said, the interesting thing is at how high a proportion of GDP investment has settled, notwithstanding the recession.
It is 14.1 per cent.
of GDP for the second half of 1991 — that is a high level.
If Labour Members wish regularly to employ international statistics on investment, they should bear in mind the fact that during the 1970s the average annual growth rate in business investment in the United Kingdom was 2.3 per cent., against an average of 3.1 per cent .
for the Group of Seven.
In the 1980s the average annual growth rate in business investment was 6.7 per cent.
as against a Group of Seven average of 4.6 per cent.
That is quite a transformation.
Mr. Batiste
Is not it clear that the excellent record of business investment in the United Kingdom reflects the fact that business men recognise the Government's commitment to containing inflation in the long term?
After all, it is the cost of capital which determines business investment.
Would not that be threatened only by the advent of a Labour Government, with their profligate spending plans?
Mr. Mellor
Yes.
It also reflects the bold decision taken by my right hon. Friend the Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) to cut corporation tax and liberate a range of resources for investments which companies would choose for themselves rather than being pointed in a certain direction by the distorting effect of allowances.
In the middle to late 1980s that led not only to an unprecedented increase in investment in terms of value, but to a sharp increase in the quality of that investment.
That is evidenced by the unprecedented increase in the productivity of all manner of industries that has taken place since.
Mr. Robert Sheldon
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman have a serious look at capital allowances, especially for plant and machinery, which should not have only a 25 per cent.
capital allowance?
That is not an incentive; it is a penal rate.
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman consult the Confederation of British Industry, which is coming round to the view that a 40 per cent.
rate — which is not enough — would be appropriate?
Mr. Mellor
The real point that one needs to note is the increase in capital investment in plant and machinery under this Government — It is no good hon. Members shaking their heads.
Interruption
Since I gave the figures to the House last time, they have not been contradicted.
I will give them again and, if I am wrong, I shall have to be put right next week.
Gross investment in plant and machinery in the last year in which the right hon. Member for Ashton-under-Lyne (Mr. Sheldon) had stewardship of these matters, at constant 1985 prices, was just over £17 billion.
In 1990, it was over £32 billion.
That is comparing like with like and is a sign of the real difference in investment under this Government.
Mr. Ian Taylor
Does my right hon. and learned Friend remember that under the previous Labour Government, the International Monetary Fund came to the rescue?
Is not a warning signal needed for Labour Front-Bench Members over the current draft proposal on economic and monetary union, because it contains a no bail-out clause?
This country had better not be under a Labour Government.
Mr. Mellor
That is one of the subtleties of the European negotiations that should impinge on the consciousness of Opposition Members.
Mr. John Smith
As the Chief Secretary takes refuge in international comparisons, especially with the other countries of the Group of Seven, will he explain why the United Kingdom is not only at the bottom of the investment league of the G7, but at the bottom of the investment league of leading European nations?
Mr. Mellor
That is a very short-term statistic.
It is clear that over the 1980s, our investment record has run well ahead of that of the rest of the Group of Seven.
We shall return to that.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman and I can swap statistics quite soon and I look forward to it.
Interest Rates
Sir John Farr
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a statement on the current level of interest rates.
Mr. Maples
Base rates are 10 per cent.
Sir John Farr
Does my hon. Friend believe that interest rates should be reduced by 0.5 per cent.
now and that immediate action would save thousands of jobs?
Do the Government have the ability to make that adjustment, or are they tied hand and foot by the exchange rate mechanism?
If so, will my hon. Friend say so?
Mr. Maples
My hon. Friend knows that our policy on interest rates is to set them in a way that is compatible with our commitment to the pound's band within the exchange rate mechanism and to bear down on inflation.
That policy has been manifestly successful over the past 12 months in reducing the rate of inflation to 3.7 per cent.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Is the Minister aware that a respectable reason for high interest rates is the control of inflation?
However, given the claim of the Chancellor of the Exchequer, in response to the hon. Member for Ealing, North (Mr. Greenway), about lower inflation, should not the Chancellor have a little more regard for board rooms where, in the balance between optimism and pessimism, the state of opinion remains distinctly negative, than for the exigencies of the exchange rate mechanism?
Mr. Maples
The mood in board rooms as disclosed by the CBI business confidence survey shows something rather different — a substantial and continuing increase in business confidence.
Business men who are borrowers naturally want lower interest rates, but I am afraid that the Government have to take a rather broader view of what is in the interests of the economy.
They cannot simply allow one sectional interest in the community to override others.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
Does my hon. Friend accept that high interest rates are a disincentive to investment?
Instead of indulging in sterile exchanges of statistics across the Chamber, should not the House decide whether the level of investment in this country is adequate to ensure that our manufacturing base can compete against other countries?
How does the level of investment in this country compare with that of our major competitors?
Mr. Maples
I am surprised that Opposition Members cheered that question.
They obviously have short memories.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary has given them the figures on investment in this country and they are rather good.
Interest rates are set, as I said, in a way that is compatible with our commitment to the exchange rate mechanism and to bear down on inflation.
That policy has been successful.
There is nothing in the long run that is more damaging to investment than inflation.
VAT
Mr. Turner
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what have been the changes in the rates of value added tax since the beginning of 1979.
Mr. Maples
From 18 June 1979, the higher rate of VAT was abolished and the standard rate of VAT became 15 per cent.
On 1 April this year that rate was increased to 17 per cent.
Mr. Turner
I thank the Minister for his answer.
It demonstrates clearly the enormous burden of indirect taxation that has been placed on the shoulders of millions of families since the Government came to power.
Will the Minister give the House a categorical assurance that VAT on road and rail transport will not be increased?
Mr. Maples
What short memories we have.
The hon. Gentleman does not remember that, under the previous Labour Government, the rate of VAT on things that they described as luxuries, such as petrol and caravans, was 25 per cent.
I can certainly give the hon. Gentleman an assurance that we will not go back to that.
Mr. Budgen
Does my hon. Friend concede that the cause of the recession is not the high level of value added tax, but our membership of the exchange rate mechanism?
Does he concede also that the question is not whether the war can be won, but whether it can be won with fewer casualties?
Is not there a risk that, in future, the present Chancellor will be known in the economy as soldiers remember Field Marshal Lord Haig?
Mr. Maples
No.
PSBR
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what he estimates the public sector borrowing requirement will be for 1992-93.
Mr. Norman Lamont
The actual PSBR for 1992-93 will be set in the Budget.
A working assumption of a PSBR of 3 per cent.
of GDP was used to construct the autumn statement forecast.
Mr. Evans
Will the Chancellor confirm that the large increase in the public sector borrowing requirement planned for next year will be to pay for the massive increase in unemployment which has been brought about by his own economic incompetence?
Mr. Lamont
Of the £6 billion increase in the planning total, it is true that £4 billion is for social security, but not all that — indeed, I think that only about £2 billion — is the increase in unemployment benefit.
There is another £2 billion for other benefits.
There is also a large increase in the financing programmes of nationalised industries.
I thought that Opposition Members wanted more investment in infrastructure.
That is what they are always telling us and that is what they have got.
Mr. Tim Smith
What would the public sector borrowing requirement be today if it was running at the same proportion of GDP as in 1975-76?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend, remarkably, has those figures at his fingertips.
He knows that it was 9 per cent.
of GDP.
That would be in excess of £50 billion today.
As my right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary pointed out, when the Labour party was in power the fastest-growing item of Government expenditure was debt interest.
They would certainly have had no chance of financing their programme without large increases both in taxation and in the borrowing requirement.
Dr. Marek
Will the Chancellor have a word with his Chief Secretary and tell him the facts of life, which are that the burden of taxation is much higher than it was in 1970 when the Labour party was in office?
As the Chancellor has decimated British industry, how will he pay for all the public borrowing?
Has he a secret agenda to put VAT, for example, on items which bear no VAT at present , such as railway fares, books and periodicals?
Has he a secret agenda to increase VAT to 22 per cent?
Has he a secret agenda to do both?
Mr. Lamont
The hon. Gentleman's question makes no sense.
He asked how we are going to pay for the borrowing.
We shall pay for the borrowing by borrowing — that is the normal way in which one pays for it.
Sir Ian Stewart
Does my right hon. Friend agree that if the Labour party implemented even a fraction of the spending priorities that it has been spreading around over the past year or two, to the tune of £30 billion or £40 billion extra expenditure, it would not only have to face the problem of raising taxation, but would have to resort to massive borrowing, which would increase interest rates and greatly damage the economy?
Mr. Lamont
My right hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The Labour party seems to have a new-found concern about the level of borrowing, but I must advise the Opposition that if they are serious about that, they could pay for their programme only by increases in taxation.
There is no other way.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Barry Field
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Field
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on the anniversary of his Prime Ministership.
May I remind him that inflation has come down from 10.9 to 3.7 per cent., that interest rates have been cut by 4.5 percentage points and that we have the lowest level of inflation for 25 years — below that of west Germany.
Is not that in marked contrast to the events of 25 years ago this very day, as reported by The Times, when the then Economic Affairs Minister warned the Confederation of British Industry that if it breached the inflation-wage restraint, there would be a prices and incomes policy?
It brought the worst economic turmoil that this country had seen since the industrial revolution.
Will my right hon. Friend set out his policy for 1992 —— so that I can congratulate him on his anniversary again next year, when he will still be Prime Minister?
Interruption
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
He is right about the success of the anti-inflationary policy.
It is absolutely imperative that we get inflation down to the lowest level and keep it there, for most of our future prospects depend on that being the case.
Happily, we are making excellent progress on inflation.
It has come down and we shall ensure that it stays down.
Mr. Kinnock
Is the Prime Minister aware that in the past 12 months, because of his policies, 768,000 people have lost their jobs, 100,000 people have lost their homes and 45,000 companies have gone bankrupt?
How does he square that record with his promise a year ago today to build a country at ease with itself?
The Prime Minister
If the right hon. Gentleman examines completely what has happened during the past year with that objective in mind, he will find that not only have we cut inflation, as I have just said, but we have cut interest rates.
We have given Britain the lowest corporate tax rates in Europe.
We have successfully come through a war.
We have successfully produced a new initiative for the Kurds which has saved hundreds of thousands of lives.
We have introduced the largest debt relief package anywhere at any stage and we have made changes in both domestic and overseas policies which command the wide respect of people throughout the country.
Mr. Kinnock
Is not it clear that everyone knows that the Prime Minister has reduced inflation only by creating a deep and lasting recession?
The right hon. Gentleman has lost more jobs, more businesses and more homes than any Prime Minister in modern history.
He truly will be known as the Prime Minister of evictions, unemployment and bankruptcies and that is why, as soon as the people get the chance at the next general election, they will stop him.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman cannot seriously expect that the people of this country will buy the pig-in-a-poke policies that he produces.
Now that inflation and interest rates are coming down, the economy is moving into an upturn and prospects are getting better, as even the Labour party's former adviser has agreed and written repeatedly in the newspapers.
Mr. Kinnock
If there are any pig-in-a-poke policies, the recession policies of the Government are the pig and 768,000 people have got the poke.
The Prime Minister
I can only assume that the right hon. Gentleman's last question was a knee-jerk reaction.
Derbyshire
Mrs. Currie
To ask the Prime Minister if he has any plans to visit Derbyshire.
The Prime Minister
I am making a series of visits to all parts of the country and very much hope to include Derbyshire.
Mrs. Currie
Is the Prime Minister aware that in south Derbyshire, having seen off Arthur Scargill, we have a vigorous, successful engineering industry, a high level of exports and a young and growing work force with a low level of unemployment?
We know that we are far better off in Europe — indeed, we are well off in Europe — and far better off in Europe than out.
May I therefore pass on to the Prime Minister the good wishes of all my constituents for his efforts at Maastricht and hope that when he has finished there he will come up to Derbyshire and tell us all about it?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
I share her view that industry, commerce and individuals in this country are better off in the European Community than outside it.
Many companies are increasing their sales and increasing their relationship with Europe week after week.
One of our objectives at Maastricht will be to achieve stricter implementation of Community measures to ensure that there is genuinely a level playing field for British industry and commerce in Europe.
Mr. Skinner
If the Prime Minister comes to Derbyshire, whatever else he does, he wants to avoid canvassing with the hon. Member for Derbyshire, South (Mrs. Currie).
When she went to Bolsover a few years ago at the time of the salmonella in eggs crisis, she went into South Normanton marketplace and met a woman there who said,’ Hey you, are you Currie, the one about the salmonella?’
The hon. Lady said,’ Oh, yes.
Are you going to vote Tory?’
The woman said,’ Look, I've got six of these eggs in my basket and if you don't sling your hook back to south Derbyshire, you'll have these on top of your head.’
Mr. Speaker
I did not detect a question in all that, but carry on.
The Prime Minister
I suspect that many people in Bolsover will carry eggs in their basket in the hope of meeting the hon. Gentleman.
Engagements
Sir David Steel
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the right hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Sir David Steel
Does the Prime Minister accept that any reform of the government of Scotland implies some useful reform of the procedures of this place?
As it is now three weeks since the Kincardine and Deeside by-election, when will he respond to our invitation to meet him to discuss these serious matters?
The Prime Minister
I have made it clear to the right hon. Gentleman and to the House that we believe that the Union between the United Kingdom and Scotland is important.
We have no plans to change it.
Mr. Adley
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Adley
Does my right hon. Friend recall the answer that he gave to my hon. Friend the Member for Saffron Walden (Mr. Haselhurst) on Tuesday about monetary union?
He said that he was surprised at the contradictory answers which the House had received from the shadow Chancellor and the Leader of the Opposition on this complex issue.
Why was my right hon. Friend surprised?
The Prime Minister
I am always hoping for something better from the right hon. Gentlemens although, alas, I rarely get it.
The Leader of the Opposition claims that he has been a consistent supporter of the Common Market for years, but everyone knows that he was a consistent and bitter opponent of it for many years.
Many of us doubt that he has really changed his mind.
Liverpool
Mr. Parry
To ask the Prime Minister when he plans to make his first visit to Liverpool.
The Prime Minister
I am making a series of visits to all parts of the country and hope to include Liverpool in them.
Mr. Parry
When the Prime Minister visits Liverpool will he meet some of the local trade union leaders and some of the long-term unemployed, especially the construction workers who lobbied Parliament last week?
Unemployment is very high in Liverpool.
My constituency has the highest level in England, Scotland and Wales with an average of 30 per cent.
When the Prime Minister arrives, will he let people know that he is coming?
His predecessor, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), crept into Liverpool and crept out again without letting people know that she was coming.
That was an insult to the people of Liverpool and I hope that it will never be repeated.
The Prime Minister
I will certainly bear that in mind.
I share the hon. Gentleman's concern about unemployment in Liverpool and elsewhere.
I know that he will join me in welcoming the announcement yesterday by my hon. Friend the Minister of State, Treasury at the start of the project to construct a new building for Customs and Excise at Queen's dock.
When completed, it will provide more than 800 new jobs locally.
Mr. Michael Spicer
Will my right hon. Friend give his assurance that, neither explicitly nor implicitly will any deal be done at Maastricht?—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It will have to be done in Liverpool, I am afraid.
Engagements
Mr. David Martin
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Martin
Is my right hon. Friend aware that in Portsmouth, which is connected to the continent by the finest ferry services in the country, there is a growing realisation that success at Maastricht is crucial to trade and investment, on which jobs depend, and that the main prize to be achieved is an agreement which recognises the importance of closer co-operation between European nations rather than moves towards inevitable integration?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend.
It is crucial to our trade and investment that we continue to play a leading role in the Community.
All the Governments of the Community, without exception, are working for an agreement at Maastricht, but there are important national interests at stake.
I am negotiating for an agreement that reflects our national interests and is also in the interests of a wider Europe.
Mrs. Wise
Does the Prime Minister understand that his description of the Sunday trading laws as’ bizarre’has encouraged law breaking?
Will he withdraw that word and condemn the retail giant law breakers?
The Prime Minister
I should have thought that the hon. Lady would now recognise that the description that I gave was entirely apposite.
The present situation is unsatisfactory.
There are acute difficulties in changing that in the short term.
The House of Lords has concluded that our Sunday trading laws are unclear and has therefore referred them to the European Court of Justice to clarify whether they are compatible with European law.
We hope that the European Court will make its ruling at the earliest possible moment so that the House of Lords can give a judgment.
In the light of that, the next step will be for the Government to identify proposals that will command the support of the House.
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Evans
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that on 15 May 1983 he said:’ We want out of the Common Market?’
Could he also tell me whether he said on 16 December 1983:’ We are committed to a non-nuclear defence policy?’
Also will he confirm that in August 1991 he said:’ I think the people trust me.
They trust me for my word and my attitude.’
Would he also tell me
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I think that is enough.
The Prime Minister
I can confirm that, of course, I made none of those statements, but I believe that each of them can be attributed to the Leader of the Opposition.
It was also the Leader of the Opposition who said that if he were to abandon socialism he would not be worth voting for.
Mr. Bill Michie
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Michie
Will the Prime Minister tell the House where my constituent Joanne, who is on a vocational course, receives £35 a week, lives on her own through no choice of her own, occasionally goes without food and sits in the dark because she has no coins for the meter, fits into his citizens charter and the classless society?
The Prime Minister
I cannot comment on individual cases without all the information available in front of me.
If the hon. Gentleman will provide me with all the information, I shall examine the case.
Dr. Twinn
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Dr. Twinn
I thank my right hon. Friend for his clear and positive support for finding a solution in Cyprus.
Will he now seek the urgent help of the President of the United States in making it clear to the new Government in Turkey that the west expects a positive and constructive contribution to the United Nations peace process from now on?
The Prime Minister
I have discussed Cyprus with President Bush on more than one occasion and we both actively supported the efforts of the United Nations Secretary-General.
A settlement will require good will on both sides and I hope that the new Turkish Government will play a full, constructive and early part in the Secretary-General's renewed efforts to find a settlement.
A settlement in Cyprus is long overdue.
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 28 November.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Canavan
Have the Government finally abandoned the erstwhile Tory doctrine that the rule of law must be upheld in all circumstances, now that the Attorney-General is turning a blind eye to big supermarkets breaking the Sunday trading law and as the poll tax non-payment campaign has apparently recruited the architect's daughter?
The Prime Minister
The law must be obeyed.
In the case of Sunday trading, it is not at the moment clear, because of the House of Lords' ruling, what the law may be.
In the case of the community charge, the law is clear.
People should pay their community charge.
It might have helped if the hon. Gentleman had given people a better example in that respect.
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES OFFICIAL REPORT IN THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE FIFTIETH PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND [WHICH OPENED 25 JUNE 1987]FORTIETH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II
SIXTH SERIES VOLUME 200
THIRD VOLUME OF SESSION 1991-92 House of Commons
Monday 2 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
WALES
Training and Enterprise Councils
Mr. Ray Powell
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales what was the total funding for each individual TEC in Wales for 1990-91; and what is the total individual funding for 1991-92.
The Minister of State, Welsh Office (Sir Wyn Roberts)
As the answer contains a lot of figures, I will, with permission Mr. Speaker, arrange for them to be printed in the Official Report.
However, I can assure the hon. Gentleman that there was a substantial increase in funding for each training and enterprise council this year on the year before.
Mr. Powell
We usually get the figures in the replies to questions.
It is difficult to question the Minister when we have not been given the figures.
Most people in Wales are sick and tired of the glossy brochures that confuse the issue of training in Wales and TECs.
Is the Minister aware that since CATO closed in my constituency, 230 training places remain to be filled and 35 trainers have yet to find jobs?
That is the position with TECs in Mid Glamorgan.
The whole of the Principality —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
One question please.
Mr. Powell
I shall be brief, Mr. Speaker, but this question covers a wide subject.
In March, an inquiry was called for into the case of manager Dereck Jones, who took away property belonging to Llynfi workshop.
I demand a reply from the Minister about my request for an inquiry into the financial ramifications for Mid Glamorgan TECs.
House of Commons
Tuesday 3 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HEALTH
NHS Capital Spending
Mr. Moss
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what has been the average annual increase in national health service capital spending since 1978-79; and what was the average increase between 1973-74 and 1978-79.
The Minister for Health (Mrs. Virginia Bottomley)
National health service capital spending has increased by an average of 4.3 per cent.
a year in real terms since 1978-79, compared with an average real terms fall of 6.7 per cent.
a year between 1973-74 and 1978-79.
Mr. Moss
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
Will she confirm that that excellent national news is reflected in my constituency, which is served by three separate district health authorities which have invested more than £54 million in new hospital builds since 1979?
Mrs. Bottomley
Not only can I confirm my hon. Friend's figures, I can go further and tell him that an additional £115 million has been invested by the three health authorities that his patients use in Cambridge, Peterborough, and West Norfolk and Wisbech.
That is a real and practical example of investing in the health service for the future and of serving patients.
Mr. Hinchliffe
How much of that capital spending was funded from the closure and sale of established hospitals during those periods?
Mrs. Bottomley
I cannot give the hon. Gentleman that figure at the moment, but it is essential that we use NHS buildings as effectively as we can.
Investing in capital does not mean preserving units that are no longer needed.
There were 30,000 tuberculosis beds in this country before the war, but we do not need TB beds now; we need day surgery and intensive care facilities, such as those that I opened yesterday when I visited a hospital in the constituency of the hon. Member for Peckham (Ms. Harman).
That shows the side of the health service that the hon. Lady is not so keen to talk about — our investment in the future and our effective use of facilities and resources.
In-patient Waiting Lists
Sir Fergus Montgomery
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many in-patients are waiting for treatment currently; and how many were waiting in March 1979.
The Secretary of State for Health (Mr. William Waldegrave)
There were 752,422 people waiting for in-patient treatment in March 1979 and 692,946 in March 1991 — a drop of 8 per cent.
However it is the time that patients wait that matters.
Latest provisional figures for in-patients and day cases for September 1991 show that in the past six months the number of patients waiting over a year fell by 7 per cent.
and the number waiting over two years fell by 16 per cent.
This builds on the record reductions achieved last year.
Comparisons with 1979 can be made only for in-patients.
On that basis the number waiting over 12 months is now 27 per cent.
lower than in March 1979.
Details have been placed in the Library.
Sir Fergus Montgomery
Does my right hon. Friend agree that those figures clearly show the progress that the Government are making?
Will he confirm that in the north-west region the latest figures show a fall of 26 per cent.
since last March in the number of patients having to wait more than a year?
Are not those figures the best in the whole of England?
Mr. Waldegrave
It gives me pleasure to confirm that my hon. Friend's region has been the winner in the past six months, and that waits of more than one year have been reduced by 26 per cent.
while waits of more than two years have been reduced by 37 per cent.
Mr. Gareth Wardell
Will the Secretary of State tell the House how many magnetic resonance imagers are available in England and Wales to provide essential diagnostic information, given that the town of Portland in Oregon has 14?
Mr. Waldegrave
I do not have the figure to hand, although I can assure the hon. Gentleman that it is a great many more than in 1979.
I will write to him.
Dame Jill Knight
I thank my right hon. Friend on behalf of the west midlands, which is also high in the league table.
The numbers waiting two years have fallen by some 31 per cent.
in my area, and we are most grateful for that.
Mr. Waldegrave
I can confirm that my hon. Friend is right — over two-year waits in the west midlands are down by 31 per cent.
and over one-year waits are down by 24 per cent.
That shows the real progress that is being made on the waiting lists initiative and towards fulfilling our commitment to get rid of all over two-year waits by next year.
Ms. Harman
Can the Secretary of State point to any year in the past 10 in which the September in-patient waiting list figures have not been higher than for every year under Labour?
While he is dealing with waiting list figures, will he tell us more about the figures for day patients?
Does he admit that the waiting list for day patients has shot up by 50 per cent?
Does he also admit that for the first time in the history of the national health service, waiting lists for day patients and in-patients combined have risen above 900,000 people?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Lady persists — I do not think that it is because she does not understand — in making the bogus comparison between in-patient and out-patient waits now and in 1979.
I am proud that we have greatly increased the facilities for day-case treatment.
That was right.
Therefore, there are increasing numbers of people on the waiting lists for such treatment and they are being treated rapidly.
I hope that she will welcome that — if she understands it, which I believe she does.
Patients Charter
Mr. Brazier
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what representations he has received from NUPE and COHSE on the patients charter.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
Two representations were received yesterday
Mr. Brazier
Is not it sad to hear that until yesterday no representations had been made on the patients charter by NUPE and COHSE?
Does he agree that it shows that the unions do not represent their ordinary members who, in hospitals such as the Kent and Canterbury hospital in my constituency, strive for every possible improvement in care of the patient?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is to be congratulated.
It is perhaps not entirely a coincidence that his question was due to be answered today and the representations from the two trade unions arrived in the Department yesterday.
We know something about the views of Mr. Bickerstaffe because he gave a substantial interview to the New Statesman and Society recently.
He did not mention the patients charter, but he gave us some other insights into his approach to the problems.
He was asked:’ What are the likely expectations of your members with Labour in power?’
He answered:’ We hope the national minimum wage — currently £3.40 an hour for 40 hours before stoppages — will rise.’
When asked what relationship there was between NUPE and Labour's leadership, Mr. Bickerstaffe said:
’ I meet with the leader, with John Smith, Robin Cook, when necessary.’
My hon. Friend might like to speculate about who decides when it is necessary.
Mr. Canavan
Will the Minister pay tribute to the distinguished record of COHSE and NUPE in providing excellent standards of patient care over many years?
That dates back to long before the Government's so-called patients charter was ever dreamt of.
Will the Minister respond positively to COHSE's request for a ministerial meeting to discuss certain aspects of the patients charter?
Mr. Dorrell
I will gladly give credit to the unstinting support that the staff of the national health service give to the principles of the NHS.
Without it we could not possibly deliver the high quality of service that we do.
However, the role of COHSE, the trade union which sponsors the hon. Gentleman, in delivering that quality of care is, at best, marginal.
Mr. Sayeed
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is regrettable that the same unions that stopped the sick from getting to hospital in 1978 and 1979 are showing the same callous disregard — or at least their leaderships are doing so — for the needs of patients?
Does he hope that Labour Members of Parliament who are sponsored by COHSE and NUPE will prevail on those unions to put the patients first?
Mr. Dorrell
Yes, I hope that the Labour party is anxious that reference to patients should be one of the priorities of the unions which claim to represent health service staff.
In the same interview from which I quoted, Mr. Bickerstaffe went on to repeat the high priority that NUPE attaches to increasing the minimum wage — a proposal which the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) has already said would cost the NHS between £400 million and £500 million.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Would the Minister work for £80 a week?
Mr. Dorrell
Mr. Bickerstaffe said that he wanted to see that bill increased.
He goes on to say:’ We would like to have argued’—
Interruption
Mr. Campbell-Savours
The Minister is a hypocrite.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Even though that remark was made from a sedentary position, the hon. Gentleman must withdraw it.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Nobody in the House would work for £80 a week.
I withdraw the remark.
Mr. Dorrell
Mr. Bickerstaffe goes on to repeat:’ We would like to have argued for a higher minimum wage, for example, but the party has said no, there are others — pensioners and so on .
Even in that context, Mr. Bickerstaffe does not mention patients.
Mrs. Heal
The health service unions, like members of the public, are worried that the commitments in the patients charter’ to receive health care on the basis of clinical need, regardless of ability to pay’are being breached daily.
The promises made have already been broken.
Do not Conservative Members, the Secretary of State and his health team agree with the hon. Member for Birmingham, Edgbaston (Dame J. Knight), who said in a newspaper article that’ All in all, it was, and is, wrong to breach the principle that a health check within the NHS should be free’?
The question that the Secretary of State must answer is —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mrs. Heal
Conservative Members do not like to be reminded of what is going wrong.
The Secretary of State has said that he wants a national health service that is well informed of people's needs and preferences.
Does the Minister agree that people need and prefer a free eye test?
Mr. Dorrell
Once again, the Labour Front Bench is raising the red herring of charges.
The commitment to deliver a health service on the basis of clinical need and not of ability to pay is common ground between both sides of the House.
Any charge within the NHS requires a statutory authorisation.
There are three important bases for such charges, and two of them were introduced by the Labour party.
Air Ambulance Services
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many area health authorities now have (a) part-time and (b) full-time use of helicopters for air ambulance; and what advice his Department gives to area health authorities on the desirability of these services.
Mr. Dorrell
Several ambulance services now use helicopters.
It is the view of the regional ambulance officers' group that further development of air ambulances should await the outcome of the current evaluation of helicopter ambulances.
Mr. Coombs
I am sure that the research being undertaken will show that air ambulances are a useful contributor to paramedical facilities within health authorities.
However, will my hon. Friend consider the impact on residents in areas close to the landing pads for helicopters providing such services?
Will he also consider the difficulties being experienced by some of my constituents in Swindon, who have a helicopter landing pad only 20 yds away from their back fence?
That has been provided because it does not require planning permission.
No doubt it is to the benefit of patients, but it is by no means to the benefit of residents.
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend raises an important matter.
The local ambulance service in Wiltshire is to be congratulated on the innovative proposal that it has introduced — sharing the cost of a helicopter ambulance between the health authority and the police service.
However, when a helicopter lands it can cause a disturbance to local residents.
The health authority has recognised that and has sought an alternative and more convenient landing pad.
Unfortunately, it did not get approval from the Civil Aviation Authority.
I am sure that that issue is not dead and that the health authority will continue to look for more appropriate landing facilities.
Mr. Kennedy
Is the Minister aware of the broad welcome that has been given to the development of such a service in various parts of the country?
Is he further aware of the important contribution that it can make in large and more geographically remote areas, as it allows casualty access to larger regional hospitals in the event of mountaineering or road accident emergencies?
Will the Minister examine how the system is working at the weekends?
I gather that in some areas, where facilities are usually available from Monday to Friday, the lack of weekend facilities is causing anxiety.
That is especially true for travelling, mountaineering and similar accidents, when weekends may be times of maximum need.
Mr. Dorrell
The hon. Gentleman raises an important point.
The patients charter sets out clearly the entitlement of a patient and the standard we seek to set for ambulance services.
The charter does not specify 14 minutes in urban areas and 19 minutes in rural areas during weekdays; it sets that standard for seven days a week, 365 days of the year.
It is the responsibility of the regional ambulance officer to deliver that standard to all the people living in his district.
GP Fund Holders
Mr. Knapman
To ask the Secretary of State for Health whether he intends to relax the patient numbers criteria so that smaller general practitioner practices can apply to be fund holders.
Mr. Waldegrave
I know that many general practitioners who are not eligible to join the scheme recognise the benefits of fund holding and wish to take part.
I hope to be able to open the scheme to more practices soon.
At present, small practices may group together to become fund holders.
Mr. Knapman
My right hon. Friend is aware of the clear advantages to patients of fund-holding practices.
That is being increasingly recognised, not only by doctors but by the British Medical Association and, possibly, by some Opposition Members.
Does he appreciate the keen desire of many small practices to join these excellent schemes?
Mr. Waldegrave
My hon. Friend is right.
There is a growing consensus about the success of the scheme, and that runs right across the general practitioners taking part in it.
The hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) is not exactly clear about his policy on these issues.
I hope that that unclarity means that he is moving towards us.
Mr. Loyden
Does the Secretary of State agree that there is a danger that the number of patients per doctor might have an effect on the eventual standard of treatment that patients receive?
Is he carefully watching the changes that are taking place to ensure that the number of patients per doctor conforms with the ability to supply a good service?
Mr. Waldegrave
Yes, we are assessing the whole fund-holding scheme jointly with the general medical services committee, the relevant committee of the BMA.
The hon. Gentleman might recall that one of our successes has been to bring down average list sizes markedly since Labour was in power.
Mr. Wolfson
Does my right hon. Friend agree that general practitioners, whether fund-holders or not, as a result of the new contract — which initially was often bitterly opposed — are now giving patients a much better service than they had in the past?
Mr. Waldegrave
My hon. Friend is right, and that is not just his opinion.
A recent independent poll on exactly that matter showed that already, within the first year, a significant number of patients of general practitioners recognised that they were getting better services than a year previously.
The level of opposition that existed when my predecessor brought in the contract will be shown by history to have been wildly overstated.
It has been a success.
Mr. Rooker
In the context of smaller practices, I wish to raise with the right hon. Gentleman a subsidiary but related issue, that of the single-practice general practitioner.
Does he believe that, even with massive commitment and dedication, it will be possible for the large number of single-practice GPs in this country to measure up to the demands of the community care programme in 1993?
I cite as an example the urban areas of the city which I partially represent — I speak for all of Birmingham when I speak on this issue, and I am trying to raise an important matter in which there may be some common cause.
There are 586 GPs in 270 practices, over a third of which are single practices.
Even with their dedication and commitment, one must feel concern about their ability to measure up to the infrastructure needed for a viable community care programme.
Interruption
Mr. Waldegrave
I respect the hon. Gentleman's commitment to those matters, and he is right to point to one of the problems.
In recent years there has been a move to much bigger primary care teams, which has generally been welcomed.
Many dedicated single-handed practitioners remain, and we must ensure that that option remains so that GPs are free to practise how they wish.
One of the strengths of the fund-holding scheme is that general practitioners can group together to use the benefits of the scheme.
Therefore, the scheme can provide some of the back-up for single-handed practitioners without their losing the independence that they rightly value.
National Health Service Expenditure
Mr. Ian Bruce
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what is the percentage of gross domestic product spent on the national health service in 1991-92; what it will be in 1992-93; and what it was in 1978-79.
Mr. Waldegrave
An estimated 5.6 per cent.
of the United Kingdom's gross domestic product will be spent on the NHS this year, rising to 5.7 per cent.
next year.
In 1978-79, the NHS share of GDP was a full percentage point lower, at 4.7 per cent.
Mr. Bruce
Does my right hon. Friend agree that not only has the Conservative party demonstrated that it is willing to spend a greater proportion of gross national product, but, by continuing to expand our economy, we have surpassed the Labour party bid at the 1987 election — when it said that it would increase spending on the national health service by 3 per cent.
— by about a third?
Mr. Waldegrave
It is important to note that if the pledge that the Labour party made at the last election had been carried through, dramatically less money would have been spent on health, for the reasons that my hon. Friend gave.
That achievement represents a larger share of a larger national product and the Conservative party can be extremely proud of it.
Mr. Nellist
Has the Secretary of State seen the item in The Independent yesterday about NHS spending on opted-out hospitals?
It refers to a paper called’ Personnel Policy and Practice’, which advises the managers of all opted-out hospitals to sack renegades and subversives.
They are defined as all those who do not share the values and goals of opt-outs.
At Coventry's Walsgrave hospital, in virtually every ballot that was held, 80 to 90 per cent.
of all doctors, nurses and health workers voted against opt-out.
If they are all sacked, who will run the health service?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman actually threatened some of the staff in that hospital for carrying out Government policy.
He was forced by the Leader of the Opposition to withdraw that threat, so he should be a little careful.
He referred to an old paper that is regularly recycled by one of the unions.
It is a little out of date.
I direct the hon. Gentleman to the leader on the matter in the same newspaper today.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
Will my right hon. Friend consider that, although statistics are helpful, the important thing about the health service is the quality of care, and the outcome of the treatments that are given?
It is important, especially in my area, to accept that Mersey has achieved dramatic reductions in health service waiting lists, for which Sir Donald Wilson should be given credit in Mersey and Mr. Peter Hayes for the part that he has played in Macclesfield.
However, the quality of the service for the amount of money allocated and the outcome of the treatment are critical for the people of this country.
Mr. Waldegrave
I strongly agree with my hon. Friend and I join him in paying tribute to the management of the health service in his part of the country.
We are taking on Mr. McKeever from Crewe to help us with new waiting list initiatives in the Mersey region, and we are giving him £2 million to deal with some of the longer lists.
We should be most proud that, despite the fact that our health service spends less wastefully than those in some other countries, our figures on, for example, perinatal mortality are better or just as good.
Hospital Ancillary Services
Mr. Salmond
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what representations he has received on the contracting out of hospital ancillary services; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Dorrell
The Government's further proposals for market testing hospital ancillary services are set out in the White Paper’ Competing for Quality’, and take account of representations received.
Mr. Salmond
Can the Minister confirm that health boards have been issued with new instructions, both written and by meetings, to be responsive to the needs of private contractors?
Is there any chance of the Government issuing similar instructions to ask health boards to be responsive to the needs of health service workers?
How can a Government who claim to defend the national health service pursue that claim when the hidden agenda behind so many of the changes is to break the morale, commitment and solidarity of people who work in the health service?
How can a Government at war with health service workers claim to be defending the NHS?
Mr. Dorrell
The hon. Gentleman does not need to rely on my words to rebut every word that he has just said; he need only read the latest edition of the in-house magazine of the Confederation of Health Service Employees, where it is written:’ The Mid-Glamorgan District Linen Service is efficient because it has no choice.
In 1987, the service had to compete for the hospital's laundry contract for the first time and in 1993, it will have to submit another tender.’
The article quotes Mr. Jeff Chard, a former COHSE shop steward, as saying:’ At the moment, I have to use hospital staff like engineers to service the machines and do repairs.
But eventually I'll be able to go to anyone I like if he's cheaper I'll have to get Dai Jones the carpenter from down the road instead.’
He went on
Hon. Members
Boring!
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is in order for Ministers to quote, but I think they should do so briefly.
Mr. Dorrell
Just two more sentences, Mr. Speaker.
The article continues:’ Competitive tendering was forced on to us and it's put a tremendous pressure on everyone.
But it has made us more productive and more of a team — we all have to co-operate and pull together just to keep our heads above water.’
Mrs. Currie
Is not the key to good service in the health service, good management?
Would not the worst thing that could possibly happen for any of our constituents or patients be for the Labour party to come to power and abolish competitive tendering?
That would not only cost a great deal of money, but put power once again into the hands of the National Union of Public Employees and the Confederation of Health Service Employees, which could then decide how hospitals were to be run.
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is precisely right.
The compulsory competitive tendering programme has already saved the health service £630 million in England and £85 million in Scotland — enough to complete 225,000 hip replacements.
The repeating saving on an annual basis is £156 million, which is used to increase patient care.
It is that figure that the Labour party is committed to cut.
Mr. Robin Cook
Does the Under-Secretary of State ever ask in relation to competitive tendering about the price patients have to pay in poorer food and dirtier hospitals?
Does he not know that one in five of private contracts has ended in failure?
Is he aware that the National Childbirth Trust recommends that mothers in maternity wards should clean the baths?
Is he aware of the concern expressed by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland about the poor food supplied by a private contractor in my constituency?
Does the right to a clean hospital or decent food figure anywhere in his patients charter, or does cutting costs always come first with the Government?
Mr. Dorrell
Perhaps not surprisingly, the hon. Gentleman's question is a straight paraphrase from publications issued by COHSE and NUPE.
The hon. Gentleman must answer this question: how can he argue that it is in patients' interests to move away from a system of competitive tendering and use that money to pay trade union members rather than to pay for extra treatment for patients?
Mr. Gregory
Will my hon. Friend confirm that savings in ancillary services such as catering, cleaning and laundry go to benefit patients directly, not to the paymasters of the Labour party, COHSE and NUPE?
Mr. Dorrell
Yes, competitive tendering is based on the simple proposition that health service managers are trained to manage health care institutions, not laundries or cleaning forces.
It is surely better to use skilled laundry and cleaning managers to manage those services and to rely on the skills of health care managers to manage the essential core activity of the health service — the provision of health care.
NHS Trusts
Sir Patrick Duffy
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what representations he has received in connection with applications for national health service trust status from within the Sheffield health authority.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
Trent regional health authority received a wide variety of responses to the consultation exercise for the Sheffield applications which the Secretary of State took fully into account when making his decisions to grant NHS trust status.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Is the Minister aware that now that clear decisions have been taken on trust status, anxiety in Sheffield relates to the likely impact of the Chancellor's autumn statement on the health authority's financial position next year and in the long term, and particularly the need for greater per capita funding given the number of elderly people and the levels of health inequality and social deprivation in Sheffield, particularly in Attercliffe?
Mrs. Bottomley
I am pleased to hear from the hon. Gentleman that there is no more concern about trust status.
There has been most impressive progress in Sheffield.
I commend the annual report from the health authority chief executive, which shows that Sheffield is a centre of excellence for health.
The hon. Gentleman need not look only to the health authority chief executive; he can ask the patients.
A recent survey by Sheffield university showed that 95 per cent.
of patients surveyed were either satisfied or very satisfied with the service that they were receiving at the Northern General hospital trust — an impressive result.
The hon. Gentleman particularly asked about weighted capitation.
He will know that the health service has an excellent settlement this year, with an additional £2.2 billion for the regions — an increase of 8.9 per cent., or 4.2 per cent .
in real terms.
Weighted capitation is expected to be a more equitable system of distribution, taking account of the young and the elderly.
The precise allocation of resources within the region is a matter for the hon. Gentleman's regional health authority chairman, but I know that he will have confidence in the excellent work taking place in Sheffield, particularly in the light of its new health strategy.
Mr. Roger King
Will my hon. Friend suggest that hospitals in the Sheffield health authority area considering trust status should visit the Walsall trust hospital in the west midlands, where they will discover that in the first three months of this year 1,100 more patients were treated than in the year before — a 13 per cent.
increase?
Is not that evidence that hospital trusts work?
Mrs. Bottomley
If the citizens of Sheffield needed to go to Walsall, I am sure that they would do so, but they need look only to their own trust to see the remarkable progress already made.
It has six more consultants, a new computerised axial tomography scanner, new plastic surgery beds and an additional surgical ward.
I am delighted that in Walsall, as in the other trusts around the country, more patients are being treated more effectively and morale is good.
The trusts are a great success.
Local Authority Social Services
Mr. Lofthouse
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the provision of local authority social services under the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1970.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
Local authorities provide a range of social services under section 2 of the Act, including assistance in the home, meals, equipment and adaptations, telephones, holidays and recreational facilities.
Mr. Lofthouse
Why are the Government preventing local authorities from providing adequate services for the chronically sick and disabled?
Is the Minister aware that if the Wakefield district council social services department had to stick to its standard spending assessment it would have to save a further £3 million this year on services for the chronically sick and disabled?
Is she further aware that, like myself, each weekend many hon. Members meet many chronically sick and disabled constituents who are not receiving adequate services to enable them to lead a reasonable and respectable life?
What do the Government intend to do about that?
Mrs. Bottomley
I am pleased to be able to report to the hon. Gentleman that we have just had the first results of the monitoring arrangements for the implementation of community care and we are impressed with the practical schemes already being advanced to ensure that the frail and vulnerable, and particularly the chronically sick and disabled, receive the support that they need.
The hon. Gentleman will want to know that during the past two years personal social services standard spending will have increased by nearly 33 per cent.
— 19 per cent.
in real terms — which is more than adequate to allow for demography and renewed pressures on local authorities.
Mr. Thurnham
Does my hon. Friend agree that voluntary groups and private providers can efficiently deliver services for the disabled?
Will she instruct local authorities not to use all the extra funds for their own union-dominated monopoly services, so beloved by the Opposition?
Mrs. Bottomley
There is little doubt that the work undertaken by the voluntary sector, and often by the independent sector, is of an extremely high quality.
It is vital that local authority social services departments do not use the additional resources for a job creation scheme for their own staff.
They are required to identify the best way of helping the frail and vulnerable and in many cases that will be by using the voluntary or the independent sector.
Mr. Wigley
Does the Minister accept that those vitally important services that she described depend not only on her own Department, but on the Department of Social Services, on the Department of the Environment in respect of local government, on the Scottish Office and on the Welsh Office?
Given the importance of those services from 1993, in the context of care in the community, will the Minister undertake an in-depth review to ensure adequate budgets for those services to ensure that there is no shortfall thereafter?
Mrs. Bottomley
I greatly respect the hon. Gentleman's comments.
If the individual is to receive a seamless service, effective co-operation at local level is essential to ensure that the frail and vulnerable receive help from suitable services and health authorities, with the assistance of housing authorities.
We in central Government are taking strenuous steps to make sure that we work effectively; similarly, it is vital that local and health authorities, together with general practitioners, make sure that they are ready for April 1993.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Does my hon. Friend the Minister agree that while Britain has the highest proportion of health costs funded by the public purse, the British public have shown their confidence in it by the fact that only 13 per cent.
of them choose private treatment, compared with 25 per cent.
in France, and 28 per cent.
in Germany?
Will Opposition Members kindly keep quiet?
Interruption
Mrs. Bottomley
Once , my hon. Friend identifies a vital point about public confidence in our national health service, which stems from the Government's investment in and support for it.My hon. Friend need ask only one question.
If she or any of her friends become unwell anywhere else in the world, what would they do?
They would make their way back home as fast as they could to receive the benefits of national health service treatment.
Mr. Alfred Morris
How many disabled people, after being assessed for services under the Chronically Sick and Disabled Persons Act 1979, are now on waiting lists for the help that they need?
At the latest date for which the Minister has figures, how many local authorities had reduced or removed services in cases where there was no diminution of need?
How does the Minister react to the case, of which I have informed her right hon. Friend the Secretary of State, in which home help provision was withdrawn from an elderly couple, both of whom are severely and progressively disabled?
Mrs. Bottomley
The right hon. Gentleman will be aware that there has been a steady and substantial increase in resources for all kinds of community care — be it day places for the mentally ill or for those with learning disabilities, or increased resources for home help.
The right hon. Gentleman identified the way in which some home help services have been moving towards home care services.
We are looking at that, but to suggest that there has been other than a clear and steady increase in available services would be a travesty of the truth.
NHS Expenditure
Mr. Day
To ask the Secretary of State for Health by how much spending on the national health service (a) in England and (b) in the United Kingdom will increase in 1992-93.
Mr. Waldegrave
Total NHS spending is forecast to increase by £2.2 billion in England and by £2.8 billion in the United Kingdom next year.
That means that, throughout the United Kingdom, the national health service will be spending roughly £100 million per day.
Mr. Day
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the shadow Chancellor said recently that to repair what he unjustifiably called the Government's neglect of the national health service would require an extra £2 billion in this year's autumn statement?
Given that an extra £2.8 billion was found, has my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State received an apology from the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith), or have any of Labour's Front-Bench spokesmen for health offered to withdraw that allegation?
Mr. Waldegrave
I wrote a number of letters to Labour's spokesman on such matters, asking him to clarify Labour's spending pledges.
Some months later, he is still working on the reply, but doubtless I shall receive it sooner or later.
Labour's spending pledges are in an equal muddle to its policy position, which was described, in two separate New Statesman and Society articles last week and this week as being meaningless.
Mr. Eastham
Is the not Secretary of State continuously presenting a distorted view when he tries to convince the House that the Government are spending more on the national health service?
Is it not a fact that with 560,000 people reaching the age of 65 this year and the elderly accounting for a larger proportion of the population, national health service provision is proportionately poorer, not better?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman is wrong.
His difficulty is that his party has nothing to tell him about what it would spend if it were returned to power, which it will not be.
That lack of leadership makes it difficult for him to do other than cavil at our figures.
I sympathise with him.
Competitive Tendering
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what is the latest estimate of the savings from competitive tendering in the national health service.
Mr. Dorrell
Total annual savings from competitive tendering of NHS ancillary services in the United Kingdom now amount to £156 million.
Mr. Marshall
Does my hon. Friend agree that the abolition of competitive tendering and the introduction of a national minimum wage would rob the NHS of hundreds of millions of pounds and would lead to the closure of hospitals and the cancellation of operations?
Would not such a course of action be as successful as the racing tips of the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook)?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The Labour party is not committed to any specific increase in health service expenditure, but it is committed to a specific cut in the proportion of NHS expenditure used for patient care.
My hon. Friend correctly identifies that, and the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) will have a difficult task explaining it to patients who would not be treated if his policies were implemented.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Carrington
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning, I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Carrington
Is my right hon. Friend aware that in my constituency Labour-controlled Hammersmith and Fulham council keeps many of its council houses and flats empty?
Does he agree that the most effective action that could be taken to end homelessness would be if Labour-controlled London councils brought back into use the many thousands of empty homes under their control?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes a valid point and I share his concern about homelessness.
For that reason, we are spending more than £100 million over the next three years to provide accommodation for young single people.
The Government's initiatives on rough sleeping are having a marked effect on the problem in London.
Mr. Hattersley
Is the Prime Minister aware that doctors working in the health service have said today that his promise to cut waiting lists to two years can be achieved only if desperately ill patients sacrifice their beds to less serious cases who have waited longer?
Is he prepared to sanction such manipulation of waiting lists?
The Prime Minister
I have not seen that comment by doctors, but I assure the right hon. Gentleman that that is not the situation.
Long waiting lists are falling fast.
Since March 1990, the number of patients waiting more than two years has come down by 47 per cent.
— a substantial reduction — and the number waiting longer than one year has reduced by a quarter.
Mr. Hattersley
During the day, doctors from Nottingham University hospital and Chase Farm hospital Enfield have said that they can meet the target only if seriously ill patients are sacrificed.
Is the Prime Minister prepared to abandon the target or the seriously ill patients?
The Prime Minister
There is no question of abandoning the seriously ill patients.
For that reason, we have expanded expenditure on the health service, increased the number of medical staff and introduced initiatives to cut waiting lists.
All those are practical methods, all of them are working, and all of them are delivering better health care and will deliver faster health care.
Mr. Hattersley
The Prime Minister's wilful refusal to answer a specific question demonstrates the underlying truth of the Government's health service policy: they are interested in public relations, not patient care.
No wonder the people of this country know that the health service is not safe in their hands.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is talking nonsense on stilts, and he knows it.
Mr. McAllion
Is the Prime Minister aware of the survey published yesterday by the housing charity, Shelter, which revealed that on every working day in Scotland last year 84 children became homeless because the Government had failed to invest enough in decent, affordable rented housing?
Is he not ashamed that so many children have been thrown on to the streets of Scotland while he has been Prime Minister?
Will he now do something about it by calling a general election and making way for a Labour Government committed to ridding this country of the Tory scourge of homelessness?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman would do well to recall that the policies of so many Labour authorities leaving properties empty and voids untreated which significantly adds to the level of homelessness; until those Labour authorities operate properly with their housing resources, they will not make inroads into the housing problem.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I inadvertently called two hon. Members from the same side.
Mr. Franks
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Franks
Will the Prime Minister state clearly and concisely that, irrespective of the place or the audience or the day of the week, he has but one policy for the fourth Trident submarine — to build it, equip it and send it to sea armed for the nation's defence?
Will he find time to read recent Official Reports of debates and questions in the House where he will find’ We will build a boat’,’We won't build a boat’and’We will build a boat but it will have no weapons’, all of which is official Labour party policy?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to confirm the Government's commitment to Trident, as so frequently set out in this House.
As my hon. Friend makes clear, there is no comparable commitment from the Opposition, whose polices on defence vary from day to day.
Mr. Cran
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Cran
Is my right hon. Friend aware that a senior Japanese industrialist has made it clear that if the European Community adopts the social action programme it will be committing industrial suicide?
That being so, will my right hon. Friend give the House a commitment that he will not give way on that in the discussions next week?
Does he also agree that the European Community should be an evolutionary community, not a revolutionary one?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right to say that we live in an increasingly competitive environment and that much in the social action programme would damage that competitiveness within the European Community — to the interests of the Japanese, the United States and our other competitors.
I confirm to my hon. Friend that I am not prepared to see our competitiveness lost in that manner.
Mr. Wallace
I congratulate the Prime Minister on the fact that at long last common sense prevailed and he was prepared to meet the Dalai Lama of Tibet.
Can he give any indication of whether at that meeting he expressed the British Government's support for the United Nations human rights sub-commission report in relation to the expressions of concern about the violations of human rights in Tibet, and what proposals did he make to help the many thousands who have been refugees from Tibet in the past 30 years?
The Prime Minister
The substantive part of my discussion with the Dalai Lama was specifically concerned with human rights — most notably, though not exclusively, in Tibet.
We discussed the present situation and the representations that we had made to the People's Republic of China, and I reaffirmed the fact that I would continue to make such representations.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bottomley
As this is’ Youth and Parliament’day, led by the British Youth Council, would my right hon. Friend recognise the importance of investing in the young, overcoming unnecessary disadvantages such as handicap, and giving them the opportunity to contribute fully to a better future for the country?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend.
Perhaps the most striking expression of the changed opportunities for young people is the increasing number now going into higher education.
In 1979 it was one in eight — today it is one in four, and in the future, under the plans now projected, it will be an even higher percentage.
Mr. Vaz
Will the Prime Minister reflect on the continued hardship and anxiety facing depositors, creditors and former members of staff of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International?
Will he join me today in thanking the Sheikh of Abu Dhabi for his recent proposals which form part of the crucial negotiations that are taking place?
Will he for the first time publicly endorse those negotiations and wish them well?
Will he ensure that his Ministers are actively involved in getting the best possible settlement for those who have suffered and who are the real victims of this awful tragedy?
The Prime Minister
We have repeatedly made it clear that we wish depositors to get back as much of their money as possible.
I am pleased with the improvements evident from the negotiations that have taken place.
As the hon. Gentleman will know, the recent adjournment is to allow the provisional liquidator to formalise details of the compensation package that he has been negotiating with the Government of Abu Dhabi.
That is proceeding and I welcome it.
I hope that it will reach a satisfactory conclusion and remove the substantial problem that it has laid over the lives of so many former customers of that bank.
Mr. Speller
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Speller
On our way to the single market, is it not time to give a healthy nudge to the metrication programme so as to enable our manufacturers and exporters to compete more fairly with our continental rivals?
The Prime Minister
As my hon. Friend knows, there will be a similar system by the end of 1994, which I believe will bring substantial advantages for industry.
Mr. Enright
Will the Prime Minister explain what attitude he intends to take at Maastricht to co-operation on development issues, and what practical result that will have?
The Prime Minister
We are content to develop on a co-operative basis a whole range of policies.
Where we often have great difficulty with Community proposals is when co-operation is replaced not by agreement but by majority voting on issues of concern to us.
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Evennett
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating the Secretary of State for Education and Science on devising tests for seven-year-olds which go back to the basics of reading, writing and arithmetic?
Will he further commend the Secretary of State for pushing on with the tests, despite the opposition of the National Union of Teachers, the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats?
The parents of this country will welcome those tests most warmly.
The Prime Minister
I believe that my hon. Friend is right.
We are concerned primarily about the quality of education and for that reason I very much welcome the tests.
Testing is a crucial part of ensuring that we know what quality of education our young people are achieving, so that if a satisfactory level is not reached, appropriate action can be taken.
Mr. James Lamond
Is the Prime Minister fully aware of the importance for many industries in this country, including the textile industry, of a successful outcome of the GATT negotiations?
Is he aware that the negotiations have been going on for five years, that we must have a replacement for the multi-fibre arrangement that will enable our textiles to penetrate the markets of countries which do not allow any textiles in and those with tariffs of 200 per cent., and that even the United States has a tariff of 36 per cent .
on British wool cloth?
Unless those tariffs are diminished our textile industry will have a tough time, and more jobs will be lost.
The Prime Minister
I share the hon. Gentleman's view of the importance of GATT and of all aspects of the negotiations.
In recent weeks, I have had the opportunity of discussing the matter not only in the United States but with a number of colleagues in the European Community.
It is clear that both sides will have to make concessions to reach a satisfactory GATT conclusion.
It is to be hoped that that will happen before the end of the year.
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Greenway
Bearing in mind Britain's good marine conservation record, will my right hon. Friend join some of us in the Whale and Dolphin Conservation Society, with a view to saving thousands of whales and dolphins from drift nets, from so-called scientific whaling and from industrial pollution?
I have a form here, it will cost my right hon. Friend £5 or £10 to join, and I invite him to do so.
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes me an irresistible offer.
I have much sympathy with the aims that he set out.
The Government have taken a strong lead in international forums to restrict the use of drift nets and to increase the safeguards for whales.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
In the context of the Prime Minister's duties in the House, will he advise us whether he will stay to listen to the statement by the Secretary of State for Scotland?
Is the Prime Minister aware that the allocation of trust status to hospitals in Scotland is against the general and political will of the people there?
Will he therefore spell out what he decides is democracy in Scotland?
It seems that the Secretary of State for Scotland is to ride roughshod over the views of elected members at district, regional and parliamentary level.
The Prime Minister
I shall not be present for the statement because I have a series of meetings with hon. Members immediately after Question Time.
Mr. Ian Bruce
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bruce
Does my right hon. Friend agree that many people who choose to work more than 48 hours per week, and who thereby earn overtime and give greater security to their families, would be most upset if an edict from Brussels took the right to work such overtime away from them, especially as hon. Members would be excluded from the rules, as would the bureaucrats in Europe and all managers and executives?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend on that point.
It goes wider than just the position of individuals, important though that is.
It also covers the competitiveness of British industry and commerce, a point to which I referred some moments ago.
If we were to have to suffer all the rigours of the directive to which my hon. Friend refers, it would cost employers substantial sums — billions of pounds — in the next year.
House of Commons
Wednesday 4 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
ENVIRONMENT
Homelessness
Mr. Kilfoyle
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what information he has concerning the number of people registered homeless in Liverpool.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Tim Yeo)
The information available to me, provided by Liverpool city council, is that it accepted 397 households as homeless in the second quarter of this year.
Mr. Kilfoyle
Is the Minister aware that since 1988 in the city of Liverpool there has been a 48 per cent.
increase in the number of homeless families?
We have had the smallest number of new home completions in the city since 1982-83.
In addition, nationally in the first six months of 1991 there was a 53 per cent .
increase in the number of mortgage repossession orders.
In this year, the 25th anniversary of Shelter, does the Minister agree that the time is right for him to give effect to the Prime Minister's boast in his letter of support to Shelter that the Government would employ public expenditure where necessary?
Or does he concur with the view of the Minister for Housing and Planning that the homeless are merely the people whom one steps over on the way out of the opera?
Mr. Yeo
I share the concern expressed by the hon. Gentleman for homeless people in Liverpool.
It is because I share it that I must draw attention to the scandalous mismanagement of the housing stock in Liverpool.
There are 5,733 empty council houses, almost 2,000 of which have been empty for more than a year.
There is £16 million of uncollected rent, more than a quarter of the total rent roll.
Those resources in property and money could be put to good use to top up the £23 million housing improvement programme allocation this year, the £12.5 million of estate action money, the £71 million of Housing Corporation money and the £15 million for the vacant dwellings initiative.
Those are huge resources which taxpayers are making available to Liverpool.
If the city council was doing its job, it would put those resources to good use on behalf of the tenants.
Mr. Alton
Is the Minister aware that in addition to the 5,700 empty council-owned properties, there are a further 7,000 empty properties in the private sector, bringing to over 12,000 the number of empty properties in the city of Liverpool?
Although I agree with the Minister that empty properties could be used to house homeless people, is not it the case that until capital receipts are released from the sale of council properties, councils will not have the resources to put properties back into use for people who need them?
Mr. Yeo
I have already listed the extensive resources that are available to the council.
In addition, the vacant dwellings initiative, which provides £15 million of public money, topped up by £17 million of private investment, is designed to bring privately owned empty properties back into use.
There is even more good news on the horizon for Liverpool in the form of a housing action trust.
Despite the unremitting hostility of the Opposition Front-Bench team, I am glad to say that the majority group on the present Liverpool city council, in contrast to its predecessor, is showing interest in a housing action trust and my Department is discussing the matter with it.
Local Government Reform
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what response he has so far received on his White Paper about reform of local government.
The Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Michael Heseltine)
A list of the respondents to the consultation paper,’ The Structure of Local Government in England’and copies of the responses were placed in the Library of the House on 14 October.
There were 1,893 responses.
Mr. Pawsey
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the draft guidance issued by his Department does not require local authorities to be of any particular size to deliver an effective and efficient service?
Does he agree that, generally speaking, smaller authorities are closer to local people and better able to reflect their needs and aspirations?
Therefore, will he do what he can to encourage a response from small authorities to adopt the new powers?
Mr. Heseltine
My hon. Friend will be glad to hear that in our draft guidance we have left considerable room for the discretion of the Local Government Commission.
We are looking for authorities that can deliver efficient and effective services.
Certainly there will be every opportunity for authorities of any potential size to put forward their views.
Mr. Pike
Does the Secretary of State accept that if local government is to be local, it is essential that we do not repeat the mistakes of the 1973-74 reorganisation and that any reorganisation must be acceptable to local people?
Mr. Heseltine
The hon. Gentleman has obviously followed the Government's proposals, which are designed carefully to consult local people and to find out whether we can create local authorities that reflect a genuine sense of local community.
Mr. Channon
Does my right hon. Friend agree that his proposals are welcome, but that the sooner the uncertainty is removed the better?
By what date does he believe that the reform of local government will be complete?
Will he do his utmost to ensure that it is as quick as possible?
Mr. Heseltine
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for his support.
We expect that the first of the new authorities will be in place by April 1994.
We have not set a date for the completion of the exercise, but I shall bear what he said very much in mind.
Local Authority Housing
Mr. Steinberg
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on his funding of local authority new build.
The Minister for Housing and Planning (Sir George Young)
The building of new social housing is now mainly the responsibility of housing associations, with local authorities assuming an enabling role.
Mr. Steinberg
Is the Minister aware that in my constituency, because of Government policy, little house building has taken place?
As a result, people can expect to be on the waiting list for about seven years whereas under the Labour Government it was about one year.
Is not that a disgrace?
Will the Minister confirm or deny that his Department is now threatening local authorities that plan new builds, by saying that it will take away discretionary housing grants?
Sir George Young
I can deny that.
No departmental official of mine has told a local authority not to build new.
In one case — I think it was in Warwickshire — a local authority, on reflection, revised its bid and decided to develop its relationship with housing associations rather than commit its allocation to its own project.
I notice that the housing investment programme allocations to the city of Durham rose from £1.8 million in 1988-89 to nearly £3 million in the current year.
On top of that, £358,000 was allocated to housing associations.
I urge the local authority in Durham to develop a relationship with housing associations so that it can make faster progress in meeting the problems to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
Mr. David Nicholson
In answer to an earlier question the Under-Secretary of State mentioned the vast resources given to the city of Liverpool, and by definition to other inner city authorities, which have not used housing resources sensibly and have not proceeded far with the right to buy.
Is my hon. Friend aware that many authorities in the south-west have not only used housing resources sensibly, but have sold about 25 per cent.
or more of their stock?
In making HIP allocations, will he take those matters into account as well as the efficiency with which those authorities use their stock and their willingness to co-operate with the private sector?
That will be good for the building industry and for meeting housing need.
Sir George Young
Local authorities that use their resources sensibly, develop an enabling role and co-operate with the private sector and housing associations will benefit from the new regime being introduced this year by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State, whereby HIP allocations take account of the use to which resources are put to give an added incentive to local authorities to improve their performance and the standard of service for their tenants.
Mr. Soley
Is not the Minister dodging the question yet again?
Only the other day on’ Panorama’Conservative councillors in Worcester said that they could not build new council houses without losing money.
Is not the truth of the matter that the way in which the Government have skewed the finances means that councils cannot provide that housing?
How much more bad publicity do the Government have to get on the failure of their housing programme from the Duke of Edinburgh, Conservative councillors and their supporters around the country before they do what we are all asking them to do and undertake a planned release of the capital receipts?
That is money from the sale of council houses and the Government should invest it again in housing.
Sir George Young
Much of the bad publicity on housing accrues to Labour-controlled local authorities that have mismanaged their resources, let down their tenants, do not implement the right to buy, have been short-sighted about the role of the housing associations and have not developed the enabling role.
The Government are making £8 billion of housing resources available next year and £24 billion over three years.
We believe that that is a square deal for the housing movement.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
Will my hon. Friend confirm that it is often precisely those authorities that complain most about not being able to use capital receipts which have used the most in the past few years?
My local authority, sadly Labour-controlled, has been able to use £16 million of capital receipts in the past five years.
Many of those authorities also have land available which they are able to use with housing associations to provide new build, but they would not have been able to do so had not this Government been in power.
Sir George Young
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary have talked with housing authorities throughout the country in the past few weeks and we have been interested to find out that many local authorities have land banks which they are not prepared to make available to housing associations.
They are not adopting the broader role that we envisaged.
I hope that any local authority that has land available will develop a dialogue quickly with the housing association movement, whose resources are increasing substantially, to see whether it can make faster progress than would otherwise be the case in meeting housing needs in its area.
River Quality
Mr. Alan W. Williams
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on the condition of Britain's rivers following the 1990 river quality survey conducted by the National Rivers Authority.
The Minister for the Environment and Countryside (Mr. David Trippier)
I understand that the National Rivers Authority intends to publish the results from its 1990 river quality survey shortly.
Mr. Williams
When the Minister reads that report, which has already been widely leaked, he will discover that 11 per cent.
of Britain's rivers have improved in quality since 1985, but that 15 per cent.
have deteriorated.
From 1958 there was a steady improvement in the quality of Britain's rivers, but since 1980 there has been a net deterioration of 6 per cent.
Is not that an appalling commentary on the Government's record of caring for the environment?
Mr. Trippier
No, it is not.
First, the hon. Gentleman has suggested that the report, which he says has been leaked, is accurate, but I suggest to him and to the House that it is not.
That will be revealed by the time the report is published by the NRA.
Secondly, the fact that 90 per cent.
of river water in the United Kingdom is judged to be of a good or very high standard is something of which I am enormously proud.
That contrasts with the rest of the European Community, where 75 per cent.
of river water is judged to be of good quality.
I suggest to the hon. Gentleman that our record is the best in the European Community.
Mr. Dunn
Is my hon. Friend aware that large sections of the River Darent, which runs through the constituency of Dartford — hence the name Dartford — have largely disappeared?
Will my hon. Friend therefore give me an undertaking that he will visit Dartford early in the new year, or on Christmas day if need be, to see for himself the damage that has been done to our river and how much has been lost?
My hon. Friend should bring with him members of the NRA so that they can provide best advice on how we can give our river back to the people of Dartford.
Mr. Trippier
I am happy to give an undertaking to my hon. Friend that I would be only too delighted to visit his constituency, but I should be grateful if he would release me on Christmas day.
Mrs. Ann Taylor
Does the Minister realise that his attitude on river quality is incredibly complacent and that the condition of Britain's rivers is causing great concern to many people, from anglers and recreational users of rivers to the chief scientist of the NRA?
Why has there been a downturn in river water quality under the Government which has reversed the trend since the mid-1950s?
That downturn is all the more remarkable considering the damage that the Government have done by reducing British industry.
Mr. Trippier
It is brass cheek for the hon. Lady to refer to the Government's record on river quality and water in general when one remembers that the Labour Government cut investment in water quality by 30 per cent.
It would have taken a considerable amount of time for any Government taking over their shambolic performance to improve the quality of just about everything in the environment, as we have been doing.
I remind the hon. Lady who set up the National Rivers Authority.
She at least praises the National Rivers Authority on every conceivable occasion.
We invented it and set it up — the Labour party did not.
Poll Tax
Mr. Madden
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he has any plans to abolish the poll tax 20 per cent.
contribution rule for 1992-93; and if he will make a statement.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Robert Key)
I do not propose to make any change in the existing basis of liability or the benefit arrangements for the remaining period of the community charge.
Mr. Madden
Will the Minister now accept that the 20 per cent.
contribution is perhaps the cruellest feature of the poll tax fiasco, placing a significant burden on those with the lowest incomes, including many pensioners, in places such as Bradford?
It costs local authorities more to collect than it raises in revenue.
Is not the Minister deeply ashamed that he intends to carry on with that cruel and stupid tax instead of scrapping it, as he should have done a long time ago?
Mr. Key
There is nothing cruel or stupid about providing a benefit system which more than compensates for the 20 per cent.
that those people are asked to pay.
As for it costing more to collect, the average 20 per cent.
charge is about £50, whereas the average cost of collection is about £12.
Mr. Janman
Was not extra money given to those on income support specifically to pay the 20 per cent.
contribution?
Does my hon. Friend agree that the Government are being amazingly generous with taxpayers' money from 1993 onwards, when although the minimum 20 per cent.
contribution will have been abolished, those on income support will still receive that extra money, which they started to receive two years ago?
Mr. Key
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
I wonder what advice Opposition Members give to their constituents who are liable to pay that 20 per cent.
when they discover that they are not paying more than the 20 per cent.
that they receive from the rest of the taxpayers.
Mr. Blunkett
Will the Under-Secretary of State read the Audit Commission's evidence about the cost of collecting the 20 per cent.
contribution, the havoc that it is causing in terms of non-collection rates and the administrative difficulties that it is causing in magistrates courts?
Does he agree that the announcement last Thursday by the Secretary of State for Social Security is nothing short of a scandal?
It suggested that when the 20 per cent.
is abolished the taper will be changed so that, instead of people over social security levels losing 15p in the £1, they will lose 20p, thereby penalising people who are struggling to lift themselves out of poverty, provide pensions for themselves and do what the Conservative party always preaches — stand on their own two feet.
Is not it a scandal that, in so doing, their feet will be kicked out from under them?
Mr. Key
Before my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State made his announcement, Opposition Members accused us of creating a situation where there would be no taper, but a cut-off and said how cruel that would be.
Now that there is a taper, they complain just as loudly.
I pay tribute to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Social Security for providing a generous new benefit system for the council tax, from which there will be no clawback of the uprated benefit.
Oxleas Wood
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what new proposals he will be putting forward to protect the environment of Oxleas wood in south-east London.
Mr. Yeo
English Nature is discussing with the London borough of Greenwich the adoption of a management plan for the wood.
Mr. Townsend
As the wood is an 8,000-year-old oak wood only eight miles from the centre of London on a site of special scientific interest, could not the Department have done more to insist that the important new road going close to my constituency was cut-and-cover?
Following the thought of my hon. Friend the Member for Dartford (Mr. Dunn), may I invite the Minister to come there for a walk with his dog on Christmas day to envisage the damage that the new road will cause?
Mr. Yeo
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his invitation.
I was brought up until the age of seven near Oxleas wood and I do not recall so much publicity about the value of that 8,000-year-old wood 40 years ago.
A cut-and-cover tunnel would involve slicing a great swathe through the wood to construct the tunnel, quite apart from the £10 million that it would cost.
In addition, such a tunnel would involve the closure of the south-facing slip roads at Shooters Hill and would increase traffic on local roads.
English Nature is discussing the management plan and proposes the readoption of the practice of coppicing.
It also proposes more exploitation of the wood for educational purposes.
The local borough has proposed that the wood should be declared a local nature reserve.
Mr. Simon Hughes
Are not the Government missing an opportunity to be both good Europeans and good environmentalists at the same time?
Would not it be easy to accede to the commissioner's request to change the three points in the regulation which the Commission says are defective and deal with Crown immune areas, reduce the latitude given to authorities and ensure that environmental assessments are recorded in writing so that we have proper regulations and proper environmental impact assessments?
That would test whether Oxleas wood, Twyford down and other such places would survive if there were proper implementation of European law.
Mr. Yeo
As I have made clear, the disagreement between the Government and the Commission does not involve the merits of the case, but the procedures.
I do not think that many people are fully aware of that.
The Government intend to comply with the Commission's directive and have an exceptionally good record of compliance with directives on environmental assessments.
In this case, we followed the procedures in operation at the time.
We are good Europeans.
For the reasons that I gave in answer to my hon. Friend the Member for Bexleyheath (Mr. Townsend), I believe that we are looking after the interests and future of the wood as thoroughly as any reasonable person could.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
Does my hon. Friend accept that the change is that there is now a proposal to cut a road through the wood whereas 40 years ago there was not?
Would not it be legally wise and politically sensible not to go ahead with the compulsory order to bring in bulldozers until difficulties with the European Commission and local people have been resolved?
I can tell my hon. Friend that local people would not mind losing the south-facing slip roads.
Mr. Yeo
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his offer to defend increasing traffic in his immediate neighbourhood.
A cut-and-cover tunnel involves cutting, so considerable damage would be inflicted on the wood if that alternative were chosen.
In addition, I do not believe that it would necessarily be the most cost-effective use of resources in terms of environmental output to spend such a substantial sum on that project.
Council Tax
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what method he will use to value domestic properties for council tax purposes.
Mr. Heseltine
The principles and assumptions to be used for valuations were set out in regulations laid on2 September.
Mr. Evans
How long does the Secretary of State expect that it will take to complete the valuations and how long will it take to deal with householders' objections to those valuations?
Will not local authorities, which will still be wrestling with the poll tax in 1992, be in a state of total chaos in April 1993?
Will those householders whose properties are valued through the use of aerial photographs be informed of that?
Mr. Heseltine
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that responsibility for the detailed exercise of the valuation measurements is the responsibility of my hon. Friend the Economic Secretary to the Treasury.
I can help the hon. Gentleman by saying that we believe that we are on schedule for the introduction of the council tax in April 1993.
Mr. Bowis
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that he has listened to hon. Members and representatives of people with disabilities who are worried that the additional room or larger property that they need to accommodate their disabilities might take them into a higher band and that he has decided that any such people should fall within one band lower than would otherwise be the case?
Mr. Heseltine
I am extremely grateful to my hon. Friend for reminding the House of our special announcements to ensure that special features of properties adapted for the disabled should be disregarded.
Local Authority Services
Mr. Cryer
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on the efficiency of local authority professional and technical services.
Mr. Key
The Government believe that competition is the best guarantee of efficiency.
That is why we are consulting on our proposals for extending compulsory competitive tendering to professional and technical services carried out by local authorities.
These are set out in’ Competing for Quality — Competition in the Provision of Local Services’, published on 5 November.
Mr. Cryer
Does the Minister accept that the vast majority of professional and technical officers in local authorities are providing a devoted, decent and efficient service for the benefit of local communities?
Does he recognise that his proposals are a kick in the teeth for that devoted service and an invitation not to services that are democratically accountable to the local community, but to the spivs of the free enterprise service sector such as Mr. J. G. L.
Poulson, the well-known Tory who demonstrated what sort of corruption can be applied to private enterprise competitive local authority services?
Mr. Key
It is always a pleasure to reply to the beguiling and dulcet tones of the hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer).
I seem to recall that a gentleman called T. Dan Smith was also involved at that time and that he was not a Conservative.
As I said in Chester to the Society of Chief Architects of Local Authorities, I greatly admire the work carried out by local authority professionals.
It is precisely because the best is very good that we want to make it apply to everyone.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
Does my hon. Friend accept that in many authorities the work being carried out by professional and technical officers is of a high standard and very cost-effective?
However, that is not universally the case.
Do we not owe it to community charge payers in each of those areas to ensure that the best value is obtained for their money and that they get the most efficient service?
The only way to do that is to make sure that they have the fresh air of competitive tendering.
Mr. Key
My hon. Friend is right.
I would add just one other factor.
On performance standards, under our proposals in the Local Government Bill which is going through another place, the Audit Commission will issue directions whose effect will be to define yardsticks against which local authorities will report their performance.
That is not a retrospective or prescriptive but a descriptive process and will allow the citizens of this country to measure the standards of service that they receive from their local authorities.
Mr. Gould
Now that the extension of compulsory competitive tendering has been rejected by the professional bodies, by the whole of the local government world and, most recently, by their Lordships, why will the Minister not admit that the game is up, that the consultation paper will have to be withdrawn, and that the Government must abandon their dogma-driven obsession with privatisation in favour of our insistence that quality and value for money must be the sole criteria?
Mr. Key
Like the hon. Gentleman, I read the Association of Metropolitan Authorities press release calling for withdrawal of the consultation paper.
It is astonishing that the Opposition should ask us to legislate without consulting on this very important issue.
Council Tax
Mr. John Greenway
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what representations he has received on the proposed council tax.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
My Department received more than 800 representations in response to the consultation paper,’ A New Tax for Local Government’, most of which welcomed its principles.
Mr. Greenway
What changes does my hon. Friend envisage in the assessment of local authority spending needs and in the distribution of Government grant under the council tax?
Is he aware that the spending assessment for Ryedale district council, which is in my constituency, is some 20 per cent.
lower than that for neighbouring Hambledon, part of which is also in my constituency, even though the two districts have similar characteristics?
Does he agree that if the distribution of Government grant were seen to be fair, local residents would not only be able to assess the performance of local authorities but would begin to see that our new council tax is a far better deal than the uncosted return to the rates — or, even worse, the uncosted local income tax — proposed by the Opposition parties?
Mr. Portillo
Our distribution is fair.
The reason why Hambledon and Ryedale get different standard spending assessments is not that they are similar but that in some ways they are dissimilar.
For example, Hambledon scores much higher on the sparsity valuation, and sparsity was one of the factors that we took into account and put into the process precisely because the Association of District Councils thought that it was a relevant factor.
The association is right: it is more expensive to provide services in an area of sparsity than in an area which suffers less from that.
Mr. Bellotti
Will the Minister confirm that he has received representations from Age Concern and others about the income of single pensioners being 60 per cent.
of the average income of a retired couple?
In the light of those representations will he reconsider the Government's attitude towards the 25 per cent.
discount with a view to increasing it?
Mr. Portillo
I believe that 25 per cent.
is the right logical discount for single people.
The tax is a 50 per cent.
property tax and a 50 per cent.
personal tax, so the full tax is payable if there are two or more people in the household, while half the tax is payable if the property is empty or is not a sole residence.
Therefore, 75 per cent.
of the tax is payable if a single person lives there.
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman and I agree that there should be a discount for single people — I am only sorry that the Labour party continues to insist that we should return to a rating system in which single people would have to pay through the nose, as they did before.
Miss Emma Nicholson
In view of the forthcoming reform of the common agricultural policy, farmers are naturally concerned about downward pressure on incomes.
Will my hon. Friend confirm that under the council tax farms will be identified as working farms and thus avoid an unnecessarily high banding?
Mr. Portillo
Valuers will have to take account of what properties are really worth.
If they are tied into a working farm, or if there are legal agreements that constrain the ways in which they can be used, clearly that will be a material factor in determining whether the properties have a market value and what it is.
The answer to my hon. Friend's question is that of course those are relevant considerations for valuers to take into account.
Mr. Gould
In response to the statement by the Birmingham city treasurer that he would have to keep a register to administer the council tax, the Minister asserted that the keeping of such a register would be unlawful.
Does he adhere to that assertion and, if so, what was the basis for it?
Mr. Portillo
The basis is that there is no power in the Local Government Finance Bill now in Committee for councils to keep a register.
Nor is there any power for them either to require details from people in order to keep a register or to require people to continue to notify them of changes in any register.
Therefore, I believe that my comments were valid.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Will my hon. Friend commend as compulsory reading part of our proceedings in Committee when for the first time hon. Members listened for two or two and a half hours to —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman is not going to talk about what is going on in Standing Committee.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
If people cared to read that record, they would know that for two and a half hours the Liberal Democrats proved beyond —
Interruption
Mr. Portillo
My hon. Friend is right to say that the local income tax is not an alternative to council tax which commends itself to Conservative Members — or even to most Opposition Members, and he is right to say that anybody interested in knowing why local income tax will not work could do no better than to read the report of our proceedings in Committee.
Poll Tax
Mrs. Mahon
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment how many people he estimates will be liable to pay the 20 per cent.
contribution to the poll tax in Calderdale for 1992-93; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Key
The number of people liable to pay 20 per cent.
of the community charge in Calderdale next year will depend on a number of factors, including the number of people on incomes at or below the income support level.
Mrs. Mahon
My local authority informs me that the proportion of the population will be 12 per cent.
In this season of goodwill, will the Minister promise to listen to the Association of Metropolitan Authorities, the Audit Commission and every other organisation, including the charities, which say that the 20 per cent.
tax is unfair, and that it is a bad tax which works against the poor, or is he content to support the Ebenezer Scrooge of the Department of the Environment?
That miserable gentleman repented.
May we have an assurance that the Minister will do the same?
Mr. Key
I do not think that anyone has ever accused me of being Ebenezer Scrooge.
I am informed that Calderdale tells us that about 11 per cent.
of its payers are at the 20 per cent.
community charge level — which means about 16,200 people this year, 600 of whom are students.
I have explained to the House that we shall not change the benefit system or the 20 per cent.
system until we introduce the council tax, but of course I will listen with care to any representations that are made, as I always do.
Mr. Dickens
Is it not a fact that because we have introduced up to 100 per cent.
rebates on the new council tax, my constituents in Littleborough and Saddleworth, on the border of Calderdale, will gain quite significantly if they are on income support?
Mr. Key
My hon. Friend is right.
Those people will benefit in a number of ways.
When the next Conservative Government are re-elected, we shall have a growing and buoyant economy, and everyone will be better off.
Mr. Nellist rose
Mr. Speaker
I know that Coventry is nowhere near Calderdale, but let us see what the hon. Gentleman can do.
Mr. Nellist
Will the Minister still tell people in Calderdale that no one who cannot afford to pay the poll tax will go to prison for that inability?
If so, what are they to make of the case last week of Maria Jones, a 22-year-old woman who was 31 weeks pregnant?
She offered £5 per week out of her £42 per week benefit, but was sentenced to 60 days in prison by magistrates in Stroud.
Will the people in Calderdale still believe him?
Mr. Key
I do not know the details of the individual case; that is a question for the magistrates.
My advice to the hon. Gentleman's constituents is not to listen to the advice of someone who does not pay the tax himself and who advises others not to pay.
Planning and Compensation Act 1991
Mr. Steen
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement as to the progress he is making in implementation of the Planning and Compensation Act 1991.
Sir George Young
My right hon. Friend has already brought some provisions of the Act into force and intends to bring all its provisions into force progressively within about one year of enactment.
Mr. Steen
Is my hon. Friend aware that directors of planning all over the country and hon. Members of all parties are concerned that the number of unauthorised developments has risen from 60,000 in 1988 to more than 90,000 in 1990?
Will he assure the House that the new planning practice guidance that he is to issue will give planners teeth, and not just false teeth, to deal with the unauthorised developments being built all over the country?
Planners must be given powers to stop that happening before such developments cover the countryside.
Sir George Young
The particular provisions of the Planning and Compensation Act 1991 in the consideration of which my hon. Friend played such a distinguished part do not come into force until next month, so directors of planning will not yet have had the benefit of the provisions.
They come into effect next month and we shall issue planning policy guidance later this month.
I hope that when planning directors have the new powers available to them they will be able to take faster and more effective action against unauthorised development.
Mr. Win Griffiths
Does the Minister intend to bring the concept of sustainable development right into planning guidance as a primary role?
Will he confirm that the primary role of the plan will take precedence over all other considerations?
Will he beef up the public consultation procedures which his Department are currently casting aside like autumn leaves shrivelling on the ground, or do we have to wait for a Labour Government in the full flush of a green spring and summer to bring sense back into our planning system?
Sir George Young
No, that delay will not be necessary.
We had a long debate in Committee on sustainable development.
There was a lot of sympathy for the concept, but we saw real difficulties about enshrining it in the planning machinery without far more information about how one would take the concept of sustainable development forward in district plans.
We are moving towards a plan-led system in which, other things being equal, what is in the plan will happen.
There is a balance between getting the plans up and running quickly and a protracted consultation procedure.
We do not want to diminish the opportunities of local people to consult on the plans, and I do not believe that we have cut corners in the way that the hon. Gentleman implied.
Business Rates
Mr. Squire
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what is his estimate of how much more businesses would have paid in rates during 1990-91 and 1991-92 if uniform business rate had not been in operation.
Mr. Portillo
Taking account of actual levels of local government spending for the two years, we estimate that without the uniform business rate businesses would have paid £1 billion more in 1990-91 and £850 million more in 1991-92.
Mr. Squire
Those figures are significant.
Given that the Labour party has pledged to abolish the UBR, will not the consequence inevitably be higher business rates for many businesses, which Labour says it is concerned about, leading a number of those businesses to the very edge of bankruptcy and liquidation and increasing unemployment as a consequence?
Mr. Portillo
Yes.
In so far as I can make out the policy of the Labour party, it is to give the business rate back to local authorities.
We know what the experience has been over the years.
Local authorities increased their spending much faster than inflation, which meant that business rates had increased faster than inflation.
Under the uniform business rate, the rate in the pound that businesses pay stays in line with inflation and never rises faster than inflation.
That is a major gain for business.
Mr. James Lamond
While we are on the subject of the amount paid in business rates, can the Minister tell us whether shops whose rates have been assessed on the basis of six-day or even five-and-a-half-day trading will have their rateable values reassessed on the basis of seven-day trading?
Mr. Portillo
The next revaluation will be carried out in 1993.
It will come into effect in 1995.
Mr. Oppenheim
Bearing in mind the need to keep the business rate down, has my hon. Friend had time to glance at a pamphlet entitled’ The Citizens' Charter’, written in 1921 by one Herbert Morrison, then secretary of the London Labour party, which states that the best way to improve local services is to increase competition?
Does that not illustrate that no amount of tacky red plastic roses or glossy image-making can disguise the fact that, far from progressing, Labour policy is regressing?
Mr. Portillo
My hon. Friend makes a valuable point.
It seems that only the modern Labour party is opposed to competition.
I have not read that pamphlet.
Perhaps during the next hour-long speech by the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) in Committee I will find an opportunity to do so.
National Parks
Mr. McFall
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on the work of the Edwards committee on national parks for England and Wales.
Mr. Trippier
We welcome the general thrust of the report of the Edwards panel and the recommendations for the future of the national parks put to us by the Countryside Commission and the Countryside Council for Wales.
We have already announced our intention to establish independent authorities for the eight national parks currently run as county council committees.
We are considering very carefully the other recommendations from the countryside agencies.
Mr. McFall
Given that the Government have broken two of their manifesto pledges — the implementation of the Common Land Forum and increased protection for national parks — will the Minister give an assurance now that he will implement the recommendations of the Edwards committee in full?
Given the comments of the right hon. Member for Bath (Mr. Patten), when he was Secretary of State for the Environment, that national parks were the jewels in the crown, does the Minister not think it fair that that should apply to the entire United Kingdom, not least to my constituency which contains Loch Lomond which is facing ecological disaster as a result of the political intransigence of the blockheads in the Scottish Office in Edinburgh?
Mr. Trippier
I cannot give the hon. Gentleman the assurance that he seeks that I will agree with everything that the Edwards committee has recommended, but I can certainly assure him and the House that I will respond positively to the recommendations.
On the precise matter that he raised regarding Scotland, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland has set up working parties to advise on the need for early action on the Cairngorms, Loch Lomond and the Trossachs.
My right hon. Friend has asked Scottish Natural Heritage to consider how to protect Scotland's special areas more effectively in the future.
Mr. John Greenway
Will my hon. Friend assure the House and my many constituents in the North Yorks moors national park that whatever new structure he puts in place to manage the parks, the planning policy guidance given to the park authorities will give the social and economic needs of the people who live in the parks a high priority in the considerations for planning permissions?
Mr. Trippier
I am happy to give my hon. Friend that assurance.
Public Sector Housebuilding
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what are the latest figures for housebuilding in the public sector; and what are the comparable figures for 1979.
Mr. Yeo
The public sector, mainly local authorities, completed 9,000 dwellings in England in the year to September 1991 compared with 75,000 in 1979.
Housing associations, which are in the private sector, are now the main providers of new social rented housing.
They completed nearly 16,000 newly-built dwellings in the year to September 1991, and together with acquisition and renovation of houses for letting, building for shared ownership sale, and other activities, the total output of housing associations was almost 22,000 units in 1990-91, compared with only 16,000 in 1979.
Under our public expenditure plans, housing association output is due to rise substantially to at least 40,000 by 1993-94.
Mr. Skinner
Is it any wonder that every one of my hon. Friends is now inundated with more complaints about housing matters than at any time since we have been in the House?
Is the Minister aware that eight times as many houses were built under the previous Labour Government than those doctored figures show for the last financial year?
It is high time that we got rid of the Government who have characterised the 1980s with cardboard city and got a Government for the 1990s who will start using bricks and mortar again.
Mr. Yeo
It is no surprise that hon. Members are inundated with complaints because the problem with housing policy in Britain is that, although it is made by the Government, it is delivered by the local authorities, far too many of which are Labour controlled.
There are two real housing scandals in Britain today.
The first is the appalling mismanagement and waste of resources.
In the hon. Gentleman's constituency of Bolsover no less than 5.3 per cent.
of rent remains uncollected.
That puts it in the worst quarter of local authorities.
More than 120 authorities do twice as well as that with uncollected rent less than half the level in Bolsover.
The other scandal is the doctrinaire attitude of Labour-controlled councils such as Plymouth city council which, when Labour took control in May this year, halted for several months the previous Conservative policy of selling land to housing associations at concessionary prices, enabling rents to be kept down and output to be increased.
Mr. Patrick Thompson
With regard to complaints about housing, of which I have many from my constituents, will my hon. Friend confirm that if Labour-controlled Norwich city council were to adopt a more up-to-date approach to housing, co-operate properly with housing associations and take advantage of the various initiatives that have come from the Department of the Environment, it would be better for housing in my constituency and better for my constituents?
Mr. Yeo
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State recently visited my hon. Friend's constituency and delivered a few home truths to the city council about its housing policy failures.
If Norwich were to adopt a proper enabling role and take advantage of the huge opportunities that the Government have made available to local authorities for delivering increased housing output, particularly in co-operation with the private housing sector and the housing associations, the people of Norwich would be much better served.
Mr. O'Brien
Is it not a fact that due to Government policy local authorities will be building no new houses next year and housing associations will achieve only what they achieved in the mid-1970s?
Is it not also a fact that waiting lists for houses to rent are increasing and have more than trebled since the Conservatives took office?
When shall we have the affordable rented houses that people need?
The Government's housing policy is abysmal.
When shall we have some policies to provide affordable homes for rent?
Mr. Yeo
The hon. Gentleman obviously was not listening to my answer.
Housing association output will soon be running at three times the level that it was in the 1970s.
In addition, Britain's total housing stock has increased by 2 million units in the past 12 years — a far higher rate of increase than that of the population as a whole.
But the fact remains that while local authorities demonstrate their continued inability to use the resources that are already at their disposal, when so many Labour-controlled authorities cannot even be bothered to collect the huge sums in uncollected rent, I cannot see why the hon. Gentleman should be concerned about the level of rents.
Mr. Ian Taylor
Does my hon. Friend agree that in constituencies such as mine in the south-east there are problems in providing houses for those most in need and I welcome the additional figures that he has announced for housing associations?
One of my boroughs, Elmbridge, tried it, but there were objections from Labour groups connected with housing and now my tenants are in a much worse position than they otherwise would have been.
Mr. Yeo
My hon. Friend has made a most important point.
Those authorities that transferred their stock, under the large-scale voluntary transfer policy, have received a substantial capital receipt, a quarter of which they are able to use.
In addition, independent research shows that tenants in those areas where transfers to housing associations have taken place have been extremely satisfied with the service that they get and the improved repairs.
Moreover, the rent guarantees that they were given have been honoured.
I would also draw my hon. Friend's attention to our planning circular 7/91 in which we have encouraged local authorities to identify housing need in their areas and then, when private developers bring forward proposals for new housing, to negotiate with them an element of affordable housing in their developments.
Sand Extraction, Druridge Bay
Mr. Beith
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment whether he will undertake an environmental assessment of the effect of sand extraction at Druridge bay, Northumberland.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr.Tony Baldry)
The extraction activities began at Druridge bay many years ago and my right hon. Friend does not have powers to initiate environmental assessments in such circumstances.
Mr. Beith
How can it be acceptable for this beautiful beach to be shipped away in unlimited quantities under planning permissions granted by Ministers on appeal 30 years ago?
That would never be acceptable today.
Since it was central Government, not the local communities, who made the decision to allow that to happen, the Minister surely recognises that central Government must play some part in bringing this disgraceful practice to an end.
Mr. Baldry
I think that the hon. Gentleman knows that in the first instance it is for the mineral planning authority to decide whether to revoke the planning consent for extractions and whether such action is warranted.
Eco-labelling
Mr. Illsley
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what representations he has received recently regarding an eco-labelling scheme for environmentally benign products; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Trippier
The Environment Committee published its report on eco-labelling in September and the Government responded in November.
Mr. Illsley
I am grateful for the Minister's reply.
Do the Government intend to implement an eco-labelling scheme?
Can the Minister say whether the Government will agree to a Europewide eco-labelling scheme, to try to eliminate some of the misleading claims that are made on behalf of some products, which prejudice products that are environmentally safe?
For example, glass products are completely recyclable.
Will the Minister ensure that a life cycle analysis is built into the scheme to ensure that a product is judged from the time it is produced until it is recycled or destroyed?
Mr. Trippier
The hon. Gentleman is absolutely right.
A number of misleading claims are made by companies suggesting that their products are environmentally friendly when clearly they are not.
In many cases, that can be a rip-off for the consumer.
We should prefer to go along with the European Communitywide scheme so that British industry is not put at a disadvantage.
I hope that the Environment Council of Ministers that I shall attend next week in Brussels will decide on a directive.
Sir Hugh Rossi
Does my hon. Friend agree that the answer lies in early amendment of the Trade Descriptions Act 1968 so that the misleading claims to which he has referred can be squashed?
Mr. Trippier
Such an amendment might well be needed, but it is more important that we get the European eco-labelling scheme up and running.
I am anxious that we should play an active part not only in setting it up but in ensuring that it is in operation in the United Kingdom by the end of 1992.
Mr. Turner
Does the Minister recognise that the people of Wolverhampton do not regard the Secretary of State for the Environment as environmentally benign, certainly over the problems that they face with the new standard spending assessment announced in the past few days —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That was a bit wide of the question.
Mr. Turner
It affects the people of Wolverhampton.
Mr. Speaker
Yes, I know, but the hon. Gentleman must keep to the question.
Mr. Turner
How can the Secretary of State for the Environment be environmentally benign when he is introducing the Heseltax, as it is known in Wolverhampton, and disastrous standard spending assessment being inflicted on Wolverhampton?
Mr. Trippier
My right hon. Friend is not environmentally benign but environmentally friendly.
His friendliness is made clear in Wolverhampton's settlement.
Although the hon. Gentleman may be concerned about it, I prefer the view of his neighbour, my hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, North-East (Mrs. Hicks), who is extremely pleased with my right hon. Friend's settlement.
Local Government (Competitive Tendering)
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on the savings to local authorities from competitive tendering.
Mr. Key
Research into compulsory competitive tendering under the Local Government Act 1988 has shown average savings of 6 per cent.
in the annual value of contracts for all services subject to competition.
Average savings of between 10 and 15 per cent.
of annual value have been achieved on services such as refuse collection and building cleaning.
Standards of services have generally been maintained or improved.
Mr. King
I thank my hon. Friend for that encouraging reply, but does he share my concern that certain Labour authorities, such as the city of Birmingham, carry out the letter but not necessarily the spirit of the law on competitive tendering?
What proposals has he to ensure that local authorities, particularly Labour councils, achieve the full benefits of competitive tendering for poll tax payers?
Mr. Key
We are introducing our proposals in the other place.
Contrary to some of the comments of Opposition Members, the Opposition amendment made in the other place this week makes no difference to our determination to encourage compulsory competitive tendering in the interests of the taxpayer.
House of Commons
Thursday 5 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HOME DEPARTMENT
South Yorkshire Police
Sir Patrick Duffy
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on current manning levels in the South Yorkshire police.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
At the end of September there were 2,998 officer in the South Yorkshire police — an increase of 438 officers or 17 per cent.
since 1979.
Eighteen additional police posts were approved with effect from 1 October 1991 and a further 15 posts from 1 April 1992.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Is the Minister aware that 21 years of casework in Attercliffe have left me wholly admiring of, and grateful to, the South Yorkshire police?
I am confident that they could make the streets of South Yorkshire safer if they could expand their manpower levels just that little bit more, but within the scope of the present standard spending assessment.
Will he ask his right hon. Friends the Home Secretary and the Secretary of State for the Environment to bring that home to the support services and the district decision-takers in South Yorkshire and to urge on them the prior claim of South Yorkshire police at this time?
Mr. Lloyd
I agree that the South Yorkshire police have a good record.
Crime is lower in their area than it is nationally and the clear-up rate is higher.
The hon. Gentleman asked me about future numbers.
South Yorkshire police have asked for 17 posts for the coming year; they have been given 16.
The SSA is up by 17.4 per cent., which enables them to increase the precept by 15 per cent .
They should have no difficulty in paying for those extra officers.
Northumbria Police Authority
Mr. Clelland
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department when he next expects to meet the chairman of Northumbria police authority to discuss resources in the area.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Kenneth Baker)
I met the chairman of Northumbria police authority on 1 November when I visited Tyneside.
Northumbria has received a generous increase in standard spending assessment of 17.3 per cent.
In addition, it will be eligible for up to £3.66 million under the urban crime fund initiative that I announced on 26 November.
Both the SSA increase and the experimental urban crime fund demonstrate clearly the Government's continuing commitment to a high level of police funding.
The police authority has been facing serious difficulty in meeting the additional costs arising from the disturbances in Tyneside in September, so I am pleased to announce today that the Government will make a special payment towards those costs, at a rate of 95 per cent.
Mr. Clelland
That news will come as a welcome relief to the authority, which has been waiting for more than three months for a reply from the Home Secretary.
Will he confirm that the 5 per cent.
that the authority must now find from its budget is on top of the £4 million shortfall and the 116-officer shortfall in an area with rising crime?
When will he get together with the Secretary of State for the Environment to put an end to the nonsense of capping, which is squeezing resources at a time of rapidly rising crime?
Mr. Baker
I do not agree with what the hon. Gentleman has said.
I ask him to reflect on my answer.
The increase this year in the Northumbria police SSA is 17 per cent.
In addition, there is the experimental urban crime fund, from which Northumbria can benefit by £3.66 million.
The 95 per cent.
figure is the highest level that we have granted for any riot expenditure, and could involve a sum of between £5 million and £7 million, depending on the claims.
That is a very generous, but correctly generous, settlement for Northumbria.
Mr. Devlin
I am sure that the people of Northumbria will welcome the excellent news that my right hon. Friend has given the House.
Will he reflect on the fact that one of the most unpleasant duties of the Northumbria police is having to drag the mangled bodies of motorists from cars that have gone into ditches alongside the A1 while on their way to Scotland?
The sooner that that road undergoes a major programme of improvement, with it possibly increased to motorway status, the better.
Will he make the appropriate representations to his colleagues at the Department of Transport?
Mr. Baker
That question goes rather wide of the main question.
I have driven along that road to Scotland many times and I know that beyond my hon. Friend's constituency it is not so good.
I will draw my hon. Friend's suggestions to the attention of my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Transport.
Mr. Sheerman
Can I put the Home Secretary back on the right road by telling him that the reason why morale in the Northumbria police force is low and why chief constables generally despair is not because the right hon. Gentleman suddenly makes a generous offer of help in a crisis, but because all chief constables, including the new chief constable of Northumbria, want consistency of funding so that they can be sure that they will get the officers and resources they require over a number of years?
This year it has been impossible to plan policing in Northumbria because the force has 112 fewer officers than last year.
That is not the way to run a police force, and that is why police morale is low.
When will the right hon. Gentleman give that consistency and leadership to the police and back them for a change?
Mr. Baker
I remind the hon. Gentleman that since we have been in office there has been an increase of 693 officers in Northumbria's police strength.
I approved an additional 26 posts from 1 October of this year, with a further 27 from 1 April of next year.
The hon. Gentleman talks of the need for consistency, but the only consistency under Labour was in cutting the numbers of police — and at that time the hon. Gentleman was a member of the Cabinet.
Mr. Beith
Will the Home Secretary bear in mind that the rural areas of Northumberland have been especially difficult to police while the urban areas have been under great pressure and there has been a shortage of officers?
Will he encourage the chief constable in the task that he has set himself of increasing the number of officers available for normal duties within the community?
Mr. Baker
I could not agree more with the hon. Gentleman.
There is a very high proportion of police officers on the beat, although it varies from force to force.
I should like about 80 per cent.
of a force to be on the beat.
I have spoken to the new chief constable of Northumbria and he is a most impressive officer.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman has met him.
We discussed the problems of policing rural Northumbria as well as the towns and cities.
The hon. Gentleman's points are well made and I am sure that he will draw them to the attention of the chief constable.
Passport Agency
Mr. Robert B. Jones
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what measures will be taken by the United Kingdom Passport Agency to raise its standards of service.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
The Passport Agency has been very successful this year in speeding up the processing of passport applications.
It has recently completed a major computerisation programme which will enable it to improve its service to the customer still further.
Mr. Jones
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that answer.
The Passport Agency deserves our congratulations on the improvements that it has already achieved.
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is time for the public to play their part?
As the vast majority of applications occur in the same peak period, should not people try to spread them so that there is not the same concentration?
To that end, would it be a good idea to impose a surcharge on passport applications in the peak period and give a discount in off-peak periods, so providing an incentive?
Mr. Lloyd
My hon. Friend is right to say that there has been an enormous improvement.
The average turnround for a passport application in the last year has been six working days.
I agree that many applications come in the holiday period and that that makes it difficult to maintain that average.
The Passport Agency is using advertisements to suggest that people renew their passports at other times of the year.
It is for the agency to consider whether it would be sensible to alter the price for a passport depending on the time of year and then to make any recommendations to the Home Office.
Mr. Ronnie Campbell
Will the Minister consider establishing a passport office in the north-east, because at present people must travel to Liverpool or Glasgow to find the nearest office?
Mr. Lloyd
The hon. Gentleman might suggest that his constituents make their applications by post, as most other people do.
It is an efficient service and it causes the customer much less trouble.
Rev. Ian Paisley
Does the Minister agree that his decision to retain the passport office in Belfast was a good one?
He made that decision having listened to representations from hon. Members from Northern Ireland.
Will he commend the Belfast office for being at the top of the league of all passport offices for getting passports out quickly for the people of Northern Ireland?
Mr. Lloyd
We listened to the representations of hon. Members from Northern Ireland, but, more particularly, we observed the great efficiency of the passport office.
We not merely retained it but expanded it, and it has fully justified our confidence.
I pay tribute to it.
Car Thefts
Mr. Battle
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what recent representations he has received about his proposal to introduce a Bill to address problems of youngsters under 17 years stealing cars.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
My right hon. Friend introduced a Bill last week to strengthen the law against those who criminally take other people's vehicles.
We had numerous written and oral representations from hon. and right hon. Members and from members of the public.
I am happy to report that they were all in support of an early change in the law.
Mr. Battle
I welcome the Bill, but will the Minister take seriously the views of the chief constable of West Yorkshire, whose recent report on vehicle theft — which has reached 85 per cent.
in Leeds and 53 per cent.
in West Yorkshire — stresses the need for preventive measures to identify potential offenders at an early stage, rather than wait for tragedies to occur?
Does the hon. Gentleman agree that one of those measures could be a Government publicity campaign to warn youngsters that car stealing is as dangerous as alcohol or drug abuse?
Mr. Patten
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman is in favour of more Government publicity campaigns and I shall listen to his advice on that.
I have not read the report of the chief constable of West Yorkshire, but I shall do so.
Yesterday I was in Salford in the metropolitan police area and I went to a crime prevention scheme that endeavours to divert youngsters from continuing with or getting into car crime.
It is an excellent scheme and such schemes should be developed more generally.
Mr. Lawrence
Does my right hon. Friend agree that if more people locked their cars fewer 17-year-olds would get into them?
If car manufacturers treated alarm systems as standard, there would be even fewer.
Will the Government look into a way to encourage car manufacturers to install alarm systems as standard equipment?
Mr. Patten
I agree with my hon. and learned Friend.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary and I shall see British car manufacturers again in the near future to urge them speedily to incorporate immobilisation devices into cars.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Transport is doing all that he can within Europe to achieve the speedy adoption of a Europewide directive, on which Great Britain has been in the lead, to get our Western European car manufacturing colleagues to do exactly the same.
Mr. Trimble
I welcome the Government's moves in that matter.
Does the Minister agree that, although the problem in English cities is bad — I do not wish to underplay the tragedies that have occurred there — the problem in Northern Ireland, especially in West Belfast, is much worse?
Many more tragic and fatal accidents have occurred there.
Should not the Government act with similar urgency to remedy that situation?
Mr. Patten
I understand that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is considering whether to change the law in Northern Ireland to meet the ends to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
While noting that what the hon. Gentleman says about west Belfast is right, we should also note that, setting terrorism aside, Northern Ireland is the most law-abiding part of the United Kingdom.
Long may it remain so.
Sir Michael Neubert
If my right hon. Friend is looking for ways to cut down car crime, will he have a word with the producers of’ Inspector Morse’.
That police officer habitually, at the end of each episode, parks his red Jaguar unlocked and then strolls off — not into the sunset but into the nearest pub.
What sort of an example is that?
Mr. Patten
I am happy to inform my hon. Friend that that excellent series is filmed in my constituency.
However, Inspector Morse's behaviour in not locking his car and in drinking heavily before driving is utterly disgraceful.
Miss Lestor
I agree with what the Minister said.
May I add that the promotion of fast cars and reckless driving by the media is not good for the youngsters attracted by such aspects?
I refer the Minister to his reference earlier to a scheme in Salford, where my constituency is.
Surveys have shown that of 4,500 youngsters on diversion schemes to stop them stealing cars, only about 100 have reoffended.
Bearing in mind their success, does the Minister support such schemes, as many of us do, and will resources be forthcoming to finance them and make them viable?
Mr. Patten
On the hon. Lady's first point, it is disappointing that car manufacturers advertise maximum speeds and acceleration more than security devices.
In a period when car crime is a problem, I hope that manufacturers will begin to advertise cars using better security as a selling point.
On the hon. Lady's second point, yes, I entirely support such schemes.
They are an important part of our twin-track approach so that we not only come down hard on offenders who commit the crime of taking vehicles, but we do all we can to prevent youngsters from offending.
More resources will be made available through the safer cities scheme, which is funded by the Home Office.
Mr. Marlow
Can we use a bit of common sense on this vexed problem?
Is it not true that giving 17-year-olds fines does not work and sending them to prison is counterproductive?
Could we arrange for such offenders to have a sound thrashing?
Will my right hon. Friend do something about it?—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman has every right to express his views.
Mr. Patten
As you know, Mr. Speaker, I often turn to my hon. Friend the Member for Northampton, North (Mr. Marlow) for common sense advice.
However, I deplore the way in which he is becoming increasingly moderate.
This week he urges a sound thrashing; last month he recommended immediate castration.
Immigration and Nationality
Mr. Maclennan
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what discussions he has held recently with Ministers in European Community countries about immigration and nationality questions.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
I attended meetings of European Community Ministers concerned with immigration matters at Berlin on 30 and 31 October, and at The Hague on 20 November.
The Minister of State — my right hon. Friend the Member for Oxford, West and Abingdon (Mr. Patten)— attended a meeting on my behalf at The Hague on 2 and 3 December this year.
In addition, I have had a number of informal bilateral discussions with European Community colleagues.
Mr. Maclennan
As those matters are clearly occupying the time of Ministers in the European Community, and as interest in the issue is bound to deepen with the removal of internal border controls, does the Home Secretary accept the proposed draft treaty article A arrangements recognising the common interest of Community countries in such matters?
Does he accept that there should be Community competence in that sphere?
What will be the Commission's role in it in future?
Mr. Baker
The draft treaty on immigration, which is to be discussed at Maastricht next week, contains a series of proposals starting with article A. That proposes that immigration and asylum matters, together with certain police, fraud and drugs issues, should not come under the competence of the treaty of Rome, but should be dealt with on an intergovernmental basis — a view with which the Government completely agree.
Article K allows for those matters to fall within the competence of the treaty only after a double lock — first, the unanimity of Ministers, and secondly, the specific approval of the House.
The Government support that position and do not believe that immigration and asylum matters should fall within the competence of the treaty of Rome.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
Does my right hon. Friend agree that while Jean-Marie Le Pen is legally entitled to come to this country, his obnoxious views on racism, immigration and nationality mean that he is simply not welcome in this country?
His racist views will be rejected by all the people in this country regardless of party.
Does my right hon. Friend share my view that those people who may wish to have a dialogue with Mr. Le Pen are simply selling short their country and their countrymen?
Will my right hon. Friend say how unwelcome Mr. Le Pen and his views are?
Mr. Baker
I am sure that Mr. Le Pen's views are racially and politically unacceptable.
I was asked as Home Secretary to consider whether I should ban his entry.
I decided not to do so.
I see that a former Home Secretary, the right hon. Member for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees), agrees with that decision.
I think that it is correct.
Apart from anything else, Mr. Le Pen is a Member of the European Parliament.
However, I want to make it clear that, by allowing him to come to Britain, neither I nor any Conservative Member has any agreement whatever with the racialist views that he is peddling, and I am sure that that is true of Opposition Members as well.
Mr. Winnick
On reflection, does the Home Secretary consider that if someone is due to come to Britain with the sole purpose of inciting race hatred there is no reason why he should be allowed in, and that Le Pen should have been excluded?
I welcome the view of the hon. Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) that Le Pen — a person whose only claim to fame is the manner in which in France he has agitated to poison race relations and incite hatred — is completely unwelcome in Britain and should not have been allowed in.
Is it true that Le Pen is to meet a number of Tory Members and, if so, will the Home Secretary make it clear that that would be wrong?
Mr. Baker
The best way of dealing with poisonous views is to expose and destroy them, and that is what free speech does.
Le Pen will have few converts in Britain.
The views that he is peddling in France exploit the anxieties of many people in a ruthless and unacceptable way.
We want none of his ideas here and I am sure that they will not become established.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn
Will my right hon. Friend consider the remarks of the hon. Member for Caithness and Sutherland (Mr. Maclennan), who suggested that we were moving towards a cross-border liberalisation and liberation?
Can my right hon. Friend explain why the hon. Gentleman's party suggests that we should increase the differences between those of us who live north and south of the border in the United Kingdom?
Mr. Baker
If these matters were to pass into European competence in the way that the Liberal Democrats want, there would be an inevitable weakening of our controls and our frontier controls, which I am not prepared to accept.
We need greater co-operation in Europe in these matters, because immigration and asylum flows are a major political concern, as we have just noted from the exchanges about Le Pen and the way in which people are feeding upon his visit.
However, that comes best through the co-operation of European countries rather than through competence under the European treaty.
Mr. Darling
I welcome what the Home Secretary said about Le Pen's visit to Britain, but will he go a little further and dissociate himself from those of his colleagues who are seeking to meet that man?
Mr. Baker
I have no information on who is meeting Le Pen.
I have made my views clear
Hon. Members
—’ Come on.’
Mr. Baker
I do not know who is meeting Le Pen and I have made my views clear.
I regard Le Pen's views as totally and utterly unacceptable, and I have made that clear.
Neighbourhood Watch
Mr. Lee
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department how many neighbourhood watch schemes are now in place.
Mr. John Patten
At the end of December 1990 there were estimated to be more than 92,000 neighbourhood watch schemes in England and Wales, covering nearly 5 million households.
They are multiplying fast.
Mr. Lee
I am sure that my right hon. Friend will be pleased to know that my Pendle constituency has 96 of these excellent neighbourhood watch schemes involving almost 20,500 households.
Does he agree that not only do those excellent schemes make a positive contribution towards crime prevention, but they build bridges between the police and the community?
Mr. Patten
As my hon. Friend says, the schemes are valuable in building bridges between the police and the community.
I was particularly interested to note that in the Whitefield area of Nelson in my hon. Friend's constituency, largely occupied by ethnic minority households, a neighbourhood watch scheme has recently been set up and is helping to build bridges between the ethnic minority residents and the police.
Mr. Vaz
I, too, welcome the growth of the neighbourhood watch schemes.
However, does the Minister realise that the schemes place a great burden on individual residents in a particular area and that they depend on the co-operation of the police?
In Leicestershire, the police are spending a great deal of their valuable time assisting neighbourhood watch schemes.
What additional resources can be provided to local police forces in order to make the schemes even more efficient than they are?
Mr. Patten
Neighbourhood watch schemes are by their nature genuine voluntary organisations, although they receive Government support, in that substantial resources are devoted to them through the funding of the police, who themselves assist neighbourhood watch schemes.
While I am on my feet, perhaps I may apologise for referring in an earlier answer to my hon. Friend the Member for Northampton, North when I meant my hon. Friend the Member for Littleborough and Saddleworth (Mr. Dickens), who made the suggestion.
Mr. Malins
Neighbourhood watch schemes are very strong in my constituency and are a good example of the police and public working together in helping to beat crime.
In the Croydon area, where neighbourhood watch schemes are strong, burglaries are down.
Does not that show that public co-operation and awareness are major factors in reducing crime in our cities?
Mr. Patten
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
That pattern is the same whether one is speaking of reasonably affluent, suburban Croydon, the outer estates of Luton, or the council house areas of Wythenshawe.
Where there is sustained development of neighbourhood watch schemes, there is a sustained decrease in the number of burglaries.
Mr. Randall
Does the Minister agree that not only crime but anti-social behaviour are causing immense alarm and distress throughout almost all of Britain?
Does he accept that the overall effectiveness of the various schemes and agencies that contribute to crime prevention, including neighbourhood watch, is seriously impaired by the lack of co-ordination between them?
Will he consider encouraging local authorities to formulate local strategies aimed at preventing crime and anti-social behaviour which are based on far greater co-ordination between the various agencies involved?
Mr. Patten
We are consulting further on a recent report on those issues.
Suffice it to say that no one owns neighbourhood watch schemes, except those who belong to them and who have helped to make them a success.
The schemes are not in the ownership of the police, local authorities, any political party or any business.
They are in the ownership of their communities, which we should support in their endeavours — not try to take over something that they started only in 1982, when the first neighbourhood watch began.
There are now 92,000 such schemes, entirely due to the endeavours of individual active citizens and communities.
Mr. Dunn
Will my right hon. Friend take time today to congratulate those who are running successful neighbourhood watch schemes in Dartford?
Does he agree that neighbourhood watches can be deemed only an aid to proper policing, in terms of numbers and police efficiency?
Will my right hon. Friend intervene with the chairman of Kent police authority to ensure that Dartford has its fair share of the new allocation of extra manpower for the county of Kent?
Mr. Patten
I will certainly consult my noble Friend Earl Ferrers, who is directly responsible for those matters, and will draw my hon. Friend's remarks to his attention.
The additional 1,000 police recently announced by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State will be largely devoted to beat policing.
My right hon. Friend has rightly ensured that 80 out of every 100 additional officers provided will go straight back on the beat, in Dartford and elsewhere.
Derek Bentley
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will now announce the results of his consideration of the case for the posthumous pardon of Derek Bentley.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
The representations made on behalf of Mr. Derek Bentley are still under consideration.
I have asked the police to make inquiries and when I have the results of those inquiries I will be in a position to decide whether any action on my part is appropriate.
Mr. Hughes
The right hon. Gentleman will be aware that the case for pardoning Derek Bentley was supported by his trial jury, which recommended mercy in 1952; by the Lord Chief Justice of the day; by the trial judge, who said subsequently that he believed that Bentley would not hang; a subsequent Lord Chancellor, Lord Hailsham; by many members of another place; by many right hon. and hon. Members of this House — nearly one third of whom signed a recent early-day motion; and by millions of our fellow citizens.
On the face of it, the case for a pardon is overwhelming.
Will the Home Secretary expedite his consideration and either grant a posthumous pardon or at least instigate a public inquiry, so that what is regarded as the greatest injustice of our post-war criminal justice system left unremedied will be put right before the last member of the Bentley family dies without knowing the result?
Mr. Baker
I know of the hon. Gentleman's interest in and concern about this; they are shared by many others.
The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis has been asked to look at the allegations and to arrange for certain persons who are said to be able to shed new light on the case to be interviewed.
When I get his report, I shall, of course, examine it carefully and examine the full details of the case.
Until I get that report, I will not get immersed in the details.
I think it is right for me to receive the report and then to examine it.
Mr. Alexander
Will my right hon. Friend, on the other hand, bear in mind the fact that when Bentley was apprehended and before PC
Miles was shot, Bentley said to the police:’ He's got a gun and it's loaded’?
Will he bear in mind the fact that at no time did Bentley discourage Craig verbally from firing that gun, that he brought a 16-year-old accomplice, armed, to commit a robbery and that the Lord Chief Justice had every justification for what he did?
Mr. Baker
These are the sorts of considerations that I shall have to take into account.
I am quite clear that I shall have to go into the evidence very carefully when the police report is available to me.
I hear what my hon. Friend says, as I hear all representations on this matter.
Mr. Cryer
Will the Home Secretary acknowledge that fresh evidence was presented to him in the summer and that his review is long overdue?
Will he acknowledge that this is an outrageous case of injustice?
Derek Bentley could not have taken anybody anywhere; he could barely get himself around.
He had a mental age of 11, although in body he was 19, and evidence of his mental incapacity was never produced during the trial.
In view of that, will the Home Secretary make sure that he examines the evidence as rapidly as possible?
Will he also acknowledge the sterling campaign carried out by the sister of Derek Bentley, Iris Bentley, in making sure that that grave injustice and wrong is righted as rapidly as possible?
Mr. Baker
No one could accuse me of delaying consideration of allegations of miscarriage of justice when they have been presented to me.
I have dealt with them very promptly, as, indeed, a Home Secretary should.
I am awaiting further analysis of the evidence and I assure the hon. Gentleman that, when I get it, I will examine the whole case again.
Ram-raiding
Mr. Paice
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what representations he has received regarding increases in the incidence of ram-raiding.
Mr. John Patten
I have received representations from the London and Provincial Antique Dealers Association and from Sir Stanley Bailey, the former chief constable of Northumbria police.
Mr. Paice
Despite the short list that my right hon. Friend read out, he will be aware that the problem of ram-raiding is increasing substantially in parts of the country.
The difficulty with that type of crime is that, because of the speed with which it is executed, burglar alarms and security systems are relatively ineffective.
The only way to protect property is by the construction of bollards and barriers, but that requires the consent of landlords and planning authorities.
Will my right hon. Friend do all that he can to open a dialogue with representatives of landlords and planning authorities so that they can encourage and enable retailers to erect something to protect their property?
Mr. Patten
That is a very constructive suggestion and I will certainly discuss it with my hon. Friend the Minister for Housing and Planning.
I know that in some parts of the country, notably in the north-east, one or two local authorities have made it rather difficult for protective street furniture to be erected along the sides of roads where there has been ram-raiding.
In my hon. Friend's own area in Cambridgeshire there have been no recent incidents.
There have been many more incidents in the north-east, in particular, and that is why the recent transfer of Mr. J. A. Stevens from being deputy chief constable of Cambridgeshire will doubtless be welcomed in Northumbria.
Cambridgeshire's loss is Northumbria's gain.
Mr. Bermingham
Does the Minister agree that the next time one of these offenders comes before the courts for sentencing, if the sentence does not contain a deterrent element, bearing in mind the increase in this type of crime, it would be wise for the Home Office to seek the guidance of the Attorney-General so that the sentence can be referred to the Court of Appeal, which could then lay down a guideline sentence for this type of crime which contains a deterrent element?
Mr. Patten
Again, I welcome the hon. Gentleman's constructive suggestion.
I shall draw his views to the attention of my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General.
The decision on whether to lay down guideline sentences is for the Lord Chief Justice, the deputy chief justice and others in the Appeal Court, not for me.
Mr. Janman
Although I agree with the sensible suggestion of my hon. Friend the Member for Cambridgeshire, South-East (Mr. Paice), does my right hon. Friend agree that we must try to prevent these crimes from happening and that the best way to do that is for him to instruct magistrates courts throughout the country to pass very harsh sentences on those who are convicted of this outrageous abuse of private property?
Mr. Patten
I agree entirely that this is an outrageous invasion of private property, but I am sure that the House would not want Ministers to be able to instruct the judiciary to do anything, because we value its independence.
A range of serious and severe penalties is available for those who are convicted of ram-raiding — for example, if robbery is involved, up to life imprisonment.
West Yorkshire Police
Mrs. Mahon
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the allocation of police officers to West Yorkshire.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
Fourteen additional police posts were approved with effect from 1 October 1991, providing for an establishment of 5, 295.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary announced on 28 November that he had not approved the police authority's application for 79 additional police posts in 1992-93.
Mrs. Mahon
The victims of crime in West Yorkshire will not be satisfied with that answer.
The Minister must be aware that, because of the threat of poll tax capping, by April 1992 we will have lost 200 police personnel on the beat and 200 civilian personnel.
As the Government, with their policies of dividing society, have been responsible for the breakdown in law and order, cannot we at least expect bobbies back on the beat to protect us?
Mr. Lloyd
I do not accept that capping, or the threat of capping, is responsible for West Yorkshire's inability to recruit its full establishment.
I think that the hon. Lady will find the answer in Her Majesty's inspector of constabulary report for 1991, which notes that’ West Yorkshire has one of the highest levels of expenditure per head of any police authority.
If it could bring its cost-effectiveness nearer the average, it could recruit up to the establishment that the Home Secretary has recommended.’
The hon. Lady mentioned policemen on the beat.
West Yorkshire has a smaller percentage of its force on the beat, which no doubt is partly due to its slow pace in the civilianisation of its various police activities.
Mr. Donald Thompson
Is my hon. Friend aware that the chief constable of the West Riding and one of his policemen wrote to me recently to say that there are no outstanding matters with the Home Office and that they welcome the £3.16 million to fight crime and the refurbishment and establishment of new police stations in Bradford, Leeds and Pontefract?
Will my hon. Friend do his best to ensure that constituents and police combine to spend the extra resources wisely?
Mr. Lloyd
I am glad that my hon. Friend mentioned the extra expenditure under the urban crime fund, which is designed to tackle crime in particular areas.
West Yorkshire has had the benefit of that.
He is right that there are no outstanding issues with the Home Office.
The outstanding issue is using the resources that the police authority has effectively.
Mr. Corbett
Does the Under-Secretary accept that in the face of a tidal wave of crime there must be better planning in police manning in West Yorkshire, as everywhere else?
Instead of the piecemeal approach, cannot he offer a three-year rolling programme of force levels to assist chief constables to make more effective use of manpower in a bid to prevent and combat crime?
Mr. Lloyd
Of course, but decisions on the effective use of manpower are taken by the police authority and the police force.
The inspector's report shows that there is room for improvement.
As I said, there is certainly scope for further civilianisation.
Police Interviews (Video Recordings)
Sir John Farr
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what plans he has to introduce video recordings of all interviews in police custody.
Mr. John Patten
We will consider further introduction of video recordings of all interviews in police custody when the outcome of a joint study being conducted by the Association of Chief Police Officers and the Home Office has been fully considered.
The pilot project is being carried out on three forces and an independent evaluation will be completed in the spring of 1992.
We will announce our conclusions as soon as possible at that stage.
Sir John Farr
Is my right hon. Friend aware that many miscarriages of justice have occurred recently due entirely to uncorroborated confessions?
The sooner that that disgrace is ended, the better.
One way of dealing with it, without waiting for the royal commission report, is by starting to video all such interviews forthwith.
Will he do so?
Mr. Patten
As my hon. Friend said, the issue is being considered by the royal commission, which will report as soon as possible.
Perhaps my hon. Friend will be reassured when I announce to the House that we will be laying tomorrow an order to ensure that, for all indictable offences, there will be the compulsory taking of evidence by tape recording in police stations.
That will apply throughout the country as soon as possible.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Bradley
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 December.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Bradley
Will the Prime Minister confirm that neither he nor the Chancellor of the Exchequer has taken any action to ensure that the European central bank is located in Britain?
Does he now agree that it should be based in Manchester?
The Prime Minister
I can confirm to the hon. Gentleman that there have been no serious discussions yet about the location of the European system of central banks.
It is possible, but not yet certain, that there will be such discussions next week in Maastricht.
Mr. Patrick Thompson
Has my right hon. Friend had time to see the OECD report on unsatisfactory unemployment levels in France and the clear evidence that its minimum wage policy has served to make unemployment worse?
Does he agree with the conclusions of the report?
Has he noted that the Leader of the Opposition has turned this, like everything else, on its head?
The Prime Minister
I have not seen that report, but I have expressed before the dangers that a minimum wage policy would hold for employment levels.
I believe that it would cost many people their jobs and would cause far more damage than good.
Mr. Kinnock
Does the Prime Minister recall telling The Daily Telegraph six months ago that economic recovery was coming, in his words,’ within weeks’?
How did he get it so badly wrong?
The Prime Minister
If the right hon. Gentleman would study recent CBI surveys he would see that domestic and export orders are rising, that export orders are at their highest level for over a year and that there is confirmation that business conditions are beginning to improve in line with confidence.
That is not just my view, but the view of industry and commerce.
Mr. Kinnock
Is the Prime Minister aware that building employers say that conditions are worse than they have been in 40 years, that car sales are down 20 per cent.
on the year and that Lord Prior, chairman of GEC, says there is no improvement in trading conditions?
If the Prime Minister thinks that all that adds up to recovery, he is not living in the real world.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman should get out of the habit of writing his supplementary questions before he hears the first answer.
What is concerning the right hon. Gentleman is the fact that the economy is moving back into growth and he does not like it.
Growth is good for the country but bad for the Labour party.
Mr. Kinnock
After years of pushing Britain down, the Prime Minister is in no position to make that kind of claim.
He has taken Britain into negative growth, rising unemployment and falling output.
It is time he was out.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is a specialist in talking this country down and does it week after week.
The only way to get proper growth is to have an economic recovery based on low inflation and proper investment, not on the sort of policies that the right hon. Gentleman has advocated.
The policies that he stands for — of high taxation and centralised control — are the policies that would drive this country to ruin.
Mr. Favell
As my right hon. Friend prepares for Maastricht, may he be reassured that to return without a treaty would be no failure?
Our European colleagues' vision of Europe is fundamentally different from ours and a shotgun marriage would be in nobody's interests — and good luck.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his best wishes.
I assure him I will return with a treaty that I can recommend to the House or come back without a treaty.
Mr. Galbraith
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 December
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Galbraith
As his experiences clearly influence his policies and following his recent interview in The Sun, can the Prime Minister now tell the House exactly when he was unemployed?
The Prime Minister
I was unemployed in the early 1960s.
As to the precise dates, that is not a matter which I can immediately remember.
It was in the early 1960s.
Mr. Churchill
Is not it unacceptable that pensioners should be defrauded of pensions to which they have contributed throughout their entire working lives, as is the case with the Mirror Group Newspapers pensioners?
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that there will be swift Government action to remedy that situation and will he commiserate with the Leader of the Opposition about the fact that his and his party's principal supporter should turn out to be a crook?
The Prime Minister
I am not able to comment on the Mirror Group pension fund as the Serious Fraud Office is examining it.
We have greatly tightened the protection of pension fund members over recent years.
Nothing, of course, can be complete proof against criminality.
Mr. Hain
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Hain
The future of the Daily Mirror is now in hock to City spivs and business tycoons — Hon. Gentlemen can shout as much as they like, but does the Prime Minister agree that citizens' rights are best protected by pluralistic ownership of the press?
Or does he want to gag free speech and have every tabloid newspaper supporting the Tory party?
Interruption
The Prime Minister
I do not think that it would be proper for me to get involved in what is happening in terms of the Mirror Group pension fund.
I commented as far as I am prepared to a moment ago.
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. King
The news that millions of new investors are seeking to invest in British Telecom is good news indeed.
Will my right hon. Friend extend to them his best wishes on becoming part of the property-owning democracy and will he send a message of best wishes to the management and employees of West Midlands Travel — the country's biggest bus company — who yesterday concluded a £70 million buy-out?
Is not it obvious that when employees own their own business, that is the Conservative way forward?
The Prime Minister
Yes, Sir.
The privatisation programme has been an enormous success in recent years and not the least part of that success has been the extent to which it has widened and deepened share ownership around the country.
That will certainly increase in the years ahead.
Mr. Ashdown
Will the Prime Minister reconsider his answer to me two weeks ago on mortgage repossessions?
Does he realise that his answer was not only factually wrong, but betrayed a depressing complacency in the face of the scale of the homes repossession crisis which is now upon us?
Does he realise that if he will not act on the problem, it will not only produce a tide of human misery, but will bring to a clattering end any hope of economic recovery?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman touches on an important matter, but he misrepresents the views of the Government and he misrepresents what I said.
As I said, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Social Security has announced help in terms of income support assistance for those facing repossession and the loss of their homes.
That help amounts to £400 million a year, which is very considerable and is necessary.
The right hon. Gentleman should not misrepresent what the Government have said and are doing.
Mr. Moss
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Moss
Does my right hon. Friend agree that privatisation receipts have helped the Government to increase public spending, to cut taxation and to pay off national debt?
Does he further agree that it is sheer hypocrisy to oppose privatisation in principle and to promise more nationalisation, yet to claim that there will still be privatisation proceeds to spend, as did a Labour Front-Bench Treasury spokesperson this morning?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is entirely right.
If the privatisation programme were to cease, it would have a damaging effect on the inflow of funds, as would proposals to renationalise parts of industry which is what the Labour party proposes.
There is no doubt that there is a huge gap between Labour's spending proposals and its capacity to fund those proposals without huge increases in direct tax for the vast majority of people.
Mr. Rooney
Does the Prime Minister have any intention of visiting Essex?
If he does, does he have any retraining plans in mind for those of his hon. Friends who will not be here after the next election?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is ill-informed.
We have gained four local council seats in by-elections in Essex recently.
Mr. David Nicholson
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Nicholson
As a former Social Security Minister, my right hon. Friend will be aware of the importance attached by the retired to occupational pensions and to the great and successful expansion of those over the past 12 years.
Given the crocodile tears on those matters from the Labour party, is not it essential that my right hon. Friend should as soon as possible launch an inquiry into how people's pensions were protected by the prominent Labour party members who were directors and trustees of the Mirror Group Newspapers pension fund?
The Prime Minister
It would not be proper for me to comment on individuals who may be trustees of that pension fund.
Pension management is based on trust law and the good management of pension funds and the behaviour of trustees is, therefore, paramount.
As I said some moments ago, we have strengthened the law requiring trustees to disclose key information to members, to pensioners and to trade unions.
People listening to this Question Time may wonder why Opposition Members wish to drown out the subject.
Mr. Hume
Does the Prime Minister agree that it is impossible to have a genuine single market without a single currency?
Does he also agree that the reservations in his party about a single currency have more to do with nationalism than with economics?
Given that in the harmonisation process we have already got rid of the half crown and of the threepenny bit, what is the emotional difficulty about changing the pound coin to the ecu?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman bases his question on a premise that I do not accept.
I believe that it is possible to have a perfectly satisfactory single market without a single currency.
The question whether it would ever be right to move to one at some distant date is separate.
Balanced Budget
Mr. Janman
To ask the Prime Minister in what financial year he expects to balance the budget between Government expenditure and revenue received.
The Prime Minister
It remains our policy to balance the budget over the economic cycle.
The balance between revenue and expenditure in any one financial year will depend largely on cyclical developments.
Mr. Janman
May I urge my right hon. Friend to keep as tight as humanly possible control on public expenditure so as to meet the objective of a balanced budget as soon as possible?
Does he agree that the idea of spending an extra £35,000 million a year would be absolutely disastrous for the economy of this country?
That is precisely what the Labour party seeks to do.
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is entirely right.
We have repaid a great deal of debt over recent years.
It remains our policy to move back to a balanced budget as speedily as possible.
The Opposition always promise to spend more.
They never say where the money is coming from and they never will, but the taxpayers know where it is coming from — it will be coming from them.
Mr. Tony Banks
Am I being completely cynical
Hon. Members
Yes!
Mr. Tony Banks
Give me a chance!
Am I being completely cynical in thinking that the Government's announcement about the great increase in public expenditure has something to do with a general election?
The Prime Minister
Yes, totally cynical.
House of Commons
Monday 9 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
ENERGY
Coal Mining (Productivity)
Mr. Knox
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what has been the increase in labour productivity in the coal mining industry since 1983-84.
The Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. John Wakeham)
The British Coal Corporation has achieved impressive improvements in productivity, which is now 105 per cent.
above 1983-84 levels.
Mr. Knox
Does my right hon. Friend agree that that is an impressive increase over that period of years?
Can he say whether productivity in the British coal industry is beginning to catch up with productivity in the coal industries of our major competitors?
Mr. Wakeham
Certainly the productivity of the coal industry has improved greatly over the years, but further improvement is still required.
Although our productivity compares well with coal industries in Europe, it has some way to go before it is at the level of some of the coal industries outside Europe.
Mr. Alan W. Williams
Does the Secretary of State accept that Britain has the most cost efficient coal industry in Europe, producing the cheapest coal, and that if it were in any one of the other 11 European countries there would be no question of its further contraction at this time?
What is his view of the European Commission's proposals for reference pricing, which would allow Governments to support certain mines which produce coal for less than £50 per tonne?
Mr. Wakeham
No communication has been sent to the British Government about European reference prices, so I have not had a chance to study those, but I pay full tribute to the improvement in productivity.
What is important is that the British coal industry should achieve contracts with the generators in the next round of contracts due to start in April 1993.
The size and volume of the contracts secured is the best safeguard for the future of the coal industry.
National Grid Company
Mr. Norris
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will now take the National Grid Company back into state ownership.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory)
No.
The National Grid Company has played a centra role in the development of the new competitive electricity market.
Mr. Norris
I thank my hon. Friend for that entirely commendable answer.
Was his calculation based on any assessment of what he thinks the cost of that renationalisation might be?
Perhaps more important, given that it is Labour party policy, what impact would that have on the price of electricity for consumers?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Yes, I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
To take the grid company back into public ownership would cost about £2 billion.
I do not know how the money would be found, except from higher taxes or higher electricity prices, or both.
Such a move would reimpose the dead hand of state control and political interference.
That is Labour party policy, so taxpayers and electricity customers had better beware.
Mr. Hague
Is my hon. Friend aware that although it would be wasteful, unnecessary and expensive to renationalise the National Grid Company, the company has incurred great unpopularity due to its proposals to build pylons through the finest parts of our rural landscape in Cleveland?
May I welcome his decision to hold a public inquiry about these proposals and urge him to ensure that the inquiry is held in such a way, in such a place and at such a time that the concerns of many thousands of people about the proposals can be fully communicated?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I know of the proposal to which my hon. Friend refers and I know that he has vigorously represented the concerns of his constituents.
I wish to ensure that environmental considerations are properly taken into account.
I can tell my hon. Friend that there will be a public inquiry into the proposal and that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State will announce that formally in due course.
Mr. Dobson
Before the Minister starts to make criticisms of the cost to the taxpayer of buying back the grid company, may I remind him what happened when his right hon. Friend sold it?
He so underpriced the shares that the taxpayer lost £1,200 million on the first afternoon of dealing.
Since then, the directors have done little other than line their own pockets, award themselves enormous pay increases and indulge in dodgy share options, all of which has been done at the expense of the domestic customer, whose bill has gone up by 40 per cent.
since privatisation was announced.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The hon. Gentleman is entirely wrong.
The taxpayer and the electricity customer have benefited in every way from privatisation and restructuring of the electricity supply market.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that, for the first time, domestic electricity customers are protected by a price cap which ensures that, for the next three years, electricity prices will not rise by more than retail price inflation.
North Sea (Capital Investment)
Mr. Donald Thompson
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what was the level of capital investment in the North sea in 1990, and in the first half of 1991.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. ColinMoynihan)
Capital investment in the North sea in 1990 was £3.5 billion.
In the first half of 1991 it was £2.1 billion, which is some 30 per cent.
higher than in the first half of 1990.
Mr. Thompson
Is my hon. Friend aware that continuity of orders is most important for manufacturers in my constituency who produce valves, pumps and pipes for the North sea oil industry?
I welcome my hon. Friend's answer.
Mr. Moynihan
In this industry as, no doubt, in the rest of the manufacturing sector in my hon. Friend's constituency, my hon. Friend has continued to work assiduously for his constituents.
I believe that we shall have greater continuity of orders throughout the 1990s than we did in the 1980s, due to the maturing nature of offshore oil and gas work, including refurbishment, sub-sea systems and satellite developments.
Mr. Wilson
In relation to the North sea, I am sure that the Minister will recall that during the Kincardine and Deeside by-election, various hints and half-promises were given about the transfer of the petroleum exploration division jobs to Aberdeen.
We understand that consultants have now been appointed, so can the Minister give us an assurance about the timetable for those inquiries?
Will he also guarantee that there will be an announcement this side of the general election?
The Government may believe that once the Kincardine and Deeside election was out on the road — somewhat unsuccessfully for the Government — those promises might be out of sight and out of mind, but they are still in the mind of the Opposition.
Mr. Moynihan
We are seeking tenders from a range of consultants to review the location of the petroleum engineering directorate.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State will announce who is to carry out that review as soon as the consultants have been chosen.
Dr. Michael Clark
Will my hon. Friend confirm that 1990 was an all-time record year for activity in the North sea, with the drilling of 224 exploration and appraisal wells resulting in 16 significant finds?
Will my hon. Friend also confirm that 1991 has been a vibrant and exciting year in the North sea?
On the eve of discussions at Maastricht, will my hon. Friend confirm that such activity in the North sea enables this country to provide 82 per cent.
of Europe's indigenous oil?
Mr. Moynihan
I can confirm those three points.
If company intentions on wells to be drilled, as recorded in a survey by my Department, are realised, the total of such wells in 1992 could yet again be extremely high indeed, as high as 220.
Mr. Hood
I welcome the capital investment, but will the Minister join me in condemning those oil companies which use the Economic League to blacklist workers and potential workers?
Surely the best way to look after the industry is to stop the nonsense of blacklisting people simply because they belong to a union or for whatever other reason?
Mr. Moynihan
I think that is it is the hon. Gentleman who is talking nonsense on this occasion.
As my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has said on many occasions in the House, the Department is more than happy to receive representations from the hon. Gentleman or anyone else about specific cases of blacklisting.
Straw
Mr. Moss
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what research is being undertaken into the use of straw as a renewable source of energy.
Mr. Moynihan
The Department of Energy has funded research and development into the use of straw as a renewable source of energy within its biofuels programme.
The results of this work were disseminated most recently at a workshop in Peterborough on 7 November 1991 which we jointly sponsored with the Agricultural Development and Advisory Service.
Mr. Moss
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
Given that about 7 million tonnes of surplus straw is produced each year, much of it from the cereal-growing area of East Anglia in my constituency, does my hon. Friend agree that it is an important source of energy?
The ban on straw burning will come into effect in 1993, so does my hon. Friend agree that we in East Anglia have a ready market for such initiatives?
Mr. Moynihan
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
In particular, the ban on burning straw in the field from 1993 could stimulate the use of straw as a fuel.
That practice has already been very successful — as, for example, in straw combustion for space heating, which was demonstrated at Woburn abbey.
There is good potential for straw as a fuel source, so long as we continue the important research and development programme that we are currently commissioning.
Mr. Haynes
Mr. Speaker, Sir, may I congratulate the Minister on his engagement?
It is about time.
The Minister ought to come off it, though.
He is under instructions from the Secretary of State.
Anything that the Government can burn to destroy the mining industry, they have done and will do.
If it is not gas, it is oil.
If it is not oil, it is straw.
If it is not straw, it is imported coal from foreign lands.
Why do the Government not come off it?
We in the coal fields know what is going on.
The Secretary of State ought to say, through the Minister, that the Government will back off.
Let us keep the mining industry.
Mr. Moynihan
I am most grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his kind opening remarks.
I was certainly under no instructions from my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State in that respect.
As to the hon. Gentleman's other points, he will be the first to accept that straw is very low in sulphur and will reduce acid rain when it is substituted for — or, as the hon. Gentleman would no doubt hope, co-fired with — fossil fuels.
Mr. Dickens
Conservative Members also congratulate my hon. Friend the Minister on his engagement.
We are very pleased to hear about it.
If it is true that 7 million tonnes of straw are wasted each year, why is straw so expensive to horse riding, racing, and show jumping stables?
If straw is used as a fuel, will that not make it much more expensive to the horse fraternity?
Mr. Moynihan
My hon. Friend will know the importance which needs to be attached to transport costs when considering the economics of straw.
For that reason, straw as a fuel is likely to be most efficient and economical when used in heating close to the point of production.
That is due not just to its comparatively high transport costs but to its low density.
Nuclear Generation
Dr. Kim Howells
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy when he last met the chairman of Nuclear Electric to discuss the future of the nuclear generating industry.
Mr. Wakeham
I regularly meet the chairman of Nuclear Electric to discuss a variety of matters.
Dr. Howells
Whatever one might think about the virtues or otherwise of nuclear energy, clearly it is a viable source of base load electricity for the future.
However, it requires long-term thinking, in terms of the industry's future funding.
Does the Secretary of State agree that it is too large an area of expertise and of excellence in many ways to be allowed to rely simply on the vagaries of the open market?
Mr. Wakeham
The Government have made it clear that they will review the future of this country's nuclear power industry in 1994.
By that time, we want to see a future which demonstrates that nuclear power can be produced safely and economically.
Today, Nuclear Electric published its half-year results, which show continuing and encouraging progress towards Nuclear Electric's aims.
Its output is up by 13 per cent.
compared with the same period last year, its market share is up from 17 to 19 per cent., and its operating profits are up by 50 per cent .
— entirely reflecting higher output and tighter cost control.
Mr. Hannam
Does my right hon. Friend agree that Nuclear Electric's half-year results confirm a long-term future for nuclear power?
It is not important that we keep together the teams that will ensure that the nuclear power construction industry will continue in the future?
Mr. Wakeham
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
That is why I am delighted that the Sizewell B project is being built on time and within cost.
That is a testament to Nuclear Electric's management in respect of that project, which is a major achievement by British industry.
Mr. Wigley
The Secretary of State will be aware of the uncertainty surrounding the future of the Trawsfynydd nuclear power station, which employs up to 200 people in my constituency.
Can he give an assurance that if the Magnox reactors are indeed approaching the end of their days and Trawsfynydd has no continuing nuclear future, the Government will accept responsibility for finding jobs for those who depend on the industry?
Such responsibility has been taken in other areas where a major rundown of significant employers has taken place.
Mr. Wakeham
I think that we must deal with such matters stage by stage.
First, we must satisfy the nuclear installations inspectorate that the reactor is safe; it will not reopen until that has been done.
The same applies to any other Magnox stations whose safety is being reviewed by the NII.
We shall see what happens after that.
Sir Trevor Skeet
Is my right hon. Friend aware that if the nuclear power programme were abandoned completely, 15 million tonnes of carbon dioxide would be pumped into the atmosphere every year?
That is one thing that we should avoid.
If my right hon. Friend holds a review in 1994, he may find that not much of the industry is left by then, because many of the teams will be broken up.
Mr. Wakeham
I agree with the first part of what my hon. Friend has said: nuclear power certainly makes a valuable contribution to the environment by curbing carbon dioxide emissions.
My hon. Friend mentioned 1994.
That is the year in which the Sizewell B project will come on stream, and will start to produce electricity.
I feel that that is a good time at which to review the implications for the future, and I very much hope that the expertise that now exists will not be lost to the industry.
Mr. Morgan
Can the Secretary of State confirm that, notwithstanding the encouraging programme that he has just reported, Nuclear Electric's directors could not continue to pay the £1 million per day that it costs to continue the Sizewell B construction project if they were not covered by a letter of comfort from the Treasury, without which the company would be technically insolvent?
Does the right hon. Gentleman propose that in 1994, when the review is completed, that safeguard protecting the company's directors against the threat of unlawful trading while technically insolvent should be lifted?
Will he also tell us when he expects the nuclear levy, which is still rising, to start to fall in the light of this morning's results from Nuclear Electric?
Mr. Wakeham
As the hon. Gentleman knows, Nuclear Electric was formed out of the old Central Electricity Generating Board and has remained a Government-owned project throughout.
It is therefore entirely proper for the directors to be given proper assurances by Government about the funding of a project undertaken on behalf of Government.
The nuclear levy is set to decline over the 1990s, and at present runs only until 1998.
The calculation is quite complicated, as I am sure the hon. Gentleman knows.
The actual amount of cash is not rising; it is the relation of that cash to the output of electricity and, therefore, the area that must be covered, which make the difference to the percentage.
The percentage went up last year, but the amount of the levy is still set to fall over the 1990s.
Interruption
Sizewell B
Mr. Irvine
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will make a statement on the progress of construction of the Sizewell B nuclear power station.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I am pleased to say that the Sizewell B project is progressing on time and to cost.
Mr. Irvine
Does my hon. Friend agree that all those involved in the work on the power station, many of whom are constituents of mine, deserve great credit for the fact that it is proceeding so well?
Does not that provide a welcome contrast with the bad old days of the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s, when all too often the construction of power stations — nuclear and conventional alike — fell years behind?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Yes.
The project remains eight months ahead of the committed 72-month programme.
That reflects very well on the management and work force concerned.
It contrasts markedly with similar past projects which often suffered from appalling industrial relations and were sometimes years late.
North Sea Oil
Mr. French
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what is his Department's estimate of North sea oil reserves and how long it is anticipated they will last; and what were the corresponding estimates five years ago.
Mr. Moynihan
My Department's central estimate of reserves remaining in existing discoveries at 31 December 1985 was 1,230 million tonnes.
The corresponding estimate at 31 December 1990, after production of 549 million tonnes in the intervening period, was 1,195 million tonnes.
These estimates confirm that the United Kingdom will remain an important oil producer.
Mr. French
Do not the figures reveal that those independent oil analysts who, in the early and middle 1980s, forecast a substantial depletion of United Kingdom resources in the early 1990s got it wrong?
Is not the position that the United Kingdom will remain a very substantial oil producer until well into the next century?
Mr. Moynihan
It is certainly the case that, due to the substantial improvements in the technical ability to recover oil, in particular by means of enhanced oil recovery techniques, many of the past estimates have proved inaccurate.
Many of the reserves that were not then technically capable of being produced economically will come on stream and, in my view, will ensure that we are a major oil producer until well into the next century.
Mr. Doran
As well as North sea oil, we have also been fortunate enough to discover gas in the North sea.
Can the Minister provide similar figures for the amount of gas discovered in the North sea and an estimate of the life of our gas supplies?
That issue is the subject of debate, given the recent Office of Fair Trading report into British Gas.
I should also be interested to hear the Minister's views on the Government's policy regarding gas imports.
I noticed that last week permission was given for gas exports.
Will the Minister make a statement on that issue, too?
Mr. Moynihan
In 1990, gas produced from the United Kingdom continental shelf increased to 50 billion cu m, compared with 45 billion cu m in 1989.
That included gas used by operators for drilling and production operations.
As for gas imports and exports, United Kingdom continental shelf gas reserves should also be capable of supplying the expanding United Kingdom gas market well into the next century.
The Government's objective is to work towards freer trade in gas throughout Europe.
For that to happen, we need to be able to export United Kingdom continental shelf gas.
The European gas market, which is dominated by large and often state-controlled monopolies which shun competition, needs to be liberalised.
Mr. Simon Hughes
Given that we need to ensure that we should have as a priority the conservation of resources and energy efficiency, whatever the amount of reserves of oil and gas, what progress has been made by the Department and the Treasury in discussions with the European Community on the value added tax harmonisation talks with a view to the introduction of a lower level of VAT for environmentally friendly technologies which conserve resources?
Mr. Moynihan
I will happily refer the hon. Gentleman's latter point to my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Energy conservation and environmental pressures are rightly being placed on oil and gas producers in the North sea.
A very high priority is placed on both issues.
I can assure the hon. Gentleman that his concerns are well reflected in all the discussions between operators and Ministers.
Mr. Dickens
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the greatest danger to the North sea would be an incoming Labour Government, who would seek to shackle the oil and gas companies by imposing new controls and high taxes?
Mr. Moynihan
The answer is yes.
Combined Heat and Power
Mr. Vaz
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will make a statement about the Government's support for combined heat and power schemes.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The Government fully recognise the environmental and energy efficiency benefits of combined heat and power.
The Energy Efficiency Office in my Department continues to promote the wider use of the technology under its best practice programme.
Interest in CHP is at a high level and the prospects for CHP in the 1990s are excellent.
Mr. Vaz
In view of Leicester Energy Limited's continued interest in the establishment of a combined heat and power scheme in Leicester, will the Minister give his wholehearted support and instruct his officials to give their wholehearted co-operation to Leicester Energy Limited in the tremendous efforts that it is making to promote that scheme?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I know of the hon. Gentleman's interest in the subject.
He will know that my Department gave a grant for a feasibility study into large-scale CHP in Leicester, but the scheme did not proceed.
The privatisation and restructuring of the electricity industry have offered new opportunities for independent electricity-generating schemes, particularly those that combine heat generation with electricity generation.
That will assist those in Leicester, if they decide to revive the scheme, and those elsewhere.
Mr. Rost
Under the Electricity Act 1989, the regulator is directed to monitor the progress of combined heat and power.
Will my hon. Friend discuss with the Office of Electricity Regulation the complaints of the Combined Heat and Power Association that existing regulations contain barriers to the progress of combined heat and power, which should be removed?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I know that the Combined Heat and Power Association recently submitted a report to OFFER pointing out some institutional and administrative barriers that it should like to be tackled.
That is being considered, with our support, by the Director-General of Electricity Supply.
Mr. Barron
The Minister cannot fail to acknowledge what has been common knowledge in the combined heat and power industry — that the major block is electricity prices.
Despite the so-called new market that the Government have created, they have never recognised the price differences between electricity from combined heat and power plants and that from conventional generation.
When will they act instead of saying at every Question Time how much they are in favour of combined heat and power?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The combined heat and power industry was held up for many years because it was in the hands of a state monopoly.
We have ended that and have given unprecedented new opportunities for independent generators, particularly those that employ combined heat and power technology.
Oil-related Fabrication Sector
Mr. Kennedy
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will assess the implications of the single European market post-1992 upon the United Kingdom oil-related fabrication sector; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Moynihan
United Kingdom companies that have a good track record and are competitive will continue to win orders.
It is up to United Kingdom industry to demonstrate and promote its strengths — its productivity, its advanced capabilities, its technological edge, its reliability and its safety record, all of which are vital ingredients of a bid package.
Mr. Kennedy
I am grateful for that reply.
I am sure that, from the Minister's knowledge of and visits to the area, he will agree that companies such as Highlands Fabricators at Nigg, which has an excellent work force, a good track record, is competitive and highly skilled and has diversified on site, are well placed to take advantage of the single market.
Will he recognise the persistent anxiety and doubts of United Kingdom-based fabrication yards about indirect subsidies finding their way to yards based in some of our main European competitors?
Will he continue to press our interests on that front?
Mr. Moynihan
On the former point, the hon. Gentleman will be pleased to note that all of the most recent fabrication contracts have been awarded to United Kingdom yards.
For many of the reasons that he gave, the contract for a Shell Sole Pit compression platform has been awarded to Highfab.
The Offshore Supplies Office will continue to play an important role in promoting fair commercial opportunity in all oil and gas markets and in supporting EC initiatives for the creation of open and commercially fair markets.
Mr. Moss
May I congratulate my hon. Friend the Minister on securing a 40 per cent.
increase in the budget for the Energy Efficiency Office for next year?
It will total about £59 million, which compares favourably with the measly £3 million that Labour spent in its last year in office.
May I extend the grateful thanks of Mr. and Mrs. Emery of Eye in my constituency, whom I visited this morning and who have just had their home insulated under the Government's home energy efficiency scheme?
Mr. Moynihan
I am delighted to accept those congratulations, not least on behalf of my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary, who have spearheaded the campaign.
Oil and Gas (Irish Sea)
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will make a statement on the latest situation in respect of oil and gas exploration in and around the Irish sea.
Mr. Moynihan
Since the beginning of 1990, a total of 13 exploration and four appraisal wells have been drilled in that part of the United Kingdom sector of the Irish sea generally known as the Manx basin.
In addition, four exploration wells have been drilled in surrounding onshore areas of Great Britain.
Four significant gas discoveries and one significant oil discovery, all offshore, have been announced resulting from this activity.
Mr. Wareing
Does the Minister agree about the urgent need to exploit the resources of the Irish sea, in the hope that there will soon be a Government who will not dissipate the revenues from such exploration, as happened so tragically in regard to the North sea?
Will the hon. Gentleman give an assurance, which is urgently needed on Merseyside, that every effort will be made to ensure that contracts for Irish sea exploration are given to firms in the north-west of England in general and to Merseyside in particular?
Mr. Moynihan
I have no doubt that companies in that area which have proven expertise will be in a strong position to win contracts on merit.
Opencast Mining
Mr. Sumberg
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy how many jobs are both directly and indirectly supported by the opencast coal sector.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
There is no precise figure available about employment in the opencast coal industry, but the number is likely to be of the order of 17,000.
Mr. Sumberg
My hon. Friend will know of the considerable worry in the Radcliffe part of my constituency about the prospect of an opencast coal mine being developed there.
That matter will be determined by the local council a week on Thursday.
Although jobs are always welcome, particularly at this time, does my hon. Friend agree that the environmental impact on the locality is also important, because a safe environment will protect the area for future generations?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My hon. Friend has vigorously represented the interests of views of those who may be affected by this project.
I agree that there must be a balance between the need to exploit economic coal reserves and the need to pay close attention to any possible environmental impact.
That is done through the planning system and the fact that appeals are heard not by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State but by the Department of the Environment.
Mr. McAllion
Will the Minister confirm that there will be fewer jobs in opencast mining as a direct result of the Government's policies?
Will he confirm that, for example, opencast mines and jobs in Ayrshire are threatened by the Government's proposals to privatise Northern Ireland Electricity?
Will the hon. Gentleman explain to miners and other people in Ayrshire how the Government can try to persuade them to vote for Tories in marginal seats when Government policies, because of their privatisation obsessions, lead directly to job losses in Ayrshire?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
No.
Jobs in the opencast sector are at risk from the vendetta against opencast mining conducted by the Labour party.
We know that a successful deep-mine sector and a successful opencast sector are complementary.
We need the output from both for blending purposes.
Mr. Michael Morris
Is not opencast coal a vital national resource in the same way as sand and gravel in my constituency are?
Does my hon. Friend agree that, except in areas of outstanding natural beauty or sites of scientific interest, our mineral resources must be exploited?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I agree with my hon. Friend that an important balance must be struck.
Provided that environmental concerns are met and are specifically addressed in the planning process, we believe that output from the opencast sector must be blended with output from the deep-mine sector.
Indeed, the coal industry as a whole would be put at risk through premature shutdown of the opencast sector.
Mr. Dobson
If the Department of Energy believes that 17,000 people are employed directly or indirectly in the opencast coal sector, why did the Secretary of State for Employment recently say that 40,000 people were employed there?
Who is right?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The figure that I gave was of those who are directly or indirectly affected by the opencast sector.
The figure that my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Employment gave included those who might be affected in other ways by premature closure.
Wave Energy
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what has been the level of investment since 1979 into wave energy research; and what initiatives he has undertaken to promote its use.
Mr. Moynihan
My Department has invested £17 million since 1979-80 on wave energy research, including £900,000 for an experimental shoreline wave energy project on the Scottish island of Islay, which is the most technologically advanced of its type in the world.
The review of wave energy currently under way is due to report early next year.
Mr. Evennett
I thank my hon. Friend for his reply, which is most impressive.
Can he give the House more details about the important review of wave energy and will he also tell us which other projects it will cover?
Mr. Moynihan
Yes.
The current review includes a detailed, technical and commercial assessment of the leading wave energy devices ranging from large offshore to shoreline systems, including Professor Salter's duck, the National Engineering Laboratory's breakwater device, the Bristol cylinder, Coventry polytechnic's circular clam and other devices.
The review has covered four main areas of work — wave resource modelling, capital costing, availability assessment and economic modelling.
Combined Heat and Power
Mr. Rost
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what representations he has received from the Combined Heat and Power Association about the barriers to the wider use of combined heat and power; and what action he proposes.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My right hon. Friend and I have received a number of representations from the Combined Heat and Power Association.
I am aware that the association has provided a review paper to OFFER on the perceived barriers to the development of CHP, and the issues raised are primarily matters for OFFER.
Mr. Rost
Is my hon. Friend aware that the main barrier to CHP is that producers have to sell their electricity to the pool and then buy it back at a much higher — an uplift price?
Is not that regulatory nonsense, and what is my hon. Friend going to do about it?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State will shortly pronounce on alternative measures and I think that my hon. Friend will be pleased with the outcome.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Legal Profession (Recruitment)
Mr. Jessel
To ask the Attorney-General what discussions he has had with the chairmen of the Bar Council and the Law Society concerning the impact on the effective operation of the legal system of the quality of recruitment to the legal professions.
The Attorney-General (Sir Patrick Mayhew)
Neither the Bar Council nor the Law Society has raised with me the question of the quality of recruitment to the legal profession.
Mr. Jessel
I am sorry, Mr. Speaker, but I could not hear as an hon. Friend was standing up.
The Attorney-General
Neither the Law Society nor the Bar Council has raised with me the question of the quality of recruitment to the legal profession.
I think that I put it the other way round last time.
Mr. Jessel
Whatever the quality of recruitment of barristers and solicitors, is my right hon. and learned Friend aware of the deep weakness in the British legal system in that justice is readily available to the poor who can get legal aid and to the rich who can easily afford it anyway but that to a large proportion of people in between it often seems barely accessible and yet they have to pay taxes to provide justice for others?
Is not that in itself an injustice, and should Government and Parliament tolerate it?
The Attorney-General
I am well aware of the widespread anxiety about the thresholds of eligibility for legal aid.
My right hon. Friend the Lord Chancellor expects to issue a consultation paper next year on the financial conditions for legal aid in criminal proceedings.
He has already done so in respect of civil non-matrimonial legal aid and is considering the responses to that.
His purpose is to try to target legal aid on individual need and he continues to seek ways — as we all must — to reduce the cost of litigation, both criminal and civil.
Mr. Fraser
I am sure that the Attorney-General will agree that it is important that women, blacks and other ethnic minorities, and working-class people should be able to get into the legal professions.
Is he aware that at the moment there is great difficulty in obtaining discretionary grants for professional training and for the final qualifications for both professions?
Will he discuss with his Cabinet colleagues whether the discretionary grants for vocational training for the professions might be made mandatory or whether the training and enterprise councils might provide money to help those with little means to train for entry into the professions?
The Attorney-General
I very much agree with the desirability of the objective expressed by the hon. Gentleman at the beginning of his question.
As for the remainder, I shall draw the suggestion to the attention of the Lord Chancellor.
War Crimes
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Attorney-General when he expects to bring prosecutions under the War Crimes Act 1991.
The Attorney-General
The Metropolitan police are conducting a major investigation into alleged war crimes.
It is too soon to say when a decision whether to prosecute will be taken.
Mr. Bottomley
Does my right hon. and learned Friend accept that the House is united in abhorring war crimes — and no doubt there were many — but that the House will want to consider early-day motion 275 which draws attention to some articles in the Evening Standard and elsewhere which remind us that mistakes have been made?
We hope that we do not make any here.
The Attorney-General
I am aware of the article to which my hon. Friend refers, which involves a case that was tried in Israel, and of the fact that, apparently, KGB records recently made available in Moscow suggest that there was mistaken identification.
That is one of the matters that feature in any such consideration, and would always feature with a court.
Mr. Janner
Will the Attorney-General confirm that in many of the war crimes cases now under investigation in this country the issue of identity does not arise?
How many cases are being investigated?
Bearing in mind the urgency of the matter now, after so many years, when does he believe that action will be taken?
The Attorney-General
Naturally, each of the cases referred to in the report by Sir Thomas Hetherington and Mr. Chalmers has been and is being investigated.
I cannot give a reliable date as to when the Metropolitan police report in the case of the first matters will be available, but I have no reason to suppose that it is not being prosecuted with all celerity by the dedicated team that the Commissioner has made available.
Sir John Stokes
My right hon. and learned Friend knows how highly I regard his judgment, but is he still satisfied that it is wise to go ahead with the charges after all the mistakes have been made, and after such a long time has passed?
Will not the whole matter cause nothing but trouble and tears to him, his Department and the Government?
The Attorney-General
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for the kind remarks at the beginning of his question.
I have to be loyal to the decision of Parliament, which passed the War Crimes Act 1991.
All those involved in the prosecuting process will approach their task in a fair and proper way, as the House would expect.
Crown Prosecution Service
Mr. Vaz
To ask the Attorney-General if he will make a further statement about job vacancies in the Crown prosecution service.
The Solicitor-General (Sir Nicholas Lyell)
Over the 12 months to 31 October this year, 209 lawyers have joined the Crown prosecution service and vacancies have fallen from 17.4 to 10.8 per cent.
Vacancies for administrative staff are currently 5.3 per cent.
Mr. Vaz
Does the Solicitor-General share my concern that years after the CPS was established, vacancies still exist among its professional staff?
There has not been a single year when the CPS has been fully staffed.
Does not the Solicitor-General accept the views of the Select Committee on Home Affairs, which conducted an inquiry into the CPS, that it is now time for a full inquiry into why the CPS is not up to its full complement?
Also, when does the right hon. and learned Gentleman hope to fill the post of Director of Public Prosecutions?
The Solicitor-General
I think that the hon. Gentleman is less well informed about the Crown prosecution service than he was a year or so ago.
He certainly underestimates the effective recruiting campaigns that the CPS has carried out during the past year and he seems to have ignored the fact that, in order to carry out its work as well as possible, its total manpower requirement has been increased.
Consequently, the figures do not appear to have risen as much as they actually have.
The CPS has been recruiting successfully.
Mr. David Shaw
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that any temporary difficulties of manpower in the Crown prosecution service will not in any way affect prosecutions that may be necessary as a result of the discovery of potential fraud in the Maxwell case?
Will he confirm that the possible political connections of any individuals will not be taken into account in relation to any prosecutions that may be necessary?
The Solicitor-General
My hon. Friend will appreciate that the investigation of anything to do with the Maxwell empire is being undertaken by the Serious Fraud Office.
I can certainly confirm that that investigation will be carried out and any decisions taken without fear or favour, affection or ill will.
Mr. Winnick
Is the right hon. and learned Gentleman aware that many people in this country find it almost inconceivable to understand how such a crook as Maxwell could have got away with what he did for so long without the Crown prosecution service being in any way involved?
Is not it necessary to recognise that in future the Crown prosecution service should be far more willing to listen to allegations and to investigate them?
The Solicitor-General
It is important in these matters to remember where the responsibilities lie.
The Crown prosecution service is not an investigating body.
Investigation in these areas is carried out by the police.
The Serious Fraud Office has powers of investigation, and it is exercising them.
House of Fraser
Sir Teddy Taylor
To ask the Attorney-General if he will make a statement setting out the action which he has taken since the report of the Select Committee on Trade and Industry about the circumstances relating to its consideration of the House of Fraser issue.
The Solicitor-General
The Metropolitan police have been making inquiries.
Their preliminary report on this matter has been received and is under consideration by the Crown prosecution service.
Sir Teddy Taylor
As the Select Committee has made serious allegations about interference in its important work, is not it worrying that it has taken quite so long to make any progress in dealing with its complaint?
Does my right hon. and learned Friend appreciate that many people are genuinely mystified by what appears to be the astonishing delays — in some cases of years — in dealing with issues of any sort relating to the activities of Mr. Fayed?
The Solicitor-General
We are certainly not talking about delays of years.
The preliminary report was received within the time notified to my hon. Friend the Member for Aldridge-Brownhills (Mr. Shepherd) in an answer to his recent question.
That preliminary report on a matter by no means without complexities and evidential difficulties is being carefully considered.
OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT
East Timor
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he has any plans to visit Indonesia to discuss assistance to East Timor.
The Minister for Overseas Development (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
May I begin by paying tribute to the long and distinguished career of the late Baroness Hart of South Lanark?
No one in the developing world or the ODA will forget her great contribution.
The answer to the hon. Gentleman's question is: no, Sir.
Mr. Evans
As chairman of the Labour party, I thank the right hon. Lady for her tribute to my good friend Dame Judith Hart.
She was a former chairman of the Labour party and she performed noble duty both to her party and to millions of people from the dependent territories.
I suggest that the best aid that could be given to East Timor would be an arms embargo on Indonesia until an independent United Nations inquiry has been held into the slaughter of many defenceless men, women and children by the Indonesian army.
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman will probably already know that we do not permit the sale of arms or other equipment that could be used internally against the people; but I fully agree that it is necessary to see the report of the commission of inquiry.
I gather that a draft will be presented to President Suharto at the end of this week.
That inquiry is not being carried out by the military or the police, and when we see what it reports, we will decide, together with our EC partners, what to do next.
Sir Peter Blaker
Is my right hon. Friend aware that Conservative Members who remember Lady Hart will wish to be associated with her tribute to her?
Is my right hon. Friend further aware that she is supported by our party in being circumspect about jumping to conclusions before the official inquiry report to which she referred is received?
Is not this a particularly suitable case for the development of an EC attitude?
Mrs. Chalker
I thank my right hon. Friend for his remarks.
Together with our EC partners, on 13 November we condemned the violence against the people in East Timor and urged the Indonesian Government to ensure that the Indonesian armed forces and police stopped using violence and that those responsible for these acts were brought to trial.
On 3 December, the European Community repeated its condemnation and called on the Indonesian authorities to respond to the serious concerns expressed by the international community.
We supported the demands for a thorough and credible investigation by independent and impartial experts.
I believe that we are right to wait until the independent report has been received, but I assure my right hon. Friend and the House that all EC partners who have worked well together on this are carefully considering future relations in the light of what appears to have happened, as shown on the video which so many of us have seen and which the families of the people involved have had to witness in their suffering.
Mrs. Clwyd
I thank the right hon. Lady and hon. Members for their condolences on the loss of Dame Judith Hart.
We are all very saddened that she has died.
I am very puzzled by the Minister's reply to my hon. Friend the Member for St. Helens, North (Mr. Evans).
She continues to maintain that we do not allow the export of arms and equipment that are likely to be used against civil populations.
However, in a letter to Canon Michael Doe, who wrote to her, the right hon. Lady said:’ it is not practical to monitor their use once they have reached their destinations.’
How does she square her answer to my hon. Friend with her letter to Canon Michael Doe?
It is incredible that both the Minister and the Prime Minister whitewash the inquiry by describing it as independent.
In no way can it be described as independent when the chairman of that inquiry is a former general who is responsible for some of the worst atrocities against the East Timorese.
There are continuing violations of human rights against the East Timorese while that farce of an inquiry is being carried out.
The Government should freeze supplies of military equipment and aid to the Indonesians forthwith.
Mrs. Chalker
I am not prepared to take action until the facts have been established.
There is absolutely no whitewash as far as this Government are concerned, and nor will there be.
Right from the beginning of that terrible saga, I have been absolutely determined that the United Nations and any other body that it may be necessary to involve in order to get to the bottom of this and to resolve matters for the people of East Timor — they have gone on since 1975 — should have our support.
We have told the United Nations Secretary-General of our support for his efforts to resolve the problems in East Timor.
On this latest apparent atrocity — I see it as that; I have seen the film as much as anybody has — I have to be absolutely certain of the facts before I take action.
I cannot act without facts.
Mr. Alexander
My right hon. Friend's measured response will be widely welcomed in the House and elsewhere.
Although all of us are deeply concerned to know precisely what happened in East Timor, will she bear it in mind that, since Indonesia took over East Timor a few years ago, there has been considerable development of the infrastructure in that country, and that, although no one condones that massacre, we must know what has been going on before we adopt the language that we heard from the Labour party?
Mrs. Chalker
As I said a moment ago, I will wait until I have the facts, but I have already undertaken to review co-operation with Indonesia in the light of the response by the Indonesian Government.
My right hon. Friend the Earl of Caithness called in the Indonesian ambassador and expressed our grave concern.
We have taken action — indeed, led action — at every possible turn, but we must establish without doubt exactly what is going on.
OECD
Mr. Shore
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what discussions he has had with Overseas Development Ministers of OECD countries on aid matters over the last month.
Mrs. Chalker
I met all EC Overseas Development Ministers present at the Development Council meeting in Brussels on 28 November, and most other Overseas Development Ministers at the OECD joint ministerial and development meeting and the OECD development assistance committee high-level meeting in Paris from 2 to 4 December.
Mr. Shore
I thank the Minister for that reply.
It has been made plain that Government policy on aid will be increasingly conditioned by the performance of recipient governments in terms of human rights and observance of democratic practices, and I wholly welcome that.
Have the principles of United Kingdom policy been discussed with colleagues in the OECD and, if so, with what response and result?
Mrs. Chalker
I am pleased to be able to tell the right hon. Gentleman that we have had discussions on that matter both in the European Community Development Ministers' meeting the Thursday before last and at the OECD.
As a result of those two meetings, we now have resolutions that support the line that we have consistently taken — that aid will be dependent on the trends shown by all countries — and I mean’ all countries’— with regard to their respect for the rule of law, human rights, the development of good government practices and of an independent judiciary, and the following of sound economic policies.
The right hon. Gentleman can be assured that the whole aid community is firmly behind those principles.
Global Environmental Facility
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what role he sees for the global environmental facility in helping developing countries with their environmental problems.
Mrs. Chalker
The role of the global environment facility is to help developing countries act to reduce threats to the global environment.
It will finance costs that are justified only by their global benefits.
It will play a key role in helping to finance responsibilities accepted by developing countries under the conventions on climate change and biological diversity, which we hope will be agreed over the coming months.
Mr. Townsend
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that that excellent facility is not supported from the aid budget?
Does she agree that it should be reinforced and strengthened so that the developing countries can play their full part in dealing with the world's acute environmental problems?
Mrs. Chalker
I can, indeed, assure my hon. Friend that the £40.3 million for the GEF is additional to and separate from the development aid budget.
In addition, there is up to a further £9.4 million for the Montreal protocol fund.
We very much hope that that money will help many countries to phase out CFCs much earlier than they might otherwise have done.
House of Commons
Tuesday 10 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
Pupil-teacher Ratio
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will state the current pupil-teacher ratio, and that of May 1979; and if he will make a statement.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Michael Fallon)
In January 1979 there were 18.9 pupil per teacher in maintained nursery, primary and secondary schools in England.
By January this year the ratio had fallen to 17.2 pupils per teacher.
Mr. Greenway
Will my hon. Friend accept the congratulations and thanks of parents, children, teachers and all concerned with education on the great improvement on the 1979 figures?
Will he also confirm that overall teacher vacancies have improved by 30 per cent.
in the past year?
Will he consider conducting an inquiry into what the optimum pupil-teacher ratio should be for each age of children, because that ratio will differ?
Some people could not teach five children very well, while others can teach 75 perfectly well.
Mr. Fallon
The situation today is a big improvement on the 1970s.
What is most important is how classes are taught and how a school manages its teaching staff, rather than the actual number employed or the number of pupils per class.
Mr. Fatchett
Will the Minister confirm that since the previous election in 1987 the number of youngsters in primary schools who are taught in classes of more than 30 has increased by 100,000?
We now face the disgraceful situation of nearly 1 million children in primary schools being taught in classes of more than 30.
Are those figures unacceptable even to the Government?
Is it not true that Ministers would not accept such class sizes for their children in the private sector?
Mr. Fallon
Primary class sizes were much bigger in the 1970s under the last Labour Government.
I cannot confirm the figures that the hon. Gentleman has given.
I repeat that what is important is how a school deploys its teaching staff, not the number of people it happens to have on its books.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
I welcome the significant improvement in teacher-pupil ratios since the last Labour Government were in power.
My hon. Friend should be aware how much we welcome his statement and that of the Secretary of State, which concentrate on how children are taught in schools rather than on the number of teachers employed.
In that regard, does my hon. Friend agree that the commission that the Secretary of State has set up under Professor Alexander to look at the way in which primary school children are taught is particularly welcome?
In that way we shall be able to improve standards of education in primary schools.
Mr. Fallon
The statement that my right hon. and learned Friend made about primary education has been warmly welcomed by parents right across the country who are increasingly concerned about the methods and organisation of delivering primary education in our schools.
City Technology Colleges
Mr. Grocott
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how much money has to date been contributed by the private sector to city technology colleges.
The Minister of State, Department of Education and Science (Mr. Tim Eggar)
By the end of the colleges' last school year on 31 August, nearly £19 million had been contributed to city technology colleges by the private sector.
More than £30 million has been committed in all.
Mr. Grocott
Can the Minister confirm that in the last financial year, 1990-91, no less than 88 per cent.
of the capital costs of the CTC programme, including those of the Telford college in my constituency, were paid for by the taxpayer?
Industrialists have been notably unwilling and unforthcoming in responding to the Government's requests.
Can the Minister allay my suspicions about this by assuring me that as a result of a few industrialists having contributed to the programme we shall not find the names of certain chairmen and managing directors appearing in the new year honours list?
Since we the taxpayers are having to pay for the programme, can the Minister at least listen to the taxpayers on this and spend these huge sums of money on all our children and not just a few?
Mr. Eggar
The hon. Gentleman should be doing the listening.
He should be listening to parents in his constituency who have opted overwhelmingly for the CTC, with more than 500 applications for 248 places last year and with 660 applications for next year.
Before he makes wild aspersions about other people, he should visit the school in his constituency, where he will find excellent education going on.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Will the Minister pay tribute to the generosity of Mr. Harry Djanogly, who gave £1 million of his personal money to see that Nottingham has a CTC?
Will he confirm that the capital cost of the school is no different from the cost of building a new school anywhere, that the funding per pupil is no different compared with any other state pupils and that the evil campaign by Nottingham county council would deny the most deprived children in our inner city a first-class education?
Mr. Eggar
I completely agree with my hon. Friend.
Nottingham CTC is extremely attractive to parents and is very well supported.
The attitude of Nottinghamshire local education authority has been quite disgraceful by any standards.
Why should it be seeking to deprive children of a first-class education?
I wish that Labour Members would make their position clear.
Do they really want to deprive parents of the kind of choice that their policies would mean in Nottingham, Telford and elsewhere?
Mr. Flannery
Why does the Minister not talk reality about the city technology colleges?
He knows as well as I do that, like the assisted places scheme, they are another step towards privatisation of the education system.
The inspectorate is another example.
The hon. Gentleman knows full well that the CTCs were intended to be paid for by private employers.
That failed, so the Government are taking money from the taxpayer to the tune, with the assisted places scheme, of more than £500 million — That is what it is costing, based on the Government's own figures.
That is why I ask the Minister to admit the reality of the situation, with that amount of money being removed from the state system of education.
Interruption
Mr. Eggar
The Labour party will simply never understand the position.
Parents want choice.
Whether they live in the inner cities or elsewhere, they want choice to send their children to independent schools with the benefit of an assisted place, choice to send their children to grammar schools and choice under the new technology schools initiative.
Choice is hated by the Labour party because it cannot control what parents and children want if choice is offered.
That is the old-fashioned type of socialism that the hon. Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Mr. Flannery) has always pursued, and unfortunately the occupants of the Labour Front Bench have taken a lead from him rather than from more sensible parents.
Teachers' Pay
Mr. Andrew MacKay
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the proposed independent pay review body for teachers.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Kenneth Clarke)
The school teachers' review body has been asked to make recommendations on the pay and conditions of school teachers in 1992-93.
It will report to the Prime Minister in the new year.
Mr. MacKay
Parents in my constituency are anxious that teachers should be properly remunerated because teachers with low morale are bad teachers, and they are particularly concerned that there might just be a slight possibility of a Labour Government next year, with a resultant cut in teachers' real pay, as happened when Labour was last in office.
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that under Conservative rule there has been a 30 per cent.
increase in real terms in teachers' pay and that there was an increase of only 6 per cent.
during the last Labour Government?
Mr. Clarke
My hon. Friend is correct.
There has been a substantial advance in real-terms pay under our Administration, and this year the pay award that has been made for the current year is increasing the teachers' pay bill overall by 11.3 per cent.
I agree with my hon. Friend that raising standards requires having a good quality teaching force, properly rewarded and encouraged.
The public welcome the way we are treating teachers as a professional body by taking the advice of the independent review body, and we look forward to Graham Day and his colleagues producing the kind of advice that we require about how our teachers should be rewarded.
The fact that Labour Members voted against the review body approach to teachers' pay should provide the warning that my hon. Friend described.
Mr. Skinner
Why should teachers have to submit to an incomes policy when the bosses made a 22.7 per cent.
average increase last year?
What is good enough for the bosses should be good enough for the teachers.
Mr. Clarke
The hon. Gentleman has just been reminded of the shabby teachers' pay record of the Labour Government whom he supported some years ago — It was his Government then, although their successors may not be represented on the Front Bench in quite the way that the hon. Gentleman would wish.
Interruption
We have set up a review body to advise the Government on the proper remuneration for teachers.
It is a status that we give to very few public servants, but we are giving teachers a special status because we realise that their professionalism and commitment are essential to a good teaching service.
Examination Results
Mr. Butterfill
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the relationship between spending by local education authorities and examination results.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
There appears to be no direct relationship between the level of education spending and examination results.
Some authorities obtain good results at much lower cost than others.
Mr. Butterfill
Can my right hon. and learned Friend confirm reports in The Guardian earlier this year that the 12 local authorities with the worst record in English, mathematics and modern language results were all controlled by the Liberal Democrats or the Labour party?
Mr. Clarke
I am not sure whether I can confirm that off the cuff, but The Guardian sometimes gets it right.
The figures that I have before me certainly show that the highest spending authorities comprise almost entirely Labour and the occasional Liberal authority and that those have some of the worst results.
There is an enormous gap between inner London boroughs, which spent £2,745 per pupil in 1989-90, under the old Inner London education authority, and Kent, which spent £1,570 per pupil in a comparable year and achieved much better results.
Mr. O'Hara
Will the Secretary of State confirm that local authorities that perform badly in the league tables, which cover a very narrow spectrum of examination results, often spend more on pupils with special educational needs?
A local authority that spends less on special educational needs does so either because it has less incidence of such needs or because it is in dereliction of its duties to pupils with those needs.
If it has less incidence of such needs, does it not follow that it should score highly in the narrow spectrum of examination results for the most able pupils?
Mr. Clarke
I am aware of no evidence that pupils with special educational needs are distributed unevenly across the country.
Special educational needs include pupils with physical disabilities or particular difficulties in learning.
It is simply not true that those needs correlate with high spending local authorities.
There are great discrepancies in the amount spent by one authority compared with another, and in the amount that local authorities spend on central administration, but there is little correlation with the results.
When we produce the seven-year-olds' test results local authority by local authority, good results will be shown for some authorities serving comparatively deprived urban areas, while shockingly poor results will be shown for others serving similar areas.
The quality of education rather than the amount spent is what counts.
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
Is it fair for young pupils in an area controlled by a Labour council to have their prospects of good examination results considerably reduced?
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that, year after year, the examination results of Wolverhampton education authority — a high-spending council — are in the bottom half of the national league?
Is it any wonder that I now plead with my right hon. and learned Friend to intervene on behalf of pupils and parents who wish to move their children over the border to Staffordshire because they are fed up with their own high-spending council and they want that council to take responsibility?
Mr. Clarke
I agree with my hon. Friend's point.
The figures for 1989-90 show that Wolverhampton was about 20th in the list of spenders but 83rd in the list of GCSE results.
Mr. Straw
Is the Secretary of State aware of the serious threat to standards in schools caused by his spending decision in the Prime Minister's county of Cambridgeshire, where the Cambridge branch of the Secondary Heads Association has said that impending cuts will cause’ larger classes fewer books, less equipment, reduced sixth form provision and serious difficulty in providing the national curriculum’?
When will the Secretary of State accept responsibility for the crisis in education provision in Cambridgeshire, or does he believe that it is just another scare got up by pupils, parents, teachers and Conservative county councillors in that county?
Mr. Clarke
In fact, Cambridgeshire will enjoy an increase in real terms in resources next year.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, I publicly criticised the so-called cuts announced by Cambridgeshire a short time ago.
Cambridgeshire is planning substantially to increase spending on education, but has chosen, for some reason best known to itself, to make more money available by imposing sharp reductions in its secondary school budgets.
I am prepared to criticise that action when taken by a Conservative council.
The hon. Gentleman supports high spending and progressive teaching methods but seems indifferent to the results, which he does not want to give the public in any comprehensible form.
He should not intervene in little local difficulties in Cambridgeshire which, sooner or later, will be sorted out when the authority spends its additional resources sensibly by devoting them to raising the quality of education.
Second Degrees
Rev. Martin Smyth
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will review the operation of the present system of discretionary awards for those undertaking courses for second degrees.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Alan Howarth)
Detailed arrangements for postgraduate student support are kept under review, but we have no present plans for major changes.
Rev. Martin Smyth
Does the Minister expect that while the award system is kept under review and resources are scarce, some consideration should be given to students who come from poor backgrounds and achieve high marks but are turned down because of a shortage of places?
Does he accept in particular that there is a problem involving students from Northern Ireland who have attended English universities and been recommended for further degrees and second awards, but are turned down because they are from Northern Ireland?
Mr. Howarth
The hon. Gentleman raises two points.
He recently raised two cases on behalf of his constituents.
I appreciate his concern that the practical operation of the system for conferring postgraduate awards on Northern Ireland residents can be confusing and may create difficulties.
I am grateful to him for drawing my attention to that.
The practicalities are being considered by the research councils in the Department of Education in Northern Ireland.
I hope that arrangements will be introduced which will be more convenient for Northern Ireland residents.
As for the criteria for granting postgraduate awards, postgraduate study and research are academically demanding and candidates should be selected by competition to ensure that the resources available are used as effectively as possible.
Sir John Farr
Will my hon. Friend look at the issue again?
In England there are cases where degree holders cannot get jobs and are therefore forced to attend further education courses to try to improve their qualifications.
Will my hon. Friend look at the matter in light of the present strained position in the jobs market?
Mr. Howarth
The overall number of postgraduate awards has considerably increased over the years.
Between 1979-80 and 1990-91, the total of new studentships awarded by research councils rose by almost 28 per cent.
We must consider priorities for public expenditure on education, as elsewhere.
It is questionable whether it would be a topmost priority for us in the context of present economic circumstances to urge a substantial increase in the overall funding of postgraduate study.
Sport Funding
Mr. Menzies Campbell
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science when he next plans to meet the chairman of the Sports Council to discuss funding for sport.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Robert Atkins)
The funding of sport in the United Kingdom is one of many issues that I discuss regularly with the chairman of the Sports Council.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
The Minister will know that the Sports Council is funded on a year-by-year basis whereas, by contrast, the Arts Council receives its funding on a three-year rolling programme.
Does the Minister agree that three-year funding for the Sports Council would allow it to plan better for development and expansion?
Will he undertake to achieve a three-year funding programme for the Sports Council?
Mr. Atkins
That is an interesting point.
There are differing views about whether three years or a single year period would be better or worse.
Three years provide some degree of continuity, but they also build in a degree of inflexibility, making it difficult to react to change.
I have no hard and fast views on the matter and I undertake to consider it, but there are no immediate plans to do as the hon. and learned Gentleman suggests.
Ms. Hoey
Has the Minister seen the Sports Council report on projected capital investment by local authorities?
Does he realise that it shows huge decreases for the next five years, especially in London, with up to 95 per cent.
cuts in inner London and 85 per cent.
cuts in outer London?
Does he share my view and that of the Sports Council that, with local authorities providing nearly 90 per cent.
of all participatory sports facilities, unless we get more capital for our local authorities they will be able to spend money only on basic repairs?
Mr. Atkins
The most up-to-date figures that we have on these matters show a continuing increase in capital provision, but I recognise that there has been some indication of a downturn in the most recent, as yet uncompleted, year.
Our view is that we should let local authorities make their own decisions about their priorities.
We shall have to watch and see whether that will mean a cut in sports provision.
I have my eye on the subject; the hon. Lady's point is well taken and, in so far as I have control over these matters, I shall make certain that local authorities concentrate as much of their resources on local sport and recreation provision as they should.
Mr. Cormack
On the point made by the hon. and learned Member for Fife, North-East (Mr. Campbell), does my hon. Friend agree that funding both for sport and the arts could be far higher and much more in line with demand if we had a national lottery?
Will he undertake to support the Bill to be introduced by my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence)?
Mr. Atkins
My hon. Friend knows full well that there are differing views on that subject.
My own are well known.
If my hon. Friend wants to hear them, I shall be more than happy to tell him afterwards.
Mr. Gregory
Will my hon. Friend agree, when considering the long-term funding for the Sports Council, to look sympathetically on its application for relocation expenses for its planned move from London to the city of York?
Mr. Atkins
My hon. Friend represents his city with as much assiduity as my hon. Friend the Member for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo) represents his, and both are keen on a move by the Sports Council to one of those two great cities.
There are no plans at present for such a move.
Any request for costs would have to go to my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Mr. Denis Howell
When the Minister met the nine regional chairmen last week they regarded his statement that he sought to achieve no more funding for sport in this country — Wales received 8.5 per cent., Scotland 15 per cent .
and the Arts Council 14 per cent., but the Minister went for only 4 per cent .
— as a craven surrender to the Treasury.
Is it not time the hon. Gentleman did the job he is paid for and stood up for British sport?
Mr. Atkins
The right hon. Gentleman is as wrong about that as he was in his assertion during the recent debate that I had refused to meet the regional Sports Council chairmen, which he knows to be untrue.
In my discussions with the regional councils for sport and recreation — There is a football hooligan shouting from the Opposition Benches —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Do not stir it up.
Mr. Atkins
Wot me, guv?
The right hon. Gentleman's contention is quite wrong.
We went for the rate of inflation, and that is what the Sports Council got.
Adding to that all the other money that the Government have provided for sport, sport can reckon that it has had a pretty fair deal from the Government.
Mr. Dickens
Would my hon. Friend, the excellent Minister for Sport, agree that those who play and train for sport are the least likely to get involved in offences?
Does he agree that sport is one of the most character-building of activities?
Will he pursue sports within our schools?
Mr. Atkins
My hon. Friend is living proof of his own contention.
Student Loans
Mr. Pike
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how many applications for student loans have been processed since their introduction.
Mr. Alan Howarth
More than 245,000 students have received loans since the introduction of the student loans scheme in autumn 1990.
Mr. Pike
Does the Minister accept that the Secretary of State was mistaken when he said that the initial slow and small take-up of student loans showed that there was no widespread poverty and hardship among students since all the evidence of citizens advice bureaux, Members' mail and so on shows clearly that, because of the reducing value of student grants and the attack on student benefits, there is real and widespread hardship and poverty among the British student population?
Mr. Howarth
The rate of applications for student loans this year is almost double what it was a year ago, recruitment to higher education is soaring and student numbers have increased by 10 per cent.
this autumn for the third year running.
We are giving more public support to more students than ever before.
During the 1980s the participation of 18-year-olds in higher education doubled from one in eight of the population to one in four.
That is a widening of personal opportunity, a lifting of the nation's educational attainments and a sharpening of our competitive skills which will stand us in good stead for the future.
Mr. Batiste
Does my hon. Friend agree that the real problem facing students, particularly those from areas such as my own in Leeds, is that the local education authorities have been extraordinarily late in supplying their mandatory grants?
For example, some eight weeks after the term began students in Leeds still had not had their grants.
How long will it be before the Student Loans Company will be able to administer mandatory grants as well as cut out the middle man?
Mr. Howarth
My hon. Friend rightly draws attention to a deplorable state of affairs that applies in a limited number of authorities — about seven — of which his own in Leeds is a conspicuous example.
We have a system of student support as generous as any in the world, but, under long-established arrangements, local education authorities administer the award system and students depend on their playing their part.
I am concerned at the failure of Leeds in that regard.
We wrote to the Leeds authority at the end of October but no one replied.
We sent a reminder letter but received no reply.
I am told that the authority is not answering the telephone and that is not good enough.
Mr. Matthew Taylor
The Minister will nevertheless be aware of the real hardship this summer and of the queues at the soup kitchens on the campuses.
Does he believe that the loans plus grants system covers the full year or does it cover only the terms after the Christmas and Easter vacations and, if so, what does he recommend to students who cannot find work during the summer in the present employment conditions and who had to resort last summer to the soup kitchens?
Mr. Howarth
We introduced the new system of student support last year.
We uprated the grant and introduced a top-up loan, the effect of which was that publicly provided support for students rose by 25 per cent.
Most students became ineligible for social security benefits, but the loan that was made available was well above the average benefit claimed.
To ensure that individual students were not losers under the system, access funds were distributed to higher education institutions for them to use at their discretion to help students in particular need.
That is a soundly based principle.
More students than ever before are entering higher education.
It is important that colleges and universities use the access funds sensitively and target them on those who need them.
If students do not take up the publicly provided loans that are available for them, they are neglecting an important element of the student support system.
Grant-maintained Schools
Mr. Shersby
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how many secondary schools in the London borough of Hillingdon have now been approved for grant-maintained status and how many applications are still outstanding.
Mr. Eggar
Eight schools in Hillingdon have now been approved for grant-maintained status.
There are no outstanding applications.
That number, which is almost half of Hillingdon's secondary schools, is both a testament to the support shown by Hillingdon to GM status and a rebuke to those local education authorities that remain hostile to the policy.
Mr. Shersby
Is my hon. Friend aware that Hillingdon is leading the country in recognising parents' wishes?
Does he agree that grant-maintained status plays a significant role in raising the morale of the teaching profession, raising education standards and improving the fabric of buildings?
Mr. Eggar
I agree completely with my hon. Friend.
The move to grant-maintained status has been overwhelmingly supported by the parents of pupils at the Hillingdon schools that opted to go grant-maintained.
When I visited Bishopshalt school with my hon. Friend, I saw for myself the superb improvement in equipment and facilities that it has managed to achieve only shortly after attaining grant-maintained status.
Adult Education
Mr. Latham
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science whether he will make a statement on his replies to representations which he has received regarding the future financing of adult education.
Mr. Eggar
In reply to representations on that matter, my right hon. and learned Friend and I have made it clear that funding will continue to be available from central Government for all types of further education for adults.
There is no question of courses being discontinued, or of fees rising, as a result of the Government's reforms.
Mr. Latham
Is my hon. Friend aware that, despite his welcome answer, deep concern is still felt by Leicestershire community colleges — which have a proud and long-standing record of providing adult education — that they will be squeezed out by the new proposals?
Will he reconsider the matter in the interests of the widespread rural provision of that essential and popular service?
Mr. Eggar
I am aware of the concern felt by community colleges in Leicestershire, Devon and Cambridgeshire.
My right hon. and learned Friend and I met several delegations and held discussions with a number of our right hon. and hon. Friends.
We believe that the Further and Higher Education Bill's provisions meet the concerns expressed by my hon. Friend the Member for Rutland and Melton (Mr. Latham) and by others, and we can categorically reassure those colleges that they have nothing to fear.
Mr. James Lamond
Is the Minister aware of the deep concern felt also by those who attend non-vocational classes in the evenings and at other times who, I am sorry to say, do not believe a word that the Minister says about continuing those classes?
They have read earlier statements by the Minister and by the Secretary of State, which convey a completely different point of view.
Mr. Eggar
Before making such statements, the hon. Gentleman should take the time and trouble to read the Further and Higher Education Bill that is going through another place.
If he does, he will find that, among other things, it makes no division between vocational and non-vocational adult education.
The hon. Gentleman should do his homework.
Mr. Haselhurst
Does my hon. Friend accept that the fears raised in some people's mind by the White Paper have not been entirely quelled by the reassurances that he and my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State have given?
There is anxiety that there will be rationalisation and that some colleges and available classes in rural areas will cease to exist.
Can my hon. Friend the Minister give any reassurances in that respect?
Mr. Eggar
I can reassure my hon. Friend that nothing in the Bill will make that sort of rationalisation necessary.
Furthermore, both I and my right hon. and learned Friend have made it clear that we want more education provided locally for adults than is currently available.
We believe that the Bill will make that possible.
Mr. Andrew Smith
Why does the Minister think that — as the hon. Member for Saffron Walden (Mr. Haselhurst) said — those having a close knowledge of adult education, including the voluntary sector, women's institutes and members of the Conservative party, are so deeply unconvinced by the Minister's replies that there were half a million signatures to a petition opposing the Government's proposals?
Is it not the case that the decision to split adult education between a further education funding council and local education authorities is a recipe for disaster for an important sector of education, which has already been cut to the bone as a consequence of the Government's failed policies?
Mr. Eggar
In the context of the Bill, we will ensure that more adult education is available locally, and that it is of better quality.
That is increasingly being recognised by many interested parties.
I wish that the political posturing promoted by the Association of Metropolitan Authorities and by Mr. Stephen Byers in particular would cease.
Mr. Patrick Thompson
Is my hon. Friend aware that, despite what has been said, there is continuing concern in Norfolk — as represented by those involved in Wensum Lodge in Norwich?
Will my hon. Friend do all that he can to persuade local authorities to play their full part in ensuring the continuation of adult education?
Mr. Eggar
Undoubtedly, some local education authorities are now spending less on adult education than we think that they should be spending.
It is important for those who are rightly keen to ensure the provision of plenty of adult education of an appropriate standard to address their concerns to the education authorities.
They should make certain that the authorities are spending a suitable amount on adult education, and that it is available locally as well as centrally.
Youth Organisations
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science when he will next meet representatives of youth organisations to discuss youth matters.
Mr. Atkins
I met representatives of the National Association of Youth and Community Education Officers yesterday.
I shall be meeting the representatives of the Standing Conference of Principal Youth and Community Officers for the London and south-east Region on 17 December, and I am meeting representatives of the British Youth Council and the Scout Association in the near future.
Mr. Hughes
I welcome that news.
When the Minister meets those representatives — if not before — will he be able to tell them that the Government support the amendment to the Further and Higher Education Bill, which has been promoted by the National Youth Agency and the British Youth Council and backed by hon. Members from all parties?
That amendment would put the youth service on a proper statutory basis.
Mr. Atkins
I cannot make any such commitment at this stage.
It is, I think, generally felt that the youth service is already a statutory requirement under various education Acts.
I shall draw the hon. Gentleman's point to the attention of my hon. Friends who will serve on the Standing Committee on the Bill.
However, I do not encourage the hon. Gentleman to entertain high hopes in that regard.
Mr. Rowe
In recent years, there has been a welcome elision between the definitions of the responsibilities of the youth service and those of the community as a whole.
Will my hon. Friend join me in paying tribute to the imaginative experiment that the Lord Mayor of London is supporting this year, in which young people go into schools to help pupils with learning difficulties and those who are quicker than the rest of the class?
That experiment has had a remarkable effect on the performance of both pupils and helpers.
Mr. Atkins
I defer to none in my appreciation of the work done by the youth service all over the country.
The idea to which my hon. Friend refers strikes me as excellent, and I am happy to support it.
Arts and Humanities
Dr. Bray
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what steps he is taking to improve support for research in the arts and humanities.
Mr. Alan Howarth
The Government provide grant in aid for the British Academy to support postgraduate research in the humanities and social sciences.
New financial arrangements introduced this year give the academy greater control over its resources, and enhance its discretion and determine spending priorities across the range of its activities.
The Universities Funding Council provides substantial funding on research-based criteria for the humanities.
Dr. Bray
Is the Minister aware that, while the science research councils have fared badly under the present Government, the humanities have fared a good deal worse under the direct rule of his Department?
Is he aware of the part played by the humanities in preserving and developing our national heritage?
Why is the Department pussyfooting around, extending the role of the Economic and Social Research Council — which does an entirely different job — instead of accepting the original recommendation of the British Academy for a humanities research council?
Mr. Howarth
Public provision for the research councils in support of the science budget has already increased by 23 per cent., and will have increased by more than 25 per cent .
next year.
I therefore cannot accept the hon. Gentleman's opening proposition.
Like him, I attach enormous importance to humanities research.
I regard the existence of flourishing humanities research as an index to the civilisation of our society; Labour, however, has committed itself prematurely to the establishment of a humanities research council.
A debate is in progress among scholars in the arts and humanities about whether it would be right to establish a humanities research council or a humanities, economic and social research council, or to continue with no research council at all.
Such issues must be considered thoroughly and carefully; every scheme has its pros and cons.
The British Academy and the ESRC have agreed to establish a working party.
I think that it would be best to listen to what it has to say before reaching a decision.
Special Needs Education
Mr. Battle
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what improvements there have been in the education provision in primary schools for children with special needs since 1979.
Mr. Fallon
Among the major improvements, The Education Act 1981 provided a coherent framework for identifying and assessing children with special educational needs.
The introduction of the national curriculum and schemes for the local management of schools will build on that framework and bring about further improvements in provision for such children, not just in primary schools but throughout the state system.
Mr. Battle
Given the Government's stress on education selectivity and exclusivity in the national curriculum and in the league tests, did the Secretary of State insist on a special emphasis on educational special needs when he commissioned his report into primary education last week?
Mr. Fallon
The inquiry that my right hon. and learned Friend has commissioned into primary education will, of course, encompass the needs of children with special educational needs.
I point out to the hon. Gentleman that the 1981 Act is now steadily being made more effective, that more resources are being made available every year and that parents are becoming more and more aware of their rights under that Act.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Ward
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 December.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
I have been asked to reply My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister is attending the European Council in Maastricht.
Mr. Ward
I am sure that my right hon. Friend will join all his right hon. and hon. Friends in wishing the Prime Minister well in his important negotiations.
Has my right hon. Friend seen a recent public opinion poll which says that 66 per cent.
of the people asked believed that taxes under the Labour party would be increased?—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I know, but the hon. Gentleman must relate his question to the Government's responsibilities.
Mr. Ward
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, in contrast, the Government have been responsible and does he further agree that the policies of the Opposition seem to be —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is not very good, you see, on Government responsibility and this takes up a lot of time.
The hon. Gentleman must bring his question to a conclusion, please.
Mr. Ward
Will my right hon. Friend further agree that the only hope of keeping low taxation is to return the Conservative party to Government?
Mr. MacGregor
I am sure that not only hon. Members on this side of the House but the majority of people in this country wish my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and my other right hon. Friends well in their very important negotiations in Maastricht.
As for my hon. Friend's other question, I confirm that it is as a result of this Government's economic policies and the growth achieved over the years that we have secured not only higher public spending but a substantial reduction in direct taxes.
I saw the report to which my hon. Friend referred and I am not at all surprised that the Opposition tried to shout him down, for the simple fact is that the report revealed that the majority of people in this country recognise that the Labour party has now promised to increase spending on just about everything under the sun, which would mean higher borrowing, higher inflation and much higher taxes.
Mr. Kinnock
The British people will also note that all that came from the spokesman for the Government who have raised the tax burden to its highest level in British history.
The right hon. Gentleman will be aware that the draft of the treaty at Maastricht today provides for the improvement of employees' working conditions, for legal protection and for entitlement to consultation and to information.
When other Community Governments are prepared —
Interruption
Mr. Dickens rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I do not need any help from the hon. Member.
Mr. Kinnock
When other Community Governments are prepared to extend those rights to their people, is not it completely wrong for the British Government to refuse to do the same for the British people?
Mr. MacGregor
I am not surprised that the right hon. Gentleman avoided the first point, because the report to which my hon. Friend the Member for Poole (Mr. Ward) referred produced the following answer within the Labour party:’ Some argue it will highlight one of our weaker points’.
It certainly does.
On Maastricht, we are opposed to a number of the points in the social charter because in practice it would damage employment and prosperity.
That is why my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has been arguing against the social text.
It will put a huge burden on industry and will cost jobs.
Another point is that it offends the important principle of subsidiarity.
I agree with the point made by the right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown) in today's edition of The Guardian.
He said:’ It provides for an expansion of treaty-based Community competence into areas of wage bargaining and social security that should rightly remain with member states’.
That is right and that is why we oppose so many elements in the social charter.
Mr. Kinnock
Is the right hon. Gentleman trying to tell us that other Community Governments, many with economies more successful than ours, do not care about employment, about costs and about competitiveness?
Of course they do.
Why is it that those countries can accept basic, decent minimum standards for their people whereas this Government will not accept them for the British people?
Mr. MacGregor
In trade union legislation and in other ways, there are different practices in different countries.
The plain fact is that some elements of the social charter would run the risk — indeed, would make it a real possibility — of this country returning to some of the trade union practices that did so much damage during the 1970s.
What is more, my right hon. Friend's position in Maastricht has the support of the Confederation of British Industry and of the majority of British industry which recognises the increasing burdens that the charter could impose on it, which would damage our competitiveness in relation to countries outside the Community which are not so burdened.
Mr. Kinnock
When it is obvious that the other 11 Governments are prepared to accept the draft before them at Maastricht today and that this Government are not, the Government are confessing to a unique combination of political prejudice and economic weakness which marks them out from the rest of the Community and which marks Britain down in the Community.
Mr. MacGregor
There is no question of marking Britain down.
My right hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the dangers which lie within the social charter of making European industry uncompetitive in relation to Japanese industry and to others.
It is no wonder that the right hon. Gentleman wants to support elements of the social charter being imposed here.
That would result in a return to the period when 29 million days were lost to strikes and when substantial burdens were imposed on British industry.
That is why we oppose the proposals.
Mr. Stevens
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 December.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Stevens
Will my right hon. Friend today find time to join my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science in condemning Labour and Liberal Democrat councils, such as Nottingham, Derbyshire and Richmond, which have blocked the distribution of the parents charter?
Does not that hostility to the charter give the lie to the Opposition parties' request for freedom of information?
Mr. MacGregor
I agree with my hon. Friend and I condemn those authorities.
He is right to draw attention to the hypocrisy of those local authorities, as he has described it.
They have advised schools not to make copies available to parents.
It goes further than that.
The Government's education policies in schools are designed entirely to raise standards, to increase choice and to improve information to parents.
The parents charter is an important part of that and I am glad that most schools have ignored the attitudes of those Labour authorities.
Mr. Blunkett
In 1909, Winston Churchill, talking about workers' rights, said that there were necessary laws to be passed to ensure that the bad employer was not undercut by the very worst.
Is not that why other Governments and employers across Europe understand well today that the Government are reneging on that and wish this country to undercut others by treating workers in the worst way possible?
Mr. MacGregor
This Government have implemented all 18 of the social measures that have so far been agreed under the social charter, which is more than can be said of a lot of our Community partners.
We do implement such measures where we believe that it is right to do so, but we have opposed the working time directive, for example, because it could have added an extra £5 billion to British industry's costs.
We believe that that would destroy jobs and make industry uncompetitive.
We have been successful in going in the opposite direction — in increasing the number of jobs and in making British industry more competitive in the past 10 years.
Mr. Gill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 December.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave a few moments ago.
Mr. Gill
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the majority of my constituents believe that what they voted for in the referendum on Europe was a single market, not a single currency?
Does he further accept that the failure of the common agricultural policy, coupled with doubts about the realisation of the level playing field for goods and services by the end of next year, mean that this is a singularly inappropriate time to extend the competence of the European Community?
Does —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is enough.
Mr. Gill
Would my right hon. Friend —
Hon. Members
Sit down.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Gill
Does my right hon. Friend agree —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
In fairness to everyone else, the hon. Gentleman should sit down.
Mr. Gill
Does my right hon. Friend agree —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is very unfair to other hon. Members.
Mr. MacGregor
I am afraid that I could not catch the last part of my hon. Friend's question, but I agree with him about the importance that he attaches to the single market.
That, of course, is why the United Kingdom Government have been in the lead in pressing for the completion of the single market and that is why, in the current negotiations, we are arguing for steps to strengthen the observance of Community law to ensure that a level playing field is included in the single market.
As to the steps that are now being taken at Maastricht on the development of the Community, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has made it clear that if he gets an agreement that is right for Britain and for Europe, he will sign, but if he cannot, he will not.
Miss Lestor
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 December.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave a few moments ago.
Miss Lestor
Will the right hon. Gentleman confirm that Britain was one of the countries that ruled against the inclusion of the role of overseas development and co-operation as part of the discussions at Maastricht?
Was that because it could mean that Britain would have to increase the amount that we spend on overseas aid and development to match the contributions of other European countries?
Mr. MacGregor
I cannot comment on details of the negotiations because I do not know the details of what is actually happening today, but it is quite clear that we have been arguing that matters affecting foreign policy should continue to be decided under the auspices of intergovernmental co-operation.
On overseas aid, the hon. Lady knows that this year we have yet again increased the amount of money that is spent on that.
Mr. Butterfill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 December.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave a few moments ago.
Mr. Butterfill
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating the courageous efforts of the European Community observers in Croatia?
Does he share my concern that they have found almost universally that the aggression has been initiated by Serbia?
Does he agree that it is desirable that today's events in Maastricht might lead to future improved co-operation on such matters by the European Community which may, in the end, lead to a reduction in the genocide in that country?
Mr. MacGregor
Like my hon. Friend, I pay tribute to the efforts of Lord Carrington and others within the Community who have been endeavouring to obtain a ceasefire, and to the efforts made by Mr. Cyrus Vance.
My hon. Friend rightly draws attention to the benefits of Community co-operation.
We have already seen much of that in the lead that has been given by the Community, which has taken special steps to limit the damage and the fighting to enable the parties to come together.
Britain has played a large part in that.
We have set up a peace conference, sent in monitors and have established ceasefires.
I very much hope that that co-operation and the Community's continued efforts will produce the results that my hon. Friend seeks.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 December.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Griffiths
Does the right hon. Gentleman think it right that under the Tory council tax every millionaire who lives alone will be entitled to a 25 per cent.
rebate while the majority of pensioner couples with modest savings or occupational pensions will have to pay the full council tax?
Is this the classless society but only open to millionaires?
Mr. MacGregor
The council tax will produce about 40 per .of total local authority revenue and people on higher incomes will contribute to local authority expenditure much more through the taxes that they pay.
Mr. Brazier
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating the Prime Minister on his initiative yesterday with President Mitterrand on the Soviet Union?
Does he agree that it is a sign of considerable leadership that, right in the teeth of the complexity of the negotiations at Maastricht, the Prime Minister should have recognised that the awesome events on the other side of Europe may have an even larger say in the history of Europe?
Mr. MacGregor
I agree with my hon. Friend.
Indeed, I pay tribute to all the work that my right hon. Friend has done throughout the year with regard to events in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
Yesterday he drew attention to the three matters of concern to which I have no doubt that he will turn, in co-operation with other countries who are equally concerned, as soon as the Maastricht negotiations are complete.
House of Commons
Wednesday 11 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
SCOTLAND
NHS Trusts
Mrs. Fyfe
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what action he takes to enforce procedures laid down in national health service circular No. 1975 (GEN) 46.
The Minister of State, Scottish Office (Mr. Michael Forsyth)
I have received no complaints regarding health boards' compliance with this or any other circular.
Mrs. Fyfe
I am rather surprised to hear that, because Greater Glasgow health board is very dissatisfied with the lack of consultation over the closure of two wards in Ruchill hospital in my constituency.
Will the Minister of State nevertheless assure me that if the move to day care will be to the detriment of those who were receiving in-patient care for endocrine and metabolic problems, he will take action?
Will he reassure me about the future of those patients who, until now, have been in the rheumatology unit of Ruchill hospital?
Mr. Forsyth
I am a little puzzled by the hon. Lady's question.
I do not see how Greater Glasgow health board can be dissatisfied with the consultation process when it is responsible for —
Mrs. Fyfe
Health council.
Mr. Forsyth
Health council — the hon. Lady has corrected her position.
As part of its general consultation process, Greater Glasgow health board consulted in respect of its acute services strategy for Glasgow.
It has also carried out secondary consultations in respect of particular services.
If the hon. Lady has anxieties, she should address them to Greater Glasgow health board, which is responsible for delivering the service.
Mr. Canavan
Why have Scottish hospital waiting lists increased by more than 4 per cent.
in the past year?
Why is the worst record in Scotland that of the Forth Valley health board area — which includes the constituency of the Minister of State — where the increase has been more than 24 per cent?
If he has no regard at all for the welfare of patients, does he have regard for his job security?
Mr. Forsyth
I am astonished that the hon. Gentleman, as a Member of Parliament in Central region within the Forth Valley health board area, does not know the answer to that question.
He will know that the largest increase in waiting lists as published is in respect of the new service and facility that have been provided in Forth Valley.
He will also be aware that Forth Valley has expanded the number of treatments provided and, as a result, is offering a better service for patients.
Mr. Canavan
Why are the waiting lists so long?
Mr. Forsyth
The hon. Gentleman should give some credit to that health board and every other health board in Scotland that has managed to increase the numbers of patients treated.
Mr. Canavan
It is the worst record in Scotland.
Mr. Forsyth
If the hon. Gentleman wants to find a worse record in Scotland for waiting lists, he should look at the waiting lists that were left to us by the previous Labour Government.
Knife Assaults
Mr. David Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland how many people in Scotland have been injured as a result of being assaulted with a knife or pointed article since 1988; and if he will make a statement.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland (Lord James Douglas-Hamilton)
In the period 1 January 1988 to 30 June 1991, 2, 370 in-patient discharges were admitted as emergencies having been assaulted by a cutting or piercing instrument.
Figures for persons dealt with as out-patient emergencies are not available.
Mr. Marshall
Is not the Minister ashamed and horrified at those disgraceful and scandalous figures?
Has he seen the excellent Glasgow Evening Times article of 20 November which highlights that serious problem in Scotland?
When will he shake off his complacency and bring the law in Scotland in line with the law in England under section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988?
I have been communicating with the Minister since 1988 on that problem.
Is not the simple truth that the Government do not give a damn about law and order and do not care about the safety of people in their homes and on the streets?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
We are well aware of the facts in that connection and have substantially increased the capital allocations for police forces in Scotland by some £6 million this year, which is an enormous increase.
We shall make certain that Strathclyde's bids are carefully considered before making a final allocation.
I shall look into the point that the hon. Gentleman makes about an amendment to the law, but the existing penalties go up to life imprisonment for various forms of crime involving knives and the like.
The Secretary of State's crime prevention committee is reviewing the position.
If Strathclyde increased the number of police officers by 200 to the complement that it deserves, there would be a much stronger law and order policy there.
Mr. Wilson
We all know that there are crimes for which the penalties go up to life imprisonment, but that does not seem to cover the point raised so eloquently by my hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow, Shettleston (Mr. Marshall).
Does the Minister accept that in Scotland, particularly west central Scotland, there is currently an epidemic of violent crime such as armed robbery and the carrying of offensive weapons, including knives?
I endorse what my hon. Friend said about the excellent efforts of the Glasgow Evening Times in drawing the matter to our attention.
It is astonishing that, when the facts were put to the Minister, he was unable to give the statistics on the number of offences involving knives and other weapons with which stabbings can be carried out.
Does the Minister also accept that far too many people in such communities are now living in fear of violent crime?
In addition to the rhetoric of law and order, they want action in terms of policing which will enable people to leave their homes in the evening and not be curtailed by fear of violent crime.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
We collect statistics on various crimes such as breach of the peace, vandalism, the carrying of offensive weapons, robbery, petty and serious assaults, attempted murder and murder.
The Secretary of State's crime prevention committee is considering how information should be collected and will continue to do so.
The hon. Member must remember that the Labour party strongly opposed the police powers of search, which we introduced and which have greatly helped to reduce the incidence of such crimes.
Mr. Bill Walker
How many additional policemen have been provided in Scotland and how much extra money, in real terms, have the Government allocated to law and order since 1979?
Will my hon. Friend confirm that, if the Government were to introduce proposals to toughen up sentencing policy — to impose stiffer sentences — we could look forward to Opposition Members agreeing with us for the first time?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
Yes, indeed.
It is important that the strongest penalties should be available.
I mentioned the sentence of life imprisonment and the unlimited fines that are available for crimes involving knives.
The number of police officers has increased enormously during the past 10 years.
The important figure is the £6 million extra that will be allocated for capital equipment and buildings to assist police forces this year.
The use of high technology will also be of great importance.
Home Improvement Grants
Mr. Darling
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what recent representations he has received about the home improvement grants scheme.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
I receive representations from time to time about various aspects of the home improvement grants scheme and its operation; in the main those concern individual cases.
Mr. Darling
Is the Minister aware that there are now thousands of people waiting for home improvement grants, some of whom applied before 1984?
Why does the Minister refuse to meet Edinburgh district council and other councils to discuss the crisis?
Is not he aware that thousands of people's property will deteriorate unless grants are forthcoming?
Why is the Scottish Office so feeble that it is not prepared to go to the Treasury to obtain the funds needed to complete the improvement scheme once and for all?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
Edinburgh district council estimated the cost of clearing the backlog at £25.5 million and we made that allocation to it over a two-year period.
It used the allocation, came back and said that its original estimate was entirely wrong and it required an extra £48 million — the original estimate was £48 million out.
By contrast, Glasgow gave accurate estimates.
I can give a commitment to the hon. Gentleman that we shall consider Edinburgh's bid with great care before making the final allocations to local authorities.
Some £205 million has been made available to Edinburgh for repairs and improvement grants since 1979.
That is a considerable sum; Edinburgh has done well.
Sir Hector Monro
Does my hon. Friend agree that the home improvement scheme has been one of the most successful in Scotland?
Does he also agree that the increase this year is extremely valuable and that steps should be taken towards improving houses in rural districts, where improvement grants are particularly valuable and welcome?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
Yes, that is extremely important.
The rural housing strategy developed by Scottish Homes will also assist.
Since the scheme was introduced, £957 million has been made available through it in Scotland to help bring many empty houses back into use and assist in reducing waiting lists.
Mr. Stephen
While welcoming the changes that the Minister has introduced to the home improvement grants scheme for houses affected by high radon levels, may I ask whether he agrees that in cases of severe hardship there should be access to 100 per cent.
grants, as is the case in England and Wales?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
That would require legislation.
However, what we can do immediately and are in the process of doing is to introduce a statutory instrument to increase the grant level to 90 per cent.
That will substantially help those who are in the circumstances that the hon. Gentleman mentions.
We have also made it clear that free tests will be available to anybody who wishes to have them in the hon. Gentleman's local authority area.
We are conscious of the extent of the problem in the hon. Gentleman's constituency.
Sunday Trading
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement on the operation of Sunday trading laws in Scotland.
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
The restrictions on Sunday trading contained in the Shops Act 1950 do not apply in Scotland, with the exception of hairdressers and barbers.
Although there is almost complete freedom of trade, many traders choose not to do so in response to the prevailing wishes of their local communities.
The present arrangements appear to work satisfactorily and I see no reason to alter the present position.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my right hon. Friend for his reply.
Has he any evidence of a decrease in church-going, an increase in marital break-up or an increase in the number of complaints to industrial tribunals by women who are asked to work on Sunday against their will?
If he has no such evidence, does he think that the introduction of Sunday trading in Britain is likely to cause the kind of social and moral breakdown that has been suggested by some advocates of restrictions?
Mr. Lang
I am sure that the problems described by my hon. Friend have increased, but I have no evidence that any such increase is related to shops in Scotland opening on Sunday.
I have no plans to change the present arrangements.
Mr. Harry Ewing
Would not it be a good thing to allow barbers to open on Sunday, if only to help the Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Eastwood (Mr. Stewart)?
Mr. Lang
As ever, the hon. Gentleman takes a great interest in hon. Members this side of the House, but I suppose that from his point of view it is a receding problem.
Western Isles
Mr. Macdonald
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement on the economic situation in the Western Isles.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Allan Stewart)
The Western Isles economy has performed relatively well i recent years despite a narrow base and inherent difficulties faced by island economies.
Mr. Macdonald
Does the Minister accept that the islands economy now faces its worst crisis since the war?
Does he appreciate the despair and anger felt by the community at the Government's lack of response so far?
Whatever the origins of the present crisis, does he agree that the brunt should not fall on the most vulnerable in the community — the elderly, the handicapped and school children?
I extend an invitation to the Minister to visit the community.
If he cannot accept it, can he at least dispatch a team of Scottish Office officials to see matters on the ground and report back to the Scottish Office on the grim situation faced by the islands?
Mr. Stewart
As the hon. Gentleman knows, my right hon. Friend has granted the islands council consent to borrow up to £24 million during the rest of this financial year.
I recognise the effect of the decisions taken by Western Isles council.
It is worth recording that before these expenditure reductions were announced Western Isles council received 98.4 per cent.
of its expenditure from aggregate external finance — revenue support grant, non-domestic rate income and community charge grants.
Only 1.6 per cent.
of the expenditure was borne by community charge payers.
The hon. Gentleman invited me to visit the area.
If I am not able to visit the Western Isles in the near future, I shall certainly act on his suggestion that we should send a team of Scottish Office officials and that will be arranged as soon as is reasonably practicable.
Mr. Wallace
Does the Minister accept that transport costs are of considerable importance to the economy of the Western Isles?
My constituents often look with envy at the relatively low freight costs for transport from the Scottish mainland to the Western Isles compared with transport costs from the mainland to the northern isles.
When can we expect the Government to announce the subventions for next year?
May we expect that the cost of transporting freight from the mainland to Orkney and Shetland will be comparable with the cost of such transport to the Western Isles?
Mr. Stewart
Orkney and Shetland are further from the mainland than the Western Isles, but the answer to the hon. Member's specific question about when an announcement will be made is, shortly.
Homelessness
Mr. Hood
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what he is doing to discourage young Scottish homeless from leaving home and living rough in London.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
Grants totalling £150,000 over three years are being made to voluntary organisations for projects aimed at dissuading young Scots from drifting to London without making adequate preparation for housing and employment, assisting those in London who want to return to Scotland and supporting the young homeless in Scottish cities.
Moreover, tomorrow I shall announce extra capital allocations of £4.137 million for specific projects for homelessness throughout Scotland, and Clydesdale will be one of the 29 authorities.
Mr. Hood
I thank the Minister for his answer.
He will be aware that last night, thousands of young Scots slept rough on the streets of London and he may also be aware of the recent statement by the Moderator of the Church of Scotland, who referred to the fact that 25 per cent.
of the homeless in London come from Scotland.
Is not it a blight on Scotland that we cannot provide homes for our homeless, including those who are still kids?
I am pleased to hear that the Minister will announce an increase tomorrow, but £1.2 million will not even look at the problem.
Why does not he address the problem seriously and put real money into solving it — or will he continue to opt out and sell out, just as the Prime Minister did for the country in Maastricht yesterday?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
When we made available the special allocation of £3.5 million earlier in the year, eight authorities in Scotland came forward with specific projects that resulted in 700 extra housing units being made available.
For that reason, we wish greatly to expand the programme and are doing so.
If any authorities do not succeed tomorrow, they may still be considered for a share of the extra allocation of £7.5 million next year.
The £50,000 awarded to voluntary organisations is specifically for the purpose of preventing homelessness and dissuading young people from coming to London when they have neither housing nor jobs.
Mr. Maxton
Is not the Minister's attitude smugly complacent in view of the fact that the Shelter survey shows an over 100 per cent.
increase in homelessness in Scotland since 1983 and his Scottish office survey shows a 14 per cent.
increase last year alone?
Although the £4.1 million may be welcome to homeless people in Scotland, the Secretary of State for Scotland announced a £63 million cut in housing generally in Scotland last year and that does nothing to solve the problems of homelessness.
Will he now announce an increase in investment in housing in Scotland and, more particularly, persuade the Cabinet to restore benefit to 16 and 17-year-olds in Scotland immediately?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
First, no young person should be without income.
As to housing allocations, the hon. Member must bear in mind the fact that the receipts are well up this year, so the gross programme should be considerable.
However, there are 26,000 empty council houses, a considerable portion of which could be brought back into use.
Local authorities take their statutory responsibilities seriously, so that in 1990-91, 82 per cent.
of those assessed as homeless were found permanent accommodation by local authorities.
We are giving them maximum encouragement in this direction.
Constitutional Change
Mrs. Irene Adams
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will now meet representatives of the Scottish Constitutional Convention to discuss proposals for constitutional change in Scotland.
8
Mr. McKelvey
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he intends to meet the Scottish Constitutional Convention to discuss the future government of Scotland.
Mr. Lang
I have no plans to meet the self-styled Scottish Constitutional Convention, whose report fails to address the substantive issues involved in constitutional change in Scotland.
But I welcome any participation in the debate I have called for on these issues, provided that it addresses the issues in a realistic way.
Mrs. Adams
Will the Secretary of State recognise that now his party is being called to the debate, not the Opposition?
Will he reconsider his decision on meeting members of the Scottish Constitutional Convention, which represents 70 per cent.
of the views in Scotland, including the churches, trade unions, the Labour party and the Liberal party?
Will he consider bringing the Conservative party, and talking to the Scottish National party to bring it into the Scottish Constitutional Convention so that we can then have a genuine debate on which way the constitution of Scotland should go?
Mr. Lang
I certainly do not intend to fight the Scottish National party's battles for it.
The Scottish Constitutional Convention, which I have described in the past as the Labour party at prayer, failed to address any of the substantive issues that would affect Scotland's representation in the House if its proposals came into effect.
It took no account of funding arrangements, parliamentary representation at Westminster or the position of the Secretary of State for Scotland, and the members of the convention disagreed among themselves on the number and sex of its members, the method of election and a number of other aspects affecting Scotland's constitutional future.
Mr. McKelvey
Some hon. Members will welcome the partial movement by the Secretary of State for Scotland in as much as we have had the enormous political death-bed confession that he will look at the Scottish situation.
But does not he realise that throughout Scotland he and his cronies are seen as a’ wee parcel of rogues in a nation who were bought and sold for English gold’?
Why does not he take his head out of the sand and understand Scotland's problems?
Scotland as a nation will determine its own sovereignty whether he agrees to it or not and he should be talking to the Scottish Constitutional Convention about the matter.
Mr. Lang
Far from being reluctant to debate the matter, I have invited the Opposition to take part in four debates on matter days in the Scottish Grand Committee to compensate for their failure to make use of those opportunities in the Scottish Grand Committee during the previous parliamentary Session.
Far from being unaware of the impact on Scotland of the Scottish Constitutional Convention's proposals, I am aware that Scotland enjoys identifiable public expenditure 22 per cent.
per head higher than the rest of the United Kingdom which would be jeopardised by any change in the constitutional arrangements.
Mr. Rowe
It sounds slightly improbable that my right hon. Friend will be called to a meaningful debate on Scottish constitutional matters in the near future, but will he assure Conservative Members that were he to be so he is fully aware that people in England would take it amiss if any proposition were seriously entertained which allowed Scottish Members to decide matters in Scotland and then to have a say in English matters in England?
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend identifies part of the problem which those who favour changes in the constitutional arrangements should address.
In the event of the changes that the Opposition favour, one wonders whether Scottish questions could take place on the Floor of the House, or whether there would be a Scottish Grand Committee or Scottish Standing Committees.
Mr. Salmond
Both the Secretary of State and the Prime Minister have made clear statements in the past 10 days that if the Scottish people vote for independence at the election, independence is what we shall have, but will the Secretary of State say a bit more today about how he answers the current argument about whether he has the right to run Scotland with nine Members of Parliament and, according to the latest poll, 18 per cent.
of the vote?
Does he incorporate the votes of everyone who voted Labour or Liberal Democrat at the last election and use that as part of his mandate to enforce his unwanted policies on the Scottish people?
Mr. Lang
At the previous election I stood for election to a United Kingdom Parliament, as did the hon. Gentleman.
As a Member of that Parliament, I am a member of the United Kingdom Government and no one has seriously called in question the right or propriety of the United Kingdom Government to govern Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and England.
Mr. John Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend agree that a tax-raising Scottish assembly would be the worst thing for Scotland because it would discourage the inward investment which will be encouraged into the United Kingdom by the fact that we are not part of the social charter?
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The tax-raising powers of such an assembly, which are referred to coyly by Opposition Members as being only marginal, would, even if they raised only 2p in the pound, cost a single man on average wages £4.72 per week.
The single man on average wages will think carefully before welcoming such an impost.
Sir David Steel
Does the Secretary of State recognise how arrogant his original answer sounded with its reference to the’ self-styled’Scottish Constitutional Convention?
Does not he recognise that it is a broadly based representative body in which it was open to the Conservative party to participate and that for him to call now for a debate, once its work is completed, is extraordinary?
He is still welcome to join the convention.
Mr. Lang
The right hon. Gentleman can hardly refer to such a body as having the kind of authority with which he seeks to imbue it when it disagreed on a number of matters and failed to address any of the ones that really matter.
Mr. Dewar
May I add my congratulations to the Secretary of State on yet another about-turn?
Does he recall that just a few months ago he dismissed devolution as a stale hangover from the 1960s in which there was no public interest?
I therefore welcome his belated decision to take part in a full debate and the fact that he is now — I quote him from last week — keen to acknowledge that there is always room for constitutional change.
Will he give an assurance that his ideas for reform will be produced before the Scottish Grand Committee debate on the constitution that he proposes?
Does he recognise that dialogue is not criticism by Ministers of everyone else's proposals without making any positive contribution themselves?
Mr. Lang
Once again, the hon. Gentleman shows great coyness in approaching debates on the issues that he and his colleagues support.
He is trying to set preconditions before agreeing to those debates taking place.
I welcome the possibility of debating the proposals of the Opposition parties.
They have come forward with plans which, they say, are carefully costed and carefully thought through and represent the interests of the great body of the Scottish people.
I wish to explore those proposals, lay bare the dangers which lurk beneath them and identify the threat not only to parliamentary representation from Scotland in this House but to the economic well-being of Scotland if the Labour party were ever in a position to exercise in Scotland the kind of powers that it would give to such an assembly.
9
Mr. Bill Walker
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what representations he has recently received about the governance of Scotland; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Lang
A range of representations, both for and against constitutional change in Scotland, has been received.
Mr. Walker
I thank my right hon. Friend for his reply.
Does he agree that there is only one place where the constitution of the United Kingdom can be changed, and it is this Parliament?
Therefore, debates in this Parliament must address the realities of the constitution that the so-called self-appointed body would have to face such as the West Lothian question, the Goschen formula and the number of Members coming to this House from Scotland?
Unless those constitutional proposals are properly, fully and adequately addressed in a manner that both this House and the other place can accept, they are no more than pipe dreams.
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
One of the important issues that would have to be addressed in any new constitutional settlement for Scotland would be the funding arrangements of Scotland within the United Kingdom.
On 5 December The Scotsman said:’ Of course, upon devolution there would have to be an adjustment in spending: there is no dispute about that.’
I think that the editor of The Scotsman would be surprised to hear the views of Opposition Members on that.
However, it is a very important issue which would need to be fully addressed in any debate.
Mr. Eadie
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that the problem is not the West Lothian question but the Westminster question, which will become predominant if, after having just nine Members, his party is left with none, or just two or three?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman is right to identify Westminster as the seat of government.
It is the Union of the United Kingdom that would be breached by the sort of proposals that the Labour party identifies.
I intend to expose the shortcomings of the Labour party proposals.
Moreover, I do not anticipate the general election consequences to which the hon. Gentleman refers.
Mr Worthington
It is clear that the Secretary of State has not a single idea on the issue.
If he wants a debate, he must produce some ideas.
Part of the government of the United Kingdom consists of local government in Scotland.
The Tory party's working party on local government — including Bearsden and Milngavie district council, one of the three Tory district councils — proposes that education, social work, housing, the police, fire, water, sewerage and strategic planning should be removed from local government and transferred either to the Secretary of State or to local prosperous companies, or that they should be privatised.
Do the Government agree with those proposals?
Is that part of the Secretary of State's proposal for the government of Scotland?
Does the Secretary of State agree that when local democracy does not come up with the results that he wants he abolishes it?
Is that his policy?
Mr. Lang
Oh dear, the hon. Gentleman is in a muddle.
He contradicted himself within his own question by saying that we have no constitutional ideas and then identifying an area on which we are currently consulting with a view to making constitutional changes.
Local government reform is important.
We were consulting widely on the possible change to a single-tier all-purpose authority structure in Scotland.
I do not regard the United Kindom constitution as set in concrete.
It is not a written constitution — it is organic, and it can develop change and adapt to the needs of new circumstances.
I should be more encouraged if I could identify within the Labour party a consensus for the preservation of the Union.
Steel Industry
Mr. Oppenheim
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what recent representations he has received from the Scottish steel industry.
Mr. Allan Stewart
My right hon. Friend recently received a letter from the chairman of the Scottish Steelfounders Association expressing concern about state subsidies to European steelfounders.
Mr. Oppenheim
Bearing in mind recent noisy Opposition condemnation of steel plant closures, has the Opposition spokesman yet had the guts to give the people of Scotland an unequivocal assurance that, given the chance, they would prevent such closures —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman must ask about government policy.
Mr. Oppenheim
Is the Opposition spokesman afraid that people will remember the days before the Government's policy when political meddling led to huge overcapacity, massive losses and the closure of no fewer than three plants under Labour in Scotland alone?
Mr. Stewart
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
No such assurances have been given by the Opposition because it is not possible for them to do so.
Dr. Bray
Is the Minister aware that the recent fall in British Steel profits has made British Steel look again at capital expenditure and ways of economising without damaging future profitability?
Will he use this opportunity to ask British Steel to consider modernising the Dalzell plate mill in Motherwell rather than building an expensive new plate mill, which would be less profitable for British Steel?
Mr. Stewart
I have seen speculation about that.
Naturally, we would welcome any investment at Dalzell and any decision that extended the plant's long-term prospects.
Some time ago the Scottish Office put a submission to British Steel on the case for investment at Dalzell.
That submission was given to the trade unions and is public knowledge.
We would welcome any positive news on that front.
Mr. Tom Clarke
Is the Minister aware that perhaps there were so few representations to his right hon. Friend the Secretary of State because the steel industry has been decimated in Scotland, especially in Lanarkshire?
Does he accept that there should still be a future for the tube division despite the fact that workers are seeing imported tubes used in the North sea when they are capable of making them?
To achieve that, there is an essential need for investment and training.
That is particularly necessary in Lanarkshire.
Mr. Stewart
Like the hon. Gentleman, I regret the job losses at Clydesdale, which are due fundamentally to overcapacity in seamless tubes.
I agree with the hon. Gentleman's general point about the Lanarkshire economy.
That is why the Government have provided an extra £28 million for economic regeneration in Lanarkshire in the current year and why up to an extra £25 million will be available to the Lanarkshire development agency, in addition to what it would otherwise have received in 1992-93.
I would hope that the hon. Gentleman would agree that many people of all political persuasions in Lanarkshire are working together extremely hard to build a better and more prosperous future for the area.
Agriculture Support
Sir Hector Monro
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what increase in financial support is available to farmers in less-favoured areas for 1992; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
Planned programme expenditure on agricultural support in Scotland in 1991-92 was £158 million.
Planned expenditure in 1992-93 is £199.5 million an increase of 26 per cent.
The great majority of that support is directed to the less-favoured areas, which include about 90 per cent.
of agricultural land in Scotland.
Sir Hector Monro
Does my hon. Friend agree that in recent years the income of farmers in Scotland, particularly those in the less-favoured areas, has fallen substantially?
I welcome the recent payment of the suckler cow premium and the ewe premium, but when will the hill livestock compensatory allowance be announced, and will it be increased?
Mr. Forsyth
I agree with my hon. Friend.
Farming is in a difficult position and farm incomes have dropped substantially.
We increased the HLCAs last year by an average of 14 per cent.
I know that my hon. Friend is anxious for a conclusion to be reached for next year, and I hope that it will be possible to do so soon.
As my hon. Friend knows, we have agreed to review the position of hill farming, and I know that the farming union is anxious to assist the Government in recognising the problems facing agriculture.
Mr. Foulkes
Is the Minister aware that when I recently addressed a meeting of the Ayr, Renfrew and Bute Black-Faced Sheep Breeders Association not only was I extremely well received but much concern was expressed about the position of sheep rearers in the area?
The association is dissatisfied with Government policy, particularly with the fact that agriculture in Scotland is dealt with by a Minister in the House of Lords.
Does the Minister agree that agriculture would be given higher priority and better consideration if it were dealt with by a Minister in this House?
Mr. Forsyth
I hope that the hon. Gentleman did not try to pull the wool over the association's eyes, as he usually does.
My noble Friend the Under-Secretary of State addressed a meeting of farmers in my constituency.
They were extremely impressed by what he said and were buoyed up by his message that the Government are determined to ensure that the proposals on reform of the common agricultural policy are strongly resisted because they are not in the interests of Scotland's farmers.
I imagine that that was one of the matters raised with the hon. Gentleman, and I hope that he was able to assure farmers of the splendid job that my noble Friend is doing for farming in Scotland.
Mr. Andrew Welsh
Does the Minister agree that agriculture is the backbone of the rural economy and that the loss to the Angus economy of more than £1 million due to the closure of Anglia Canners in Brechin is a body blow to agriculture, transport, ancillary industries and the whole community?
As that area of high unemployment has now lost 91 full-time jobs and 41 part-time jobs, what action does the Minister intend to take to sort the problem out?
Mr. Forsyth
As the hon. Gentleman will know, much of our agriculture policy is determined at Community level, so the strength of our voice in the Community is important.
If the hon. Gentleman had his way and we had an independent Scotland, we would have four votes instead of 10 and our influence in being able to fight for the interests of Scotland's farmers would be less.
Scotland in Europe
Mrs. Ray Michie
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland when he last met CBI (Scotland) to discuss the role of Scotland in Europe.
Mr. Allan Stewart
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and I have regular exchanges of views with CBI (Scotland) on a variety of matters.
Scotland's role in Europe has featured in those exchanges.
Mrs. Michie
Will not CBI (Scotland) take a dim view of the Government's decision to opt out of a commitment to the single currency?
Because of the Government's apparent lack of enthusiasm for all things European, and their determination to go along a slow track, will not Scotland lose out again without any chance of the central bank being cited in Glasgow or Edinburgh?
Mr. Stewart
I disagree with the hon. Lady and I have no doubt that CBI (Scotland) would also do so on that matter.
In relation to the agreement on social policy at Maastricht, I noted that Jacques Delors has suggested that the United Kingdom will now be a haven for inward investment from the United States and Japan.
On this occasion, I agree with Mr. Delors.
Mr. Ian Bruce
Does my hon. Friend agree that the CBI, in Scotland and in the rest of the United Kingdom, is keen to see flexibility in our social standards and would not wish Scotland to be signed up to a social charter restricting the freedom of workers and employers alike, who look forward to continuing to be a magnet for inward investment from Japan and from the rest of the European Community?
Mr. Stewart
As I suggested in my previous answer, I am sure that my hon. Friend is absolutely right.
I have no doubt that the agreement that has been reached will enhance the position of the United Kingdom in relation to the creation of enterprise and the attraction of inward investment.
I am sure that that view is shared by Scotland.
Mr. Dewar
When considering our relationships with Europe, will the Minister explain to the CBI why agreeing to a social charter which gives protection to the young employed, gives equal status to part-time workers and sets decent standards for maternity leave should be a barrier to prosperity, given the experience of France and of Germany?
Why cannot this country afford social justice when the Governments of Portugal and of Greece have no doubt where the balance lies?
Is it not shameful that Britain should opt out in that way?
Is not the Minister embarrassed that 11 countries are signing a protocol stipulating that the United Kingdom will take no part in the Community's deliberations on the social agenda?
Is that not a humiliating prospect for the Edinburgh summit next year?
Mr. Stewart
The hon. Gentleman is talking absolute nonsense, as will be confirmed when my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister makes his statement to the House later this afternoon.
I emphasise that I do not believe that it is right to agree to measures which are damaging to the Scottish or to the British economy, and we have not done so.
I also emphasise our excellent record on structural funds from the Community, from which Scotland has gained £1.25 billion under this Government.
Homelessness
Sir Russell Johnston
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what proposals he has for the alleviation of homelessness in Scotland.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
To help Scottish local authorities carry out their statutory duties towards the homeless, we have among other things made available in the current financial year extra capital allocations of £3.5 million announced earlier, and of £4.1 million, the specific allocation of which will be announced tomorrow.
We have increased housing support grant so that all local authorities that incur a deficit in running a hostel will qualify for grant.
We have issued an updated code of guidance for authorities dealing with applicants under the homelessness legislation.
On 6 December, I announced a further £7.5 million capital allocation for projects for 1992-93.
Sir Russell Johnston
Regarding the £4 million, is not telling local authorities that they have to produce schemes within two weeks and that the money has to be spent by March a disorderly way of doing things?
If £4 million is divided by the number of district authorities in Scotland, they will have £355,000 apiece.
That is a pathetic response to the size of the problem, which is extremely serious in my area.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
The hon. Gentleman's own authority in Inverness will be one of those that will benefit.
Authorities that feel that they have not benefited sufficiently will be considered for the £7.5 million allocation for next year.
I ask the hon. Gentleman to bear in mind all the other sources of public funds that are available.
Scottish Homes has brought back into use 1,000 units that it has helped to create in the past two years.
Our revised code of guidance has been warmly welcomed by authorities.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is very gratifying to see such an interest in Scottish questions.
I ask hon. Members to listen carefully to the questions and answers because they will find them enlightening.
Mr. McFall
The Minister will remember that the Stopover project in my constituency, which was designed to allow 16 young homeless people to stay in the area, was rejected by the Scottish Office last year.
Only last month, my council applied for extra funding for another eight young people to be retained in the constituency rather than making the futile trek southwards.
Those positive initiatives have the support of the entire council.
Will the Minister respond positively by stating that he will grant both applications to allow that small number of people to be retained in my constituency?
That would help the problem of homelessness in Dumbarton.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
I can tell the hon. Gentleman that his local authority of Dumbarton will benefit.
The details will be spelt out tomorrow.
I can also tell him that urban aid of £9.7 million has been made available over the years for homelessness projects in Scotland.
That comes within the responsibility of my fellow Under-Secretary of State, my hon. Friend the Member for Eastwood (Mr. Stewart), who will have heard what the hon. Gentleman said about further applications.
Defence Industries Initiative
Mr. Strang
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland how many direct employees of Scottish Enterprise are currently working on the defence industries initiative he announced on 14 October 1991; and if he will make a statement on the actions which have so far been taken.
Mr. Allan Stewart
The allocation of Scottish Enterprise staff to particular projects is a matter for the body itself.
So far, a survey has been conducted of companies in the defence sector in Scotland and work is in hand to develop the best approach to assisting these companies.
The nature of future activity will depend on the outcome of this work.
Mr. Strang
Against the background of the thousands of jobs that have been lost in the defence industries in the past couple of years, and the thousands likely to be lost in the future, is not the Government's initiative wholly inadequate?
When will the Minister accept that only when the Government can find new money for research and development, retraining and investment in new facilities will there be a real impact on this serious problem in the Scottish economy?
Mr. Stewart
I do not accept the hon. Gentleman's criticisms for one moment.
The key decisions on diversifying in defence-related companies must be taken by those companies.
With regard to the work being undertaken by Scottish Enterprise, it is hoped that early in the new year there will be a version of the work being done — not including commercially confidential information.
It will show the hon. Gentleman that his criticisms are wholly unjustified.
Mr. Michael J. Martin
The Minister will recall that when he was a Scottish Office Minister before, he offered Springburn a special initiative to help with unemployment.
The demise of the defence jobs has added to the difficulties in my constituency, where many workers travel to Yarrow's and to Barr and Stroud.
What action is the Minister taking to help with unemployment in the north end of Glasgow?
Mr. Stewart
The primary responsibility for that lies with the Glasgow Development Agency.
I know that it is taking a full part in the exercise being undertaken by Scottish Enterprise.
I should be happy to discuss any particular problems with the hon. Gentleman at any time.
NHS Trusts
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what further representations he has received on hospitals applying for trust status.
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend the Minister of State and I regularly receive representations, both for and against, on the subject of NHS trusts.
I have now approved three applications.
Mr. Griffiths
Does the Secretary of State agree with Duncan McNeill, whom he appointed to promote his hospital trusts, that trust status provides an alternative to operating and remaining within the mainstream national health service?
Does he realise that for patients throughout Scotland, including those in the Edinburgh royal infirmary and the Royal hospital for sick children, that is a chilling message?
Mr. Lang
I have a great admiration for Mr. Duncan McNeill, and also a great approbation for the concept of trust status for hospitals.
Contrary to the rumours constantly spread by the Labour party, such hospitals remain in the national health service and continue to provide a free service at the point of delivery.
Mr. Galbraith
Is the Secretary of State aware that the first wave of opt-outs in England were examined by Coopers and Lybrand, which found that 45 of the 57 were financially non-viable?
Was a similar exercise carried out in Scotland?
If so, will the Secretary of State make the results publicly available?
If not, why not?
Is this another example of the Government opting out, as they do in Europe?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman is talking nonsense and yet again trying to mislead the public on the achievements of hospital trusts.
The fact is that those hospitals south of the border that have achieved trust status are now delivering more patient care, recruiting more consultants and buying more equipment, and improving the service that they provide to the public in their areas.
Erskine Bridge
Mr. Graham
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement on the future financial provision for the Erskine bridge.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
Financial provision for the Erskine bridge is contained within the overall trunk road provision for Scotland.
Arrangements for the financing of the bridge beyond the end of the extended tolling period in 1996 are under consideration.
Mr. Graham
Does the Secretary of State realise that we were promised 20 years ago that after 20 years the toll would be abolished?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I wish to hear what the hon. Gentleman has to say.
Mr. Graham
I am most grateful for your assistance, Mr. Speaker.
When I heard the rowdy noise earlier, I was sure that there was a John Doe — dead on arrival — back from Maastricht.
Is the Minister aware that the people of Dumbarton and Renfrewshire are sick and tired of paying the toll given that, after 20 years, the promise to abolish it has not been fulfilled, even though local business men, the local community councils and even some Tories wish it to go?
Why does not the Minister support the local economy in Renfrewshire and Dumbartonshire by abolishing the toll now?
Why does not he give freedom to the people of Scotland to move about without dipping into their pockets?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
I regard the toll as absolutely fair in the circumstances.
The bridge cost £10 million or more to build and successive Governments have supported the tolling of estuarial crossings of this nature.
The tolling period will extend to 1 July 1996 and the Government will then make a decision about the future.
Forestry Commission
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what is the total acreage of land sold by the Forestry Commission in the last five years; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
The Forestry Commission sold 42,800 hectares of land in the five years to 31 March 1991.
Mr. Evans
Is my hon. Friend aware that 40 per cent.
of all men and women have walking as their main sport?
Can he assure me that the woodlands sold off by the commission will be accessible to all walkers, especially as after the next election a lot of Scottish Labour Members will have a lot of time to do a lot of walking?
Mr. Forsyth
As a walker myself, I agree with my hon. Friend that access ought to be continued in respect of land that is disposed of by the Forestry Commission.
As my hon. Friend will know, an agreement dating back to November last year provides for the Forestry Commission to offer land to local authorities prior to disposal so that an agreement can be reached with regard to access.
I hope that my hon. Friend feels that that is a step in the right direction.
Lockerbie
Mr. Dalyell
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will make a statement on the discussions which the Lord Advocate has had with representatives of the German Government and the Bundeskriminalamt about the alleged use by Libyans or the Libyan People's Bureau of premises in East Berlin in relation to his inquiry into the Lockerbie bombing.
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
No, Sir.
Discussions by the Lord Advocate and his representatives with the authorities of other countries in criminal investigations are confidential.
Mr. Dalyell
Will the Government confirm that when the former Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), and President Reagan dispatched the bombers that had the effect of bombing the residential areas of Tripoli and Benghazi in 1986 —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Dalyell.
Mr. Dalyell
Against the evidence of the German authorities and the German police, and given that even the Israeli secret service thinks that others may have been involved, would it not at least be a sensible plan to talk to the Arab League about the very serious problem of Lockerbie and at least consider accepting the request to send British and American judges in the first instance to a trial under Libyan law?
Lord James Douglas-Hamilton
I cannot comment on the evidence, but the Lord Advocate has made it extremely clear that the criminal proceedings are the result of an extremely brilliant, thorough and painstaking investigation by the Scottish police services and their colleagues, to whom I also pay tribute.
We have rightly increased their allocations this year.
The detailed points raised by the hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) are matters for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, who will have heard what the hon. Gentleman has said.
Health Boards
Mr. Ernie Ross
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland when he last met the chairman of health boards in Scotland to discuss finance.
Mr. Michael Forsyth
I meet chairmen regularly to discuss a wide range of strategic issues affecting the management of the NHS in Scotland.
Mr. Ross
When the Minister next meets the chairmen of the health boards in Scotland, will he have had a chance to study the correspondence from Tayside about the relocation of the casualty department of Dundee royal infirmary to a green-field site at Ninewells?
Given that the health board has said that it will have difficulty finding the money for that relocation and upgrading, will the Minister consider favourably any requests that may be made at the meeting?
Mr. Forsyth
That is clearly a matter for the Tayside health board.
However, it may interest the hon. Gentleman to know that, as part of the patients charter initiative, we will take steps to consider accident and emergency and casualty cover to improve standards of provision applying to Tayside and to all other health boards.
House of Commons
Thursday 12 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NORTHERN IRELAND
Administration of Justice
Mr. McAvoy
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on his plans to heighten confidence in the administration of justice.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Peter Brooke)
The Government's strategy is to provide a criminal justice system which maintains the rule of law and creates in Northern Ireland the conditions for a fair and just administration.
Mr. McAvoy
That answer smacks of nothing less than smug complacency.
If everything is for the best in Castlereagh, why are there so many out-of-court settlements in actions for damages brought by former detainees?
Mr. Brooke
Many factors enter into account when the police authority needs to respond to complaints of that sort.
The decisions taken are taken on legal advice.
Mr. Peter Robinson
Did the Secretary of State read in the memoirs of Dr. Garrett FitzGerald that during the negotiations on the Anglo-Irish Agreement the Government had been prepared to allow judges from the courts in the Irish Republic to sit on the Bench in Northern Ireland as part of what are described as mixed courts, but that that was stopped because of the resistance of then then Lord Chief Justice, Lord Lowry?
Is the view expressed then to Dr.
FitzGerald — that this was a matter which could be considered as soon as Lord Lowry passed on — being considered by the Government now?
Mr. Brooke
The nature of my duties both in the Province and in this House means that I have not yet had the pleasure and privilege of reading Dr. FitzGerald's book, but I shall take on hearsay what the hon. Gentleman says about this entry.
The issue has not been discussed with me during my time as Secretary of State at any conference under the Anglo-Irish Agreement, and I am perfectly clear about what response I would give if it were raised.
Mr. Trimble
The primary function of the administration of justice is to apprehend and punish the guilty.
Does the right hon. Gentleman realise that, contrary to statements made from time to time by Northern Ireland Ministers, the administration of justice in Northern Ireland is signally failing to do that?
In 1985 there were 24 convictions for murder, but there were only eight in 1990.
Moreover, the people being convicted are very much from the second and third XI.
Does the Secretary of State not realise that that conspicuous failure, which is clear to the people of Northern Ireland, is undermining the confidence of the great majority, and that that is pregnant with considerable consequences?
Mr. Brooke
I understand what the hon. Gentleman says about the nature of the charge laid against certain people and the roles that they may have played in particular crimes.
That is, I fear, testimony to the experience of terrorists in making certain that the people who commit the crimes are protected by their colleagues.
But I am delighted to tell the hon. Gentleman and the House that 112 people have been charged with murder or attempted murder in the course of this year.
That is an advance on the previous year and a testimony to the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
Mr. Stanbrook
Would it not be helpful if we used existing machinery more effectively?
For example, the reciprocal legislation providing for extraterritorial jurisdiction does not seem much used.
In the 16 years in which we have had our part of the legislation, we have applied for only 31 people to be tried in the Republic, of whom only 16 were convicted and the Irish Republic has not applied for any such cases at all.
Surely there is a lot of ground here to make up if we are to make the machinery of justice as between the two countries more effective.
Mr. Brooke
The particular question that my hon. Friend raises is for my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General, but I am grateful to him for reminding me of the precise statistics with which it is always sensible to be armed in any conference on the agreement.
Mr. McNamara
Will the Secretary of State explain why the Government are still being so stubborn about the video recording of interrogation procedures at Castlereagh and elsewhere?
Is he aware of the concern expressed by Amnesty International and the United Nations committee on torture, and that it was recommended by Lord Colville, the Government's own adviser, and by the independent police complaints body and the Standing Advisory Commission on Human Rights?
It is important that the Royal Ulster Constabulary should be seen to be in the forefront of the fight against terrorism with the support and confidence of the whole community.
This is one important way in which that could be achieved.
Will the Government now reconsider their decision not to introduce video recording of interrogation procedures?
Mr. Brooke
No matter what arrangements were to be made, the Government believe that the introduction of video recording of interviews with terrorists suspects could seriously jeopardise the process of investigating crime.
However, that was a matter which SACHR raised with me only this week and made it clear that it was a subject to which it would return.
It is therefore a subject on which I expect to be in continuing dialogue.
Mr. Kilfedder
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that an essential element of the administration of justice is police primacy?
If so, will he ensure that a police officer accompanies every military patrol whenever humanly possible?
Will he also consider, as a provisional measure, initiating steps which would enable a magistrate or judge to supervise the interrogation of a defendant charged with a terrorist offence?
Mr. Brooke
The Government, police and military authorities are committed to ensure that, where feasible and sensible — the hon. Gentleman will know what those words mean in the context of the Province — Army patrols likely to come into contact with the public are accompanied by an RUC officer.
That reflects the policy that the RUC is in the lead in the fight against terrorism.
However, it must be recognised that at the current level of terrorist threat, full accompaniment of all patrols could be achieved only at the expense of aborting necessary anti-terrorist operations with a consequent increase in terrorist activity.
On the the hon. Gentleman's second question, he will know that work is proceeding on a statutory code under the Northern Ireland (Emergency Provisions) Act 1991.
Shipbuilding
Mr. Loyden
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what information he has on the number of orders, and for what types of vessels, held by shipbuilders in Northern Ireland.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Richard Needham)
Harland and Wolff Shipbuilding and Heavy Industries Limited currently has orders for 12 vessels — an auxiliary oiler replenishment vessel for the Ministry of Defence, five Suezmax type tankers and six Capesize bulk carriers, for which three contracts have already been signed, with a further three to be completed shortly.
Mr. Loyden
The Minister will be aware that, with the exception of the MOD vessel, only three of the 11 ships now on order at Harland and Wolff are United Kingdom registered and owned.
We welcome the security that the present orders offer to 1994-95, but would not Harland and Wolff's future, as well as that of other British shipyards, be better secured if we were to adopt the policy of new build for Britain's merchant fleet and thus ensure that shipyards throughout the United Kingdom employ our people and that our seamen have jobs to go to?
Mr. Needham
I am delighted that the recently privatised Harland and Wolff now has the longest order book in its history, with £565 million worth of orders, that it is competing successfully with the Koreans and the Japanese, that the future of 2,500 of its people is assured and that it is the premier shipyard in the United Kingdom.
Rev. Ian Paisley
In view of the long list of orders that Harland and Wolff has procured — I welcome that, and wholly endorse what the Minister has said — the recent large pay-offs in the island are alarming.
Could not something be done to obtain some repair jobs to hold those workers so that they will not have to be laid off for a considerable time?
Mr. Needham
I fully understand the hon. Gentleman's concern.
It was always apparent that as the AOR was completed many jobs and skills would not be required in the new orders that have come through.
However, the hon. Gentleman rightly refers to the other businesses which Harland and Wolff is now expanding and building up, and I am sure that its success, which I believe is assured under privatisation, offers the best hope for those men in the future.
Dr. Godman
May I say how thrilled I am that that United Kingdom shipyard has such a healthy order book?
However, I regret that there is no expansion in the recruitment of workers to that shipyard.
How much money has been received by way of those orders from the seventh directive of the European Community's shipbuilding intervention fund, and how much of that money will be used to purchase from United Kingdom manufacturers the goods and services required for the vessels?
Mr. Needham
Clearly, it is for United Kingdom manufacturers to compete as subcontractors for the work that will be placed out by Harland and Wolff.
I am sure that a large proportion will be placed with subcontractors.
The percentage of aid given under the EC assistance programme was 13 per cent.
last year, and it is being renegotiated this year.
However, Harland and Wolff is continuing to compete and to be profitable, even though that intervention assistance is being reduced.
Schools (Integration)
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the integration of schools in Northern Ireland.
The Minister of State, Northern Ireland Office (Dr. Brian Mawhinney)
The Department of Education has, so far, approved 15 proposals for integrated status made under the integrated schools provisions of the Education Reform (Northern Ireland) Order 1989.
Mr. Townsend
I welcome the work that the Government have done in that important respect.
Is my hon. Friend the Minister aware of a recent report suggesting that pupils from such schools are most likely to take a particularly dim view of all paramilitary organisations?
Is he further aware that a problem exists in finding suitable financial resources for nursery education?
Will he see what can be done about that?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his comments.
It is certainly encouraging that parents, not government, are choosing to expand the number of integrated schools in the Province.
I am sure that my hon. Friend is right, in that it makes sense to believe that if young people from both sides of the community are taught together in the same classrooms, they will value equally both traditions and will be more likely than some others to find common ground in later life.
I will bring my hon. Friend's point about nursery education to the attention of my right hon. and noble Friend the Paymaster General.
Mr. John D. Taylor
Will the Minister commend Lagan college in my constituency for the progress that it has made in the past 10 years?
Can he confirm that there will be no discrimination against state schools, for which the majority of parents still exercise a preference, or in favour of the segregated education system that the Roman Catholic Church and most Catholic parents want to maintain?
Will the Minister assure the House that there will be no barrier to those who oppose integrated schools serving on the boards of governors of integrated schools?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am happy to join the right hon. Gentleman in commending Lagan college's achievements.
He and I were present at the recent opening of its new school building, for which I had the pleasure of being the Minister responsible for making available the necessary resources.
I certainly assure the right hon. Gentleman that there is no sense in which the Government want positively to discriminate in favour of one type of schooling over others, because parents have a right to choose.
The Education Reform (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 put integrated schools alongside two other alternatives from which parents could choose.
As to the right hon. Gentleman's last point, there will be no bar to any governor being appointed to the board of an integrated school, provided that the appointment complies with the provisions laid down in the Education Reform (Northern Ireland) Order 1989.
Pupil-Teacher Ratio
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what is the current pupil-teacher ratio; what the comparable figures were in May 1979; and if he will make a statement.
Dr. Mawhinney
The pupil-teacher ratio at January 1991, the latest date for which figures are available, was 18.2.
The figure for January 1979 was 19.1.
Mr. Greenway
Will my hon. Friend pass on my congratulations to all who were involved in that improvement?
Pupils will benefit, and that must be the object of the exercise.
Has not the time come, however, to evaluate the optimum pupil-teacher ratio for pupils at any given age, with a view to establishing it?
As I have said before, there are those who cannot teach one pupil, and others who can teach a hundred with great facility.
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his kind comments, and for the continuing interest that he takes in this subject.
I am sure that he is right in saying that the reduced pupil-teacher ratio provides children with an advantage, and also in pointing out that the quality of teaching and the ability of teachers is at least as important.
The idea of trying to work out an optimum ratio is interesting, and we should like to think about it further.
Mr. McGrady
I hope that the Minister is more successful with his new portfolio than his predecessors were and I wish him all the best in the difficult task that lies ahead of him.
Now that the education and library boards independently assess the formula according to which they delegate budgets to schools, does not the Minister fear that a great disparity in provision will result — not only in regard to pupil-teacher ratios, but in regard to every other aspect of provision across the different area boards?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful to the hon. Member for his kind personal remarks, although I enter a caveat in regard to what he said about my predecessors.
Part of the purpose of education reform was to delegate downwards from the Department of Education, closer to the chalk face, tasks such as determining the necessary budgets, teacher numbers, and so forth.
I suspect that the hon. Gentleman may have in mind some initial teething troubles that were experienced this year in connection with local management of primary schools.
The Department is examining that issue closely, in conjunction with the boards.
Mr. Beggs
Was the significant increase in the number of temporary and part-time teachers included in the calculation of pupil-teacher ratios?
Many parents feel that the speed of education reform and curriculum change has caused their children to suffer because their usual classroom or subject teachers are often taken out of the classroom to undergo courses related specifically to those changes.
Dr. Mawhinney
As the Minister responsible at the time, let me tell the hon. Gentleman that we went to great lengths to minimise the disruption caused in classrooms by the provision of necessary training related to the introduction of education reforms.
The hon. Gentleman will recall that, on some exceptional days, schools were closed so that teachers could be trained.
Year in, year out, there is always an element of disruption, which is unconnected with education reform, as teachers undergo various courses to upgrade their skills.
That is an essential part of the education process, and I do not believe that it was greatly exacerbated by the introduction of reforms.
Security
Mr. Molyneaux
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the security situation in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Brooke
Since I answered a similar question on 14 November, seven people have been killed as a result of the security situation, of whom six were civilians and one was a member of the Ulster Defence Regiment.
The Government remain entirely committed to bringing terrorism to an end through the vigorous and impartial actions of the police and the Army.
They have succeeded in bringing suspected terrorists to justice.
Up to the end of November this year, 367 people had been charged with terrorist offences, including 37 with murder and 75 with attempted murder.
Mr. Molyneaux
The Secretary of State will be aware from his own sources of the vast array of weapons being assembled and stored as far south as Limerick for transport to Northern Ireland.
Is there not now a good case for strengthening the frontier wire, as a matter of urgency?
Mr. Brooke
The right hon. Gentleman knows, as does the House, the scale of the shipments from Libya before the Eksund was apprehended by the French customs.
It is known that a substantial part of that weaponry is in the Republic of Ireland.
Of course, I am delighted that from time to time the Garda find some of it.
Rev. William McCrea
I am sure that the Secretary of State will join me in expressing in the House sympathy for my constituent's family on the murder of Mr. Newell, a member of the Ulster Defence Regiment.
Does the right hon. Gentleman appreciate the tremendous fear felt throughout the Province as we face the Christmas period, bearing in mind both the warning given by the security forces of an impending IRA outrage near Christmas and the signal given by the nationalist community in the result of a by-election at Magherafelt today, where there was a 43 per cent.
increase in the Sinn Fein vote and a 34 per cent.
decrease in the SDLP vote?
Mr. Brooke
Of course I share the hon. Gentleman's sympathy in the case of Mr. Newell.
All terrorist crimes are horrible, but I find those which follow the pattern of Mr. Newell's death especially horrible.
The hon. Gentleman is right, too, to tell the House of the warning that the Chief Constable of the RUC gave at the end of last week about the potential level of terrorist violence in the run-up to Christmas.
As for the pattern of voting in the by-election in the hon. Gentleman's constituency, there may be others besides myself to whom he might address that question.
Sir Patrick Duffy
May I draw the attention of the Secretary of State to the report in The Irish Times yesterday week about the recent meeting of the British-Irish parliamentary group in Dublin, and the contribution of his hon. Friend the Member for Lancashire, West (Mr. Hind) about the security situation in proximity to the border?
Were the reported remarks of his parliamentary private secretary in accordance with an official departmental brief?
Mr. Brooke
Necessarily, as my hon. Friend the Member for Lancashire, West (Mr. Hind) is my parliamentary private secretary, he will have taken advantage of the opportunity of briefing.
With regard to security at the border, I have consistently said in the aftermath of conferences under the Anglo-Irish Agreement that, although we are delighted that good co-operation exists, it can always be better, and I am confident that we can make it so.
Commercial Investment
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the amount of new investment in commercial buildings and shopping facilities in Belfast.
Mr. Needham
I am pleased to report that in recent years commercial and retail development in Belfast have reached unprecedented levels.
In total, some £290 million of private investment is being spent or is programmed.
In order to undermine the enormous resurgence of confidence, the IRA has planted 400 incendiary devices, of which approximately 100 have exploded, and five car bombs, of which three have exploded.
The damage has been and is being made good.
All the stores and the vast majority of commercial buildings are back at work.
Business performance in the city centre is very little different from last year.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply, and I commend him and his colleagues on their splendid work in restoring the centre of Belfast, especially the excellent shopping facilities.
I am sure that my hon. Friend wishes to condemn the outrage last week when not only stores but the opera house were bombed, making the children's pantomime and all the other treats that normal families in the rest of Britain have at Christmas, such as shopping, Father Christmas and the Christmas lights, inaccessible to many families.
The IRA is again undermining normal decent family life in the Province.
Mr. Needham
I am sure that all the people of Belfast would like to thank my hon. Friend for her comments.
As the IRA's Libyan bombs explode, Sinn Fein and the Member for Belfast, West (Mr. Adams) remain strongly and strangely silent.
The fact is that 1991 has been an unprecedented year of success for Belfast.
Anyone who went to the tall ships race in Belfast and saw 500,000 people thronging through the city centre day after day could see the determination of the people of Belfast to lead their lives normally.
It will take more than Mr. Gaddafi's guns and the IRA to undermine the spirit of the people of Belfast.
Mr. Clifford Forsythe
I congratulate the Minister on the urban renewal and commercial development in the centre of Belfast.
We utterly condemn all the IRA's cynical attempts to bomb the heart out of Belfast.
However, is the Minister aware that the main concern of business people in Belfast is that they should have adequate security so that they can run their businesses properly?
Great efforts should be made to bring tenants into the new office and shop premises that are still empty.
Does the Minister agree that instead of freezing the outlay of public money, the Government should hurry on public development to enable those shops to be let?
Mr. Needham
Over 90 per cent.
of the two biggest shopping developments in Belfast are let, which is an extraordinary figure in comparison with other new developments in the rest of the country.
Of 720,000 sq ftof office space that has been completed this year, 350,000 sq ft has been let.
Some 95 per cent.
of prime retail space in Belfast is let.
The hon. Gentleman is right to refer to security, although he will not expect me to spell out what is happening in the city at present.
Belfast is a city of 500,000 people and for its business and commerce to thrive, it must be an open city and people must be able to get into and out of it.
Finding that balance is absolutely crucial.
There can be no question but that the people of Belfast are showing, by returning day after day to work, to shop and to enjoy themselves in Belfast, that they are the people who are succeeding.
Rev. Ian Paisley
Does the Minister agree that the confidence of the people has been even more shaken by the tragedy in the prison at which a bomb went off, killing two remand prisoners?
Is not that comment on security even more staggering than the bombs that go off in the city, although all such bombings are to be condemned and deplored?
Will the Minister comment on the question that was sidestepped by the Secretary of State?
Does he agree that the nationalists in Mid-Ulster have given a warning to the House by the way in which they voted, with a colossal rise in the Sinn Fein vote and a colossal drop in the SDLP vote?
Mr. Needham
As the hon. Gentleman is well aware, his first question is a matter for my hon. Friend the Minister of State and my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State who have, no doubt, listened to him carefully.
On the second question, I am a great believer in the common sense and balance of all the people of Ulster.
I will not comment on a particular by-election.
I will comment, as I repeatedly do, on the determination of everyone in Ulster to end violence and to ensure that they can get back to living normal lives.
That is exactly what most of them are showing in Belfast at present.
Mr. Speaker
Mr. Marshall.
Mr. John Marshall
Question No. 7, Sir.
Mr. Speaker
Sorry, the hon. Gentleman is the wrong Mr. Marshall.
Mr. Jim Marshall
Perhaps I should ask the question of the hon. Member for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall) instead of my own.
With regard to the commercial activity in Belfast, I join the Minister in condemning the terrorist attacks in commercial Belfast.
Those attacks are clearly designed to undermine business confidence and the economic well-being of both communities.
I join the Minister in saying that we are all resolved to ensure that that does not succeed.
While I pay tribute to the Government's success in attracting commercial business to Belfast, I remind the Minister that Belfast is only one part of the Province.
What plans do the Government have to introduce a more balanced development throughout the Province?
Mr. Needham
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's opening comments, but not very grateful for his latter comments.
He has been on the Opposition Front Bench for long enough to have seen and understood the redevelopment work that is currently being undertaken in Londonderry and which is being carried out in the county towns throughout the length and breadth of Northern Ireland.
There is a feeling of partnership and a commitment to partnership that I have not seen before.
I have undertaken missions with the hon. Members for Foyle (Mr. Hume), for Fermanagh and South Tyrone (Mr. Maginnis) and for South Down (Mr. McGrady) in an attempt to get more business and development in their areas.
If the hon. Member for Leicester, South (Mr. Marshall) would like to accompany me in the new year, I should be only too happy to take him on a tour and show him just how much is happening outside Belfast as well as in it.
Sunday Trading
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what recent representations he has received about Sunday trading.
Mr. Brooke
The only representation that my ministerial colleagues and I have recently received was a resolution of the Presbyterian Church in Ireland.
Mr. Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend agree that recent developments have underlined the fact that the Shops Act 1950 is illogical, out of date, rarely enforced and out of touch with the reality of the 1990s?
However, does he agree that as part of the process of reform, those who have a conscientious objection to working on Sunday should be given the statutory right not to do so?
Mr. Brooke
The most recent relevant development has been the decision by the House of Lords and a lower court to refer the relevant questions of Community law to the European Court.
We must now await the European Court's decision.
Mr. Trimble
Will the Secretary of State confirm that the recent statement by the Attorney-General about his reluctance to exercise his discretion applies only to the civil action of injunction; that the Shops Act 1950 is not suspended; that the reference to the European Court on the issue does not prevent or place any obstacle in the way of criminal proceedings for breach of that Act; and that it is perfectly open to the responsible bodies to bring such proceedings?
Mr. Brooke
My right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General has made it clear that the law is not suspended and therefore it would remain a matter for local authorities if they wished to bring actions.
Mr. Bill Walker
While awaiting the views of the European Court, will my right hon. Friend bear in mind the fact that Presbyterians in Scotland enjoy shopping on Sundays and that has not been detrimental to those who wish to attend church?
Mr. Brooke
I have continuously taken the view during the time that I have held my present office that it is a great privilege to be Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
However, to ask me to take responsibility for Scotland as well would be too much.
Hazardous Waste
Mr. William Ross
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what plans he has to deal with hazardous and toxic waste in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Needham
Hazardous and toxic waste not suitable for landfill in existing sites will continue to be transported for disposal at facilities in Great Britain.
The hon. Gentleman will be aware, however, that Du Pont Ltd. is to conduct a study into a proposed incinerator facility.
Mr. Ross
My constituents are well informed of moves in that direction.
However, does the Minister accept that it is absolutely vital that disposal of such waste should be carried out in the safest possible way?
Do the Government accept that disposal of such waste must be overseen constantly by the Government and that all those who oversee should be properly qualified, preferably to degree standard?
Does the Minister agree that such waste should be treated or disposed of not by the producers of that waste, but by some other body which may be more independent with regard to financial considerations?
Mr. Needham
The answer to three of the hon. Gentleman's questions is yes.
In answer to his last question, I do not believe that it necessarily makes sense for those who may not be fully qualified or experienced to get rid of such waste when those who are involved in a similar business are much better qualified to do so.
However, we will certainly look very carefully indeed at the qualifications and at the control of any potential incinerator and where it is to go, should one come forward in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Skinner
Will the Minister bear it in mind that if he wants to get rid of toxic waste in Northern Ireland, he had better not employ the services of the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food?
When they tried to get rid of toxic waste in Bolsover, the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food had it sent to Severn Trent in the west midlands.
It was not incinerated properly, and the result was that the west midlands was polluted with dioxine
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is a bit wide of the question.
It is.
Interruption
Mr. Skinner
I am in order —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is wide of the question.
Mr. Skinner
I am talking about Northern Ireland.
Mr. Speaker
Sit down, please.
Mr. Skinner
In Northern Ireland —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is an abuse.
Mr. Skinner
In Northern Ireland —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is an abuse.
Mr. Needham
The hon. Gentleman's question has nothing to do with Northern Ireland.
Castlereagh Interrogation Centre
Mr. A. Cecil Walker
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement concerning proposals to appoint a commissioner to oversee interrogations at Castlereagh police office.
Dr. Mawhinney
I can confirm that the appointment of a commissioner to monitor procedures at Castlereagh, and the two other police holding centres where terrorist suspects are interviewed, is under consideration.
My right hon. Friend hopes that he will be in a position to make a firm announcement early next year.
Mr. Walker
Is the Minister aware that there is a perception in Northern Ireland that that appointment emanated from the Anglo-Irish Conference?
In those circumstances, will the Minister please confirm that that appointment will have southern Irish connotations?
Dr. Mawhinney
The announcement was first made by my right hon. Friend in the House of Lords during consideration of the emergency provisions Bill — as it then was — I am speaking from memory, but I believe that it was last May.
The decision will be taken by this Government whenever it has to be taken.
The Government of the Irish Republic and anyone else who wishes to make their views known to us before we make a judgment are, of course, entirely free to do so.
Mr. Mullin
May I say that it seems incredible that, in the light of all that is known about the unreliability of uncorroborated confessions in police custody, there should be those in Northern Ireland who are attempting to defend that practice in relation to the notorious Castlereagh?
May I also say that the Department's concern would be taken more seriously if it did not take over three months to get replies from the Secretary of State to hon. Members who draw his attention to accusations that have been made in relation to what goes on in Castlereagh?
Dr. Mawhinney
Castlereagh is not notorious, and most people in Northern Ireland will join me in objecting to the hon. Gentleman's use of that word.
Whenever allegations are made about Castlereagh, they are, of course, carefully considered.
Local Government
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will set up an inquiry into the structure of local government in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Brooke
No, Sir.
Issues relating to Northern Ireland local government would, however, be an entirely appropriate issue for discussion in any fresh political talks.
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, as the all-party talks on the future administration of the Province are stalled, probably until after the general election, and as the previous review of local government in Northern Ireland took place more than 20 years ago, this is an ideal moment for an independent body to be asked to consider the structure and limited powers of present local authorities in terms of whether they meet the contemporary aspirations of people in Northern Ireland?
Mr. Brooke
All the constitutional political parties in Northern Ireland have, in recent weeks, given encouraging signs that they would wish to return to talks or to start fresh talks prior to the general election.
If we were to do that, I would not rule out any particular proposed change to the role and structure of the district councils, but proposals for change would need to be likely to command widespread support and to provide an appropriate and fair role for both sides of the community.
Inward Investment
Mr. Stevens
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the current levels of inward investment into Northern Ireland.
Mr. Needham
During the past financial year, the Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland secured 13 inward investment projects, representing an investment of £9.9 million.
Those projects are expected to create 1,294 jobs.
Mr. Stevens
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that reply.
I know that he appreciates the importance of infrastructure improvements to stimulate and encourage inward investment.
Now that European Community funds are available to assist in that process, what success did our right hon. Friend the Secretary of State have in his dealings with Commissioner Millan over his request for support for the gas and electricity interconnectors from the mainland to Northern Ireland, which would reduce energy costs in the Province?
Mr. Needham
As my hon. Friend would expect, my right hon. Friend had considerable success in his negotiations with Commissioner Millan, who agreed in principle to help to fund those two crucially important infrastructure developments.
I am delighted that, as a result of the Government's privatisation proposals, the outlook for Northern Ireland's electricity consumers is better than ever.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Butler
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 12 December.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Butler
Will my right hon. Friend reassure the House that, by rejecting the social chapter, he is rejecting the strikers' friend and the creep of socialism?
The Prime Minister
Yes, I can give my hon. Friend that assurance.
At the end of the 1970s, 29 million days were lost in strikes whereas only 2 million days were lost in strikes last year.
I have no enthusiasm for returning to the sort of legislation that applied at that time.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister tell us why Chancellor Kohl and his fellow Conservative Heads of Government do not agree with him that, by adopting the social chapter, they will jeopardise jobs?
The Prime Minister
Because they do not have the trade union structure that we have in this country or the record of trade union militancy that so damaged this country in the 1970s and to which we have no intention whatsoever of returning.
If the right hon. Gentleman begins to listen to what many employers elsewhere in Europe are saying, he will learn that they recognise that we made the right decisions.
Mr. Kinnock
What those Heads of Government do not have is a record of losing 768,000 jobs in their countries in the past 12 months.
Four out of every five of the jobs that have been lost in the European Community in the past year have been lost in Britain because of the right hon. Gentleman's policies.
He is the last person to be entitled to think of himself as a protector of jobs; he is the destroyer of jobs.
Mr. Major
Throughout the 1980s as a whole, more jobs were created in this country than in any other European country.
Indeed, nearly as many jobs were created in this country as in the whole of the European Community.
I need no lectures from the right hon. Gentleman about the social dimension.
The social dimension to Europe was part of the Single European Act, against which the right hon. Gentleman voted.
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
May I congratulate my right hon. Friend on that record?
Is he aware that Britain receives almost half the total investment coming into Europe from the United States of America and Japan and that many of the companies involved have the good sense to choose Wolverhampton and the rest of the west midlands?
Does he agree that those companies choose to come to Britain because our taxes are low, our industrial relations are good and, most of all, our Government understand business?
Does he agree that none of that would be the case if the Labour party was in charge?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right in that diagnosis.
She may have read the remarks made yesterday by the Association of British Chambers of Commerce, which made its position perfectly clear on the agreement at Maastricht.
It said:’ There will be many continental businesses today envying their competitors in the United Kingdom.’
That is because they understand that the decisions that we have taken are in the interests of British industry, British commerce and jobs for British workers.
Mr. Patchett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 12 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Patchett
Given the decision to opt out of the social charter in Europe can the Prime Minister confirm that he is planning to fight the next general election on the slogan’ Vote Tory for the lowest wages, least consultation and worst employment protection in Europe’?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is in no position to talk about opt-outs, considering that his party has opted out of every necessary decision to assist this country in the past 10 years and has backed every inflationary wage claim, every piece of trade union militancy and every policy that would do damage to Britain and its future.
Mr. Wilkinson
Could my right hon. Friend find time today to think again about the significance of an historic referendum which took place in the Ukraine on 1 December, in which the people of Ukraine freely and democratically voted for their sovereignty and independence?
Will Her Majesty's Government recognise the Government of Ukraine and show that they are on the side of democracy and freedom?
The Prime Minister
As my hon. Friend said, the referendum in Ukraine showed overwhelming support for the independence of Ukraine.
The Foreign Affairs Committee statement on 2 December gave the initial response from the European Community.
We shall continue to consult
Hon. Members
’ Reading.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The House well knows the conventions here.
It has always been in order for Ministers on the Front Bench to read their answers and it has never been in order for hon. Members to read their questions.
The Prime Minister
Most people would have regarded what is happening in the Soviet Union as a matter of some importance, not a matter for the fourth-form behaviour that we see on the Opposition Benches.
Mr. O'Brien
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 12 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. O'Brien
Will the Prime Minister confirm that because of his decision to opt out of the social charter —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I cannot hear everything down here.
Perhaps it is just as well.
Mr. O'Brien
Will the Prime Minister confirm that because of his decision to opt out of the social charter
Hon. Members
He has said that.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Does the hon. Gentleman want to ask a question or not?
Please get on with it.
Mr. O'Brien rose —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is intolerable.
Will the hon. Gentleman please ask his question.
Mr. O'Brien
Will the Prime Minister confirm that because of his action in opting out of the social charter, Great Britain will be the only country in Europe that will deny its people the legal right to paid holidays?
Does not he feel ashamed of that?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman can know what we have agreed not to join.
What we have agreed not to accept are the sort of damaging laws that nearly brought this country to its knees when we last had a Labour Government.
That is what we are not prepared to accept.
Matters such as the hon. Gentleman raised can be dealt with at present under the social dimension to which the British Government subscribe and against which the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) voted.
Mr. Hannam
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 12 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Hannam
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on helping to create a more outward-looking Europe.
In that connection, and in view of the impending serious food shortages in the Soviet Union, may I ask whether he was able to take any initiatives at Maastricht to help move foodstuffs from the Community to the Russian people?
The Prime Minister
Yes, we were able to take such initiatives.
The European Council reaffirmed its determination to act quickly to help the people of the Soviet Union and in particular those who live in the heavily populated areas of Moscow and St. Petersburg.
A substantial package of help for the Soviet Union, totalling over $11 billion worth of emergency aid in 1991, has now been put in place by the Group of Seven, under my chairmanship, and the European Community.
That includes new commitments of food and medical aid of over $4 billion.
Logistical experts will be meeting shortly to ensure that that aid gets swiftly to those in need.
I am pleased also to tell the House that the United Kingdom is sending £20 million worth of animal feed aid to St. Petersburg so that livestock need not be slaughtered this winter.
Mr. Ashdown
Is the Prime Minister aware that the Government's decision to pay the mortgage element of income support direct to lenders is a welcome but wholly insufficient response to the crisis facing thousands of families in Britain because of home repossessions?
Does he not realise that unless he is prepared to be more imaginative — for instance, with schemes for converting mortgages to rents — we shall not avoid in the new year thousands of families facing misery, a further plunge in house prices and serious damage to the economy?
The Prime Minister
The Government are providing substantial help to those who risk losing their homes when they lose their jobs.
As the right hon. Gentleman pointed out, we made new arrangements on 5 November to ensure that income support payments can be paid directly to the lender.
The right hon. Gentleman may be interested to know that the Government are looking urgently with mortgage lenders at what further measures might be taken to protect those faced with repossession.
Sir Teddy Taylor
As one who joined the Leader of the Opposition in voting against the Single European Act, before the right hon. Gentleman became a Euro-fanatic, may I appeal to my right hon. Friend to warn the voters about the huge dangers to the much-improved labour relations of Britain if they were to vote into power any Government who were prepared to pass over the power to wreck our trade union reforms by majority vote in Brussels?
Will he warn the British people of the damage that could be done to them and the danger to their way of life and democracy?
The Prime Minister
I am sure that if my hon. Friend maintains his position with his normal consistency, the day will come when the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) will join him yet again in that view.
On the substantive point, my hon. Friend will know that I agree with him, for I refused earlier this week to agree in Europe to the sort of laws that would have had the effect my hon. Friend sets out.
Q5.
Mr. Livingstone to ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 12 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Livingstone
Will the Prime Minister take time today to meet the Home Secretary to discuss how the Government should respond to the letter they have received from the mayor of Conservative-controlled Bexley drawing attention to the 140 per cent.
increase in racist attacks in the area since the British National party moved its headquarters into the area?
One of those attacks involved the stabbing to death of Rolan Adams by a racist mob.
How does the Prime Minister think that the Government can respond to the Mayor's request that Bexley council be given the power to close that fascist headquarters before more lives are lost?
The Prime Minister
I was not aware of that incident, but I deplore such racist attacks without any reservation whatsoever.
I will certainly discuss that incident with my right hon. Friend.
Mr. Rowe
The channel tunnel is about to become a major part of the United Kingdom infrastructure.
Will my right hon. Friend look with his Cabinet colleagues at the fact that Kent is receiving considerable capital-infrastructure funds but virtually all of that money is going on projects linked to the channel tunnel, to the great detriment of Kent's other needs?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is a powerful advocate for his constituency and for Kent generally.
I will certainly examine the point that he raises.
House of Commons
Tuesday 17 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
DEFENCE
Defence-related Jobs
Mr. James Lamond
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what information he has on the number of jobs in the north-west region of England which are related to defence requirements.
7
Mr. Bill Michie
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what is his latest estimate of the impact upon jobs in the defence industry of his Department's plans for the future.
The Minister of State for Defence Procurement (Mr. Alan Clark)
Historical figures, broken down by region, for the number of jobs related to defence requirements are published in volume 2 of the 1991’ Statement on the Defence Estimates’, a copy of which is in the Library.
The future level of employment in the defence industry is a matter for the commercial judgment of the companies concerned.
Mr. Lamond
That answer is in line with what we have had before, so it is not unexpected.
If we are prepared to participate in a European bank for reconstruction and development to help countries in eastern Europe which are facing the same problems as Britain's defence industry workers, could we not at least set up a defence diversification agency to help the tens of thousands of workers in the north-west and throughout the United Kingdom who will be thrown on to the scrap heap?
Mr. Clark
I understand the hon. Gentleman's concern, which is shared by my Department, but I do not think that on reflection he would want the defence industry to be singled out for particular treatment from our other manufacturing industries.
We are particularly concerned about the anxiety and deprivation that result when people lose their jobs as a result of the changing international climate.
I am in constant touch with defence industry leaders through the National Defence Industries Council and the Defence Manufacturers Association, and my Department participates in the regional seminar staged by the DTI for small and medium-sized defence industries.
An agency such as the hon. Gentleman suggests would do little more than we are already doing unless it were funded and empowered to make grants and loans which, as he will realise, is not a practical suggestion, because it would mean singling out a particular sector of British industry.
Mr. Bill Michie
Opposition Members will obviously be disappointed at the Minister's reply which is characterised by his usual laid-back approach to the matter.
Does the right hon. Gentleman realise that our competitors in Europe and elsewhere will ensure that whatever happens to future orders their defence industries will be compensated by alternative diversification?
Once again, the Government seem not to give a damn what happens to our skills and to the jobs of the future.
As always since the Government came into power, we are in the slow lane.
Mr. Clark
The hon. Gentleman's question is completely misleading.
Among our so-called competitors, the United States and west German defence industries are suffering much heavier job losses than we are.
The job losses in United Kingdom defence industries as a result of the change of emphasis in British procurement are as nothing compared with those that would be suffered under the Labour party's defence policy — if so dignified a term can be used for something so confused, contradictory and misleading.
Such job losses would be horrific and far more widespread.
Mr. Dover
My right hon. Friend will no doubt be aware of the importance of British Aerospace as a major employer in the defence industry in the north-west.
Will he accept its deep gratitude for the way in which his officials are explaining his Department's needs so as to ensure that the right commercial decisions are made about the markets to go for in future?
Mr. Clark
My hon. Friend makes an important point about markets.
It ill behoves Opposition Members constantly, for ideological reasons, to decry my Department's sponsorship of the sale of arms to friendly countries wishing to defend themselves within the terms of, for example, article 51 of the United Nations charter.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Is not my hon. Friend delighted with the $450 million order —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is most unseemly.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
— that British Aerospace has just won for 20 RJ70s that is especially designed for the United States market and fills a niche that no one else could have filled?
Mr. Clark
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to that good example of the special skills and capabilities that the British defence industry still has, and which I do not doubt will serve it well in future in both domestic and export markets.
Mr. O'Neill
The Minister has repeatedly said that he does not want to single out the defence industry for special consideration.
He surely recollects the precedents set in the steel and coal industries, in which the Community was involved in Europewide initiatives to limit the impact of the decline in demand for the products of the companies concerned.
If the Minister is not prepared to shoulder the burden on behalf of the British taxpayer, is the time not right for him to work with the European Community in establishing a Europewide diversification initiative?
Mr. Clark
I have not heard of such an initiative, but if one were to be promulgated by the Community, we would consider it carefully.
Surplus Land
Mr. Hunter
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a further statement on his policy regarding the disposal of land surplus to his Department's requirements.
The Minister of State for the Armed Forces (Mr. Archie Hamilton)
It is Government policy that the defence estate should be no larger than necessary for defence purposes.
We continually seek opportunities for rationalisation and the release of land surplus to our requirements.
To ensure that the best return is achieved for the taxpayer, it is our normal policy to offer property not needed by the services for sale on the open market.
Mr. Hunter
May I ask my hon. Friend urgently to investigate why his Department declines to release to Basingstoke and Deane borough council land in the village of Bramley that is earmarked for a playing field under our local plan?
Is he aware of the concern and indignation that perceived unwarranted delay causes?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, of course.
My hon. Friend will know that that is part of a parcel of land of about 45 acres in total.
We are in negotiations with the local authority for planning permission, and we hope to obtain it for housing on some of that land.
We are also talking to potential purchasers.
I know of my hon. Friend's concern, and I will make sure that my officials are also made aware of it.
Mr. Viggers
Where the Ministry of Defence has occupied land for generations or even for centuries, will my hon. Friend ensure that in disposing of it the Ministry will work as closely as possible with local authorities to ensure that it is developed consistently in accordance with the wishes of local people?
Mr. Hamilton
I can certainly reassure my hon. Friend in that regard.
To enhance the value of any land of which we are disposing, we often need planning permission, which we can obtain only with the help of local authorities.
We therefore work very closely with them.
Dr. Godman
Will there be any disposal of surplus Ministry of Defence land in Scotland, or is it likely that, due to the redeployment of British forces from Germany, the Ministry will be looking to purchase land in Scotland?
Mr. Hamilton
It is difficult to say where we might want to purchase land.
Where we have training areas, we are keen to enlarge them if possible.
Many of the weapons systems that we use now are bigger than before and have longer ranges, and so on.
Also, a degree of armour will return from Germany which will need space for use in training.
We do not have a closed mind, but we should like to rationalise our training areas, enlarging some that we already have and disposing of smaller ones.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
When the Broughton moor site in my constituency is disposed of, will its environmental sensitivity be taken into account?
Mr. Hamilton
I sincerely hope that the hon. Gentleman would pay tribute to the Ministry of Defence for owning more sites of special scientific interest than anyone other than the national parks.
We are extremely good stewards of the land that we have.
As to Broughton moor, we shall do all that we can to take environmental considerations into account.
Dame Janet Foulkes
May I impress on my hon. Friend that in Plymouth we are tired of waiting what seems like years for land to be released?
All that we ask is for sufficient land so that we may then help ourselves.
Mr. Hamilton
I am well aware of the anxiety of people in Plymouth to get on with the whole business of the release and development of Ministry of Defence land.
We are doing what we can, but I take my hon. Friend's point that it has been an ongoing saga for some time now.
British Nuclear Deterrent
Mr. Cryer
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the cost of refitting Polaris submarines in the current financial year.
4
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the future of the British nuclear deterrent.
The Secretary of State for Defence (Mr. Tom King)
HMS Renown, now nearing the completion of her refit, is the only Polaris submarine under refit during the current year.
The cost of the work to date has been about £150 million.
Britain's credible and effective independent nuclear deterrent is the ultimate guarantee of our security.
The strategic deterrent will continue to be provided by the Polaris force until Trident comes into service from the mid-1990s.
Mr. Cryer
Is not the Polaris fleet plagued with cracks to the nuclear reactor, and has not the game been given away by Mr. Reg Farmer, a former member of the Ministry of Defence safety of nuclear warships committee?
Is it not time that the Secretary of State came clean and admitted to the House that the boats are dangerous, the cost of repair and renovation is beyond reasonable expenditure and the boats should be withdrawn?
By taking that action, the right hon. Gentleman would be conforming with the United Nations nuclear non-proliferation treaty for the first time.
Mr. King
That question shows the weakness of preparing a supplementary before hearing the answer to the main question.
If the hon. Gentleman had listened carefully to my reply, he would have realised what rubbish his supplementary was.
Mr. Jacques Arnold
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, given the collapse of the Soviet Union and the distribution of its nuclear weapons around the country, it is extremely important for Britain to maintain its nuclear deterrent and to be ready for any eventuality?
Mr. King
Certainly I agree.
At a time when the world's largest nuclear power is in the process of disintegration into separate republics, if not worse, and when 27,000 nuclear weapons exist there, the vast majority of which are capable of inflicting considerable damage on this and other countries, it would be lunacy for us to undermine our nuclear deterrent.
It is the one nuclear shield that we have.
Had the advice of some hon. Members been followed over the years, we might now be in a very exposed position.
Mr. Douglas
The Secretary of State must reflect a little on the answer that he has given about the Soviet Union.
Does he accept that one of the reasons for the United Kingdom's continued possession of a strategic deterrent was the fact that it would provide another centre of power, and thus create disequilibrium in the mind of a potential foe?
If so, how does he justify the fear that there may be a number of fingers on the disintegrating Soviet strategic deterrent, when at the same time he seeks to justify the proliferation of nuclear strategic deterrents in the hands of France, the United Kingdom and the United States?
Mr. King
That is a fairly complicated question, which may confuse people and prevent them from seeing our present need clearly.
It is vital that we preserve our own independent nuclear deterrent as protection against nuclear blackmail; it is equally important that we take every possible step — as we are doing — to ensure that the process of rapid political change, and the change of authority that has taken place in what was the Soviet Union, do not lead to a more dangerous situation in regard to the present control and authority over nuclear weapons.
To try to wrap up that question in the way in which the hon. Gentleman has suggested, or to lose sight of either of those objectives, would be extremely unwise.
Mr. Cryer
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of that highly unsatisfactory and inadequate reply, I give notice of my intention to raise the matter on the Adjournment at the earliest opportunity.
Air-defence Frigates
Sir John Farr
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what plans he has to replace type 42 destroyers with a new air-defence frigate.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence Procurement (Mr. Kenneth Carlisle)
There will be a requirement to replace the type 42 destroyers from around the turn of the century.
An 18-month period of exploration with France is under way to consider the prospects for collaboration on an anti-air warfare frigate to meet this requirement.
Sir John Farr
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
Can he give us any timetable for the construction of the new vessels, and will he give an assurance that at least 50 per cent.
— and preferably more — of the hull and interior construction work will come to United Kingdom shipyards?
Mr. Carlisle
We certainly welcome this collaboration and wish to bring it to a successful conclusion.
The timetable that my hon. Friend asked about is as follows.
After the exploratory period of 18 months, we hope to proceed by mid-1993 with full development, leading to a first order by the mid-1990s.
We aim for an in-service date in the early years of the next century.
As for equipment, part of the purpose of the exploratory work is to agree a memorandum of understanding to cover all procurement aspects.
Mr. Michael J. Martin
Naval construction work of this type will obviously lead to work for subcontractors.
In the past six months, two of my constituents have had their passes removed by Ministry of Defence navy police.
Both are respectable men and one of them worked on the facility at Faslane for eight months.
It is a great pity that passes are being taken away from hard-working people, who are not even given any right of appeal.
Will the Minister comment on that?
Mr. Carlisle
If the hon. Gentleman will send me details, I will look into the matter.
With regard to subcontractors, we are proud of the quality of work produced by them.
Any shipbuilding orders feed through into other employment, apart from the main shipbuilders.
Mr. Boscawen
While my hon. Friend is considering replacement of the type 42 destroyers, will he bear in mind the urgent decision that he and his colleagues have to take very soon about the future of HMS
Polar Circle as a replacement for HMS Endurance?
Some of us have recently seen that vessel.
We believe that she is a very fine ship and that she is needed by the Royal Navy and the Foreign Office.
We therefore hope that a favourable decision will soon be reached regarding HMS Polar Circle.
Mr. Carlisle
As has been said in the House previously, my hon. Friend will know that we are committed to the work being done in the south Atlantic, which HMS Polar Circle will shortly be carrying out.
I take this opportunity to say that not only that ship but our collaboration in relation to the French frigate and the type 23 frigate orders which will be given shortly show our commitment to naval orders.
That is in stark contrast to what would happen if ever the Labour party came to power, with its plans to reduce our spending on equipment by many billions of pounds.
Mr. Boyes
What assurances can the Minister give that in attempting to develop a common requirement for a new air defence frigate we shall not end up with another fiasco of expensive and fruitless bickering between countries with different design requirements?
The NFR90 project suffered difficulties of that kind and our involvement in it led to almost two years being wasted.
Can the Minister tell us whether Britain's shipyards will be assured of a very early decision on a type 42 replacement, thus allowing for some continuity of work and ending the grave uncertainty in the shipyards so that men and management can get on with what they do best — building ships in British yards?
Mr. Carlisle
We have certainly learnt the lessons of the NFR90.
One of those lessons was that we had to align the needs of the platform with those of the systems.
We are already doing work on that with the French.
That is part of the exploratory programme.
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman welcomes the project, but he must face the harsh reality that if we ever had a Labour Government there would be no money available to pursue this project, let alone order any more type 43 frigates.
Competitive Tendering
Dr. Michael Clark
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what steps are being taken to encourage competitive tendering for military research and development.
Mr. Kenneth Carlisle
Equipment procurement including development is already subject to competitive tendering wherever practicable.
As regards research, once a full trading relationship has been established between the Ministry of Defence and the Defence Research Agency, we intend to implement a progressive extension of competition.
Dr. Clark
Does my hon. Friend accept that military research and development provides a significant technological spin-off for civilian use?
Does he accept, therefore, that if more of the research sponsored by his Department were replaced by competitive tendering by universities, research associations or private companies, the benefits for non-military use could be greatly enhanced?
Mr. Carlisle
I respect the point made by my hon. Friend.
It might be of interest to the House to hear that already about 40 per cent.
of the research undertaken by the Defence Research Agency is subcontracted from the Ministry of Defence to universities and industry — indeed, almost the whole of the development work goes to industry.
We certainly welcome collaboration with the civil sector and industry, a good example of which is our work on jet engine technology.
We wish to develop that interaction.
Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is important to have a research and development policy and a future procurement policy?
Unless there is a prospect of orders, research and development in the military sector is bound to suffer.
Mr. Carlisle
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
As he knows, the research effort in the Ministry of Defence is undergoing substantial change in terms of the Defence Research Agency.
Our aim is to ensure that we become more efficient and enhance the effectiveness of our sharp end research.
Nuclear Weapons (Transport)
Mrs. Mahon
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the transport of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
Safety and security are of paramount importance in our nuclear weapons transport methods and procedures.
We do not move any nuclear weapons by road, and would not do so, unless it was safe to do so.
Mrs. Mahon
Why are such weapons transported at all?
Have the Government not in effect acknowledged the findings of the Drell panel report on the safety of nuclear weapons by setting up their own review?
Will the Minister assure us that he will stop the transportation of any nuclear weapons until the Drell panel findings are issued?
Mr. Hamilton
Certainly not.
The hon. Lady, like many Opposition Members, probably does not realise that her party's policy on nuclear weapons has changed.
Nuclear weapons must be kept up to date, and they must be serviced at intervals; if that is not done, they become ineffective.
If there is a policy of having nuclear weapons, those weapons must be serviced at intervals to keep them running properly.
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that there have been no leakages of radioactive material in any of the convoys travelling to and from the establishment at Burghfield in my constituency?
Mr. Hamilton
I can certainly confirm that.
As I said earlier, the safety of the carriage of radioactive material is paramount.
Although there have been mechanical breakdowns, they have merely affected the vehicles carrying the material.
There has never been any question of nuclear radiation seeping out.
Mr. McFall
I welcome the establishment of the Ministry of Defence working party under Professor Oxburgh in the light of the Drell report, even though the Government had to be dragged a little to achieve that.
On the transport of nuclear weapons, which is covered in the Drell report and should therefore be part of the Oxburgh report, will the right hon. Gentleman undertake to give local authorities notice when nuclear weapons are to be transported through their localities?
Mr. Hamilton
When there is any question of those materials being transported, we deal with the local police.
I believe that that is quite adequate.
The local police are responsible for the safety of their areas.
One problem is that some of the local authorities with which we have to deal are extremely left wing and anti-nuclear.
They leak information about convoys to members of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, resulting in convoys being disrupted and people's lives being put in danger.
Royal Naval Reserve
Mr. Sayeed
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what plans he has for the Royal Naval Reserve; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
As my right hon. Friend said in his statement on 10 December, our aim is that the naval reserves should be’ streamlined but more closely integrated with the Royal Navy.’
Mr. Sayeed
My right hon. Friend will recognise that mine counter-measures is a hazardous undertaking — the penalty for getting it wrong is a very large bang and lots of little bits.
As the best way to reduce that risk is regular training, can he explain the logic of mothballing two of the River class MCMVs belonging to the Royal Naval Reserve which undertakes mine counter-measures and of leaving two divisions, including the largest — London division — without a ship?
Mr. Hamilton
We have had to take into account the changes in the international situation when considering the RNR, including the lengthening warning time.
In those circumstances, it was thought right to reduce some of the activities of the RNR and to make them more relevant to the future.
Sir Patrick Duffy
As the Minister reconsiders the regular-reserve mix of the Royal Navy, as he promised on 10 December, will he ensure that a proper study of task threats is completed and will he create a supplementary list of personnel whom it is planned to axe until that review of task threats is complete?
Mr. Hamilton
Clearly, the regular-reserve force mix study will have to take into account what we see as threats and how we intend to deal with them.
We expect to make a statement on that in the new year.
Mr. Robert Banks
While welcoming my right hon. Friend's reply, may I ask him to accept that the best training for Royal Navy reservists is with the regular Navy and will he give that priority in the coming operations for the Royal Naval Reserve?
Mr. Hamilton
I hear what my hon. Friend says and we shall see whether more opportunities can be given to the RNR to train with the regular Navy.
Mr. O'Neill
Will the Minister ensure that before the review is completed we shall be able to have adequate information so that we can determine the implications for the various areas and for particular bases which are under threat?
Will he give an undertaking today to give us information on recruitment levels, retention levels and the position of one base as compared with another before such a report is produced?
Mr. Hamilton
The whole process of rationalising the RNR will be progressed in conjunction with the Ministry of Defence and with the RNR itself and it will make proposals.
Mr. Wilkinson
Will my right hon. Friend bear in mind the fact that the air squadrons of the Royal Naval Reserve have been especially effective and exceptionally well recruited and that there have even been one or two Harrier pilots in the reserve?
Could not that be an example for the flying service, the Royal Air Force?
Mr. Hamilton
The position of the Royal Air Force Reserve is, as I am sure my hon. Friend knows, that does not have the opportunity to fly aircraft.
I do not believe that the Harrier pilots who found themselves in the Royal Naval Reserve will have the opportunity to fly either, but it is certainly useful to have them in the reserve should they be needed.
’ Options for Change’
Mr. Kirkwood
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what estimates he has made of the costs of providing accommodation for those leaving the Army as a result of the reductions in the Army under’ Options for Change’.
Mr. Tom King
Considerable work has been done on arrangements, not only for accommodation but for the resettlement of those who will be leaving the service in the course of the rundown.
We are considering a number of new proposals.
I will keep the House informed.
Mr. Kirkwood
Does the Secretary of State accept that the current level of 14,000 service families who are resettled every year by the Ministry of Defence is certain to increase dramatically during the restructuring?
Does the Ministry of Defence yet have an estimate of the number of personnel families who will not be able to make provision for their own housing?
Is he aware that that situation will be compounded substantially by the fact that there are about 1,700 ex-service families currently inhabiting Ministry of Defence premises to which, strictly, they have no title?
Is not it time that some urgent policy measures were introduced by the Ministry of Defence to deal with the major problem from 1992 onwards?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman has correctly established that there is a considerable turnover every year in any case.
The rundown and the changes involved in’ Options for Change’will add to that.
Off the top of my head, I think that the figure is about 25 per cent.
on top of what usually happens annually.
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that the changes will take place over a four-year period.
However, we are actively involved and a number of steps are being taken.
I have appointed to a new post — the director general of resettlement — Major-General Burden who has returned from the British Army on the Rhine.
He has an excellent record in this field.
A number of proposals are being worked on by housing associations, by voluntary housing bodies, by the Royal British Legion and by the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association, which are working with the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors and the Department of Employment on a whole range of opportunities.
I think that the hon. Gentleman will get the feeling from that that a considerable effort is being made by many people to try to tackle the problem in the most effective way.
Mr. Bellingham
Will the Secretary of State ask Major-General Burden to come to west Norfolk to have a look at houses on two RAF bases, Sculthorpe and West Raynham, which may close in the future?
Will he consider urgently the possibility of the married quarters at the bases being made available to Army personnel who are being made redundant?
Mr. King
I assure my hon. Friend that that matter is one aspect that we are considering.
Some service housing is already available to service men on discount purchase, which gives them the opportunity to get on the home ownership ladder.
There may be opportunities to rent out existing service property or surplus service property.
We are trying to see how we can employ the whole of the defence estate, including married quarters, to help resolve the problem.
We will do everything that we can in the area.
Dr. Reid
Is not the truth of the matter not only that the Secretary of State is doing nothing about the housing needs of the service men and women who will be made redundant, but that he does not even know the facts?
That was confirmed in a written answer from the Minister of State for the Armed Forces.
He said:
’ Information on the private housing arrangements or plans of those Army personnel who have applied for redundancy is not held by the Ministry of Defence.’
Official Report, 22 November 1991; Vol. 199, c. 356.
Is not the Secretary of State aware of the deplorably low level of home ownership among other ranks in the armed forces and of the dearth of easily affordable council properties as a result of Government policies?
Does the Secretary of State intend to thank those who have given service to Queen and country by making them not only jobless, but homeless?
Mr. King
I am afflicted today by people who prepare their supplementaries and do not bother to listen to the answers.
After the answers that I have given, I do not know how anyone can say that nothing is happening on the matter.
The hon. Gentleman should have the courtesy to recognise that a considerable amount is being done.
There is a challenge to be faced and the hon. Gentleman would make a more constructive contribution if he played a part in helping instead of trying to score cheap party political points when there is a genuine problem to be tackled.
For once in his life he should stand up and support service men who need help.
Jobs (South Dorset)
Mr. Ian Bruce
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the progress of studies affecting his Department's employment in south Dorset.
Mr. Kenneth Carlisle
My hon. Friend is already aware of the studies into the rationalisation of the Defence Research Agency, the relocation of the Procurement Executive and the review of the Army training base.
My hon. Friend will also know that as part of’ Defence for the 90s’we are reviewing the scope of naval support, although as I made clear in July, there will be a continuing naval presence at Portland.
Mr. Bruce
May I place it on record that I know that my hon. Friend is doing his best to ensure that south Dorset continues to have a large amount of Ministry of Defence employment?
I urge him to look at one current study which concerns the possibility of moving the sea systems control first to temporary accommodation and then, in 1995-96, to permanent accommodation.
Will he ensure that the sea systems control moves only when the permanent accommodation is available?
Will he locate the naval support command, which would be ideally suited for Portland, in the premises that are then vacated?
Mr. Carlisle
My hon. Friend is tireless in trying to protect defence jobs in south Dorset and to increase their numbers there.
I am aware of the concern of the people of the Procurement Executive about the move to Bristol.
I hear clearly what my hon. Friend said about seeking to avoid a double move.
The uncertainty is unsatisfactory.
We are carrying out a study now and we shall seek to resolve that uncertainty as soon as we can.
Trident
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what is now the estimated total cost of acquiring and maintaining the Trident nuclear weapon system.
Mr. Tom King
The current estimated cost of acquiring the United Kingdom Trident system is £9,863 million.
We expect the level of running costs of the Trident force to be well below 2 per cent.
of the defence budget, not significantly different from those of Polaris.
Mr. Canavan
Are not we entitled to be told the whole truth, as revealed by Greenpeace, which is that the total lifetime cost of Trident will be more than £23 billion?
About half that could be saved if Trident were cancelled now.
Instead of extravagant spending on such an unnecessary weapons system, will the Secretary of State now make the peace dividend a reality by cancelling Trident and investing the money in areas such as education and the national health service?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman must be unaware that his party is now pledged to keep the nuclear deterrent, according to the speeches made by the hon. Member for Clackmannan (Mr. O'Neill).
I have made it clear that the cost of running a Trident deterrent will be well below 2 per cent.
of the defence budget.
I regard that as an economical insurance and the ultimate safeguard against nuclear blackmail.
I regard it at present as an important insurance.
Sir Antony Buck
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the reasons why we are updating Trident are basically the same reasons as caused the Labour Government to update our nuclear deterrent by bringing in Chevaline, the difference being that we are doing it openly and they did it under wraps?
Mr. King
I agree absolutely.
We are told continually that the Labour party is united on this issue.
The hon. Member for Falkirk, West (Mr. Canavan) has shown how divided it remains on the nuclear deterrent.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
While accepting the need for the United Kingdom to have the protection of a strategic nuclear deterrent for the foreseeable future, may I ask the Secretary of State whether, as a result of his recent conversations with his French counterpart and the agreement reached at Maastricht, consideration has been given to greater co-operation in strategic nuclear matters with France?
Mr. King
We are in close contact and, as is known, we are examining in the sub-strategic nuclear field how we could work more closely with the French Government on a wide range of defence matters.
Mr. Grylls
Does my right hon. Friend agree that most sensible people in Britain recognise that expenditure on our nuclear deterrent is about the best and safest investment that we can make, especially in view of the alarming situation in Russia and the break-up of the former Soviet Union?
Will my right hon. Friend not stint in providing Britain with the best independent deterrent?
Mr. King
My hon. Friend makes a strong point.
Interruption
At a time when the largest nuclear power in the world is in the process of disintegration into separate republics, when that massive nuclear arsenal is under some central control of the remaining central authorities, and when our keen concern is to ensure that that security is real, it seems absolutely unthinkable that we should not have our own protection and the ultimate assurance of an independent deterrent.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
These are important questions.
I ask the House to listen to them, please.
Tactical Air-to-Surface Missiles
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence when he expects TASM to be in service; and where they will be based.
Mr. Tom King
The WE177 free-fall bomb will be approaching the end of its service life around the turn of the century, but no decision has yet been taken on the system to replace it, or where it will be based.
Mr. Bennett
In their discussions on the replacement system, have the Government talked to the German Government about the possibility of basing a new nuclear missile system in Germany?
If not, when do the Government intend to have such discussions?
Would not it be far better to seek an effective non-proliferation treaty than to go for a new generation of nuclear weapons?
Mr. King
I have just returned from a NATO meeting last week at which we agreed the military strategy that will accompany the strategic concept now agreed, of which Germany is a prominent supporter.
NATO will continue to base effective and up-to-date sub-strategic nuclear forces in Europe.
The alliance strategic concept, of which Germany is a strong supporter, makes that point clear.
Mr. Brazier
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the answer that he has just given is further reinforced by the fact that several third-world countries, including some middle eastern countries such as Iraq, Algeria and perhaps Libya, are currently acquiring nuclear weapons?
For all those reasons, it is essential that we keep a sub-strategic nuclear system in western Europe.
Mr. King
My hon. Friend makes a powerful point.
Not only do we need a strategic deterrent, but there is a strong argument that a sub-strategic deterrent continues to be relevant at a time when there is a real risk of several new nations appearing which have some form of nuclear capability and when we risk the proliferation of not merely equipment but perhaps technology from some of the scientific bases in the former Soviet Union.
My hon. Friend's point is very important.
Bullying
Mr. Ashley
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what progress has been made by his Department to prevent bullying in the services; and how much money has been spent in dealing with this matter since June 1988.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
The services take a serious view of bullying and it has been made very clear that bullying and ill-treatment will not be tolerated.
A range of measures to combat bullying has been introduced, including the banning of initiation ceremonies and, specifically in the Army, the implementation of a training package on personnel management.
Information on expenditure is not held centrally and could be provided only at disproportionate cost.
Mr. Ashley
Is the Minister aware that I welcome both advances which have been made, but it will be obvious to him from my correspondence with the Department that some bullying still goes on.
The only way to deal with that is by the appointment of a military ombudsman, who can deal with the problems objectively and is seen to do so.
Please may we have an ombudsman?
Mr. Hamilton
The right hon. Gentleman suggests that the existing disciplinary systems within the services are inadequate.
I do not believe that to be so.
They are objective and deal with such cases fairly.
I do not think that anything would be gained by having an ombudsman to handle those problems.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. John Garrett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 17 December.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Garrett
Last week the head teachers association of Cambridgeshire wrote to the county council to say that because of critical shortages of books, equipment and facilities and because of oversized classes, it would have serious difficulty providing the national curriculum.
Under those circumstances, what advice does the Prime Minister give to his constituents — to buy private education, as he does?
The Prime Minister
In Cambridgeshire the education standard spending assessment for the current year is £225 million, 16.4 per cent.
higher than last year.
There has been another substantial increase for 1992-93, an increase which safeguards the position of all children in Cambridgeshire.
Mr. Ian Bruce
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 17 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bruce
Does my right hon. Friend welcome the British Medical Association's somewhat belated conversion to the concept of fund-holding GPs?
Does he agree with the BMA that that should now be extended to every GP who wants to hold a fund?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
There is no doubt that GP fund-holding has been proving successful and has been extending quite dramatically.
I welcome the fact that that is the case.
We are currently considering how the benefits of fund holding can be extended and will make an announcement in the new year.
Mr. Kinnock
In the interests of establishing the causes of the present mortgage crisis, could the Prime Minister confirm that, as Minister of State for Social Security, he halved mortgage support for newly unemployed people and that, as Chancellor of the Exchequer, he put the mortgage rate up to its highest in history?
The Prime Minister
If the right hon. Gentleman had done his homework — rather unusually — better than he has, he would know, first, that the change in the 16-week rule was introduced after lengthy consultations with building societies and, secondly, that at the time, they said that there was no reason for people to lose their homes because of that reduction; nor have they.
Mr. Kinnock
I think the answer that the Prime Minister was groping for was yes.
Since he and his policies are uniquely responsible for the difficulties being experienced and the record repossessions and arrears, will he accept the obligation for introducing a proper mortgage rescue scheme, like the one recommended by the Labour party, instead of trying to shift the blame on to everyone else?
The Prime Minister
The alleged mortgage rescue scheme proposed by the Labour party is a farce and has been denounced as such and the right hon. Gentleman should know it.
As for the real problem, we are in the midst of discussions with the Building Societies Association and others and in due course we shall make an announcement that will build on the assistance that we have already provided.
We have been considering the problem for some time —— unlike the right hon. Gentleman, who has only just discovered it.
Interruption
Mr. Kinnock
What is a farce, a tragic farce, is the Government's record — a Government who came to power to provide a property-owning democracy and ended with a debt-ridden recession.
Since, because of the right hon. Gentleman's policies, the building societies stand to lose £1 billion because of mortgage repossessions and since local authorities are having to spend £500 million on bed-and-breakfast and temporary accommodation, does not the Prime Minister think that the rescue mortgage scheme that we have promoted would be the effective way to ensure not only the relief of misery for scores of thousands of families, but that at least he did the honourable thing by his victims?
The Prime Minister
The alleged mortgage rescue scheme about which the hon. Gentleman boasts was described this morning by an independent commentator as’ a policy made in an Enid Blyton story book’—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman's policy is ludicrous.
As for the levels of owner occupation, there are 3.5 million more owner-occupiers today than there were in 1979 and no doubt 3.5 million more than there would have been had the right hon. Gentleman been in government.
Sir Hugh Rossi
If one were looking for the reasons for the present situation, does my right hon. Friend agree that it has been the departure of the building societies and other lenders from the traditional concept of not lending more than 75 per cent.
of actual valuation, nor, from the point of view of personal status —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman must be allowed to make his point.
Sir Hugh Rossi
— more than one quarter of monthly salary?
If those criteria had been adhered to, many people would not be in their present position.
Does my right hon. Friend agree —
Hon. Members
Too long.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is being rather long-winded.
Sir Hugh Rossi
Will my right hon. Friend consider legislation to ensure that those traditional criteria are adhered to in future to stop this cyclical problem arising every so many years?
The Prime Minister
It is a sad fact that many people over-extended their mortgage commitments and now face difficulties.
The Government are playing their part to alleviate those difficulties and we expect the mortgage lenders — all the responsible ones — to play their part in that.
The sensible ones know that it is in their interests to do so.
Mr. Ashdown
If the Prime Minister is really keen to assist families who now stand in danger of having their homes repossessed, will he recognise the anomaly that exists between those on low incomes who pay rent and receive housing benefit and those on low incomes who pay mortgages and do not?
The Prime Minister
I recognise that point very well.
But the right hon. Gentleman should not pose, as he frequently does, as the friend of the home-owner —— Oh, no.
His policies are to put up taxes and abolish mortgage income tax relief.
He should stop coming to the House pretending to support home-owners when his policies would discriminate against them.
Interruption
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Does my right hon. Friend accept that only the very wealthy or the very foolish can afford to go to the libel courts for justice?
If ordinary people are to have justice, perhaps a jury should find whether somebody is guilty of libel, but these £250,000 and £500,000 judgments are not justice but folly.
Should not judges be able to decide what award is justified?
The Prime Minister
That is a matter on which I should be wise to seek the advice of my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney General and the Lord Chancellor.
Even in the heat and battle of Prime Minister's questions, it is best to go away and reflect on some matters.
Leith
Mr. Ron Brown
To ask the Prime Minister if he will make an official visit to the port of Leith.
The Prime Minister
I am making a series of visits to all parts of the country and very much hope to visit the Edinburgh area again before too long.
Mr. Brown
That is welcome news.
Leithers will give the Prime Minister a warm welcome, but they will put him in the hot seat because of mass unemployment, homelessness and general misery, which have been experienced not just in my constituency, but throughout Britain.
Nevertheless, being constructive, members of the Union of Construction, Allied Trades and Technicians have published a report entitled’ Kick-start’, which makes various proposals on how to get people back to work and revive the economy.
Will the Prime Minister read that report and, more importantly, act on it?
If not, the lessons are clear — there will not be a kick-start come the next election, but the Tories will be kicked out.
That message is clear in my constituency and I am sure that it is clear in others.
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman neglected to mention that during the course of this Parliament, unemployment in his constituency has fallen by 32 per cent.
The Scottish Office has taken a number of initiatives on homelessness, as the hon. Gentleman knows.
In the four Scottish cities, £3.5 million in extra capital allocations have been made available for homelessness and a further £4 million extra capital for additional homelessness projects was made available last November.
From April 1991, deficits on all local authority hostels met by Government subsidies will be worth an extra £1 billion a year.
So a great deal has been done by the Scottish Office.
In future, the hon. Gentleman should acknowledge the dramatic reduction in unemployment in his constituency during this Parliament.
Engagements
Mr. Gwilym Jones
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 17 December 1991.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Jones
Does my right hon. Friend agree that inward investment from America and Japan has brought highly paid, highly skilled and highly trained new jobs to areas like south Wales?
Does he also agree that to brand such investment as’ sweatshops’is a grave affront to the employees of those companies?
The Labour party is telling those investors that they are not welcome here and encouraging them to go elsewhere.
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend.
It is within the recollection of the House that, some Question Times ago, the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) was boasting about the Japanese investment in his constituency.
Perhaps he will tell us whether that is’ sweatshop’investment.
If it is not, will he denounce his right hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman), who made the comment?
Mr. Battle
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 17 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Battle
Does the Prime Minister recall when, as Minister for Social Security, he cut mortgage support in half and said that there would be no reason to suppose that repossessions would increase?
He said,’ It will not happen’.
In view of that, does not he owe many thousands of families in Britain a personal apology?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman should check his facts more carefully.
The Building Societies Association assured the Government at the time that, when the rule was introduced, there would be no reason to expect people to lose their homes as a result and they have not done so.
The simplest inquiry by the hon. Gentleman would have ascertained that fact.
Mr. Watts
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating Councillor Mrs. Lydia Simmons, the Labour chairman of the housing committee in Slough, on her appointment as a member of the board of the NHS trust for Wexham Park hospital in my constituency?
Does he agree that there is room for sensible people of all political persuasions to serve the community through NHS hospital trusts?
The Prime Minister
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
We need people of talent, whatever their political persuasions, in such public positions and I look forward to people of talent taking them up regularly.
Mr. Dunnachie
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 17 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Dunnachie
Will the Prime Minister promise the House that no senior citizen, sick or disabled person need die from hypothermia or any illnesses resulting from it because they do not have the money to heat their homes?
Does the Prime Minister agree that the elderly, sick and disabled should automatically receive a heating allowance every winter instead of having to go cap in hand to the Government?
Does not he understand that it is action, not words, that the elderly, sick and disabled of Britain require of him?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman will know that the House was advised in the summer of a new scheme to assist people during periods of very cold weather — well over 1 million payments are expected to be made for the recent cold spell.
Those payments were not available under previous Governments.
House of Commons
Wednesday 18 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS
Maastricht
Mr. John Greenway
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what assessment he has made of the implications for United Kingdom foreign policy of the outcome of the intergovernmental conference at Maastricht.
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Douglas Hurd)
We welcome the agreement reached at Maastricht on a common foreign and security policy.
This will remain outside Community competence and therefore a matter for intergovernmental co-operation, with all substantive decisions being made by unanimity.
Mr. Greenway
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his formidable and invaluable contribution to the outcome of the Maastricht negotiations.
Does he agree that perhaps the most significant development in regard to foreign policy was the clear and unambiguous agreement to widen the Community to embrace the emergent democracies in eastern Europe, and will he make that one of the key aims of the British presidency under the next Conservative Government?
Mr. Hurd
Yes.
As the House knows, we have long believed that the Community should be open to European countries who want to join and can take on the responsibilities of membership.
I am glad that at our initiative the summit at Maastricht reaffirmed that principle, and that it was agreed that negotiations could start in 1992.
We look forward to giving further impetus to the process when we take on the presidency of the Community in the second half of the year.
More immediately, it was very good to see the Prime Ministers of Czechoslovakia and Hungary, and the acting Prime Minister of Poland, in Brussels on Monday, signing the association agreements between those countries and the Community and thus bringing to fruition an initiative begun by my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher).
Mr. John D. Taylor
At Maastricht, the Germans argued for a common foreign policy for the European Community.
Within 48 hours of the agreement, Germany announced that, irrespective of the Community, it was going to recognise Croatia before Christmas.
Does the Foreign Secretary see any inconsistency in the German foreign policy approach to Europe?
Mr. Hurd
I shall be taking two questions about Yugoslavia a little later.
There are now no legal obligations arising out of joint action, which will remain until the new treaty is effective.
Mr. Latham
In regard to widening the Community, does my right hon. Friend accept that there is now a powerful case for the admission of Austria and Scandinavian countries that are members of the European Free Trade Association?
Would they not act as an invaluable bridge extending to the Baltic states and other parts of central and eastern Europe?
Will my right hon. Friend try to speed up that process in every possible way?
Mr. Hurd
Several countries have already applied, and have strong cases for membership.
Those cases will need to be examined individually, but, in principle, my hon. Friend is entirely right.
Mr. Ernie Ross
When the Secretary of State was helping to draft the declaration on the middle east peace process, did he have in mind the curfew that has been placed on the Nablus and Hebron areas and on the Al-Bireh area and did he have in mind the illegal occupation of the houses in the Silwan area of Jerusalem?
Will he confirm that the occupation is illegal and that all settlements on the west bank are illegal?
Will he confirm that curfews constitute collective punishment, which is punishable under article 33 of the fourth Geneva convention?
Mr. Hurd
Within government and through the Community we have often expressed our views and, sometimes our protests, about the nature of the Israeli military occupation of the west bank, east Jerusalem and Gaza.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we believe that the policy of settlements on the west bank is illegal and deeply unhelpful to the peace process.
Mr. Maxwell-Hyslop
Will my right hon. Friend ensure that when the United Kingdom assumes the presidency of the EC the other Scandinavian countries, as well as Sweden, are encouraged to join as full voting members at the earliest possible date?
Mr. Hurd
Some of them have active debates within their countries on that matter.
We believe that the Community should welcome all European countries that want to join and can take on the responsibilities of membership.
Syria and Iran
Dr. Godman
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs when he last discussed with the Foreign Ministers of other member states of the European Community matters relating to relationships between the European Community and the nations of Syria and Iran.
Mr. Hurd
I last discussed Iran in the Foreign Affairs Council on 15 April.
The last discussion of Syria, apart from discussions in the peace process, was on 10 July at a meeting of EC Ministers, which my hon. and learned Friend the Minister of State attended.
Dr. Godman
When next they meet will the Foreign Secretary urge upon his European Community colleagues the need for detachment and restraint in their dealings with Iran?
That detachment must surely remain while the murderous fatwa inflicted upon Mr. Salman Rushdie remains in place.
Until that evil burden is lifted from Mr. Rushdie's shoulders, the Government and the European Community should have nothing to do with Iran and its Government.
Mr. Hurd
There will be no dramatic or immediate change in our political relationship with Iran.
I would not want to rule out closer contacts with the Iranians at the right time.
Such contacts can reinforce the effectiveness of our views on the point made by the hon. Gentleman, which is that the death sentence on Salman Rushdie is an unacceptable infringement of his rights as a British citizen.
Mr. Adley
Can my right hon. Friend confirm that part of Syrian territory — the Golan heights — is still illegally occupied by the Israelis as are southern Lebanon and the occupied territories?
That being so, will my right hon. Friend seek with his Community partners to reactivate the Venice declaration which seems to many of us to be the only likely forum within which positive political action can be taken?
Mr. Hurd
That point is being discussed now directly between Israel and Syria in the bilateral discussions in Washington.
That is the best forum for that to be thrashed out and, I hope, in the end resolved.
Ukraine
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what information he has on how the nuclear weapons in Ukraine are going to be controlled by the Soviet Union following the independence vote.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Douglas Hogg)
We welcome assurances from the leaders of Russia, Ukraine an Byelorussia that they intend that effective unified control is maintained over the Soviet Union's nuclear weapons.
We are discussing with the relevant authorities how this will be taken forward in practice, and consulting closely with our NATO allies.
Mr. Evans
I thank my hon. and learned Friend for that reply.
Is he aware that the people of Welwyn and Hatfield are concerned that three republics have a larger nuclear capability than the United Kingdom?
Does he agree that British people should be told that if the Labour party were in control and there was a nuclear attack on Britain, there would be no response because the Leader of the Opposition has said that he would not push the button?
Is not that the true face of the Labour party — no heart, no brains and a leader who is not only a joke but a jerk?
Mr. Speaker
A what?
That was overdone again, I am afraid.
Mr. Hogg
In deference to you, Mr. Speaker, perhaps I had better not respond to the last part of my hon. Friend's question, but I entirely agree with the spirit of his comments.
On the first part of his question, we are anxious to ensure that the republics of Ukraine, Byelorussia, Russia and — my goodness, I have forgotten the other one
Mr. Tony Banks
Kazakhstan.
Mr. Hogg
Kazakhstan — enter into the non-proliferation treaty as non-nuclear states, if that can be achieved.
Mr. Tony Banks
The Minister obviously does not know his head from his Kazakhstan.
Given the need to rid the world of nuclear weapons, is not this a wonderful opportunity to approach the republics, particularly those that want to declare themselves nuclear-free zones — something that used to be sneered at by Conservative Members — in order to eliminate those weapons from the world?
Should not the Government grasp that opportunity?
Mr. Hogg
It is indeed an opportunity.
The Republic of Russia will probably seek to remain a nuclear state, but there is a reasonable prospect that the other three republics — Kazakhstan, Byelorussia and Ukraine — will be prepared to accept non-nuclear status.
The western powers have an interest in seeing how we can assist with dismantling the nuclear arsenals of those three republics.
One thing is plain: they do not wish to return the nuclear arsenals to the Republic of Russia.
Mr. Shersby
Is my hon. and learned Friend aware that it is the wish of many Ukrainian people that the nuclear weapons on their soil be dismantled and destroyed?
What discussions is he having with President Kravchuk on that matter?
Mr. Hogg
I am aware that the President of Ukraine has made the point that he would like his republic to be a non-nuclear state and that he would like the west to assist with the process of dismantling and destruction.
We should like to be constructive and we shall consider with our allies how best we can respond.
There is, however, a problem: the judgment of the republics of, for example, Byelorussia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan may alter if the Republic of Russia chooses to remain a nuclear state.
We cannot regard the present statements as necessarily being set in concrete.
Mr. Robertson
Does the Minister agree that perhaps a more urgent problem than the control of nuclear weapons in the republics of the former Soviet Union could be the vast amounts of conventional weapons that are in the hands of highly discontented and underpaid armed forces that have serious problems?
Will the Minister assure us that the Government will give the maximum assistance with those weapons as well as with nuclear weapons and that in granting full diplomatic recognition to those republics the acceptance of full international obligations, including the Helsinki process and those features that relate specifically to human rights, will be a priority?
Mr. Hogg
On the latter part of the hon. Gentleman's question, he will know that the Foreign Ministers of the European Community considered the subject earlier this week and made it plain that, when considering recognition, regard would be had to the extent to which the republics were ready to undertake the treaty obligations to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
The most worrying problem about conventional weaponry relates to the implementation of the conventional forces in Europe treaty, because, as the hon. Gentleman will know, there is a mismatch between the military districts as defined in the CFE and the republics.
We hope that the republics will be willing to ratify the treaty and implement its terms.
But there is a serious problem here.
Mr. Sillars
Does the Minister agree that to resolve the problem it is very important to engage those countries in the United Nations and that as Byelorussia and Ukraine are already members of the United Nations it becomes imperative — in view of his earlier answer about Russia remaining a nuclear power — for them to obtain membership of the United Nations and of the Security Council in their own right?
Mr. Hogg
I shall not deal with the second part of the hon. Gentleman's question because it raises difficult issues which will no doubt be the subject of discussion later.
Clearly, these republics will apply for admission into the United Nations in due time and we shall define our views at that time.
However, the most recent statement of our approach to the question of recognition, which is also likely to guide our attitude to the adherence of these countries to the United Nations, was that set out in the meeting of Foreign Affairs Ministers earlier this week.
Miss Emma Nicholson
Does the Minister agree that Chernobyl probably happened because of incompetence rather than by a deliberate action?
Will he assure the House that proper British expertise in all matters — in the provision of food as well as nuclear issues — will be made available to the republics to help them towards full and truly free independence?
Mr. Hogg
I cannot answer in the unconstrained sense in which my hon. Friend asked the question, but, clearly, we are prepared to play our part — bilaterally through the provision of know-how and technical assistance in appropriate matters and, of course, through the European Community to which we are a substantial subscriber.
Brazil
Mr. Battle
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs how many United Kingdom staff there are at the British embassy and consulates in Brazil; and how many have specific duties with regard to(a) human rights and (b) trade.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Tristan Garel-Jones)
There are 19 United Kingdom-based staff at the Britis embassy and consulates in Brazil.
Five are engaged in trade promotion.
Six report on political and economic issues, including human rights.
Mr. Battle
Is the Minister aware of the continuing violence against rural workers' leaders and their supporters in Brazil and of the fact that according to recent evidence from the Brazilian Church's Pastoral Land Commission since 1964, 1,667 rural workers have been murdered, that there have been 23 trials and only 13 sentences?
That is in areas in which the British Government have an environmental programme in conjunction with the Brazilian authorities.
Is there any way that our embassy staff can positively support the efforts of the procurator general in Brazil to tackle that terrible situation?
Mr. Garel-Jones
Yes, we are in close contact with non-governmental organisations, lawyers and Brazilian authorities involved in cases relating to rural violence.
Indeed, the embassy will certainly be represented at the forthcoming trials to which I think the hon. Gentleman is referring.
For some time our policy towards Latin America and, indeed, towards other parts of the developing world, has been guided by a speech made by my right hon. Friend some months ago on good government.
We seek to ensure that our reporting staff focus especially on human rights and in Latin America where democracy is now the norm, a great deal of our effort goes towards assisting those democracies in reinforcing human rights and, in particular, in upholding the rule of law and justice.
Mr. Jacques Arnold
How many of our diplomatic officers in Brazil are concerned with the environment?
Have they noticed the recent decision of the federal Government of Brazil to allocate 94,000 sq kilometres of tropical rain forest as a preserve for the Yanomami Indians?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The Overseas Development Administration — under my right hon. Friend the Minister for Overseas Development — has two officers in Brazil who are concerned with our environmental projects and our embassy of course keeps a running brief.
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The Brazilian Government have recently declared that 94,000 sq kilometres will be set aside for the Yanomami Indians.
That is a good response by the Brazilian Government to the concerns that have been expressed on both sides of the House.
Yugoslavia
Mr. Douglas
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what plans he has to recognise further states as a consequence of developments in the Union of Sovereign States and Yugoslavia.
Mr. Hurd
On 16 December we and our Community partners set out guidelines to inform our decisions on the recognition of new states in eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
We have not yet taken decisions on the recognition of the republics of the Soviet Union — apart from the Baltic states — as they are still discussing among themselves their future relations.
The Foreign Ministers agreed to recognise Yugoslav republics who meet certain conditions.
The arbitration commission of the conference on Yugoslavia, chaired by Lord Carrington, will advise whether republics meet those conditions.
A final decision on implementation will be taken on 15 January, after advice from the arbitration commission.
Mr. Douglas
Does the Foreign Secretary accept that there should be general acceptance of the criteria laid down by the European Community on recognition, but that there might be some stricture about the speed of recognition, especially for Yugoslavia?
Delay might give a spurious temptation to the so-called Yugoslavian army to exercise certain initiatives that could be detrimental to the freedom of other republics.
Will the right hon. Gentleman pay particular attention to human rights, to the rights of ethnic minorities, and —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Brief questions, please.
Mr. Douglas
I understand, Mr. Speaker.
Will the Foreign Secretary keep the House informed and perhaps make a statement when the House returns after the recess?
Mr. Hurd
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's first remark.
As I have made clear, for some time the question of recognising Yugoslav republics, especially Croatia and Slovenia, has not been a matter of principle — clearly they will not be willing to go back into any entity called Yugoslavia.
Recognition has been a matter of timing and judgment — a phrase that I have often used before.
The hon. Gentleman thinks that the timing is a bit slow; others may feel that it is a bit fast.
That is a matter of judgment, and on 16 December it was a matter of compromise.
Mr. Wells
Is it not like throwing petrol on a bonfire to promise to recognise Croatia and Slovenia?
Does my right hon. Friend know about Lord Carrington's advice that such recognition would encourage Herzegovina to claim independence too, and thus excite the Serbs to fight?
Mr. Hurd
Lord Carrington's view has been that premature recognition would be a mistake, and Mr. Cyrus Vance — the Secretary-General's representative — has made the same point.
I have been in touch with Lord Carrington since the EC decision.
He is very much in action, and so is Mr. Cyrus Vance.
They will both work hard and urgently to carry to a successful conclusion, if they can, the two processes of which they are in charge — the peace conference at The Hague and the prospects for a UN peacekeeping force.
Mr. Rees
Is the Secretary of State aware that those of us who recall the area 40 years ago believe that the German-led policy is the height of folly?
The Germans should recall their experiences in the area, when the fighting tied down seven German divisions.
Can we be sure that if this goes wrong and there is military involvement — as there might well be — we will not be involved on the coat-tails of the Germans?
Mr. Hurd
One thing is certain: there is no question of German military involvement in any of the republics of Yugoslavia.
Mr. Favell
It has been suggested in several media reports today that if my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary were free to pursue an independent foreign policy, he would not now consider recognising Slovenia and Croatia.
Is that correct?
Mr. Hurd
For us, as for the Community, it would have been a matter of timing.
There is a tradition of the main states of western Europe splitting in rivalry on Balkan questions.
There is quite a history of individual countries backing a particular group, taking a particular line, and it all ending up on the battlefield.
I do not believe that the history of that tradition is a good one.
It is better to thrash out such differences round a table rather than— eventually — on the battlefield.
Mr. Kaufman
When the deadline for judging whether the republics should be recognised arrives in January, will the 12 Foreign Ministers meet again to decide collectively whether the criteria have been met and whether all of them will recognise or not recognise the republics?
If not, and if there are to be individual assessments of the criteria, will the Foreign Secretary assure the House that if Germany decides that the criteria have been met and recognises the republics but Britain decides that the criteria have not been met, the United Kingdom will reserve the right not to recognise the republics?
Mr. Hurd
The decision asks for advice from the Arbitration Commission and from Mr. Badinter.
If that advice suggests that the republics which have applied meet the conditions set out in the decision of 16 December, there will be recognition by all 12
Governments.
If the Arbitration Commission expresses a negative view about any one of the republics, there is no collective decision to implement, and countries will be able to make their own assessment.
Mr. Cormack
Does my right hon. Friend accept that those of us who have watched the terrible destruction in Croatia are disturbed by the amount of killing time between now and 15 January?
Does he also agree that one state which does not meet the generally accepted criteria for recognition is the federal state of Yugoslavia, which has lost control of its own army?
Mr. Hurd
I know my hon. Friend's view and I believe that he had an Adjournment debate on the subject last week.
He must not create the impression that recognition will stop the killing.
The main hopes for stopping the killing are, first, the peace conference and, secondly, the prospect — not yet a certainty — of United Nations peace keeping.
I very much welcome the fact that the Security Council authorised the dispatch of a preliminary team.
I hope that Mr. Vance, with whom we have been in touch in the past 24 hours, will feel able in the light of his further explorations to suggest to the Security Council that a peace-keeping force should be sent.
The Foreign Ministers, on 16 December, warmly endorsed that effort.
6
Mr. Galloway
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what recent representations he has made to the Government of Yugoslavia on the situation of the Albanian population in that country; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
We strongly condemn Serbian abuse of human rights in the Kosovo.
It is clear that any lasting solution for Yugoslavia must incorporate guarantees for minority communities such as the Kosovo Albanians.
Mr. Galloway
The Albanians in Yugoslavia are not a minority population, but the third largest national group in the country; there are more than 3 million of them, but their national rights have long been abolished by the Yugoslavian Government.
The Minister must know that if Croatia and Slovenia are allowed to become internationally recognised next month, the Albanian population — and Albania itself, just across the border — will not sit quietly while the brutal reign of terror imposed by the Serbian authorities in the Kosovo continues.
More than 600,000 people have passed through the rough hands of the Serbian authorities since the Parliament was abolished, and have been arrested and interrogated.
Some 90,000 have been dismissed from their jobs for political reasons and thousands have been imprisoned for long sentences.
Scores have been killed or are missing.
What can the British Government do, both bilaterally and in the European Community, to ensure that the national rights of the Albanians and of the other nations in Yugoslavia are fully taken into account in the whole bloody mess?
Mr. Hogg
The safeguarding of national and minority rights is one of the most important issues which need to be addressed in the quest for an overall settlement.
The Albanians are in a huge majority in the Kosovo — well over 90 per cent.
of the total population.
There is also a substantial minority of Albanians in Macedonia.
As the hon. Gentleman will know, the draft treaty that my right hon. and noble Friend Lord Carrington has prepared identifies a range of safeguards which should be extended to the ethnic minorities in Yugoslavia.
The Serbian Government must recognise that they should extend to the Albanians exactly the rights and privileges that they seek to secure on behalf of the Serbs in, for example, Croatia.
Mrs. Currie
Does my hon. and learned Friend recognise that, whatever the concern in this country about the mess in Yugoslavia, there would be even more concern if we started sending in British troops, whether as part of a peace-keeping force or anything else?
Will he ensure that, before any consideration is given to such a development, we are quite clear in Britain how long such troops would stay, what exactly they would be setting out to achieve, and how they would cope with the aftermath?
The last thing I would want to have to sell to my constituents is the idea that they should go into that bloody mess and be shot at by the bandits on both sides.
Mr. Hogg
My hon. Friend makes a serious point, with which I largely agree.
It is very important that a peace-keeping force should not be sent to Yugoslavia until there is a peace to keep, and until it is clear that all the warring parties both invite and allow that peace-keeping force to operate.
At the same time, the United Nations is clearly contemplating the circumstances in which a peace-keeping force might be sent and I can well conceive of circumstances in which, in order to underpin a peace, a peace-keeping force should be in place.
Nevertheless, there are perils associated with the matter, and my hon. Friend has identified a number of them.
Israel
Mr. Watson
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what representations he intends to make to the Government of Israel following their decision to continue the closure of Bir Zeit university for a further three months.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
Together with European Community partners, we have already made strong representations on this issue.
Mr. Watson
Is the Minister aware that, by 9 January, Bir Zeit university will have been closed continuously for a period of four years and that a generation of young Palestinians will have been denied the right to higher education, which is surely one of the basic fundamental human rights?
Is that not just one of the many human rights being denied to Palestinians in the occupied territories, which have been illegally occupied by Israel for 24 years?
When will the Minister and the Foreign Secretary get together with their European colleagues, call Israel in, and say,’ That is it — so far and no further; no more Mr. Nice Guy,’because the soft-soaping approach simply has not worked?
Mr. Hogg
That is the first time I have, by implication, been described as Mr. Nice Guy.
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman.
I can assure him that, in whatever role he cares to characterise me, I have spoken clearly to the Israeli ambassador on this.
Moreover, both directly and through the medium of the European Community, my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary has made it plain to the Government of Israel that we deplore the closure decision and that we believe that the universities, colleges and schools should remain open.
We are deeply concerned by what is happening in the occupied territories and we are urging the Government of Israel to negotiate sensibly with the Palestinians within the occupied territories.
Sir Dennis Walters
As my hon. and learned Friend has accepted the closure of Bir Zeit is part of the systematic infringement of the Geneva convention by Israel which has been going on for years, should not a more robust approach therefore be taken, both by our Government and by the European Community, and should not economic measures at some stage be taken in relation to Israel to prevent the continuation of such unacceptable violations of human rights and of the Geneva convention?
Mr. Hogg
We regard a number of the acts taking place within the occupied territories as illegal — most obviously the policy of settlement, which we believe stands in the way of the peace process.
It is a great thing, however, that all the parties have now sat down to negotiate and I wish the negotiations well.
We shall do all that we can to support and encourage the process of negotiation.
For the moment, at least, I should prefer to rely on that process of negotiation rather than on anything else.
Mr. Janner
Does the Minister accept that when universities and other educational institutions are used as centres for terrorist activity.
However much some people may groan, that is the way in which Bir Zeit was being used, and that is why it was closed.
With our own understanding of terrorist problems, we should understand what is happening —
Mr. Galloway
You should be ashamed of yourself.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman's hon. and learned Friend has as much right to express his views as the hon. Gentleman had.
Mr. Janner
May I say how much I appreciate the Minister's approach — that if, and only if, through patience and good will the present peace negotiations succeed, there is hope for an end to terrorism in that part of the world?
Mr. Hogg
We are strong supporters of the peace process, but I hope that the House will recognise that it will be a long and difficult road.
I hope, too, that all the parties will adhere to it, however bleak the prospect may sometimes be.
On the question of closures of universities, schools and colleges, I am against that.
Mr. Latham
When my hon. and learned Friend speaks to the Israeli ambassador, in the interests of fairness, does he also discuss with him how much freedom of speech there is in universities in Syria, Iran and Saudi Arabia?
Mr. Hogg
As I have often said, I believe that Israel within her pre-1967 frontiers is a democracy, which is not true of many, if any, other states in that part of the world, but she is not a democracy in so far as the occupied territories are concerned.
Yugoslavia
Mr. Bill Michie
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what discussions he plans to have with the United Nations Secretary General about a United Nations peace-keeping force in Yugoslavia.
Mr. Hurd
We expect to discuss that and other matters with the new secretary general when he visits London I hope, next month.
Meanwhile, the British mission in New York is in constant touch with the secretary general and his staff and I have alredy told the House of Sir David Hannay's helpful discussion with Mr. Vance yesterday.
Mr. Michie
While the Secretary of State has tried to assure the House about the problems and implications of recognition of Croatia, will he try once more to reassure us about that recognition?
Does it refer to territory already held by the Croatians or does it apply to old frontiers which are up for grabs?
If it is the latter, how will Britain ensure or guarantee that the old or new boundaries are enforced?
Mr. Hurd
The decision of the day before yesterday related to any Yugoslav republics which fulfilled certain conditions that we set out.
There was no mention of any particular republic.
Obviously, recognition does not carry with it any guarantee of military protection.
However, long before this immediate question arose, we and our partners — and, I believe, the whole world — made it clear that we are not prepared to recognise the alteration of boundaries by force.
Mr. Marlow
On Monday, we had a distinct and coherent policy with regard to Yugoslavia.
Today we have an undistinguished and incoherent policy.
If it is inevitable that the over-mighty Hun is to be in the driving seat of European security and defence policies, would it not be more honest and dignified if these matters were decided by a majority vote as we could then at least honestly state our position?
Mr. Hurd
I entirely disagree with that.
I am sure that the right way forward in these matters is to discuss differences around the table for however long it takes, reach an agreement if that is possible, and act on it if we can.
And that is what we do.
If at any stage in the discussions on Monday, or in all the other discussions that I have attended in the past two years, it had been a question of majority vote, there would have been much less agreement, and to the extent that decisions had been imposed by a majority, they would have been much less effective.
Everything that happened on Monday reinforced that view.
Mr. Alton
Instead of an obsession with Germany's position, should we not be obsessed with what is happening in Croatia, where one in eight of the population has been displaced, we have provided only £77,000 in humanitarian aid and the people are being pounded into the ground?
Will the Secretary of State consider ways of ensuring that a sky shield can be erected by the international powers over Croatian air space to stop the aerial bombardment of Dubrovnik and Vukovar and also find ways to increase humanitarian aid to people who will otherwise continue to die over Christmas?
Mr. Hurd
I do not think that an air shield is feasible or would be effective.
I have already stated my view of the best way to stop the fighting.
The hon. Gentleman is right about the principle of humanitarian aid, although he is wrong about the details.
Via the British Red Cross, we have committed 425,000 blankets at a cost of £1.5 million, and £250,000 in transport costs.
Most of that has gone to Croatia.
There is also substantial aid from the European Community, amounting to £9.1 million, of which our share is £1.5 million.
If the hon. Gentleman is going to talk about humanitarian aid, I hope that he will get his facts right.
Mr. Wilkinson
If Her Majesty's Government have, at least in principle, accorded official recognition to Croatia if certain conditions are met, would it not be very difficult for Her Majesty's Government or the European Community to deny Croatia the legitimate UN-recognised right of self-defence?
In that regard, the United Nations surely has a peace enforcement role as well as a peace-keeping role.
Unless the United Nations is prepared actually physically to keep the peace, the federal forces have every incentive to maintain military operations against Croatia.
Mr. Hurd
As I have told my hon. Friend before, I do not think that there has ever been any prospect of any member of the European Community or of the United Nations believing that a United Nations or a Western European Union peace-keeping force could force its way into Yugoslavia against the opposition either of the Yugoslav national army — the JNA — or of any armed force.
The proposition has always been that a peace-keeping force should enforce and keep a ceasefire which already existed.
That remains the position, and it remains the position quite independently of any questions of recognition.
Kenya
Sir David Steel
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what discussions he has had in Kenya with President Moi on Her Majesty's Government's policy on good government.
The Minister for Overseas Development (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
My right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary had extensive and frank discussions with President Moi and senior Ministers during his visit to Nairobi on 11 and 12 September.
The Prime Minister also met President Moi at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Harare.
Sir David Steel
Does the Minister recognise that those of us who are friends of Kenya have been concerned for some time that that country has been slipping from the flagship position of good and open government in Africa?
Will she therefore welcome the repeal last week of section 2 of the Kenyan constitution, as that action seems to pave the way for the introduction of multi-party democracy?
Will Her Majesty's Government continue to press for an orderly transfer to open elections on a free and fair basis?
Mrs. Chalker
Yes, and yes, directly in answer to the right hon. Gentleman's question.
We also very much welcome the fact that President Moi has announced that he will go forward with multi-party elections, and we hope that he will also enter discussions with opposition groups about the way forward.
That is the way to achieve a peaceful transition.
We all wish to see a peaceful transition.
We believe that everything that is now beginning to happen can lead to that result, provided that there is good will on all sides.
We shall do all that we can to encourage it.
Mr. Colvin
May I ask my right hon. Friend to endorse the hope that the multi-party system that President Moi will formally introduce this week will not be based on the tribal backgrounds of those taking part, as that would be a possible recipe for disaster?
As Her Majesty's Government have based their aid to Kenya on progress being made on the political front, presumably there is now scope for increasing that aid to a country which is an island of stability in a troubled area.
Aid can have a knock-on effect in neighbouring countries which are also in great need.
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend knows that we warmly welcome the moves that have been made.
They are a crucial step on the road to democracy, but there are a lot of steps to go down that road yet.
I believe that what we are seeing from President Moi and members of his Government is all going in the right direction.
We understand their concern to avoid tribally based parties.
We know that the opposition parties will need time to form and organise.
However, I believe that as we keep pace with progress month by month we can reconsider further aid on top of the very substantial aid which continues to be well used in Kenya.
Mr. Anderson
The Minister will be aware of the long-standing concern of the Labour party and friends of Kenya about human rights in that country.
Now that we are proceeding to the welcome elections in the near future, what steps will the Government take in co-operation with the Kenyan Government in the hope that those elections will be free and fair?
I am thinking in particular of the return of those who have been forced to flee abroad, such as Mr. Oginga Odinga, free access to the press, access to the media generally during the campaign, and some form of international supervision by monitors such as those under the auspices of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association.
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman knows that although we believe that Kenya should proceed with all speed to multi-party elections, there is much preparatory work to be done.
The Commonwealth and, indeed, the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association can play a major role in that.
We pay tribute to the action of the Commonwealth in assisting Zambia to obtain a peaceful outcome to its elections.
We hope that the elections in Kenya will likewise be peaceful, swift and positive.
I fully accept what the hon. Gentleman says about human rights and the need for people to return from abroad.
I also accept that the media must be free if there is to be proper debate of the issues.
The hon. Gentleman will understand that it is not for us to tie the hands of the Government of Kenya but to encourage, offer help and point the way whenever we possibly can.
That we shall do.
Mr. Alexander
It is clear from this afternoon's exchanges that Kenya has many friends in all parts of the House.
Will my right hon. Friend undertake that when she next talks to the leaders of Kenya she will communicate the grave anxiety felt in the House about human rights in Kenya and the way in which some opposition politicians are being treated and have been treated in the past few years?
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend may know that I have made the views of the Government and of Members of Parliament well known to the Kenyan Government for a long time.
We were greatly angered by the arrest last month of proponents of a multi-party system.
Representations were made then to the representatives of the Kenyan Government in both London and Nairobi.
There could be no doubt in their minds of the view of the House.
I am glad that those arrested have been released and that the charges have been dropped.
However, we shall be satisfied only when no more such arrests are made, so that we do not have to go through the same business all over again.
There are many things to be done to assist Kenya, but we know that we can help it best by keeping quietly in constant discussion with it.
Burma
Mr. Edwards
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on relations with the Government of Burma.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Mark Lennox-Boyd)
We and our European Community partners have repeatedly condemned the Burmese military junta for its failure to respond to the unequivocal outcome of the May 1990 elections, as well as its continuing disregard for human rights, notably demonstrated by the house arrest of 1991 Nobel peace prize winner Aung San Suu Kyi.
Mr. Edwards
While the measures taken by Britain in conjunction with our European partners to isolate the Burmese Government are welcome, the military dictators are still in power, they have no intention of handing over power to the democratically elected Government, and the appalling abuse of human rights continues.
Bearing in mind that the United States introduced trade sanctions last July, is it not time for Britain to impose a comprehensive trade embargo against Burma?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
We have made many representations.
At least four official statements have been made by the United Kingdom.
A further four have been made by the European Community and through the United Nations.
However, a general trade embargo would not be effective and would require international support, which is not in prospect at present.
Mr. Lester
Will my hon. Friend consider approaching the new Secretary-General to ask him to appoint a special representative to go to Myanmar?
We are most worried that the Burmese Government have disregarded not only the United Nations Commission on Human Rights but the foreign minister of the Philippines who went to Burma on behalf of the Association of South-East Asian Nations but was allowed to make representations only on his own behalf.
In view of the United Nations resolution passed this year, it is a question of taking the matter to the highest level at the United Nations and appointing a special representative.
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
The Government of Burma continue to disregard all pressure put upon them, but I am pleased that on 30 November the United Nations General Assembly passed a resolution on Burma, in which we were co-sponsors, which called for an improvement in the human rights situation and for progress towards democratic government.
The United Nations Commission on Human Rights has begun a scrutiny of Burma, under the confidential 1503 procedure.
The special rapporteur visited Rangoon last month and will be presenting his report to the Commission in Geneva in February next year.
Mr. Foulkes
Will the Minister join me and the whole House in paying great tribute to Aung San Suu Kyi as the most worthy recipient of the Nobel peace prize for her courageous struggle against the brutal regime in Burma?
As Britain has a special responsibility towards her and her country, can the Minister tell the House what action our ambassador is taking to get access to her and to secure her release?
Will the Government now say that we shall initiate urgent discussions with both the United States and our European partners to isolate Burma —.
This is a serious matter, whatever Conservative Members may think.
What action will the Government take to isolate Burma until the military relinquish power, and democracy is installed?
Interruption
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
In my earlier reply I told the House what action the United Kingdom Government have taken, in concert with our partners in the European Community and other civilised countries, to condemn utterly the conduct of the Burmese Government and to call for the release of Aung San Suu Kyi.
I understand that not even her husband is given access to her, but that he has recently been allowed to write letters to her.
African States
Mr. Andrew MacKay
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what recent discussions he has had with leaders of African states concerning progress towards democracy.
Mrs. Chalker
My right hon. Friend met most Commonwealth African Foreign Ministers at the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting in Harare in October.
At this, and most of the many other meetings that he and I have had with African leaders, progress towards democracy and good governance has been discussed.
Mr. MacKay
While recent developments in Zambia must be welcomed as the first occasion on which an African Commonwealth head of state has left office because of the ballot box, are there not all too many countries in Africa which are not moving towards democracy?
What further pressure can my right hon. Friend place upon them?
Mrs. Chalker
As I said, we welcome the peaceful way in which the elections were conducted in Zambia, which now has a new and democractic Government.
Many countries are already proceeding towards democracy.
In an answer to the hon. Member for Londonderry, East (Mr. Ross) on 12 December, I listed those multi-party democracies.
Many other countries have announced that they expect to proceed towards democratic elections in the coming year — Angola, Cameroon, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Nigeria, Seychelles and Sierra Leone.
Progress is also likely in Tanzania.
I hope that more countries will join that number in the coming months.
Middle East
Mrs. Dunwoody
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what steps he is taking to ensure that known international terrorists do not receive any support from countries in the middle east with which the United Kingdom maintains diplomatic relations.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
We have repeatedly made clear our condemnation of terrorism and we attach much importance to international efforts to counter it.
We maintain a dialogue with a range of countries with the aim of discouraging any form of support for terrorist groups.
Mrs. Dunwoody
When the Minister made it clear a little more than a year ago that he was changing his attitude towards the Government of Syria, he said that he was able to do so because there was no known connection with terrorist organisations, such as that involving the appalling man, Jibril.
Since other Governments, such as the American Government, still have Syria on their terrorist list, is the Minister certain that no evidence exists of any link between any terrorist organisation and the Syrian Government?
Mr. Hogg
As the hon. Lady will know, when we resumed diplomatic relations with Syria at the end of last year we discussed that type of question with them and received reassurances which were sufficient to enable us to resume diplomatic relations.
Mr. Kilfedder
Has Colonel Gaddafi yet provided information about the explosives and armaments that he supplied to the IRA?
Will the Government seek compensation for the slaughter and mutilation of British citizens which have resulted from the arms and Semtex that he has provided?
Mr. Hogg
My hon. Friend will know that at the end of November we made a number of requests to the Government of Libya.
They included the delivering up of the two named individuals for trial, recognition of responsibility for acts, willingness to pay compensation, the disclosure of information relating to the IRA and renunciation of terrorism.
Colonel Gaddafi has not complied with any of those requests.
House of Commons
Thursday 19 December 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FOOD
Milk (Dioxin Levels)
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food whether he is now in a position to reveal the latest survey regarding dioxin levels in milk in the Bolsover area; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Mr. John Gummer)
I have already published all the results available to date.
The results of the further survey — which involves complex and time-consuming testing — will be published as soon as possible.
Mr. Skinner
Is the Minister aware that on 10 December the National Rivers Authority told me, by letter, that it had taken two samples from the river — above the Coalite plant and below — and that the sample from the river above the plant showed a low level of dioxin, the one below the plant showed considerably higher levels of dioxin and that it is now certain that the dioxin is coming from the Coalite plant?
As the Minister has said that the polluter must pay, will he give a guarantee that the polluter, Coalite, will pay compensation to the farmers concerned?
Will he also hold a public inquiry so that the matter can be sorted put?
Mr. Gummer
My action in support of those farmers is well known to the hon. Gentleman.
I am concerned that they should have all the help that they can get.
The tests that we are carrying out are not yet complete.
The tests done by the National Rivers Authority are different from those that we are doing.
We shall provide all that information to the public so that decisions may be made.
The decisions to which the hon. Gentleman refers are largely not for me.
Mr. Colvin
Is my right hon. Friend happy that the monitoring systems in Bolsover are as good as those in my constituency?
There are a number of petrochemical plants in my constituency, as well as the Rechem International plant, which disposes of toxic waste, where Her Majesty's inspectorate of pollution and the local district authority carry out extensive monitoring.
What additional monitoring does my right hon. Friend's Department carry out to ensure that toxic emissions cannot enter the food chain?
Mr. Gummer
Our survey programmes have been extensive and we have found nothing of a type similar to that which has been found in Derbyshire.
We continue to conduct dioxin surveys.
My job is to ensure that dioxin does not enter the food chain and we have a full programme of surveys to ensure that that does not happen.
It was as a result of those surveys that we pinpointed two and, later, three farms and that is where the detailed tests are being carried out.
In fact, we discovered the problem and acted immediately so that there would be no danger to public health.
That is the role of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
Mr. William Ross
As it appears from the information published to date by the Minister that it is almost impossible to determine the exact source of the dioxin that is causing the problem, what comfort does that provide to farmers?
If the source cannot be discovered, how can the polluter be forced to pay?
Given that these are insidious and dangerous chemicals that have wide-ranging and far-reaching implications for the food industry, is not it time that the Government thought again about compensation in such circumstances?
Mr. Gummer
The hon. Gentleman should not overstate the position.
We have carried out and are carrying out extensive tests throughout the United Kingdom and have found that only three farms are affected.
We are conducting detailed trials on those farms.
As soon as we have the results of the trials we shall publish them.
That is a perfectly reasonable statement of the position.
I do not believe that it is helpful to suggest that the problem is widespread or in any way worrying, either for the consumer or for the farming industry as a whole.
What I am concerned about is the specific effect on these three farms, which is extremely serious.
Hens
Mr. Hinchliffe
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what proposals he has to improve the welfare of laying hens.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Maclean)
We will seek the adoption o the highest standards practicable for all laying hens when the existing Community legislation is reviewed next year.
Mr. Hinchliffe
Will the Minister give an assurance that the Government will implement in full the recommendations of the recent Farm Animal Welfare Council report on the welfare of laying hens in colony systems?
Bearing in mind the fact that the report laid out only minimum welfare standards, will the Government take note of and act on the recommendations of the minority report issued at the same time?
Mr. Maclean
The hon. Gentleman has not grasped the fact that any progress that we make on improving animal welfare in Europe has to be on a Europeanwide basis.
I am conscious that we want to improve drastically the standards of laying hens, not just in battery cages but in colony and other systems.
If we are to be successful, we must have Europeanwide agreement.
If we acted unilaterally, we should end up putting out of business our own egg producers just to be flooded with eggs produced under the very system that we had banned.
Mr. Ron Davies
Should not consumers who are concerned about the welfare implications of intensive laying systems be able to shop accordingly?
In the light of the Minister's reply to my hon. Friend the Member for Wakefield (Mr. Hinchliffe), will he guarantee that at European level he will press for a system of mandatory labelling so that eggs are labelled’ battery’,’barn eggs’,’free range’or whatever?
Is not that the most effective way of harnessing consumer choice in the cause of improving welfare standards?
Mr. Maclean
Of course.
In all areas of food policy we believe in the principle that the consumer should choose and have sufficient information to do so.
We are consulting others on systems to ensure that consumers have a proper choice when buying eggs and other foodstuffs.
This is an area where extensive work needs to be done to ensure that the consumer is not misled because of the plethora of terms that are applied.
I do not want to go on a dictionary-chasing exercise, laying down one word only to find that the marketing men have circumvented it by finding another word.
Beef Exports
Mr. Hague
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what is his latest estimate of the value of beef exports.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Curry)
In the first nine months of this year total United Kingdom beef exports amounted to just over 84,000 tonnes worth about £167 million.
For the same period last year exports were 78,000 tonnes worth just over £170 million.
Mr. Hague
Does my hon. Friend agree that the continued success of beef exports is not only good news for the industry but is a powerful reminder, after all the scare stories last year, that British beef is among the best in the world?
Does he agree that the use of greater marketing expertise could open up still further opportunities for British exporters?
Can he tell us whether and how he will be using the new marketing initiative of his Ministry to assist exports in the industry?
Mr. Curry
I agree with my hon. Friend that in the past the weakness when farmers have got together has been the quality of marketing and management that they bring to a project.
The aim of the marketing grants is to address any marketing deficiencies and to provide good management, which we are willing to support.
We also have an undertaking from the supermarkets and some of the food industry that they will assist in providing managers.
That is an essential part of the campaign to ensure that our beef, which is the world's best, finds its way on to tables across the world.
Sir Hector Monro
Does my hon. Friend agree that some of the best beef exported from Britain comes from the less-favoured areas and hill land?
Does he agree that hill farmers had a substantial drop in income in recent years?
When will he announce an enhanced hill livestock compensatory allowance?
Mr. Curry
I agree with my hon. Friend that beef production is particularly important in the less-favoured areas.
He will know that the Scottish Beef Club has had great success in the export market and that the idea of Scottish beef has been extremely successful.
We are pursuing discussions on the future of the HLCAs following the autumn review and we shall announce the results as soon as we can.
Dr. David Clark
In view of the excellence of British beef, why is it that major British restaurant chains, which, incidentally make generous donations to the Conservative party, are unable, on the grounds of quantity, quality and consistency, to use a single ounce of British beef in their restaurants, when at the same time 1 million tonnes is rotting in intervention?
Mr. Curry
The reason is that under the general agreement on tariffs and trade beef from other countries, notably Australia, comes into the European Community.
I have no doubt that the hon. Gentleman supports the liberalisation of trade under GATT and that he would not wish to defy the GATT rules.
In many cases those imports are available at a cheaper price than within the Community.
The answer is to unwind some of the absurdities of the intervention system which mean that far too much money is devoted to financing the depreciation of beef rather than to putting it on the table.
We must also try to direct support much more to the specialist producers of high-quality British beef.
Schools Liaison Programmes
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what schools liaison programmes his Department promotes which enhance young peoples awareness of agricultural issues.
Mr. Curry
Young people's awareness of agricultural issues is promoted through publicity material, information packs and planned visits to farms.
Mr. Taylor
Does my hon. Friend agree that information on agricultural issues for school children is important?
Will he provide encouragement so that those schemes teach young people, particularly from inner-city areas, that the beauty of rural areas such as parts of my constituency is not necessarily just given by the good Lord, but often is created by man, because of the traditional and excellent pursuits of hunting and shooting?
Mr. Curry
It is important that children are able to find out what happens in the countryside.
Three points are important.
First, everyone should realise that the countryside is a workplace and not just a recreation place.
Secondly, recreation and sport and conservation are allied activities.
Thirdly, there is a great heritage in the countryside and we have sought to enhance that, in particular through our environmentally sensitive areas scheme.
I have no doubt that that will be an extremely good place for school children to begin.
I know that the farmers of Esher would particularly welcome school visits.
Mr. Roy Hughes
Does the hon. Gentleman appreciate that young people show a keen awareness of animal welfare?
They will be greatly perturbed by the way in which his Department is undermining the provisions of my Badgers Act 1991 by issuing licences to more than 600 fox hunts to enable them to dig up badger setts and unleash terriers into them.
Will the hon. Gentleman give the House an assurance this afternoon that that practice will stop immediately?
Mr. Curry
The hon. Gentleman has got hold of the wrong end of the stick.
The dreadful things that he forecasts will not happen.
I suggest that he waits for the consultation paper and I think that he will then be reassured.
There is no doubt that it would be to the advantage of school children if they could find out what happens in the countryside.
Perhaps they should recognise that the countryside is not just a theme park where everything is nice, woolly and furry, but that real combat occurs between animals.
Mr. Sayeed
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is worth pointing out to young children that in 1950 it took a man on average industrial wages a week to earn enough to buy his Christmas turkey and that it now takes a person in a similar position just 90 minutes to do so?
Is not that a tribute to the massive increase in the productivity of the farming community and to the massive increase in the earning power of the British worker?
Mr. Curry
I am sure that that is absolutely true.
I am sure also that, in the light of our education reforms, most children will eventually be able to do that calculation.
Mr. Pike
Does the Minister also accept that, in considering agriculture, it is crucial to bear in mind the responsibility of all involved in the food chain, from production to consumption, to ensure that at all times consumers get good, healthy, pure products at the best possible price?
Mr. Curry
That is a self-evident truth.
When children go into the countryside and visit farms, they will see that the conditions are completely different from those that their fathers may have seen when they worked on farms during their holidays — that was one of the great traditions of United Kingdom cities.
Our aim is to ensure that food is wholesome, of high quality and produced as economically as possible and to ensure that, not only in the United Kingdom but in the export market, people have the benefits of an outstanding product.
MacSharry Proposals
Mr. Moss
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what estimate has been made of the effect on the EC budget of implementation of the MacSharry proposals.
Mr. Gummer
The Commission admits that its proposals would increase the cost of the common agricultural policy to the Community budget.
Mr. Moss
Will my right hon. Friend clarify a puzzle which arose during yesterday's European Community debate?
On two separate occasions, when questioned about the cost of implementing some proposals under the Maastricht treaty, the Leader of the Opposition said that the money could be found from the reform of the common agricultural policy.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The question must relate to Government policy.
The hon. Gentleman knows the rules.
Mr. Moss
If the money can be saved from the reform of the common agricultural policy, would not that mean a reduction in income for farmers in my constituency, unemployment and a reduction in the rural economy?
Mr. Gummer
There is no doubt that reform of the common agricultural policy must be carried out in a way which ensures that there is no discrimination against farmers in the United Kingdom.
The proposal of the Leader of the Opposition to spend the money that is now spent on British farmers on farmers in southern Europe is something about which every farmer should know — unless the Opposition spokesman will advise him differently and tell the House when he has so advised him.
Mr. Hume
Does the Minister agree that those mainly affected by the MacSharry proposals are the 3 per cent.
of farmers across Europe who are large farmers and that small farmers — those with less than 125 acres of cereals, fewer than 90 beef cows or fewer than 40 milk cows — are not affected?
When that is added to the fact that rural development is now a major part of the Maastricht treaty and of the MacSharry proposals, is not that a very good thing for rural society?
Mr. Gummer
The hon. Gentleman is entirely wrong and his views are opposed by the farmers unions of every part of the United Kingdom, including such’ big’farmers as the crofters in Scotland.
All of them say that the MacSharry plans would be devastating for farmers in every part of the United Kingdom.
The hon. Gentleman's views can give comfort only to the farmers outside the United Kingdom on whom the Leader of the Opposition wishes to spend our money.
Mr. Marlow
Would not my right hon. Friend be insulting British farmers if he were to suggest that he should decimate the financial support available to them so that it could be given to M. Delors for use as a slush fund for so-called cohesion — a bribe to the countries of southern Europe?
Will my right hon. Friend ensure that if anyone does make such a daft suggestion, that person's name is put loudly and clearly in front of the British farming community?
Mr. Gummer
So far, the only person who has made that suggestion is the Leader of the Opposition.
Therefore, I am quite happy to put his name — at least in this context — in front of the general public.
The proposals suggested yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition were clearly to ensure that British farmers reduced their already low incomes and that the money be used for development — rural and urban — in the southern parts of the European Community.
Dr. David Clark
Will the Minister explain to the hon. Member for Cambridgeshire, North-East (Mr. Moss) that the common agricultural policy which he seeks to defend is a grossly inefficient system?
As my right hon. Friend pointed out from the Dispatch Box yesterday, only £1 in £3 of agricultural support goes to farmers, which we do not think makes much sense.
As the Minister and I agree that the fatal weakness of the MacSharry proposals is that they will increase the cost of the common agricultural policy, thus breaching the budgetary limit, will the Minister give the House a guarantee today that the Government will use their right of veto on any proposals to breach the budgetary limit?
He has those powers; will he use them?
Mr. Gummer
The hon. Gentleman quoted his right hon. Friend, but he should examine the words again.
The right hon. Gentleman said yesterday that’ it must be the major source of the re-orientated finance for the development of cohesion in the Community.’
That can mean only that the common agricultural policy is to be reformed in such a way as to take money from the United Kingdom and give it for cohesion to countries outside.
The Leader of the Opposition would have signed the treaty without the debate at Maastricht — he would have accepted anything that M. Delors put in front of him.
He would have lain down and been rolled over and that is why he must never be Prime Minister.
Mr. Marland
Far from taking money away from British farmers, will my right hon. Friend bear it in mind during his negotiations with Mr. MacSharry the inequity in national aids?
Food from Britain has only six representatives trying to sell British food in Spain, whereas Food from France — its French equivalent — has 60 representatives trying to sell French food in Spain.
Will my right hon. Friend find out what can be done to even up the balance?
Far from reducing the amount of money available for selling British produce, will he try to increase it?
Mr. Gummer
My hon. Friend has highlighted the fundamental difference.
The Government are determined to get rid of arrangements that differentiate against the United Kingdom, whereas the Labour party wishes to increase such differentiation and to pay farmers and others in the southern European states money that will come from the very low incomes of British farmers.
That is the difference — the Conservatives support this country.
Veal Crates
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what discussions he has had with the EC regarding the use of veal crates; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Maclean
A Community directive setting minimum standards for the welfare of veal calves was agreed by majority vote at the October Agriculture Council.
In our view this directive does not properly tackle the cruelty of the veal crate and we voted against it.
British standards for veal production will not, however, be reduced and consumers can be sure that if they buy British veal it will have been humanely produced.
Mr. Mullin
I welcome the fact that we voted against it, but this is one area in which a stand against the EC would enjoy the support of people of all political persuasions in this country.
A ban on the import of veal from countries that produce it by a method banned here would constitute such a stand.
Failing that, should we put the grand EC official who is in charge of such policies — Mr. Legras — in a veal crate for a few weeks and see whether he changes his mind after that?
Mr. Maclean
We have made a stand on veal.
We held out strongly in the EC to have our standards implemented widely throughout the Community and when it was clear that other nations were not of a similar mind, we voted against the directive.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, our mutual friend Mr. Legras does not seem to take kindly to the breaking of Community law or the treaty.
We cannot unilaterally break the law in the way that the hon. Gentleman suggests, but we can mobilise consumer opinion.
No inhumanely produced veal need be eaten in this country if consumers say that they do not want to touch the filthy stuff.
Dame Janet Fookes
I welcome my hon. Friend's robust attitude, but is it correct that it is still possible to export calves which end up in crates that would be illegal in this country?
Mr. Maclean
Yes, that is true.
That was the subject of the correspondence from Mr. Legras when the hon. Member for Sunderland, South (Mr. Mullin) tried to introduce his ten-minute Bill.
The EC has made it clear that live animal exports and imports are a fundamental tenet of the treaty and that it is not up to any nation unilaterally to seek to restrict that trade.
That is why we shall insist on the toughest possible standards in the Community directive on the transport of animals, so that animals are moved across frontiers or within any country as safely and humanely as possible.
Mr. Morley
The Minister said that British consumers would not want to buy inhumanely produced veal if they had the choice.
How do consumers know whether their veal was produced inhumanely abroad or humanely in this country?
When will the Minister introduce proposals for proper labelling, so that consumers can choose food products that have been humanely produced?
I assure him of our full support for action to stop the hypocrisy of exporting calves for veal production in other countries.
Mr. Maclean
If we are talking about hypocrisy, let me say that it would be hypocrisy to suggest that we have the powers unilaterally to introduce a labelling directive to discriminate against foreign veal.
The hon. Gentleman is making the same point that his hon. Friend the Member for Sunderland, South (Mr. Mullin) made.
All these matters have to be dealt with on a Europeanwide basis if we are to have a directive.
Alternatively, it can be done by individual companies and by retailers.
The British Government cannot order people to label inhumanely produced veal, but consumers can demand it, supermarkets can provide the labelling and the restaurant trade can do the same if it is so minded.
It is consumer pressure that will bring about a change.
Bloodstock Breeding
Mr. Bellingham
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when he next expects to meet representatives of the bloodstock breeding industry to discuss the state of this sector.
Mr. Curry
I have no plans to meet the horse bloodstock industry, but my noble Friend Lady Trumpington is to attend the annual luncheon of the Thoroughbred Breeders Association on 9 January 1992.
Mr. Bellingham
Is the Minister aware that a number of stud farms in my constituency, including two owned by Her Majesty the Queen, and also stud farms in general make a tremendous contribution to the rural economy?
That is valuable at a time when farming is in difficulties.
Is he also aware that bloodstock is subject to a far higher rate of VAT than in this country in France or in Ireland?
That is an extremely serious problem which is leading to a number of stud owners moving their horses abroad.
Will he tell the House what he is doing about that and what discussions he is having with the Treasury?
Mr. Curry
My hon. Friend will know that my hon. Friend the Minister of State, Treasury, has taken the lead in the discussions.
The Irish rate of VAT is safe because it was in place before the cut-off date in the Community.
The French rate of VAT may be challenged and may have to rise.
We cannot lower the rate of VAT under Community rules, but we can try to find a way to assist the industry.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State, Treasury, is conducting discussions with the industry on the basis of a proposal for a flat rate agricultural tax which would replace the 17.5 per cent.
VAT.
The discussions are close to a conclusion and I understand that my hon. Friend will shortly be writing to the industry to clear up some of the remaining points, which will isolate the relatively few issues to be settled.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Is the Minister aware that feeling within the industry and the related sales industry is that if the VAT gap between this country and Ireland and between this country and France is not narrowed significantly we could lose a considerable part of our breeding industry and our entire sales industry, which are the most prestigious in the world?
Although the recent approaches to the Treasury and the manner of their reception have been much appreciated, there is a feeling that little may yet be done to prevent the most serious disruption of breeding and horse sales in this country.
Mr. Curry
I appreciate the hon. Gentleman's concern.
He knows that we cannot reduce the VAT rate as a solution, but he also knows that we can take measures that would have a similar effect in helping the industry.
A meeting a week ago today between officials and the industry got to grips with some of the remaining problems.
As a result of that, my hon. Friend the Minister of State, Treasury, will write to the industry shortly.
That should clear the way for what may be the final round of discussions which, I hope, can reach an agreement to achieve a measure that is equivalent to a reduction in VAT, within the Community rules which permit it.
Beef
Mr. Knox
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when he is next due to meet the president of the National Farmers Union to discuss the beef sector.
Mr. Curry
My right hon. Friend the Minister and I are in frequent contact with the president of the National Farmers Union about all aspects of the agriculture industry, including the beef sector.
Mr. Knox
What plans does my hon. Friend have to take up the 20 ecu supplement to the suckler cow premium agreed by the Council of Ministers on 11 December?
Mr. Curry
We are discussing our response to that decision.
We voted against it on the ground that it seemed absurd to respond to a crisis in the beef sector simply by throwing yet more money into a system which has not been reformed.
As the intervention system remains entirely in place, and as the Community has not decided to try to make savings by reforming the system to make it less attractive, it seemed to us to be the wrong way to tackle the problem.
There are structural difficulties and the Council of Ministers has come up with a typical measure — just finding a few extra bob to see whether it will solve the problem.
We are discussing the result of that Council with a view to taking our own decision.
Mr. Edwards
Many beef farmers in my constituency of Monmouth are deeply anxious about the impact of the MacSharry proposals.
Their farms are generally too large to get the benefits of the MacSharry proposals, but they do not get the benefit of the less-favoured area payments.
May I invite the Minister to come to Monmouth to discuss those problems with the farmers there, which will give him the opportunity to assure them that he is seeking to protect their interests?
Mr. Curry
My right hon. Friend has made that point personally to farmers of Monmouth.
The hon. Gentleman knows that our doors are always open to members of the farming or fishing communities who have problems and that we are active around the countryside.
The hon. Gentleman can be absolutely certain that we agree that the measures proposed by Mr. MacSharry are to the detriment of his farmers and farmers in every corner of the United Kingdom.
Mr. Knapman
Does my hon. Friend accept that the intervention scheme is a uniquely silly way of buying a first-class article, storing it for months on end, and then dumping it back on the market as a third-class article?
Will he please reconsider the scheme as soon as possible?
Mr. Curry
As my hon. Friend knows, our fundamental position on reform is that the intervention system must be made a great deal less attractive.
It was designed as a safety net, but in many respects it has now become a high wire for farmers.
We should move to a system under which the specialist producer can be rewarded for producing an increasingly better carcase and an increasingly improved quality of meat, which will find a world market.
If intervention remains, it should be reduced to the original concept of a safety net for use in extreme emergencies.
Food and Drink (Trade Deficit)
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement about the United Kingdom trade deficit in 1991 as it applies to food and drink.
Mr. Gummer
Net imports of food, feed and drink into the United Kingdom were £4.7 billion for the period January to October 1991.
This compared with £5.2 billion for the same period in 1990.
Mr. Barnes
Is the Minister aware that since he was first appointed to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in 1985 there has been a £28 billion food deficit, which amounts to £15 million per year or £1,200 per household?
Is that not a pretty inept performance?
Mr. Gummer
Very much the same situation has obtained under Ministers of both Governments for the past 20 years —
Interruption
That happens to be a fact, and it was this Government who set out to do something about it.
The hon. Gentleman may like to ask some of his right hon. and hon. Friends what they did about it.
They did not even approach the matter.
We are dealing with it as well as we can in the circumstances and are beginning to have some real effect.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will ask his constituents to remember that if they want to do something about that matter there is one answer — to buy the best food that there is, and that is British produced.
Mr. Sims
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the drinks industry enjoys a surplus mainly because the value of exports of Scotch whisky far exceeds the value of imports of wine?
He will be aware that there are Commission proposals on harmonisation with a zero rate for wine but a substantially higher rate for spirits, which is bound to have an adverse effect on our trade balance.
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that he will press for harmonisation based on alcoholic strength, or at least some mechanism for capping the rate on spirits?
Mr. Gummer
That is a matter for my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer, but I can assure my hon. Friend that my right hon. Friend the Chancellor will not allow the European Community to roll over him — as would be the case if the Leader of the Opposition were in charge of the affairs of this country — but will be fighting hard for Britain's interests, and especially for the interests of the Scotch whisky industry.
Mr. Tony Banks
Why does this country import more champagne per head than any other country?
Could it be that the people of this country are storing up champagne to celebrate the wondrous event of the Tories' being smashed at the next election?
Mr. Gummer
That is an entirely new version of the phrase,’ champagne socialist’.
The hon. Gentleman does not set an example to others in the consumption of champagne, as I do not believe that he seeks such a tipple
Mr. Banks
The Minister is wrong there.
Mr. Gummer
In that case, the hon. Gentleman sets an example and shows that in a free society people can decide what they want to drink.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman wants a society in which people are prevented from drinking what they want.
Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowance
Sir Michael Shaw
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make it his policy to include environmental protection features to the hill livestock compensatory allowance scheme.
Mr. Gummer
My right hon. Friends and I are currently seeking the views of interested parties on a package of measures designed to enhance environmental aspects of our support for hill farming.
We will study the views put to us carefully before drawing final conclusions.
Sir Michael Shaw
Why are the North York moors not included in the 12 proposed environmentally sensitive areas?
Mr. Gummer
Because our statutory advisers did not recommend that they be included.
Statutory advisers from the conservation bodies all gave us a list of the areas that they wanted included and, for the most part, we followed those lists in so far as they agreed with one another .
The area to which my hon. Friend refers was not considered such a high priority as others.
As a result of our decisions, we will now spend five times as much on the environmentally sensitive areas and they will cover three times more of the United Kingdom than previously — more than 12 per cent.
of the land area of England.
That is a remarkable achievement and I hope that we can build on it in the future.
MacSharry Proposals
Mr. Allen McKay
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when he last met the National Farmers Union to discuss the MacSharry proposals for the reform of the common agricultural policy.
Mr. Gummer
I meet representatives of the National Farmers Union regularly to discuss a range of agricultural issues.
Mr. McKay
Does the Minister appreciate that his tenure of office as Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food is regarded by farmers as disastrous?
Does he agree with his Parliamentary Secretary, the hon. Member for Penrith and The Border (Mr. Maclean), who said:
’ Never have I known a time when farmers were more fearful of the future, and never has that fear been more justified’?
Mr. Gummer
In referring to the MacSharry proposals, my hon. Friend said what was true.
I am happy to say that the farmers of the United Kingdom believe in this ministerial team and in the Government, who are fighting for them against the proposals of the European Community.
They know that the Labour party, led by the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock), would lie down and be run over by anything that the Community proposed.
Mr. Bill Walker
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the hill farmers and raspberry farmers in Tayside look on him and his team as the best champions of their interests?
They regard the problems as being a result of the structure of the common agricultural policy.
How wise we were not to allow the Europeans to extend their competence to other areas.
Not only our farmers but everyone else would suffer if we followed the views expressed yesterday by the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr. Gummer
My hon. Friend is right.
The European Community's future is best served by those who believe in Europe and in putting forward strongly the position of their countrymen, farmers and those who have interests in the United Kingdom.
We must ensure that that balance exists.
It was upheld by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister at Maastricht, but it would have been undermined if the Leader of the Opposition had had anything to do with governing the country.
Intervention Stocks
Mr. Eadie
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement about the current level of intervention stocks in the United Kingdom and the EC.
Mr. Curry
Tables showing the current level of intervention stocks in the United Kingdom and the EC are placed in the Library of the House each month.
Mr. Eadie
The Minister must be aware that under the 1988 reform package we were assured that intervention stocks would disappear, but they are now at record levels, whether for skimmed milk, butter, beef or cereals.
Does the Minister agree that that reform package was merely a cosmetic exercise?
Does he further agree that we must now have a fundamental review of the 1988 package, as advocated by the Labour party?
Mr. Curry
We must have reform of the CAP and it must be continuous, because the world situation keeps changing, but we must ensure that it is the right reform.
It would be dead easy to reform the CAP at our farmers' expense and simply shovel the money across to other farmers, which appears to be the Labour party's proposal, but we do not share that view; we must ensure that it is a balanced proposal and that in the United Kingdom, where we have efficient agriculture, the efficient farmer has a long-term future.
Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Mr. Harris
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what proportion of the English countryside is covered by environmentally sensitive areas.
Mr. Gummer
Environmentally sensitive areas currently cover 3.7 per cent.
of the agricultural land in England.
Proposals I announced last month to create 12 new environmentally sensitive areas will more than treble the area covered.
Mr. Harris
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
Does he agree that the fact that so many parts of the country are queueing up for ESA status is a tribute to him and to the usefulness of such areas?
When will he announce the extension of existing areas?
Will he consider sympathetically inclusion of the Penwith moors in that list?
Mr. Gummer
I hope to announce the extensions soon after we resume after Christmas.
I thank my hon. Friend for his compliments.
The House should note that the system of environmentally sensitive areas, invented in this country by this Government, is now being copied by almost every other country in the European Community.
We are leading in the European Community, rather than allowing others to lead us.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. McAllion
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 19 December.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. McAllion
Today Scottish trade unions are lobbying the Scottish Office to support full employment policies.
Is the Prime Minister aware that in the year since he took office Scottish dole queues have lengthened by a further 28,000, leaving almost 250,000 Scots without work and leaving him with an even worse record than his predecessor, the former first lady of mass unemployment?
Does he agree that the price being paid by 2.5 million unemployed this Christmas is too high, and that if a price has to be paid for the economic mess that our country is in, it should be paid in full by himself and his ragbag of right hon. Friends?
The Prime Minister
In the period of this Parliament, unemployment in the hon. Gentleman's constituency has fallen by 39 per cent.
But I appreciate that every job lost is a personal tragedy for the person involved.
The latest figures show that the increase in unemployment is continuing to slow down.
Vacancies at November are now at their highest level for some time.
The hon. Gentleman must bear in mind what is happening elsewhere: unemployment has risen in all the Community countries except the Netherlands, in every country of the European Free Trade Association, and in every G7 country except Japan.
That is a reflection of the fact that the world economy is slowing down.
The hon. Gentleman would address the problem more accurately were he to acknowledge that fact.
Mr. Alton
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Alton
Now that it is clear that pre-Christmas Sunday trading has simply been a stalking horse for all-year Sunday trading, will the Prime Minister join me in congratulating stores such as House of Fraser, C and A, and Marks and Spencer which have upheld Sunday trading laws and refused to break them?
Will he condemn those who have flouted the law simply for commercial gain?
The Prime Minister
As the hon. Gentleman knows from previous exchanges in the House, following the appeal to the European Court the present law is unclear and no one is entirely certain what the correct law is at present.
As the Attorney-General explained to the House some time ago, the law is not suspended and local authorities, who have the primary duty of enforcing the law, should decide their own course of action.
I believe that, under existing provisions, that is the only way to handle the matter.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
As I inadvertently called two hon. Members from the Opposition Benches, I shall call Sir Peter Tapsell.
Sir Peter Tapsell
Does my right hon. Friend agree that today's raising of German interest rates, at a time when the German economy is in a different stage of its economic cycle from that of France, Britain and the United States, illustrates the great difficulties of a single European currency?
Is it not extraordinary that the Leader of the Opposition is incapable of understanding that we might frequently find that monetary and interest rate policies were wholly inappropriate to the requirements of this country if we join a single European currency?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes an important point, and one which is especially relevant when the divergence in the performance of the economies of Europe is still so great.
If and when there is convergence on a whole range of issues, circumstances may change, but we are certainly many years away from that.
Mr. Thorne
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Thorne
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the news that mortgage lenders are introducing a package to assist people who are in difficulty with their mortgages will be commended throughout the country?
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that this is not something that has arisen in the past few days, but has been carefully negotiated by the Government over many weeks?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right about that.
We have been pursuing proposals for some time.
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor has had a number of discussions with the Council of Mortgage Lenders and others, and he will be announcing a package of measures later this afternoon.
Mr. Kinnock
Is it not clear from today's awful rise in unemployment to more than 2.5 million that the recession is continuing?
Since the Government obviously have no idea what to do about it, will the Prime Minister give me an undertaking that he will call a general election very early in the new year?
The Prime Minister
I will give the right hon. Gentleman no such undertaking; nor did he expect me to.
What is clear is that the rate of increase in unemployment is beginning to slow, and that is very welcome.
The figures are quite clear about that.
Also, job vacancies are rising, unit wage costs are falling and productivity is continuing to improve.
That is what will make us more competitive and what will create more jobs.
It is not a short-term problem; it is a matter that we have to get right to ensure the long-term prosperity of this country.
Mr. Kinnock
I am sorry that the Prime Minister is continuing to run away from the electorate.
Since the right hon. Gentleman became Prime Minister, 800,000 jobs have been lost, 80,000 homes have been repossessed, and 45,000 businesses have failed.
That is the record of a completely discredited Government — a Government who must go, and quickly.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman has no policies whatever to deal with employment.
His jobs tax would cost 50,000 jobs; his strikes charter would cost jobs and lose orders; the sweatshop mentality on the Opposition Front Bench would risk losing the 450,000 jobs that have come in; their minimum wage policy would cost hundreds of thousands of jobs; and the abolition, one way or another, of the trade union legislation that we have produced would reintroduce the difficulties that we faced in the 1960s and 1970s.
The right hon. Gentleman's policies would reintroduce the levels of unemployment that we saw in the 1930s.
Mr. Kinnock
When the Government came into power unemployment was 1.25 million.
At the time of the last general election, unemployment was going down.
The right hon. Gentleman has spent the past two years as Chancellor of the Exchequer and Prime Minister.
In that time he has put unemployment up by nearly 1 million, so he can offer us no lectures on the subject of unemployment.
The Prime Minister
I can certainly inform the right hon. Gentleman about matters that he does not seem to understand.
Unemployment has risen in virtually every western country in the past decade.
Many of the major industrial countries have seen unemployment increase —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is a terrible noise to make.
The Prime Minister
It is clear that the Opposition Whips have been active.
Unemployment has been rising in the United States, Italy, France and Canada, and in every country of the European Community.
Only the right hon. Gentleman believes that we can be insulated from what is happening throughout the world.
Sir Robert Rhodes James
As the Secretary-General of the United Nations, Mr. Perez de Cuellar, is retiring at the end of the month, would it not be appropriate on behalf of the House and of all parties for my right hon. Friend to record our gratitude and appreciation for a fine international servant?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to join my hon. Friend in that tribute, which I think is the united view of the House.
Mr. Perez de Cuellar has had a lengthy and distinguished record as Secretary-General and the House would wish to record its appreciation of his activities and those of his personal representative in securing the release of so many hostages.
Mr. David Marshall
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 19 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Marshall
The Prime Minister approves of the obscene pay rises and profits made by the privatised monopolies.
Does he also approve of the scandalous racketeering by the gas, electricity and British Telecom undertakings in imposing huge standing charges, which often amount to more than 50 per cent.
of the bill for the most vulnerable people in our society and are causing millions of pensioners and poor people to face a cold and miserable Christmas?
Does he have any compassion at all?
Will he take steps to abolish standing charges or is he the Scrooge of the 1990s?
The Prime Minister
I see that the Christmas spirit has descended upon the hon. Gentleman a little early.
Standing charges have often been discussed in the House.
The difficulty is that their abolition would have a direct relationship to an increase in unit costs, which would bear most heavily on many of the people who are most in need.
Therefore, it is not a way to help people who are particularly in need.
Many would suffer from that change.
Mr. Hill
Does my right hon. Friend accept that practically everyone in the House welcomes his initiative on repossessions, no matter what political claptrap we may hear later?
The main problem is the dead hand of local authorities, which keep tens of thousands of properties empty.
Is it not time for an initiative to make local authorities hand over their property to housing associations, and could regional ombudsman be set up for that purpose?
The Prime Minister
In a few moments my right hon. Friend the Chancellor will set out our detailed proposals to deal with the problem of repossessions.
If my hon. Friend will forgive me, I shall not trail that in advance.
My hon. Friend's point about local authorities in terms of voids and, often, delays in letting is a genuine problem.
Performance is patchy in different parts of the country.
In many inner-city areas, typically though not exclusively run by Labour councils, the policies followed mean that many properties are left empty unnecessarily when many people could safely live in them.
Mr. Michael
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 19 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Michael
On the day when the Prime Minister's unemployment figures have gone over 2.5 million, will he consider the training and employment needs of adults with learning difficulties, and people over 19 with mental handicaps whom he and his Government have abandoned?
Will he consider in particular the training workshop recycling products in my constituency, Track 2000 in Splott, whose income was ended as a result of his cuts in employment training, where the trainers, who are on the dole, and the trainees, who do not get a training allowance, are coming in voluntarily?
People are still being referred to the centre by social services because there is nowhere else for them to go.
What does the Prime Minister propose to do about that?
The Prime Minister
If the hon. Gentleman were genuinely concerned about employment and training, he would be prepared to condemn the Trades Union Congress boycott of employment action, youth training, and training and enterprise councils, but neither he nor his party has done so.
In the coming year, about 1 million people will be helped through employment and training programmes to get back to work.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that we are spending on training and enterprise two and a half times as much in real terms as the last Labour Government.
When they left office, they were training 6,000 people a year.
This year, we shall be training 260,000.
Mr. Hayward
Has my right hon. Friend had time to notice this week substantial orders from abroad for British Aerospace, Rolls-Royce and Govan Shipbuilders?
Is it not churlish that Labour Members have not welcomed any of those orders?
The Prime Minister
Yes, I welcome the substantial orders that have been received and I was pleased to see that in the past few days a number of them have come here.
The special order for Govan will be particularly welcome.
It is a shame that Opposition Members utterly neglect to welcome the successes of this country and take every opportunity to run them down as well as the prospects of the country.
Mr. Patchett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 19 December.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Patchett
What single word would the Prime Minister use to describe his Chancellor of the Exchequer?
The Prime Minister
He is a very good Chancellor.
House of Commons
Monday 13 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
TRANSPORT
London Transport
Mr. Carrington
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport when he next expects to meet the chairman of London Transport to discuss improvements to public transport in London.
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr. Malcolm Rifkind)
I meet the chairman of London Transport regularly to discuss a variety of issues, including future improvements and standards of service.
Mr. Carrington
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware how welcome the prospect of bus deregulation in London is, with the likelihood of improved services and of getting more people back on buses?
Will he take steps to ensure that buses have greater priority over other road users and to eliminate one of the major causes of road congestion in London — the long time that it takes to get passengers loaded on to one-man operated buses because drivers have to give change to passengers?
Mr. Rifkind
I welcome what my hon. Friend said.
Bus deregulation in other parts of the country has led to much innovation in the bus industry and to a 19 per cent.
increase in bus mileage.
I agree with my hon. Friend about encouraging the quick movement of buses throughout the capital.
The red route option, which we introduced, has already shown that bus services improve when comparable improvements are made to traffic management.
Mr. Sedgemore
Will the Secretary of State confirm that the start of crossrail is being delayed?
As proposals for the Hackney to Chelsea tube line will not be tabled until crossrail starts, does that mean that development of the Hackney to Chelsea line will be delayed?
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman discuss that issue with London Transport?
Mr. Rifkind
The crossrail Bill has been introduced and I have no doubt that it will be taken forward with all proper expedition.
British Rail and London Transport have a massive expansion programme of new investment, which means that certain projects must be completed before others can reasonably be expected to begin.
The priorities are extension of the Jubilee line, then crossrail and then development of the Chelsea to Hackney line.
The safeguarding of the Chelsea to Hackney line has already been announced.
Mr. Gerald Bowden
When my right hon. and learned Friend meets the chairman of London Transport to discuss improvements, will he draw to his attention the importance of providing for south-east London, which is so ill-served by the underground system, and of driving a route through Camberwell, Dulwich and onwards to Crystal Palace?
Mr. Rifkind
I am aware that, historically, south London has not been as well served by the underground as north London.
The Jubilee line extension will be a major new additional part of the infrastructure and will serve certain parts of south London, but I take note of my hon. Friend's other comments.
Ms. Ruddock
When the Secretary of State next meets the chairman of London Transport, will he confess that the Government are in a complete mess?
Will he acknowledge, unlike the view of the hon. Member for Fulham (Mr. Carrington), that there is overwhelming opposition to bus deregulation in London?
Will he explain rumours of a Government U-turn on the need for a strategic authority?
Will he recommend a cheap and cheerful service for the underground, or a new compensation plan of chocolates and flowers?
I suggest that the Secretary of State take a little time to read our new document,’ London: a strategy for transport’, which might help him and his colleagues to get sorted out on the need for better transport in the capital city.
Mr. Rifkind
I certainly hope that the hon. Lady will cheer up because —
Ms. Ruddock
I am cheerful.
Mr. Rifkind
I am glad that the hon. Lady is cheering up.
I must remind her that, to judge by the performance of the last Labour Government as opposed to the promises of the present Labour Opposition, Londoners can look forward only to cuts in the investment required.
I remind her that the Labour Government's White Paper of 1977 said that the upsurge in the subsidy in the early years of that decade had been accompanied by sharp cuts in investment.
That was our experience under the previous Labour Government and would be the experience of Londoners if there were ever to be the misfortune of another Labour Government.
Kent Rail Services
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he has any plans to meet the chairman of British Rail to discuss commuter services in north-west Kent; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister for Public Transport (Mr. Roger Freeman)
My right hon. and learned Friend and I meet the chairman of British Rail regularly to discuss all current issues.
I recently travelled on the Kent rail service and visited my hon. Friend's constituency with him.
Mr. Dunn
I thank my hon. Friend for the time and trouble that he took last week to visit my constituency and see at first hand the problems caused by and resulting from British Rail.
Bearing in mind the fact that my constituents want a reliable and quality service, will he take steps today to confirm that the orders that are placed for the new Networker rolling stock will be supplied in the near future, for the betterment of the north-west Kent commuter?
Mr. Freeman
I can confirm that 486 vehicles for new Networker trains are being manufactured at a total cost of £365 million and that the first of those trains will come into service on my hon. Friend's line in May this year.
Some 63 stations have already had their platforms lengthened to take the new longer train — positive evidence of the Government's support for British Rail's expansion programme.
Mr. Prescott
Will the Minister confirm that the order for the north Kent line, the Kent line, is the one that has not yet been agreed by the Treasury?
Would not it be much better to pinch another of Labour's ideas and lease the 188 trains rather than provide compensation schemes, chocolates and flowers?
Mr. Freeman
I have already explained to the House that 486 vehicles are being manufactured for the Kent link services, which serve Dartford, Swanley and Sevenoaks.
The orders have been placed —
Mr. Prescott
Only for the first three batches.
Mr. Freeman
— for the first three batches.
One hundred and eighty eight of the class 465 trains have been authorised, but not yet ordered, by British Rail.
We expect British Rail to give urgent consideration to the timing of the placement of that order.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Normally, I do not call hon. Members after Front Benchers, but I shall make an exception today.
Dame Peggy Fenner, first.
Dame Peggy Fenner
My hon. Friend will be aware that the commuters in Kent are looking for some advantages from the channel tunnel rail link.
Will he please assure me that the story in The Sunday Telegraph yesterday about considering yet another line is untrue?
Mr. Freeman
I can confirm that that story in The Sunday Telegraph is wrong.
The Government have made their position clear on the route of the high-speed rail link and there is no reconsideration.
Mr. Spearing
Will the Minister tell us whether these north Kent lines will be privatised under some new emanation of the London, Chatham and Dover railway?
If they are, will they run two, three or four types of train for typists, civil servants and even, perhaps, Ministers of the Crown who might occasionally like to travel by public transport?
Mr. Freeman
The House will expect me to apologise again for the remarks that I injudiciously made when I was trying to illustrate a simple point — that, with the private sector providing more rail services in future, I hope that a range of choice will be available to the travelling public in terms of price and time of day, rather like that provided by the airlines and the long-distance coach market.
On the north Kent lines, the Government want to see a modern, first-class rail system in Network SouthEast.
Substantial progress has been made on, for example, the Northampton line and the Thames and Chiltern lines and will shortly be made on the Kent link lines.
By the end of the decade Network SouthEast will be the best mass-transit system in the world.
Southend-on-Sea
Sir Teddy Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he will pay an official visit to Southend-on-Sea travelling by public transport.
Mr. Freeman
I should be happy to visit Southend-on-Sea travelling by British Rail at the earliest opportunity.
The Government are well aware of the problems on the London-Tilbury and Southend line and are keen to see improvements in that service.
The Government's recent increase in funding to British Rail will enable the modernisation of the line to be begun with a £50 million resignalling project.
Sir Teddy Taylor
Although the Minister's welcome acceptance of my invitation will bring confidence to the people of Southend that their serious problems with the Fenchurch street line are not being ignored, can he give some information soon about the replacement of the rolling stock, following his welcome assurance that we will have a good bit of money for the replacement of the signalling?
I sincerely express the hope that when my hon. Friend visits Southend-on-Sea his train there and his train back will be on time.
Mr. Freeman
I can give my hon. Friend some positive news.
The Department is urgently considering British Rail's proposals to meet the need for replacement rolling stock on the London-Tilbury and Southend line by transferring relatively new class 321 and class 315 rolling stock from other lines after resignalling on the London-Tilbury and Southend line is complete.
Rail Signalling Systems
Mr. Morgan
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what consultations he has had with the chairman of British Rail regarding the safety of the signalling systems in use on the Cardiff-Paddington line.
Mr. Rifkind
I have frequent meetings with the chairman of British Rail at which various safety-related topics are discussed.
Mr. Morgan
Will the Secretary of State confirm that, subsequent to the accident at the Severn tunnel on 7 December, the Government's railway inspectorate removed and confiscated a length of self-healing cable, which is suspected to be part of the cause of the signalling failures that may have led to the accident?
Since then, that length of self-healing cable has been kept under lock and key at the railway inspectorate building at Reading.
It has not been released for independent investigation or for investigation by BR experts, so it is not part of the evidence that is being considered at the BR internal inquiry now under way.
Does the Secretary of State agree that that action demonstrates an appalling lack of trust between the Government's railway inspectorate and BR in discovering the cause of that accident?
Mr. Rifkind
The hon. Gentleman should not draw that type of conclusion.
In addition to BR's internal inquiry, the railway inspectorate, which is totally independent, is to carry out its own examination of that accident.
It is wise to allow the inspectorate to begin its inquiry.
We will all look carefully at the conclusions that it draws from its work and from the evidence submitted to it.
Mr. Prescott
If the Secretary of State has discussed inter-city routes with the chairman of British Rail, will he tell us what is his view, if not the view of Cabinet colleagues, on the privatisation of InterCity?
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman require the guaranteeing of through routes to all parts of the United Kingdom?
Is he prepared to give a subsidy to maintain those routes to guarantee private profit rather than meet public transport needs?
Mr. Rifkind
I think that the hon. Gentleman is referring to certain press reports that appeared last week which referred to an alleged internal British Rail document about the implications of privatisation for InterCity.
Since those reports appeared, it has become clear that that document was not a BR document, but a bogus one, which I understand the hon. Member for Cunninghame, North (Mr. Wilson) was involved in passing to the press.
What the public would like to know is whether the Opposition, including the hon. Member for Cunninghame, North and the Front-Bench spokesman, the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, East (Mr. Prescott), were aware that that document was not a genuine document, but was something prepared, no doubt, for political purposes.
Rail Safety
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what plans he has to improve safety on the railways.
Mr. Rifkind
We are committed to improving the already extremely high level of railway safety.
Both British Rail and London Underground have major safety programmes under way.
These include investment in new equipment, new work procedures, additional training and new safety management systems.
Mr. Wareing
Does the Secretary of State agree that the number of railway accidents, which has increased recently, is in no small measure due to the under-investment in British Rail since the Tory Government placed restrictions on the railway system?
As Italy invests £63 per head, Germany £41 per head and this country only £24 per head in the railways, does not the Secretary of State have a teeny-weeny twinge of conscience when he hears of railway accidents?
Mr. Rifkind
I might, if the hon. Gentleman's facts were right, but they are wrong in two fundamental respects.
First, safety expenditure under the Government and British Rail is higher than it has ever been in British Rail's history — it has gone up from £140 million to £200 million.
Secondly, the number of significant train accidents recorded in 1990 was the lowest on record and it is expected that the final figure for 1991 will show a further decline.
Mr. Adley
I welcome the change of policy, which took place some time ago under my right hon. and learned Friend's sponsorship, of increasing investment in the railways.
However, does he agree that there has been a fall of well over half in the percentage of gross domestic product invested in the railways in the past 10 years?
If the public service obligation grant is substantially reduced, will not there be an inevitable increase in dissatisfaction with customer service?
If my right hon. and learned Friend believes in cause and effect, will he assure the House that he has learnt a lesson from it and that not only investment in but the subsidy to British Rail will be maintained to provide the service that people expect from the railways as we approach the end of the century?
Mr. Rifkind
I agree with a certain amount of what my hon. Friend said.
There is certainly a case for subsidy on the social railway, but I am sure that my hon. Friend will agree with the judgment of the previous Labour Government, who said that there was no case for subsidising inter-urban services, nor was there a social case for subsidy with regard to inter-city services.
As for rural railways and other parts of the subsidised railway, the Government have made it abundantly clear that investment will go ahead.
Indeed, it is now higher than at any time since the early 1960s.
Mr. Fearn
Is the Secretary of State aware that London Underground has stated that there is no limit to the number of people who wish to push themselves on to a London Underground train?
Does he intend to take action on that official statement?
Mr. Rifkind
We are anxious to see an expansion in the capacity of the underground.
One reason why we accepted the investment that London Underground told the Monopolies and Mergers Commission was necessary was to ensure that, in years to come, there would be the rolling stock to meet the problems to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
Mr. Bowis
My right hon. and learned Friend will recall the bomb explosion a month ago on the track in my constituency.
Mercifully, it did not cause the death and destruction intended.
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that, although we cannot protect the entire railway track throughout the country, a useful step may be to see whether cameras can be used at strategic points, not least at the busiest rail junction in the world?
Mr. Rifkind
I note what my hon. Friend says.
There are already a number of cameras at railway stations and other spots.
The incident to which my hon. Friend refers happened on track outside the railway station.
Clearly, it is not feasible to have cameras covering the whole of the track.
It is for those involved in enhancing the security of the infrastructure to identify where cameras would be most useful in the battle against terrorism and vandalism.
Mr. Snape
May I ask the Secretary of State about the current safety inquiry into the accident at Newton junction in Scotland?
Is it true that among the inquiry's recommendations are the provision of signalling alterations, the installation of new protective devices and changed signalling practice at that and other junctions, which may cause delays to approaching trains?
Would not it be safer, cheaper and quicker to reinstate the conventional junction lay-out at that and other accident sites?
Is not it beyond the realms of possibility that the Secretary of State and railway management have got it wrong on this occasion?
Mr. Rifkind
The inquiry's recommendations have not yet been put to Ministers.
When they are, we shall consider what the independent inquiry has identified and we shall do whatever is necessary to enhance safety in the use of the railways.
Fortunately, our railways remain one of the safest means of transport and I am sure that the whole House welcomes the fact that the number of significant accidents on the railways is now the lowest on record.
Roll On/Roll Off Ferries
Mr. Terry Davis
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport when he expects the higher standards of residual stability recommended by the steering committee of the roll on/roll off ferry safety research programme to be applied to all roll on/roll off ferries using British ports.
The Minister for Shipping (Mr. Patrick McLoughlin)
The maritime safety committee of the International Maritime Organisation has agreed that the higher standards referred to by the hon. Gentleman should be phased in, starting in October 1994.
When the matter is further considered by the committee in April, the United Kingdom will continue to press for the phasing-in period to be less than the proposed five years.
Mr. Davis
Will the Minister confirm that it is now five years since the Herald of Free Enterprise capsized, with tremendous loss of life, and two years since the committee for the research programme into the safety of roll on/roll off ferries said that something should be done about the safety of existing ferries — those built before 1990?
The Minister has now said that it will be another seven years before everyone crossing the channel on holiday will be carried as safely as possible.
Will he accept personal responsibility for any tragedies that occur in the meantime?
Mr. McLoughlin
A number of recommendations following the immediate aftermath of the Herald of Free Enterprise tragedy have been put into operation.
Research was carried out on the stability of such ferries, which took some time.
We are now trying to get agreement with the International Maritime Organisation to phase in the recommendations much more quickly, and the United Kingdom has led those calls.
It would not be acceptable to anyone for ships using United Kingdom ports to be treated differently.
I am not sure whether that is what the hon. Gentleman proposes.
The simple fact remains that, if we cannot get agreement, we may consider taking unilateral action in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Rathbone
Does my hon. Friend accept that the continuing Government pressure to bring about the improvements is welcome news?
Will he use the facilities of the European Community to ensure that ships that are manned and owned by France, for example, obey the new rules as quickly as possible?
Mr. McLoughlin
Yes, indeed.
That is one reason why we are trying to get agreement through the International Maritime Organisation.
We see the matter not as a purely British problem but as a far more widespread problem.
The best way in which to get agreement on those matters is through international agreement and international regulation.
Ms. Walley
Does the Minister agree that with ferry safety, as well as putting on pressure, the Government should act?
Is not it about time for the Government to move responsibility for ferry safety away from the Department of Transport to a separate, independent body so that we can be fully assured about all aspects of ferry safety, including crewing levels?
We do not want situations such as that at Commodore Shipping, where English officers and crews have been replaced by Norwegians and Poles who cannot even speak English, thus increasing the risk of severe ferry accidents.
Mr. McLoughlin
What we see from the Opposition spokesman is more confusion in the Labour party.
At one stage, Labour sheds crocodile tears for the decline in the merchant fleet, yet in the next breath, it says how much more regulation it would like to be applied to the merchant fleet.
The simple fact is that we believe, as the Opposition have so far, that the best way to make movements along those lines is through international agreement and through the International Maritime Organisation.
That is what we are trying to do.
Mr. Andrew Welsh
If the Minister is genuinely concerned about maritime safety, he must do something about the massive proposed cuts in the coastguard service.
Will he make a statement to the House about the matter and will he get rid of the unwanted and unnecessary cuts in the number of coastguards?
Mr. McLoughlin
If the hon. Gentleman thinks that cuts mean setting up 68 new sector organisations throughout the country, I agree that there are cuts.
Under the coastguard sector review, we have considered the most effective way to provide a coastguard service around the whole of the United Kingdom.
That has meant that we have increased the number of sector offices throughout the United Kingdom and we have announced a large new building programme.
We have increased the amount being spent on the coastguard service and a good coastguard service is available to our coastline.
Road Construction
Mr. Knox
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport how much has been spent on motorway and major trunk road construction in each of the past three years at constant prices.
The Minister for Roads and Traffic (Mr. Christopher Chope)
At constant prices, expenditure on construction of motorways and trunk roads in England was £782 million in 1988-89, £981 million in 1989-90 and £1,318 million in 1990-91.
Mr. Knox
In view of the congestion on motorways and major trunk roads, do not those figures still fall short of what is necessary and desirable, despite the improvement that has been made in the past three years?
Mr. Chope
There is much in what my hon. Friend says.
That is why the Government are committed to an expanded roads programme and continuing major investment in our transport infrastructure.
In that respect, the Government's policy is very different from that of the main Opposition parties, both of which are committed to reductions in real terms in expenditure on our roads.
Mr. Janman
My hon. Friend will be aware of the difficulties on the A13 — one of the main trunk links out of London to Essex and East Anglia.
Can he confirm that things are on course for the early completion of the Mar Dyke-Wellington link on the A13, and can he tell the House the date on which he hopes that work on that link will start?
Mr. Chope
I hope that the results of the public inquiry will be announced shortly and that the advance works on the link can be started before the end of the year, although that depends wholly on the outcome of the general election, because, as I said, the Opposition are committed to reducing expenditure on roads and vital pieces of road infrastructure such as that for which my hon. Friend rightly argues would be threatened by a Labour Government.
Rail Signalling
Mrs. Dunwoody
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he will instigate an independent inquiry into the signalling system of British Rail.
Mr. Rifkind
British Rail investigates all cases of signal failure.
Those caused by vandalism, or which result in accidents, are already investigated by independent agencies and there is therefore no need for a general inquiry into British Rail's signalling system.
Mrs. Dunwoody
The Secretary of State has said several times today how proud he is of British Rail's safety record — a pride which we all share — but that is surely no reason not to look again at the real doubts that have arisen in the past year about manning, the number of hours worked and the quality of some of the new systems of signalling that are being installed.
We need to maintain that safety record, and one of the best ways to improve the traveller's commitment to BR is to ensure that the signalling system is working very efficiently indeed.
Mr. Rifkind
I note what the hon. Lady says.
She is right to draw attention to the priorities involved in enhancing safety.
We are seeking to enable British Rail to take forward its safety standards by substantially increasing the resources available — from £140 million to £200 million in the current year.
That is an indication of the priority that we all attach to this important issue.
Mr. Batiste
Can my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that many of the problems that British Rail experienced on the east coast line at the end of last year were due to criminal vandalism affecting the signalling system, particularly in Scotland and the north of England?
What action is being taken to prevent a recurrence?
Mr. Rifkind
I agree that criminal vandalism is appalling: it can often lead to loss of life or the risk of serious injury.
Clearly, criminal proceedings, which are a matter for others, would normally be the consequence of such action.
British Rail is doing all in its power to protect its property from acts of vandalism, but, given the many thousands of miles of infrastructure, there are inevitably limits to what can be done by British Rail alone.
Mr. Wilson
In assessing the safety of signalling and other safety factors, will the Secretary of State take account of the genuine concerns, based on genuine information, about the Government's plans for InterCity?
In that context, will he break the habit of a lifetime and answer two questions straight?
Are there any plans to downgrade the role of the ScotRail board?
And is there any possibility — or is it part of current thinking — that InterCity tracks will be sold off as part of InterCity in the highly improbable event of the right hon. and learned Gentleman still being in a position to proceed with such a sale?
Mr. Rifkind
I note that the hon. Gentleman did not take this ideal opportunity to deny that he may have been involved in the passing to the press of a bogus document about the alleged future of InterCity.
On the future of InterCity, he should await the Government's White Paper.
The internal administration of British Rail is a matter for British Rail to decide.
Chelmsford-Liverpool Street Line
Mr. Burns
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport when he next plans to meet the chairman of British Rail to discuss the Chelmsford-Liverpool Street line.
Mr. Freeman
My right hon. and learned Friend and I regularly meet the chairman of British Rail to discuss all current issues.
The Chelmsford-Liverpool Street line is being resignalled and Liverpool Street station has recently been refurbished and its layout restructured to increase flexibility and capacity.
Mr. Burns
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
When he next speaks to the chairman of British Rail, will he tell him that, whereas there have been some improvements to the line in the past five years, my constituents are still extremely concerned about punctuality and the cleanliness of trains?
Will he please ensure that there is no slippage whatever in the time scale for the resignalling from Bethnal Green to Chelmsford which would obviously substantially enhance the service?
Mr. Freeman
My hon. Friend will understand that punctuality often depends on signalling as well as the quality of the rolling stock.
I can give my hon. Friend and his constituents the assurance that he seeks.
The £60 million resignalling programme for work between Liverpool Street and Southend Victoria will start this year and signalling work in the Chelmsford area will commence next year.
Mr. Tony Banks
The Minister will be aware that that line goes through Stratford station in my constituency.
Does he recall his recent visit to Stratford station, to which he was carried in his ministerial sedan chair by two sweating but cheerful typists?
He rightly said that passenger facilities were absolutely appalling, especially the absence of adequate public lavatories.
Is he aware that the situation remains the same, and will he tell us when something will be done about it?
Mr. Freeman
Yes, I recall my visit to Stratford station with the hon. Gentleman.
He will know that British Rail is considering a major remodelling of the station, in part to handle the arrival of the Jubilee line.
He also knows that there are plans for a high-speed rail link to run through Stratford.
With the arrival of crossrail through Stratford, Stratford is an important transport hub and will become even more important.
I am sorry to hear about the lavatories.
At the previous Question Time I was asked about the lavatories at Stratford station.
I shall visit them.
Rail Ombudsman
Mr. Gregory
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he has any plans to appoint a rail ombudsman to investigate customer concerns.
Mr. Rifkind
The transport users consultative committees already represent passenger interests and there is recourse to an independent arbitration scheme.
The position of passengers will be further strengthened by the publication of passengers charters for both British Rail and London Transport.
Mr. Gregory
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that in a variety of spheres such as banking, pensions and building societies, ombudsmen have been enormously successful?
Despite the work of the transport users consultative committees, they do not have the teeth that ombudsmen would have.
The travelling public and freight users are fed up with the inequality and inadequacy of British Rail.
Would not the appointment of a British Rail ombudsman restore confidence to this small part of the state sector?
Mr. Rifkind
I note what my hon. Friend says.
I hope that in the short term more attention will be paid to the availability of the independent arbitration scheme, which was set up in 1985 and which has not often been used, primarily because so few people are aware that it provides a means of getting an independent investigation of alleged grievances against British Rail and of obtaining redress and compensation where they are due.
Of course the citizens charter, as it applies to British Rail's activities, will also be a means of taking forward the rights of passengers to ensure a proper response or compensation from British Rail if there is shoddy service.
Heavy Lorries
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what new initiatives he plans to reduce the damage caused by heavy lorries.
Mr. Chope
The Government have a policy of continuing to reduce the noise, pollution, vibration and road damage caused by heavy lorries.
Mr. Flynn
Is the Minister aware that three annual checks by Welsh trading standards officers discovered that as many as one in five lorries on Welsh roads are overloaded, yet the chance of being checked is one in every 5,000 journeys?
When will the Minister do something to reduce the damage and danger caused by heavy lorries, especially in rural areas such as my constituency and the areas of Caerleon and Marshfield?
Will he promise to resist all attempts to increase the maximum permitted weights of heavy lorries?
Mr. Chope
On the last point, we are committed to minimising the impact of heavy goods vehicles on roads and we are arguing strongly in Europe for road-friendly suspension for lorries.
As to the enforcement of lorry weights, we have doubled the number of inspections over the past five years.
I share the hon. Gentleman's concern about breaches of the law.
That is why I hope that we shall be able to introduce weigh-in-motion sensors over the coming months.
Western Region Rail Services
Sir Anthony Durant
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he will meet the chairman of British Rail to discuss the western region.
Mr. Roger Freeman
My right hon. and learned Friend and I meet the chairman of British Rail regularly to discuss all current issues.
We are concerned to maintain and improve standards on all rail services, including those in the western region.
Sir Anthony Durant
Is my hon. Friend aware that the service beyond Reading has deteriorated badly, with large numbers of cancellations, particularly at Pangbourne, Tilehurst, Reading West and Theale stations?
When will the new rolling stock arrive?
Mr. Freeman
I can confirm that the new Networker turbo class 165 trains will be in service in the May timetable this year — that will bring an improvement of the service on the Thames line — and the Networker express class 166 trains will arrive next year.
These improvements follow the £75 million investment in the Chiltern line, which has gone into new trains, new stations, new facilities, all of which has meant a great improvement for all the commuters on that line; those on the Thames line will benefit similarly.
THE ARTS
Reserve Collections
Mr. Gregory
To ask the Minister for the Arts what is his estimate of the number and value of reserve collections in the public sector; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister for the Arts (Mr. Tim Renton)
Information on reserve collections is not held centrally, but most major national and local authority-run museums and galleries hold such collections.
They are of inestimable value in both financial and scholarly terms.
Mr. Gregory
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
Does he agree that the collections are vast and have often been assembled at very little cost, but at the same time they are the treasures of the night watchmen?
In other words, unless one is a special scholar or a night watchman, one does not see these collections.
Is it not time that many of them were made available to schools, colleges, banks and building societies so that the treasure trove of Britain is available to everyone?
Mr. Renton
I appreciate the point that my hon. Friend is making and I know of his support for museums and galleries in York and in Yorkshire.
One of the national museums and galleries for which I have responsibility, the Tate, is making great efforts, by setting up galleries in, for example, Liverpool and shortly in St. Ives, to make others of its collections regularly available for view in the north-west or the south-west.
I hope that other galleries will take note of the good point that my hon. Friend has made.
Dr. Godman
With regard to collections in Scotland and the housing of those collections, may I point out that many of us living in the west of Scotland are opposed to the building of a national art gallery in Edinburgh?
I remind the Minister that the visiting of galleries is not a pastime unique to residents of Edinburgh or visitors to that fine city.
Does the Minister agree that there should not be such a gallery and that our collections should be dispersed throughout the whole of Scotland?
Mr. Renton
As the hon. Gentleman will know, responsibility for the national museums and galleries of Scotland rests with my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland, not with me.
I am aware, from a number of visits to Scotland, of the fine museums and galleries in both Edinburgh and Glasgow.
I am also aware of the intention to add a new wing to the national museum of Scotland.
That apart, I would hesitate to enter the traditional fratricidal debate between Edinburgh and Glasgow.
Mr. Jessel
Is not my hon. Friend the Member for York (Mr. Gregory), who has done so much to encourage the arts in York, absolutely right?
As museums keep asking for more public money, should they not heed public opinion, which is that works of art exist to be seen and should not be stashed away in cellars but should be got up and out and on view?
Mr. Renton
My hon. Friend has a keen interest in these matters.
I should point out to him that, thanks to the generosity of the Sainsbury brothers, which has resulted in the building of the new wing of the national gallery, all the permanent collection of the national gallery is now on display to an ever-increasing part of the British public.
I am in favour of somewhat greater powers of disposal being given to some of our national museums and galleries so that if an item was clearly surplus to a collection there would be power to dispose of it, provided that the funds realised were reinvested in the acquisition of other, perhaps contemporary material.
Most local authorities already have such powers.
Design Museum
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Minister for the Arts what support he gives or plans to give to the design museum.
Mr. Renton
I understand that the purpose of the design museum is to enhance understanding of the influence of good design.
The museum is of course within the private sector, but the Department of Trade and Industry has provided pump-priming financial support over the past three years, totalling £650,000.
Mr. Bowis
I join my right hon. Friend in paying tribute to the design museum for the standard that it has set.
It has been emulated in many parts of the world, including Canada and Japan.
It has been able to obtain a third of the income that it needs from sponsorship, while a further third has been obtained from admission charges.
A significant part of the other third of its income has come in the past from moneys from the Department of Trade and Industry.
I understand that that support has averaged £250,000 over the past three years.
As that support may be coming to an end, there may be a large gap.
Will my right hon. Friend agree to talk to the museum to ascertain whether he can guide it in filling the gap?
Otherwise, the excellent work that has been done on education and exhibitions will have to cease.
Mr. Renton
I recognise the work that has been done by the design museum in making an important contribution to the understanding of the role of design in a modern industrial society.
Some of the museums that I support directly — for example, the Victoria and Albert museum and the science museum, and also the Crafts Council — often lay on extremely good displays of contemporary or past design work.
Against that background, I shall certainly talk to my ministerial colleague at the Department of Trade and Industry about how his negotiations with the design museum on further funding are progressing.
Mr. Simon Hughes
I endorse the comments of the Minister and those of the hon. Member for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) in support of the design museum, which is in Bermondsey.
Will the Minister consider the wider context of the risk to arts funding in the Docklands corporation area with the withdrawal of LDDC funding, which is threatened to start from the end of March?
That will affect both the design museum and other arts-funded projects throughout Docklands, north and south of the river.
Mr. Renton
I am interested in what the hon. Gentleman says.
I was much concerned about delays in LBGC funding of arts institutions throughout Greater London last year.
I took some measures through the Arts Council to help the cash flows of some of the institutions that were threatened by the delays in that funding.
I understand that this year the LBGC has started making decisions much more quickly.
Mr. Hughes
The LDDC.
Mr. Renton
I apologise to the hon. Gentleman.
I thought that he was talking about the LBGC, the London Boroughs Grants Committee.
I shall certainly take up the point that the hon. Gentleman has raised about London docklands.
Mr. Tracey
My right hon. Friend will be well aware of the great contest that takes place for funds in which the design museum and other bodies are involved.
Does he agree that a national lottery would help considerably?
Mr. Renton
I think that without any doubt a national lottery would be of considerable assistance both to the causes of art and heritage, and to sport as well.
Obviously there are some serious considerations to be resolved before such a lottery is introduced.
Like my hon. Friend, I shall be following the process of the private Member's Bill this Friday, the National Lottery Bill, with considerable interest.
Opera
Mr. Michael
To ask the Minister for the Arts what steps he is taking to encourage access to opera by young people and by a wider range of the public generally.
Mr. Renton
Major opera companies in receipt of public funds offer concessionary ticket prices for certain groups, including students.
Each major opera company in this country has an outreach and education programme and the Arts Council's touring programme supports clients who take opera to areas of the country which would not otherwise have access to it.
Mr. Michael
I am grateful to the Minister for that reply.
I hope that he will show his belief in the importance of the process.
Does he agree that extending the experience of opera and opportunities to learn of opera to those who would not normally even think of it, or think of taking advantage of such concessions, would be a good thing?
Will he join me in commending the exercises undertaken by, for example, Welsh National Opera in conjunction with local organisations, including those in Grangetown, Ely and Splott?
The WNO has sought to introduce young people and communities in general to opera in those locations.
Mr. Renton
Yes.
I am pleased that through the good settlement that I was able to give to the Arts Council of Great Britain for the year ahead and, through it, the Welsh Arts Council, the Welsh National Opera's overall income from the two arts councils will rise by about 7 per cent.
next year to a record figure of £6.1 million.
That must be good for everyone living in Wales who likes opera.
The WNO already operates a community-in-education project at its ardiff base, which caters for all ages.
I am delighted that it is now providing a three-day project at Sir Thomas Picton's school in Haverfordwest, around its production of Don Pasquale.
It is an imaginative educational project.
Mr. Cormack
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the sort of project to which he just referred is another example of where a national lottery could be of great assistance?
In view of his earlier encouraging remarks, will he now confirm that he intends to vote in favour of the private Member's Bill on Friday?
Mr. Renton
I have always appreciated the artfulness with which my hon. Friend asks questions.
Like him, I shall be following the proceedings on Friday with great interest.
CIVIL SERVICE
Civil Servants (Dress)
Mr. Burns
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service what plans he has to introduce a dress code for civil servants in departmental Ministries in London.
The Minister of State, Privy Council Office (Mr. Tim Renton)
Matters such as standards of dress are the responsibility of managers in Departments and agencies.
The Employment Service has recently introduced guidance on standards of dress and the Benefits Agency has introduced a range of distinctive dress.
Mr. Burns
Although the majority of people would not want to revert stuffily to the strict dress code for civil servants of the 1950s, does my right hon. Friend agree that the pendulum may have swung too far the other way?
Do not male civil servants now sometimes turn up at work wearing ponytails, earrings, jeans or, in the summer, even Lycra shorts?
Mr. Renton
I appreciate the high taste in satorial elegance for which my hon. Friend is well known.
However, the responsibility and wish of most managers, whether in Departments or executive agencies, is simply to want those who work for them to be reasonably presentable.
I must confess that I would prefer to see a pigtail with an earring rather than the traditional civil service bowler hat.
Mr. Skinner
Is there a possibility that in the new-fangled classless society the Prime Minister will give special OBEs, MBEs and CBEs for the different coloured dress codes of civil servants?
Is there not a rumour that if they all dress in grey and follow the Prime Minister's example, they can all ride in a special railway carriage without a typist in sight?
Mr. Renton
As the hon. Gentleman introduced the subject of colour of dress, I can only say that I have been listening to him for almost 18 years and I wish that he would sometimes change the colour of his tie.
It would be nice if, just for once, he did not wear a red tie.
Permanent Secretaries
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service if he will introduce arrangements so that each Department of State has co-equal male and female permanent secretaries.
Mr. Renton
No.
The Government have a comprehensive programme of action to promote equality of opportunity.
The proportion of women in the top three grades has almost doubled in the past four years.
Mrs. Gorman
Pending the time when we have a balance of men and women in this Chamber — a matter on which I shall expound next Tuesday afternoon, when I hope that many of my colleagues will support the concept of more women in this House — does my right hon. Friend agree that public consciousness of the lack of female representation of women's views in our national life is now very high?
Would not one way to meet the increasing demand for female representation be to have two permanent secretaries — a man and a woman — at each Department?
Does he agree that any Department which adopted such a policy would have the grateful thanks of a vast number of women?
Mr. Renton
Given my hon. Friend's well-known commitment to productivity, efficiency and careful spending of money in the public sector, I am surprised by her suggestion and I do not think that it is tremendously sensible.
As for my hon. Friend's other idea, I wonder whether she would enjoy having her own constituency split, with one half represented by a man called Billy and the other by a woman called Ricca.
Mr. Beith
Will the Minister persist in his rejection of that totally barmy proposal and instead direct his attention to ensuring that the many well-qualified and able women who are in the civil service get the real top jobs?
Will he set an example by persuading the Prime Minister to do something about the membership of the Cabinet?
Can it really be the case that there is no Conservative woman Back Bencher who could do a better job than some of the present Cabinet Ministers?
Mr. Renton
Not a better job, but certainly a very good job.
I am sure that after the next general election, there will be Conservative women in the Cabinet of a Conservative Government.
I am delighted to repeat that the number of women in the top grades of the civil service is improving all the time and they, of course, will be the permanent secretaries of the future.
Mr. Rowe
Does my right hon. Friend agree that one way of improving the representation of women in the higher reaches of the civil service still further would be to make matters easier for them lower down the ladder?
Can he give any information as to how arrangements such as job sharing have grown in the civil service to facilitate that desirable outcome?
Mr. Renton
It is now possible for women in every grade and every position in the civil service to be part-time workers.
That means, by definition, that there is an opportunity in every grade for job sharing of some kind.
We are considering many other aspects in order to improve the position of women in the civil service — to make it easier for them to take jobs, leave to have children, and return later.
The civil service is on the right path and it often serves as a good guide and leading light to the private sector.
Dr. Marek
As usual, the Minister makes a lot of statements but gives no real facts, It would be useful if he followed the Prime Minister's example and supported the concept of targets for the number of women that he expects to see in grades 1 to 5 of the civil service in one, two and five years' time.
As the Minister does not deny that there are enough women from which to choose, would not a little concentration on that issue, and the provision of targets so that we can all see what is going on, be very welcome?
Mr. Renton
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman gives credit to what is being done by civil service departments and executive agencies.
The setting of targets would be wrong because it would mean exercising positive discrimination, whereby not necessarily all jobs would go to those with the right and proper talents to do them.
Our principle in the civil service is that all jobs should be available to everyone — irrespective of sex, race, creed or religion.
That should be the guiding principle, together with good guidelines to managers as to how to operate within that broad principle.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that nothing is more insulting to women — whether it is said by women or men — than talk of setting targets for the number of women to be in top posts?
Has it not been proved in the House that a woman can get to the top job in the land?
Whether that is achieved by a woman on this side or the other side of the House, to talk of women gaining promotion as part of a target number is one of the most stupid and fatuous things that anyone could suggest.
Mr. Renton
My wife would certainly agree with my hon. Friend's remarks, as would most right hon. and hon. Members.
THE ARTS
Opera and Poetry
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Minister for the Arts what percentage of his budget he intends to spend in the current year and next year on (a) opera and (b) poetry.
The Minister for the Arts (Mr. Tim Renton)
I estimate that in the current financial year about £1.5 million will be spent on poetry and £30 million on opera.
That represents about 0.77 per cent.
and 15 per cent.
respectively of the Government's 1991-92 grant in aid of £194.2 million to the Arts Council.
Figures for 1992-93 are not yet available.
Mr. Flynn
Given that for every person who attends live opera, at least 1,000 more buy and enjoy reading poetry, will the Minister change his priorities and become the first legislator to acknowledge the unacknowledged legislators of the world?
Why does he persist in being munificent to Mozart and bounteous to Beethoven, but a Scrooge to Hughes and a meanie to Heaney?
Mr. Renton
Having just bought Seamus Heaney's latest book for Christmas, I can at least deny that I myself have been mean to Heaney over the festive season.
I think that the hon. Gentleman forgets that a good many operas are based on poetry — for instance,’ Gawain’,’Orpheus and Euridice’and’Dido and Aeneas’.
There has been a close connection between opera and poetry over the years; given the interchange of thinking between the two subjects.
I do not think that the problem mentioned by the hon. Gentleman exists.
Arts Facilities for Children
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Minister for the Arts what discussions he has had with London arts organisations about provision of arts facilities and entertainments for children; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Renton
The London arts board is primarily responsible for funding arts for children and young people in London.
I have not myself had discussions with individual arts organisations.
Together with the London boroughs, the LAB attaches a high priority to helping to nurture the audiences, performers and producers of the future through its support for the arts in schools and for organisations which work for young people.
Mr. Greenway
Will my right hon. Friend see what he can do to help some children in my constituency, who came to me saying that they would like access to present-day artists such as Yehudi Menuhin, Cliff Richard and Jason Donovan and other, younger stars?
How can my right hon. Friend help to allow my younger constituents personal access to such people, so that they can talk over with them the art forms that they are seeking to promote?
Mr. Renton
My hon. Friend presents an interesting challenge.
I suggest that he and his friends in Ealing, North — which he has represented so well for so many years — put together a festival that would be of interest to young people, and also to the important artists whom he mentioned.
My hon. Friend should then invite the artists to the festival.
If it would help, I would attend and be the festival's patron.
House of Commons
Wednesday 15 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
TRADE AND INDUSTRY
Inward Investors
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the impact of the Maastricht agreement on the relative attractiveness of the United Kingdom and other European countries to inward investors.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and President of the Board of Trade (Mr. Peter Lilley)
The United Kingdom is already th number one destination for foreign investment in the Community.
The fact that we shall not have burdensome employment legislation imposed on us by Maastricht may make this country more attractive still for foreign investors.
Mr. Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend agree with Commissioner Delors that the absence of a social chapter makes Britain by far the most attractive place for overseas investment within the European Community?
Will he guarantee that if Commissioner Delors and his friends seek to impose a social chapter using other headings the Government will challenge their legal right to do so?
Mr. Lilley
I entirely agree with President Delors that the exclusion of that aspect from the full Maastricht settlement would make Britain a paradise for inward investment, and I have had that message communicated to all trade attache s in our embassies throughout the world.
We shall, of course, resist any attempt to introduce such legislation by other means.
Legally, it will be harder for anyone to do so now that the separate protocol to which we are not party provides, for those who wish it, the opportunity to introduce such legislation.
Mr. Alex Carlile
Does the Secretary of State agree that one of the most successful recipients of inward investment has been and can continue to be the financial services sector?
Does he agree with the chairman of that industry, Sir Patrick Sheehy, that to opt out of the single currency would be a foolish measure?
Does he agree with Sir Patrick that the United Kingdom can retain its pre-eminent role in Europe in the financial services sector only if it subscribes enthusiastically to the principle of a single currency?
Mr. Lilley
We shall have to consider that decision if and when the time comes, and we have a right in this House to do so.
We should, however, recollect that one of the reasons for the strength of the City of London is that it has consistently followed a very open policy, which is not always followed on the continent and elsewhere.
That is what has made us so attractive.
Uniformity of policy throughout Europe would have prevented us from building up the strength of the City of London.
Mr. Favell
My right hon. Friend will remember that when the Government came to power the country was suffering from the problems of being hopelessly non-competitive.
If a Government who embraced the social charter were returned from the Opposition parties, would we not soon be back in those waters and simply become an industrial desert?
Mr. Lilley
That is, indeed, the risk that British industry foresaw, which is why it urged us to do what we did.
That is also why it so much welcomed the successful outcome of the Maastricht agreement on those lines.
It is pretty clear that Labour believes that it cannot get a majority for those policies domestically and therefore wants to achieve a situation in which they can be imposed on us by a majority of continental countries.
I thought it particularly strange that the Labour party should label its new policy,’ Made in Britain’, when its strategy is to ensure that British policy is made on the continent.
Mr. Hoyle
Will the Secretary of State stop looking for scapegoats for Maastricht?
He boasts about inward investment, but is he not aware that following the last slump under this Government, between 1979-81, investment in manufacturing industry was so slow that the capacity is now hardly any higher than it was 12 years ago?
Investment is falling back rapidly and all forecasts show that unless the Government's policies are changed there will be 4 million unemployed by the year 2000.
Mr. Lilley
That is absolutely incorrect, and I take it that the hon. Gentleman is dissociating himself from Labour Front Bench policy on the Maastricht settlement.
Comparing this point in the economic cycle with the same point 10 years ago, during that period manufacturing output has risen by a quarter, manufacturing investment by a third, manufacturing productivity by a half and manufacturing exports by three quarters.
Telephone Charges
Mr. Thurnham
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry whether he will make a statement on the effectiveness of the system for regulating telephone charges since 1984.
The Minister for Corporate Affairs (Mr. John Redwood)
The Government have set up an effective system of regulation.
During the period of controlled prices, those that are under the regulator's eye have fallen by 27 per cent.
in real terms.
The three-minute cheap rate for local calls is now cheaper in cash terms than it was in 1981.
That is effective Conservative regulation in action.
Mr. Thurnham
Will my hon. Friend confirm that 96 per cent.
of phone boxes now work and that phone call charges have been cut faster in this country than in any other country, thanks to the Government's privatisation policy?
Will he ensure that there is more competition in both phone and postal services, and will he bear in mind the excellent postal service provided in my constituency by Document Interlink Ltd?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is right that this country has the best regulatory system for reducing real phone charges.
He is also right to say that regulations improve the quality of service.
Not only do a greater proportion of phone boxes work, but there are more boxes today than there were before we introduced the privatised control system.
My hon. Friend may like to know that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State today set out in a speech the importance of improving and strengthening competition in a range of postal services.
I am well aware of my hon. Friend's constituency interest as I visited that company and know how good it is.
Mr. Lewis
Will the Minister recognise that some of the benefits that he announced this afternoon are the result of cross-subsidy from the dirty, sleazy pornographic phone calls that he and his colleagues have encouraged for some time?
Will he today resist the introduction of the 75p per minute further added value services now suggested?
Mr. Redwood
The hon. Gentleman knows that that allegation is untrue, but I am glad that he accepts that the quality of service has improved and that there have been improvements in the pricing of a number of British Telecom services.
Bearing in mind the hon. Gentleman's interventions and today's debates in the House, he may like to know that there has been yet further strengthening of the regulatory system in relation to the services to which he objects.
I assure him that there is a common interest across the Floor of the House in seeing that nasty services of that kind are not allowed on the BT network.
Miss Emma Nicholson
Will my hon. Friend confirm that nearly half of the top 500 companies in the European Community are British, led by British Telecom?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is right — United Kingdom firms have done extremely well in the list of top companies in Europe.
That came as no surprise to us, as we know how good the business climate in this country has been in recent years with the success of deregulation and low taxation and the attractiveness of Britain as a home of inward investment.
My hon. Friend is right to say that BT is one of the leading companies and has made an important contribution to our economy.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
Why is the Minister so selective and defensive in his choice of statistics?
Why will he not accept responsibility for the rise in telecommunication charges above inflation during the 13 years of the Government's misrule?
Why does he not give the hon. Member for Bolton, North-East (Mr. Thurnham) a copy of last month's Department of Employment gazette, which shows that the rise in telecommunication charges during the past year has been 7 per cent.
while the retail prices index has risen by less than 4 per cent?
Is it not true that too many people have phone bills that are too high?
Why has the Secretary of State failed effectively to tackle those problems and to take action against the excessive profits and unacceptable boardroom pay rises and perks?
Mr. Redwood
The hon. Gentleman's question was as excessively lengthy as the price increases under Labour, with the nationalised industry in the 1970s, were excessively great — far greater than any under the regulatory regime set out by this Government.
The hon. Gentleman should also know that the average residential bill has been falling.
Of course, the extent of the fall depends on the use made of the service and on the balance between rental and call charges.
Nevertheless, the average bill, assuming equal use, has been falling.
RECHAR
Mr. Dalyell
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on RECHAR.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Industry and Consumer Affairs (Mr. Edward Leigh)
The European Commission's approval of the programmes for RECHAR grants for British coalfield areas is overdue.
Mr. Dalyell
Is the Secretary of State for the Environment mistaken in pointing out that the Government's position on RECHAR has become untenable?
Mr. Leigh
For a start, the so-called leaked document in question dates from last July.
Discussions do take place within this Government — we are not so Stalinist as Labour's national executive committee in these matters.
Secondly, our position is clear: we will not allow the House of Commons to lose its control of public spending.
Labour Members may be interested in devolving power to the nomenklatura of Brussels — we are not.
Mr. Gerald Howarth
The Cannock Chase area badly needs these funds, not just in my constituency but in surrounding constituencies.
Is my hon. Friend aware that we hold entirely responsible for this delay the former Labour Member of Parliament and now Commissioner in Brussels, Bruce Millan, who is playing a fairly despicable party political game?
Will my hon. Friend do everything he possibly can firmly to nail the blame on Bruce Millan for the delay in these funds coming to the coalfield areas?
Mr. Leigh
I find it difficult to understand Mr. Millan's position.
On his own admission he is dissatisfied with additionality procedures in other countries — for instance, in Italy, the Netherlands and France — but, uniquely, he picks on this country, despite the fact that the structural funds have doubled and we are not receiving any benefit.
Why is that?
I understand that Mr. Millan is a socialist; could he be making a party political point?
Is he an honourable man?
These funds have been administered in this way since 1975.
When Mr. Millan was Secretary of State for Scotland he administered them in exactly the same way as that for which he criticises us.
What is he trying to do?
Mr. Eadie
The Minister himself was making a party political point in his reply.
Will he come back to the question asked by my hon. Friend the Member for Edinburgh, South (Mr. Griffiths)?
The Department of the Environment says that the Government's position is untenable.
Is the Minister aware that France, Germany and Spain have carried out their undertakings under the agreement?
Does he not realise that his party is being slaughtered in Scotland?
We are job-hungry in Scotland and we need this money.
Why does the hon. Gentleman not agree that the position is untenable and reach an agreement to bring the money to the areas which need it?
Mr. Leigh
I agree with the hon. Gentleman to this extent — that the coal mining areas need this money.
If Mr. Millan releases the money, every last penny of it will go to the coalfield areas.
I have said that Mr. Millan is an honourable man —— and I am sure that Mr. Millan wants the money to go to those areas.
We pay in £300 million more to the European Commission than we receive back.
The ball is now in the Commission's court.
These moneys are genuinely additional.
All that Mr. Millan has to do is to release the money and it will be spent.
Interruption
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
Is it not outrageous that coalfield areas such as Nottinghamshire which have been waiting nearly two years for this money are still denied it because of the party political games played by the former Cabinet Minister and now Labour Commissioner Millan?
Will my hon. Friend make sure that he or his officials contact the office of Commissioner Millan today and demand that the money be freed so that it can be well spent in areas such as the one that I represent?
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend is quite right.
There is another point: the additionality test is to ensure that the moneys are spent only because of the grant.
Clearly, the moneys are not being spent, because Mr. Millan is holding up their distribution.
What clearer laboratory or litmus test could there be to show that our methods are genuinely additional?
I repeat that Mr. Millan has had his day in court.
These moneys are genuinely additional and we await his decision.
We want these moneys to go to the coal mining areas, many of which are represented by Labour Members.
I hope that they will take the opportunity to ask Mr. Millan to release these moneys for the benefit of their areas.
Mr. Douglas
Does the Minister accept that although some of us may have a disagreement with Bruce Millan, we have known him for many years and we know that he has always been, and is, punctilious in the exercise of his duties?
He could certainly teach the hon. Gentleman how to master legislation.
I have complete confidence in Mr. Millan's analysis of the situation.
When will the Government own up to their responsibilities and release the money to areas such as Fife which need it?
Mr. Leigh
The hon. Gentleman is quite right.
When Mr. Millan was Secretary of State he was punctilious in operating a system that he now condemns.
The House is entitled to ask why that was so.
For the sake of the hon. Gentleman's constituency and areas such as the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Cannock and Burntwood (Mr. Howarth), these moneys must be released.
Some £109 million is being held up.
We made it absolutely clear to Mr. Millan and the Commission that we were prepared to be flexible and to listen to any representations.
At the end of the day, however, we must ensure that the House retains control of public expenditure.
That is the reality of the dispute.
Hon.
Members must address that problem.
Opposition Members may wish to make party political points, but do they want to lose control of public spending?
Mr. Dalyell
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of the Minister's unsatisfactory reply and the slur on Bruce Millan, I shall have to raise the matter on the Adjournment.
Inward Investors
Mr. Soames
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry whether he will make a statement on the impact of the Maastricht agreement on the attractiveness of the United Kingdom to inward investors from the United States.
Mr. Lilley
The United Kingdom has for many years been the preferred location for United States investment in Europe.
The Maastricht agreement will help us to maintain that privileged position.
Mr. Soames
Is my right hon. Friend aware that my constituents fully recognise the enormous benefits of inward investment from the United States and elsewhere, from which my constituency has benefited greatly?
Business men in my constituency believe that the Maastricht agreement set exactly the right tone for business in the 1990s.
Does my right hon. Friend welcome the splendid announcement of a multi-million pound investment in my constituency this week by Smith Kline Beecham?
Mr. Lilley
I am happy to welcome that investment, and I imagine that it owes much to the climate and environment that the Government have created and which might have been threatened by an alternative settlement at Maastricht such as the Opposition would have supported and implemented if they were ever elected.
That is why we shall continue to pursue our policies.
Our success in attracting more investment from the United States than has been attracted by all the countries of western Europe put together is proof that we have created a more attractive climate for investment than anywhere else in Europe.
Mr. James Lamond
Which aspect of this industrial investment paradise does the Secretary of State think is most attractive to inward investors?
Is it that they will not be bothered by maximum working hours or minimum wages, or is it just that the trade union movement in this country has been crippled by repressive legislation over the past 12 years?
Mr. Lilley
We have carried out surveys to determine what aspects of the environment in this country are most attractive to inward investors.
They are, first, the reforms of industrial relations which have created harmonious working practices, all of which were opposed and many of which would be reversed by a Labour Government.
Secondly, this country has a lower burden of tax than many of our European partners, but the Opposition are determined to reverse that.
The third reason is the end of nationalisation and the introduction of privatisation, which is being opposed by the Labour party.
Finally, inward investors find attractive the measures that we have taken to improve training and skills, almost every one of which has been opposed by Labour.
Sir Michael Grylls
Will my right hon. Friend ensure that the message goes out from British trade missions throughout the United States to American firms contemplating investing in Britain that we operate an open free market economy with low taxation and that we have no intention of introducing unnecessary social costs which would make business less competitive?
Will my right hon. Friend ensure that that message is made known throughout the American business community?
Mr. Lilley
I am sure that the whole House will wish to join me in congratulating my hon. Friend on the recognition of his distinction, not least in defending the business and small business communities in this country.
I entirely endorse what he said: we need to maintain a liberal, open, free market society.
That is what attracts investment from abroad and makes it profitable for domestic industry to invest as well.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We are making rather slow progress today.
I now propose to move on more rapidly, and would ask for brief questions and answers, please.
Industrial Policy
Mr. Ronnie Campbell
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he will next meet representatives of the north-east regional CBI to discuss industrial policy.
Mr. Lilley
Ministers and officials of my Department keep in touch with the CBI on a wide range of business matters.
I shall be visiting the north-east again on 19 February.
Mr. Campbell
Business failures are now running at 57 per cent.
in the north-east and 65 per cent.
nationally.
Will the Secretary of State admit that the Government have made a right mess of the economy and of businesses of the north-east?
Mr. Lilley
The north-east has been transformed for the better, not least by the flow of inward investment and the diversification that has taken place.
I am surprised that the hon. Gentleman runs his region down instead of talking up its successes.
Nissan is to employ 4,000 people by August 1992 and Fujitsu is creating 1,500 extra jobs.
The Department of Trade and Industry alone has spent £1.5 billion in the past 10 years in the hon. Gentleman's region, the success of which is shown by the success of local businesses and industry.
The hon. Gentleman should pay tribute to them.
Mr. Dunn
When my right hon. Friend meets the CBI in the north-east, will he try to explain away the inconsistency that has occurred in the Labour party?
Last week it announced a’ Made in Britain’campaign; yet its deputy leader is a Birmingham Member of Parliament who drives a top of the range French Citroen motor car.
Mr. Lilley
I thought that that was interesting news.
It shows — we are not allowed to use the word hypocrisy, are we?
Hon. Members
Yes.
Mr. Lilley
Then it shows the hypocrisy of the Labour party, which claims’ Made in Britain’as its slogan while its Members of Parliament drive around in French motor cars and spend most of their time denigrating British industry.
Mr. Beith
Does the Secretary of State agree that trade and industry in the north-east need good communications and that the existence of direct rail links to the channel tunnel and a much better A1 between the north-east and Scotland are extremely important to trade and industry?
He has a legitimate voice in governmental discussions.
Will he use that voice to get such projects approved?
Mr. Lilley
In many respects, the hon. Gentleman is right.
I have to be the voice of industry within the Government, arguing the case for the needs of business, and I do.
The Government have given renewed priority to improvements in the infrastructure — in roads and railways and other transport.
That shows through in many ways.
We have harnessed the private sector.
The channel tunnel is entirely privately financed.
Had we relied on public sector finance, it would have been another century before we had such an opportunity for British industry, with all the infrastructure back-up that will flow from it.
Mr. Henderson
Mr. Karl Watkin, the chairman and managing director of Crabtree, an engineering company employing 270 people in Gateshead, whom the Secretary of State knows, as he visited the plant last year, was last week voted north-east business man of the year.
In his acceptance speech, he said that the Government's economic policy was damaging business in the north-east.
Does the Secretary of State dismiss him as a dismal Jimmy, or does he agree with me that Mr. Watkin knows what he is talking about?
Mr. Lilley
I have met Mr. Watkin, and found him a lively and stimulating character.
Last time I met him, he said that words attributed to him in the House had not been words that he had uttered.
Perhaps the same is true again.
Industrial Development Act 1982
Mr. Wigley
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the working of the Industrial Development Act 1982; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Leigh
A description of the way in which the powers conferred by the Industrial Development Act 1982 are exercised is contained in the statutory annual report.
This includes details of financial assistance to industry.
Copies of the most recent report for the year ending 31 March are in the Library.
Mr. Wigley
I am well aware of the contents of the report.
Is the Minister aware that many of the schemes in the report now appear dated, as do the geographical definitions of the areas that can benefit?
For example, in Wales, the micro-electronics scheme has provided only £100,000, for a total of £80 million spent on it.
Moreover, selective regional assistance in Wales fell, from £80 million three years ago to only £50 million a year ago.
Will the Government please review the workings of the Act and make them more effective?
Mr. Leigh
The Act is already very effective because grants made under it are selective.
We spend about £567 million on regional selective assistance in the public expenditure survey round, and I think that most people now accept that it has been more effective than the automatic grants made under the regional development grants system.
Wales benefits greatly: about £124 is spent per taxpayer in the assisted areas there, compared with £82 in Scotland and £41 in England.
The hon. Gentleman also referred to the assisted area map.
That map will be reviewed, as it is once every Parliament, at the beginning of the next Parliament.
Sir Robin Maxwell-Hyslop
Will my hon. Friend ensure that, in areas of Devon and Cornwall where unemployment reaches levels as high as those in similar areas of Scotland and Wales, similar benefits under the Industrial Development Act 1982 will be available, as they are not at present?
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend is wrong — if he does not mind my saying so — in the way in which he phrases his question.
Regional selective assistance is equal wherever it is applied for in Great Britain, although the limits for Northern Ireland are higher.
A large part of Cornwall is covered by assisted areas.
The assisted area map may well change after the general election, but I can assure my hon. Friend that we ensure absolute fairness between assisted areas and that no one area is disadvantaged or advantaged in relation to the others.
Mr. Jack Thompson
Is the Minister aware that, after the general election, the assisted area map will change because the Government will change, and that changes are necessary?
For instance, in the county of Northumberland, we have an assisted development area pattern that runs from east to west — to areas such as Ponteland and Darras Hall, a huge executive residential estate which does not want or require industry.
The industrial pattern runs from the south-east to the north of the county and the assisted area pattern ought to be changed to reflect the needs of the county as a whole.
The industrial pattern in Northumberland runs from the south-east corner to the north — to the area represented by the hon. Member for Berwick-upon-Tweed (Mr. Beith).
That pattern needs to be changed now, not after the general election, to reflect the needs of industry and the county.
Mr. Leigh
The European Commission allows assisted areas to cover about 35 per cent.
of the population.
We are up against a ceiling and if we added new areas to the map, we should have to remove other areas.
If we are to maintain confidence in the system, there is no point in our mucking around with the map several times in each Parliament.
It is much better to have one review and to have it at the beginning of the Parliament, and that is exactly what we shall do.
The assisted area map will change not because the Government will change but because circumstances have changed since the last review.
We shall ensure that the map is drawn objectively.
Investment Location
Mr. Andrew MacKay
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received from business men concerning the impact of the regulatory environment on decisions about location of investment.
Mr. Redwood
Overseas undertakings investing in the United Kingdom often comment favourably on our regulatory regime.
It is one of the reasons why the United Kingdom is the preferred location for United States and Japanese undertakings investing in the European Community.
Mr. MacKay
As my hon. Friend has said, our regulatory climate has encouraged a lot of inward investment.
How distressed and worried is industry in those regions that we might mistakenly have a Labour Government, which would do so much damage to inward investment?
Mr. Redwood
Many people are asking worried questions about just that point.
They do not like the prospect of higher taxation, the minimum wage, the social charter or the Maastricht social clauses.
These would put a massive burden on business.
It is very important, therefore, that the Conservative Government continue in power to ensure that the climate remains favourable for the attraction of the lion's share of foreign investment into the European Community.
Dr. Moonie
The Minister will not be surprised to learn that my question concerns the regulatory environment of British Steel, in which the Government hold the golden share.
Are the Government prepared to exercise their right, as the holders of that share, to ensure that British Steel agrees to implement its promise that it would either stay at Ravenscraig or sell the plant to somebody else?
Mr. Redwood
That question has been answered very fully by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland and by other Ministers, and there is nothing that I want to add.
These are commercial decisions and British Steel's actions are within the terms of the guarantees that it has given.
Political Risk Insurance
Mr. Michael
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what steps he intends to take to ensure that British firms are able to obtain political risk insurance with speed and on terms that enable them to compete on equal terms with their international competitors.
The Minister for Trade (Mr. Tim Sainsbury)
The Government have already ensured that competitive political insurance can be provided by the private market, supported where necessary by Export Credits Guarantee Department reinsurance facilities.
Mr. Michael
Can the Minister tell us how the Government are ensuring the speedy response necessitated by changing circumstances in other parts of the world, particularly areas with which Britain had close links in the past?
I am thinking of the current situation in Somalia and of events in eastern Europe.
How is the Minister making sure that in the new situation that the Government have created they are able to respond quickly and effectively?
Other countries seem to do better.
Mr. Sainsbury
I take it that the hon. Gentleman is referring to reinsurance provided by the private sector through the recently privatised insurance services group, which was formerly in ECGD but is now in NCM Credit Insurance Ltd.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we have put in place arrangements under which, in the very few markets that the private sector does not accept, reinsurance can be provided through ECGD.
There are 200 countries in which the private sector is providing the necessary reinsurance.
Mr. Quentin Davies
Is not it a fact that the principal political risk against which British industry needs insurance is the risk of a Labour Government?
In the event of the Labour party coming to power British industry would be overtaxed, over-inflated, over-regulated and overburdened with additional costs such as the minimum wage.
Mr. Sainsbury
My hon. Friend makes his point very effectively.
There is a growing awareness of the disadvantages to employment and industry that a return to the discredited and failed policies of the Labour party would create.
Industrialists (Representations)
Mr. Grist
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received from industrialists on Government intervention in the strategic direction and investment in companies.
Mr. Lilley
The CBI report’ Competing with the World's Best’rejected the notion that the Government could or should’be in the business of picking winners, or of engaging in direct intervention in the strategic direction and management of companies’.
Mr. Grist
Does my right hon. Friend mean that British industrialists do not want to go back to national plans, solemn and binding undertakings, high inflation, nationalisation, high taxation and trade union unrest?
That, after all, is the Labour party's policy for this country.
Is it really true that industrialists do not want to return to such a situation?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
When I meet industrialists their first question is,’ How can we prevent a return to the policies still advocated by the Labour party?’
On the specific question of picking winners, they remember all too well the failures of the national enterprise board, which invested in just over 100 companies.
Of those, 35 were liquidated or went into receivership, 38 were sold at a loss, and only 29 were sold at a price that returned the initial taxpayers' investment.
Industrialists know that that policy was a failure, and they do not want to go back to it.
Dr. Reid
Is not that the most open admission yet that, despite the honeyed words of the Secretary of State for Scotland, he has done nothing, is doing nothing and will do nothing to intervene in any way to help to save the Ravenscraig plant?
The Government will not assist in finding a purchaser.
They are refusing adamantly even to investigate thin slab technology.
I remind the right hon. Gentleman of the Secretary of State for Scotland's words in a letter to my hon. Friend the Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown), in which he refused a meeting and stated:’ Ravenscraig shows the folly of political intervention in commercial decisions’.
Does not that show that, despite all the promises and pledges, in the past five years the Government have carried out a sorry and tragic charade and have connived at every stage with Black Bob Scholey to sell off the Scottish steel industry?
Mr. Lilley
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland made our position on that matter clear yesterday.
What was not made clear then was the Opposition's position.
When questioned on the radio, they admitted that their policy was to talk about the issue.
When pressed and asked,’ What if British Steel refuses to change its policy after talking?’the Opposition gave no indication of what they would do.
I offer the Opposition Front-Bench spokesman an opportunity now to say what they would do.
Would they renationalise British Steel, intervene in British Steel, subsidise British Steel or just talk about it?
Manufacturing Output
Mr. McMaster
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has recently received about manufacturing output.
Mr. Leigh
I have received the recent excellent report by the CBI's manufacturing advisory group which showed that there has been a transformation in manufacturing performance during the 1980s.
Mr. McMaster
Has the Minister no shame about the fact that his Government have committed industrial genocide against Scottish manufacturing?
Is he aware that, in addition to what is happening at Ravenscraig, the Paisley postcode area lost 76 per cent.
of its manufacturing jobs between 1979 and 1989 and that a further 3,600 redundancies have been announced since then?
Does he agree with the Prime Minister who told me in a letter this week that even that does not justify a special economic initiative or does he agree with local industry which is crying out for a partnership with Government to take Britain out of recession?
Mr. Leigh
As the hon. Gentleman well knows, we are in the midst of a world recession.
Even in the engine rooms of the world's manufacturing market place, such as Japan and the United States, output is falling.
The first important point, however, is that compared with the same point on the economic cycle 10 years ago, manufacturing volume is up three quarters, productivity is up half and output is up one third.
The second point is what I call the’ two Ks’point.
If one is in the midst of a worldwide tempest of economic recession, whom does one want on the bridge — my right hon. Friends the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary or their shadows, the two Ks?
Mr. Oppenheim
Will my hon. Friend remind Opposition Members that under this Government manufacturing output has increased by a quarter whereas it fell under the last Labour Government?
Will he also remind them that we now have a surplus on steel products of £1 billion per year compared with a deficit of £1 billion per year under Labour?
If the Opposition spokesman, the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown), has the guts and really cares about Ravenscraig, will my hon. Friend ask him to stand up now and commit a future Labour Government to keeping Ravenscraig open?
Mr. Leigh
We shall wait to see whether the hon. Gentleman does precisely that.
My hon. Friend is right to point to the transformation of British industry.
For proof of that, one need only read the CBI's report which, among other things, stated that recent years have seen’ a transformation of Britain's manufacturing base there is now a solid base on which to build.
The performance of UK manufacturing over the last decade shows what can be achieved Companies based in Britain are able to compete sucessfully in some of the toughtest technology-intensive markets in the world’
That is what this issue is about — making British industry competitive, and that is what we have done.
Industrial Policy
Mr. Turner
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he will next meet representatives of the west midlands regional CBI to discuss industrial policy.
Mr. Lilley
I shall be visiting a number of companies in the west midlands in March.
Mr. Turner
Does the Secretary of State accept that urgent action is needed in the west midlands if we are to halt the worst fall in manufacturing investment in history?
What are the Government doing about the investment gap, the technology gap, the skills gap and the regional gap in the west midlands?
I will tell the Minister what his Government have done; by their policies they have turned the west midlands from a productive landscape into an industrial desert.
Mr. Lilley
That is not the view of local industrial leaders as expressed in an article in The Economist this month.
It quotes the Confederation of British Industry in the west midlands as talking of’ the tremendous potential for the medium and long-term future of the region’.
It talks of Chris Tillett, a Birmingham-based economist, saying that’ the 1990s will be the decade of the resurgence of manufacturing regions'.
Sir David Lees, chairman of GKN, says there are great opportunities ahead'.
David Boole of Jaguar Cars describes the medium-term as healthier than for a long time'.’
Some Opposition Members have been talking down the region.
Indeed, we recently saw that the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) has taken actions to run down the region and its potential.
We believe that its potential is enomous and we have every confidence that the people of the west midlands will achieve that potential under our policies.
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
May I take the opportunity to thank my right hon. Friend for accepting my invitation to address Wolverhampton chamber of commerce at its annual dinner, where he will meet many members of the west midlands region of the CBI?
When he comes, will he take the opportunity to listen to them — the business men on the ground — rather than to the hon. Member for Wolverhampton, South-East (Mr. Turner)?
If things are as bad as the hon. Gentleman says, will my right hon. Friend ask the business men why the west midlands has managed to attract so much investment in manufacturing from abroad, why foreign countries have chosen to locate in the United Kingdom and whether they believe that those people would stay if they had to experience the burden of heavy taxation, job losses and days lost in strikes that would occur with the return of a Labour Government?
Mr. Lilley
I am very much looking forward to meeting my hon. Friend's constituents on that occasion.
She is right in saying that the west midlands has benefited from a vast increase both in the amount and the share of inward investment into this country.
Ten years ago only 6 per cent.
of inward investment went to the west midlands.
I am responding to the supplementary from my hon. Friend.
Now 24 per cent.
of inward investment goes to the west midlands.
I very much hope that the hon. Member for Wolverhampton, South-East (Mr. Turner), as well as my hon. Friend, will welcome the fact that whereas in 1979, 4 million working days were lost in the west midlands, recently days lost total little more than 100,000 a year.
Interruption
Mr. Gordon Brown
Given that 100 companies are going under every week in the west midlands and that 1,000 companies are going under in England, Scotland and Wales, will the Secretary of State apologise to business and to the unemployed for the false promise throughout 1991 of a recovery which never materalised?
Will he explain why he and the Chancellor have ruled out a manufacturing investment incentive as demanded by the CBI and other organisations?
Will he explain why he is cutting the industry budget even as manufacturing investment and employment are falling and are predicted to fall further throughout 1992?
Will he tell us how many thousands more people will lose their jobs while the Prime Minister tries to hang on to his?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman — a Scottish Member — refused to take the opportunity to tell us what he would do about his Scottish problem at Ravenscraig, but he has views about the west midlands.
What the west midlands would like to know is whether he will now do what he has not already done, that is, repudiate the motion of the TUC to reject alien investment — as it describes Japanese investment — in this country.
The west midlands, like the rest of the country, welcomes investment into the country.
People there want to see more of it and they wonder why the Labour party will not repudiate measures which are designed to repel that investment.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
Does my right hon. Friend accept that when he next meets representatives of the west midlands CBI or any other CBI — the north-west is my area — they are likely to raise the fact that the most powerful economies of the world, especially Germany and Japan are based on a substantial manufacturing base?
Therefore, will he use all the influence of his Department to expand the shrinking manufacturing base of Britain?
Manufacturing industry produces the only non-inflationary substantial economic growth — growth that is so necessary for Britain.
Mr. Lilley
I entirely agree with the importance that my hon. Friend attaches to manufacturing.
We cannot have a successful economy without a vigorous manufacturing sector.
However, I refer him to the recent report on our manufacturing performance produced by the CBI entitled’ Competing with the World's Best’.
It refers to the resurgence of manufacturing during the 1980s and the mistaken but widespread belief that manufacturing is still shrinking.
Of course, it was shrinking when Labour policies applied and afflicted the manufacturing sector more than anything else.
Manufacturing suffered from poorer industrial relations as a result of Labour's union policies, from nationalisation and from a lack of incentives.
We will build up all the policies that have reversed that.
We will bring about a resurgence of manufacturing.
That is what we want to achieve in the 1990s.
GATT Uruguay Round
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the negotiations over the Uruguay round of the general agreement on tariffs and trade.
Mr. Sainsbury
The Director General of the GATT, Mr. Dunkel, issued a draft final agreement for the Uruguay round of multilateral trade negotiations on 20 December.
Initial responses were given at a meeting on 13 January.
There will now be a further, final, round of intensive negotiations, with the aim of concluding the round within the next few weeks.
Mr. Arnold
Bearing in mind the importance of the conclusion of the Uruguay round of the GATT to many industries in Britain and to third-world economies, what does my right hon. Friend see as the prospects for overcoming the obstructionism of the socialist Government of France to a successful outcome?
Mr. Sainsbury
I entirely agree that a successful outcome is important to not only the British and European economies but the economies of the developing world.
The European Community has made clear its commitment to reaching an early agreement.
It is true that several countries have problems with the agricultural part of the round, but those problems will have to be resolved.
I emphasise that the Community has made it clear that it is ready to continue and to complete the negotiations according to the work plan laid down by Mr. Dunkel.
Mr. Cryer
Has the Minister received representations from the British Textile Confederation?
It simply states that present proposals are unacceptable because they do not retain a fair and equitable trading system.
Will he press that where commitments are made to open markets for textile products, a proper verification procedure must be established?
If not, thousands more textile jobs will be lost in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Sainsbury
Not only have I received representations from the Apparel, Knitting and Textiles Alliance, but my right hon. Friend and I have had most useful discussions with it.
I am glad to say that we were broadly in agreement on our approach to the round.
The AKT welcomed features in the proposed text such as the improved protection of intellectual property rights — very important to the textile trade — more rapid and effective procedures for settling trade disputes and improved rules on anti-dumping subsidies and safeguards.
Those features are all welcome to the textile trade.
Mrs. Peacock
Will my right hon. Friends ensure that they maintain a robust position in the final round of the GATT?
It is most important to our textile industry that we reach a satisfactory conclusion.
We need to preserve the jobs that we have.
We have massive investment at present and we want to see it continue.
Mr. Sainsbury
I can assure my hon. Friend that we shall continue to attach the greatest importance to achieving improved rules and disciplines, as we have throughout, along with better market openings, both of which are of importance to our textile industry, which wants lower tariffs on woollen textiles in the United States of America, where it already has a substantial export trade but where there is great further potential.
We shall continue to press to achieve that objective for the benefit of that industry.
Mr. Madden
Will the Minister go further and give assurances that, however desperate the European negotiators are to achieve a GATT agreement, nothing will be done to sell out the interests of British textiles and clothing?
Secondly, if the GATT round collapses, will he give an assurance that contingency arrangements will be made by the British Government to ensure that the multi-fibre arrangement continues and that everything is done to defend employment and the trading position of the British textile industry?
Mr. Sainsbury
I can assure the hon. Member that there is no question of selling out any section of British industry because it is greatly to the advantage of British industry and the British economy that there should be a satisfactory outcome to the present Uruguay round.
Machine Tool Industry
Sir John Farr
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what new incentive to manufacturers he intends to introduce to stimulate the home machine tool industry.
Mr. Leigh
The Government can best help industry — including the machine tool industry — by providing a stable economic framework and low inflation.
Sir John Farr
Is my hon. Friend aware of the dire state of the many east midlands machine tool companies?
Is he aware of the real problems over on-going research?
Will he consider some way to enable those firms to fund the costs of developing and bringing into use new and competitive machinery long before their existing equipment is out of date?
Mr. Leigh
The Government spend about £3 billion a year on research and development, which is a higher proportion of gross domestic product than Japan spends, but I hear what my hon. Friend says.
If there is a perceived market failure, we are prepared to act, as I have already shown by pointing out how much we spend.
We found that a previous scheme, which was designed to help the machine tool industry — the small engineering investment scheme — was distorting business decisions.
Normally the best way forward is to create a stable environment and to cut corporation tax so that businesses can make their own investment decisions, rather than to distort those investment decisions.
Industrial Policy
Mr. Ernie Ross
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next plans to meet representatives of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce to discuss industrial policy.
Mr. Lilley
From time to time I meet representatives of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce, or of individual chambers of commerce, to discuss industrial and trade policy.
Mr. Ross
Is the Minister aware that after two years of deep recession, 200,000 companies have gone under?
As Britain entered 1992 with falling investment, rising unemployment, with the highest number of bankruptcies in western Europe, will the Government finally admit that manufacturing matters, and implement an industrial policy which will lift the United Kingdom from the bottom of the manufacturing league table?
Mr. Lilley
The House will be interested to hear from another Scottish Labour Member of Parliament who will not tell us about the Labour party's policy on Ravenscraig.
I made clear in my answer to my hon. Friend the Member for Macclesfield (Mr. Winterton) the importance that we attach to manufacturing and the success, which was acknowledged by the CBI, in bringing about the resurgence and renaissance in manufacturing.
The fact is that manufacturing output fell under Labour.
It is now up a quarter on what it was 10 years ago, investments are up a third, productivity is up by a half and exports are up by three quarters.
We shall build upon that achievement in the 1990s.
Export Credits Guarantee Department
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received about Export Credits Guarantee Department premium rates and the relative rates of the United Kingdom's principal industrial competitors.
Mr. Sainsbury
I have received a number of representations on that subject.
Mr. Pawsey
First, may I thank my right hon. Friend for the courtesy which he showed in receiving a delegation from GEC Alsthom in my constituency?
May I also thank him for agreeing to visit Rugby and Kenilworth?
Is my hon. Friend aware of the growing concern among industrialists about the high premium rates of the Export Credits Guarantee Department, especially when compared with those of our overseas competitors?
Is he further aware that many industrialists believe that those high premium rates will cost us business and jobs?
Therefore, will my right hon. Friend meet with his opposite number in the Treasury to agree a much lower figure for the premium rates of ECGD?
Mr. Sainsbury
I assure my hon. Friend that I very much look forward to visiting his constituency and to meeting some of the industrialists whose interests he energetically represents.
On the rates charged by the ECGD, my hon. Friend will be aware that it is necessary to strike a balance between the national interest in providing ECGD cover for capital goods exports and the interest of the taxpayer that that should not prove to be too expensive.
My hon. Friend will be aware that as a result of the debt crisis, over the past few years the ECGD has accumulated a deficit of more than £4 billion which is, of course, a deficit that falls to the taxpayer.
Devon and Cornwall Development Company
Mr. Matthew Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what support his Department has given to the Devon and Cornwall development company.
Mr. Leigh
The Department has provided no financial support for the DCDC.
However, my regional director has worked closely with it in its efforts to bring together the public and private sector throughout Devon and Cornwall.
Mr. Taylor
The Minister should realise that it says everything that the Government should put in no financial support for the Devon and Cornwall development company.
Many involved with its setting up feel deeply unhappy that they were misled when it was set up because the Government encouraged them and they believed that they would get direct financial support.
Given the current job losses in the country, will the Government reconsider their appalling position?
Mr. Leigh
The hon. Gentleman is wrong.
This says nothing about the Government's industrial strategy, because although the Government give nothing to the DCDC, they give more than £500,000 to the Devon and Cornwall development bureau, the inward investment bureau.
The hon. Gentleman is also mistaken because he has ignored the fact that in the past three years alone, £10 million of Department of Trade and Industry money has gone to the assisted area in west Cornwall.
We are fully committed to reinvigorating the economy of west Cornwall.
House of Commons
Thursday 16 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NATIONAL FINANCE
Privatisation
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what revenue he expects from the proceeds of privatisation for the period of the public expenditure survey.
The Chief Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. David Mellor)
Privatisation proceeds are expected to be £8 billion in 1992-93, and £5 billion in 1993-94 and 1994-95.
These are as announced in the Chancellor's autumn statement of 6 November 1991.
Mr. Mullin
What will we live on when the oil revenues have all gone and there is nothing left to privatise?
Or will the Chief Secretary and his friends be sunning themselves in some tax haven by that time?
Mr. Mellor
I suspect that we will live on the talents of the British people, which will be greatly assisted by the tax and spending regime
Hon. Members
On the backs of the working class.
Mr. Mellor
It is clear how rattled the Labour party is, as it has to start barracking this early in the proceedings.
The real question that the hon. Gentleman should put is to his own party: how will it keep tax and spending plans going if it does not have the benefit of privatisation revenues?
Mr. Marlow
Apparently there are some interesting, exciting, progressive, damn fool ideas going around about renationalising the water industry.
How much would it cost if fair compensation were paid to the standard rate taxpayer each year if that were to be done?
Mr. Mellor
My hon. Friend touches on an interesting point.
The Labour party has become ever so coy about the details of its renationalisation plans.
The last time it was asked about them by The Times, the best that it could do was to put up a research assistant to the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) to answer.
I think that in due time the British people will want to know a bit more than that.
Mr. Skinner
The Minister asks what Labour will do when it gets the chance to govern.
Labour will ensure that the 3 million people on the pile of human misery known as the dole queue will be given a chance to work and to provide tax and insurance.
Then, if I have anything to do with it —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Give the hon. Gentleman a chance.
Mr. Skinner
We shall take back from the richest 1 per cent.
of the population the £26.2 billion that they have had in tax cuts and use it for the national health service, pensioners, schools and all the social services.
Mr. Mellor
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman's application for a job has been noted in the quarters which matter.
What the hon. Gentleman must explain away is why, with the reductions in the upper rate of tax which have taken place under this Government, the contribution of higher rate taxpayers as a proportion of income tax is so much higher.
It is because a low tax regime is a stimulus to effort, a way of ensuring that the British economy works effectively and that people are put back to work.
I do not doubt the hon. Gentleman's aspiration to get people off the dole queue, but I doubt whether he has any policies to achieve that.
Penalty Tax
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the policy of the Inland Revenue in respect of charging penalty tax for a period before retroactive primary legislation is passed.
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. Francis Maude)
That depends on the provisions of the legislation.
Mr. Bottomley
As the problem which prompted the question has been resolved by the Inland Revenue, will my hon. Friend pass on to its staff the thanks of many Members of Parliament for dealing with issues that we have raised on behalf of our constituents and say that we hope that the problems will continue to decline as tax rates come down rather than go up?
Mr. Maude
On behalf of the Inland Revenue, not always the best loved department of Government, I accept the kind compliments that my hon. Friend has paid to it; I am sure that they will be echoed in all parts of the House.
The Inland Revenue does a difficult job in difficult circumstances extremely well.
My hon. Friend is right to make the point that the job of tax collecting is very much easier with a tax system based, as ours increasingly is, on low rates of tax.
Manufacturing Investment
Mr. Jack Thompson
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer when he next expects to meet representatives of the CBI to discuss manufacturing investment.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Norman Lamont)
I meet representatives from the CBI from time to time to discuss a broad range of issues.
Mr. Thompson
In view of the CBI's projected figure for 1992 of a 4.4 per cent.
fall in manufacturing investment, and of the 20 per cent.
fall in 1991, is it not time that the Chancellor considered adopting the Labour party's policy on investment?
Mr. Lamont
I am grateful for that suggestion, but I am not sure which Labour party policy the hon. Gentleman is suggesting that I adopt to encourage investment.
One of the most important parts of investment is inward investment into this country, which is very much encouraged by our low rates of tax — by our low rates of corporation tax and by the fact that we have a low higher rate of income of tax.
We all know what the Labour party will do to the higher rate, but even it does not seem to know what it will do to the tax on middle managers — national insurance contributions.
If Labour Members want to encourage inward investment, they should come clean and clarify in their own minds what their plans for national insurance contributions are.
Sir Ian Stewart
As the future of manufacturing investment depends on confidence in future economic performance, does my right hon. Friend think that anyone contemplating what will happen to his income will feel more confident if he is threatened with slow torture rather than immediate amputation?
Mr. Lamont
My right hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The Labour party talks all the time about investment, but the other side of investment is savings.
There is no investment without savings.
The Labour party's way of encouraging savings seem to be the ingenious one of putting extra taxes on it.
Mr. John Smith
Does the Chancellor appreciate the harm being done to the economy by the 20 per cent.
fall in investment in manufacturing industry and the CBI's prediction of a further 4 per cent.
fall?
Bearing in mind that unemployment is rising yet again, and that 900 companies are going bust every week, when will the Government realise the depth of the recession that their policies have caused and do something to stimulate investment in our manufacturing industry?
Mr. Lamont
I note what the right hon. and learned Gentleman says about investment.
As he knows, it has fallen from high levels.
Business investment grew by 45 per cent.
between 1986 and 1989.
He will also know that manufacturing investment actually rose in the third quarter of last year.
He will also know that, notwithstanding the CBI's prediction, the latest Central Statistical Office intention survey predicted a 2 per cent.
increase in manufacturing investment this year.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman has advanced his idea of how to encourage manufacturing investment.
He says that there should be an increased capital allowance for this year, cunningly saying that it would cost nothing in the first year; that is equivalent to saying that the bill is in the post, as we all know that it is paid after 12 months.
Tobacco Goods
Sir John Farr
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what was the total revenue from duty on tobacco goods in 1990.
The Minister of State, Treasury (Mrs. Gillian Shephard)
The revenue from duties on tobacco goods in 1990 was £5.5 billion.
Sir John Farr
I thank my hon. Friend for that explicit reply.
Does she agree that tobacco companies also contribute a great deal to sport, and that they employ tens of thousands of people directly and indirectly?
Will she send out a message to those who oppose smoking and belong to the brigade who say,’ Do as I say and as I instruct you,’to the effect that they should leave ordinary people to get on with the job of smoking and supporting the economy?
Mrs. Shephard
I note what my hon. Friend says.
At this time of year we receive many such representations, but they must be weighed against the annual death toll of 110,000 people which is associated with smoking.
Employment in the tobacco industry, which my hon. Friend mentioned, has been falling steadily due to increased automation and the long-term decline in smoking.
Mr. Radice
While we are on the subject of indirect taxes, will the Government tell the House how they will continue to cut direct taxes and improve public services without at the same time raising VAT as they did in 1979 and in the last Budget?
Mrs. Shephard
I certainly would not like to prejudge what my right hon. Friend the Chancellor might announce in his Budget.
It was interesting to read in the Daily Express about Labour's plan for a luxury VAT rate.
Inflation
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a statement about the current level of inflation.
13
Mr. Andrew MacKay
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a statement about the current level of inflation.
Mr. Norman Lamont
All-items RPI inflation was 4.3 per cent.
in November.
Mr. Mitchell
Does my right hon. Friend agree that increasing expenditure on day one of a new Government while failing to deal with the important issue of taxation is the fastest way back to the high levels of inflation which characterised all Labour Governments?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
There is nothing wrong with massive increases in public expenditure, provided that the Opposition are open about the fact that they plan massive increases in taxation to finance them.
Mr. MacKay
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is difficult to take Labour seriously on unemployment when under its policy inflation would rise following increases in public expenditure and our competitiveness in world markets would diminish?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Labour does not seem interested in getting inflation down.
Indeed, the Leader of the Opposition never even mentioned inflation in his speech at the party conference.
Reducing inflation is the absolute first condition for medium-term prosperity.
The fight again inflation must go on.
Mr. Graham
While the Chancellor has been concentrating — unsuccessfully — on bringing down inflation, unemployment is raging and further factory closures and redundancies have been announced nearly every week since he came to office.
When will he take steps to reduce interest rates to give some of the companies in Britain an opportunity to survive, fight and compete internationally?
Should not the Chancellor hang his head in shame and resign now, and let the Labour party get on with bringing this country back to the richness that it deserves?
Mr. Lamont
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman will welcome the reduction of 3.5 percentage points in interest rates in the past 12 months.
I am sure that he also welcomes today's news that the Abbey National, Halifax and Nationwide building societies are reducing their lending rates to, as they put it, give a fillip to the housing market.
I am puzzled by the hon. Gentleman's comment that we are unsuccessful in getting inflation down.
At 4.3 per cent., our inflation rate is below the average of the European Community.
I hardly dare to mention the 15 per cent.
average rate of inflation under the last Labour Government.
Everything that Labour says about public spending shows that it is completely indifferent to inflation, which would have a bad effect on unemployment.
Ms. Armstrong
Will the Chancellor explain why after the 1983 and 1987 elections inflation and other indicators rose significantly but the Government managed to get them down just before those elections?
Is that the Government's real policy?
What sort of guarantee can the Chancellor give that that sort of thing will not happen again?
The only guarantee that I can give is that there will not be a Tory Government after the 1992 election.
Mr. Lamont
Perhaps the hon. Lady will tell me under which of the three Conservative Governments since 1979 the average rate of inflation was remotely near that of the Labour Government from whom we took over.
Mr. Tim Smith
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the figures for factory output prices, which were published earlier this week, show that the underlying rate of inflation continues to fall?
What effect does he expect the very welcome news about mortgage interest rates to have on the retail prices index?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend is drawing attention to an important point about the underlying rate of inflation.
We have had some excellent producer prices figures.
Excluding the volatile food, drink and tobacco sectors, which are influenced by Budget changes, the rate of inflation has fallen to 3.8 per cent.
It is forecast to be 3 per cent.
in the fourth quarter of this year, which will be the lowest figure since 1969.
The fact that the underlying rate of inflation is falling so sharply is a very good indicator and is very encouraging for the trend of the headline rate.
As for the second part of my hon. Friend's supplementary question, I cannot anticipate entirely what will happen, but the reduction in mortgage interest rates will obviously have a beneficial effect.
Mrs. Beckett
Does the right hon. Gentleman recall telling the House that a rise in inflation was expected in these months for what he called’ technical reasons’shortly after the Prime Minister told the country that the Government had inflation licked?
Did the Prime Minister speak in ignorance, or was he trying to keep the British people in ignorance before a possible November election?
Mr. Lamont
As always, the Opposition should quote my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister correctly.
My right hon. Friend said that we had inflation licked in a way that we had not had it licked for years.
The trend of inflation is very good.
The statistics prove that absolutely, and everybody except the hon. Lady knows it.
Plant and Machinery
Mr. Hayward
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what was total investment in plant and machinery in 1979, 1983, 1987 and 1991.
Mr. Mellor
Measured at constant 1985 prices, plant and machinery investment was £19.7 billion in 1979, £19.4 billion in 1983 and £25.9 billion in 1987.
Complete figures for 1991 are not available, but in the first three quarters plant and machinery investment was at an annual rate of £29 billion, and 52 per cent.
above its level in the comparable period of 1979.
Mr. Hayward
It is important that the figures confirm that positive policies are being pursued.
Will my right hon. and learned Friend say how we compared internationally in the 1970s and the 1980s?
Mr. Mellor
The figures reveal the full extent of the increase in investment in the 1980s as a result of the Government's policies, an increase which has been maintained even during this period of recession.
In absolute levels, we have fallen off only from the historically high 1980 figures.
Comparison with other OECD countries is extremely interesting.
In the 1970s, the average increase per annum in business investment in the Group of Seven was 3.1 per cent.
whereas for the United Kingdom it was 2.3 per cent.
In the 1980s, the average increase in the Group of Seven was 4.6 per cent.
and in the United Kingdom it was 6.8 per cent.
Mr. Robert Sheldon
Has the right hon. and learned Gentleman not been listening to the chorus of demands from the CBI, from the trade unions and now also from a number of Conservative newspapers for an increase in capital allowances for manufacturing industry?
Why does he not take note of that widespread feeling?
Mr. Mellor
We do take note of that feeling.
The right hon. Gentleman, who was a Treasury Minister throughout the lifetime of the Labour Government, will appreciate that figures such as those that I have just disclosed to the House would have been regarded as a complete impossibility in his time.
Mr. Budgen
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the level of investment is most of all decided by the real rate of interest?
Does he also agree that there has been a noticeable change of opinion in the business community, in that in 1990 it thought that we could go into the exchange rate mechanism without any disadvantage whereas it is now beginning to realise that the ERM obliges us to have a higher exchange rate and higher real interest rates than are appropriate for domestic needs?
Mr. Mellor
I do not know whether my hon. Friend read Gavyn Davies's recent article, which showed that what most greatly influences investment is availability of markets and demand, and that running costs come very much second to those factors.
Evidence shows that expected productivity in unit labour costs of British industry are more competitive now than they were when we entered the ERM.
Manufacturing Investment
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what was the increase or decrease in manufacturing investment between 1990 and 1991.
Mr. Norman Lamont
Complete data for 1991 are not available.
In the first three quarters, manufacturing investment at constant 1985 prices was 15 per cent.
below its level in the comparable period in 1990.
Mr. Wareing
Does the Chancellor agree that our abysmal economic growth performance since the Government took office in 1979 is due largely to the dismal performance of British manufacturing industry, and that the forecast for the year 1991 of a 15 per cent.
fall in investment is a testimony to the failure of the Government's policies?
Was it not sheer arrogant complacency for the right hon. Gentleman to tell the National Economic Development Council at its recent meeting that if he had known before that there would be a fall of 15 per cent.
he would still have done nothing?
Is it not time he retired and let somebody do something?
Mr. Lamont
The hon. Gentleman's question was supposed to be about investment, but he has asked about growth in general.
I cannot understand why he referred to poor growth performance in the 1980s unless he thinks that it is poor to have grown faster than France and Germany.
That is an extraordinary assumption.
He seems unaware that our exports in manufactures have recently been increasing their share of world trade.
That cannot be described as a poor performance.
The hon. Gentleman should get up to date with his facts.
Sir William Clark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, although the Opposition seem to delight in talking down the United Kingdom economy, the confidence of the foreigner investing in this country is great and we have the highest rate of inward investment in the EEC, despite the pessimism that the Opposition are always trying to spread?
Mr. Lamont
My right hon. Friend is absolutely right.
As he said, inward investment is one of the great success stories of the last decade.
We have achieved more inward investment than any other European country.
The great thing about that inward investment is that some of the most successful countries in the world have chosen this country in which to invest.
Mr. Beith
Will the Chancellor assist businesses in making their investment plans by telling us whether he has revised his growth forecast for this year in the light of the Prime Minister's statements in his new year interview, which seemed to cast considerable doubt on the growth forecasts given earlier?
In the light of what surely must be a changed forecast, will the right hon. Gentleman review his hostility so far to careful public expenditure designed to create infrastructure improvements for the future and to get the economy moving?
Mr. Lamont
I note the hon. Gentleman's early Budget representation.
I note that, unlike the Labour party, when the hon. Gentleman's party advocates increased public spending, it is at least honest enough to say that it will put up the basic rate of tax.
However, the hon. Gentleman's position does seem a little curious.
His party says that it will put up the basic rate of tax.
Yet, at the same time, it said that if there were a coalition Government, it would stop the Labour party putting up the higher rate of tax.
That is a curious position to occupy.
Exports
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a statement on the trend in United Kingdom export performance over the past five years.
Mr. Mellor
United Kingdom exports have grown 23 per cent.
over the past five years, and reached record levels during 1991.
I am pleased to say that after decades of decline, the United Kingdom's share of world trade in manufactures flattened out in the mid-1980s, increased in 1989 and 1990, and looks most likely to have increased again in 1991.
Mr. Pawsey
I thank my right hon. and learned Friend for that extremely encouraging response.
Does he agree that much of our country's undoubted export success has been due to competitive premium Export Credits Guarantee Department rates?
Is he aware that many industrialists are concerned that we shall be unable to maintain our export performance due to uncompetitive rates, particularly vis-a -vis our principal competitors such as Germany, France and Japan?
Will my right hon. and learned Friend therefore have a meeting with his opposite number at the Department of Trade and Industry and endeavour to bring ECGD rates down to a level which would be more favourable to British exporters?
Mr. Mellor
We regularly discuss such matters, which I recognise are important, but, as my hon. Friend will appreciate, ECGD premiums must reflect the risk for the taxpayer in export credits.
He will be aware that losses by ECGD of £3 billion, which have already been disclosed, with the possibility of a similar sum in the pipeline, suggest that we cannot afford to underestimate the possible losses to the nation if we get the ECGD judgments wrong.
One key way of protecting ourselves in future is to ensure that the premiums charged fully reflect the risks that the country has to take on in allowing such cover to go forward.
I acknowledge that we must have an eye to the international experience, and our work internationally is to try to ensure that other countries, too, put up their premiums in a way that sensibly recognises the problems of such cover throughout the world.
Mr. Tom Clarke
If export performance is as impressive as the right hon. and learned Gentleman suggests, when will unemployment levels return at least to those that the Government inherited in 1979?
Mr. Mellor
I have already told the House that the export performance of United Kingdom industry has been extremely good, with an increase of nearly 25 per cent.
over five years, and an increase in manufacturing exports even during the past year of recession, in excess of 3 per cent.
The question that the hon. Gentleman has to answer is what nostrums put forward by his Front-Bench spokesmen would make such a record possible under a Labour Government.
City Institutions
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he has any plans to meet the Governor of the Bank of England to discuss the City institutions.
Mrs. Gillian Shephard
My right hon. Friend meets the Governor of the Bank of England frequently, and they discuss a wide range of issues.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Self-regulation in the City was meant to be a panacea which would solve most existing problems.
Since then we have had Polly Peck, Brent Walker, the scandal of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International, and then the greatest scandal of all — the Maxwell scandal.
As self-regulation is proving somewhat less than satisfactory, is it not time to consider establishing a Securities and Exchange Commission — an SEC — as exists in America?
The City of London is important to the invisible exports of this country, and we cannot allow scandals such as those that have happened in the past.
Under self-regulation people tend to protect one another so that they do not get caught.
Let us get things out in the open and have an SEC to ensure that the honour of the City of London is well protected by a statutory authority.
Mrs. Shephard
I hear what my hon. Friend says.
We have certainly seen some large and spectacular frauds uncovered recently, although they were not all in financial institutions.
Clearly, however, that does not mean that the City is riddled with fraud or that the regulatory system has failed.
I am sure that my hon. Friend will agree that no system of regulation can ever give complete protection against a determined thief or fraudster.
The Government have done more than any other Government to tighten the regulation of the City, through a series of powerful pieces of legislation.
In the end, a balance has to be struck between tight regulation and cramping any sort of innovation or initiative in the financial services sector, as the Labour party would advocate.
Mr. Vaz
Could the Government be prevailed upon to persuade the City institutions to provide more positive assistance for depositors, creditors and former employees of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International?
The Minister will know that former depositors will have problems getting facilities for mortgages.
She knows, too, that representations have been made to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Could the City institutions be made positively to assist people who, through no fault of theirs, have lost a considerable amount of money?
Mrs. Shephard
The hon. Gentleman will wish to know that that point is being pursued.
He will also be aware that arrangements are in place for the liquidators to aid banks in their assessment of applications made by small businesses and personal customers for alternative facilities.
Sir Peter Tapsell
May I support what my hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Selly Oak (Mr. Beaumont-Dark) has just said in urging the Government to give serious consideration to the establishment of a Securities and Exchange Commission in Britain.
Is it not clear that the multiplicity of often overlapping self-regulating authorities are not adequately protecting the national interest?
Will my hon. Friend the Minister bear it in mind that many of the frauds that have come to the attention of our regulating authorities were first discovered and reported to them by the American SEC?
Mrs. Shephard
Of course, that was not so in the case of BCCI.
I repeat to my hon. Friend that, while there is cause for concern about the large spectacular frauds that have been uncovered, the Government have done more than any other with the Financial Services Act 1986, the Banking Act 1987, the Building Societies Act 1986 and amendments to the Companies Acts to regulate the City of London.
Mr. Salmond
In discussions with the Governor of the Bank of England on City institutions will the Chancellor discuss how to circumvent the damage done to hopes to locate the Eurobank in the United Kingdom by the Government's opt-out policy on the single currency?
Will he further discuss whether it would be better to argue for Edinburgh as a location for the bank — a location much more acceptable to other Europeans than London, which the Labour and Tory Front-Bench teams have argued for?
Mrs. Shephard
No decision needs to be taken for some time on the location of the European central bank.
The Government have made it clear that a decision on the site would be premature at this stage.
Whatever happens, the Government will do what they can to advance the case of the most credible United Kingdom candidate.
Inward Investment
Mr. Hind
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what assessment he has made of the likely impact of the Maastricht agreement on future inward investment into the United Kingdom.
12
Mr. David Nicholson
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what assessment he has made of the likely impact of the Maastricht agreement on future inward investment into the United Kingdom.
Mrs. Gillian Shephard
We expect to continue our excellent record in attracting inward investment.
Latest available estimates are that between 1984 and 1988 the United Kingdom received about one third of all inward direct investment to the EC — higher than any other member state.
Mr. Hind
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer said that the success of inward investment depends on availability of markets.
In my hon. Friend the Minister's view, what would be the effect on the economy and inward investment if she abolished the ceiling on national insurance, increased the ordinary rate and basic rate of tax for a third of the population in the south-east and introduced a higher rate of value added tax on luxury products — all measures proposed by the Labour party?
Mrs. Shephard
The attraction of the United Kingdom to inward investment is the skilled labour force, low unit costs compared with other EC countries and, of course, the competitive tax system with the lowest rate of corporation tax in industrialised countries.
I fear that many of those features would be threatened by the policies of the Labour party.
Mr. David Nicholson
The effects of the Maastricht agreement will be extremely beneficial for inward investment into Britain, but does my hon. Friend not agree that all the paraphernalia that would be inflicted on industry by a Labour Government would be disastrous for inward investment?
Will she also emphasise that we are building on success and, to this end, will she give the House the figures for 1988, 1989 and 1990 on the proportion of American and Japanese investment in the EC which came to Britain?
Mrs. Shephard
In 1988-89, 62 per cent.
of all United States inward investment in the EC came to the United Kingdom and 42 per cent.
of all Japanese direct investment in the EC came to the United Kingdom.
Mr. Enright
If the Minister is so keen on inward investment, why are she and her hon. Friends blocking the inward investment that would come from RECHARbonisation?
Mrs. Shephard
For a moment, I rather wondered if the hon. Gentleman was following in the footsteps of his colleagues in the trade union movement who regard inward investment as an alien culture.
Perhaps I might say that the problems with RECHAR, the Government consider, are entirely in the court of the European Commission.
Mr. Chris Smith
For every £1 of inward investment that might conceivably be attracted by inadequate employment conditions and inadequate rights for employees, are there not £2 or £3 of inward investment that will be deterred by the absence of any positive contribution from Britain to the growing economic and monetary integration of Europe?
Is not the greatest threat to inward investment the uncertainty that the Government have deliberately created by their opt-out on a single currency?
Mrs. Shephard
As I said before, the key factors in the determining foreign investment are a stable economic environment, a commitment to a free and open market and a lack of intrusive social and industrial regulation.
The United Kingdom's right to decide for itself on the merits of a single currency is not an important factor in investment decisions.
Employee Share Ownership Trusts
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer whether he has had any recent representations about ways of encouraging wider utilisation of qualifying employee share ownership trusts.
Mr. Maude
I have received a small number of such representations, from my hon. Friend the Member for Esher (Mr. Taylor) among others.
Mr. Taylor
Despite the considerable progress that has been made under this Government in encouraging employee share ownership, will the Minister take careful note of the recent KPMG Management Consulting report which shows ways in which the qualifying employee-share option trusts can be made more flexible and therefore likely to be more widely used by companies and available to more employees in subsequent years of Conservative government?
Mr. Maude
I have seen the report and am considering its implications carefully, but it is just worth pointing out that in 11 of the past 12 Budgets we have taken steps to encourage employee share ownership to the extent that by the end of March last year about 2.25 million employees had benefited under all employee share schemes and had received options or shares with an initial value of £6.5 billion.
It is a highly desirable development and we hope to see it continued.
Mr. Nicholas Brown
Does the Minister recall that when we discussed these matters during the passage of the Finance Bill the then Financial Secretary, now Chancellor of the Exchequer, expressed passionate enthusiasm for workers' control?
In the light of that enthusiasm is the present Financial Secretary able to tell us how many employee share ownership trusts have been set up under the statutory provisions?
Mr. Maude
As I said, by the end of March 1990, 2.25 million employees had received shares or options under approved share schemes.
Employee share ownership trusts are a relatively small part of the Government's provision of tax relief for employee share ownership, but it would be very nice to hear the hon. Member for Newcastle upon Tyne, East (Mr. Brown) express on behalf of the Labour Front Bench wholehearted enthusiasm for what we believe in, which is giving employees in companies real ownership of the companies that they work for.
National Interest
Mr. Michael
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what account he takes of the national interest in terms of the viability of businesses and the retention of jobs in deciding on the exercise of the functions of his Department in respect of Inland Revenue responsibilities.
Mr. Maude
The first duty of the Inland Revenue is to collect tax which is properly due.
It aims to treat all taxpayers with equal fairness and to settle their tax affairs impartially.
Mr. Michael
Does the Minister recognise that that is a highly bureaucratic response?
Given the way that business is suffering under the policies and decisions of this Government, and especially the policies of the Prime Minister, does the Minister recognise that he has a responsibility to ask his officials to deal with businesses in such a way as to enable them, wherever possible, to retain jobs and to keep their businesses going?
Will he also accept that this should be his personal responsibility?
Will he accept it before the House?
Mr. Maude
The hon. Member for Cardiff, South and Penarth (Mr. Michael) described my response as’ bureaucratic’.
It is not a bureaucratic response at all; it simply expresses the statutory duty placed on the Inland Revenue by the House — that is , the duty to collect tax which is properly due.
But the Inland Revenue does not pursue that in a blind and dogmatic way.
If tax is owing and payment on the due date is impossible, the Inland Revenue will discuss payment over a period of time to meet the liability; and any taxpayer who is in difficulty in paying his or her tax should contact the Inland Revenue at the earliest opportunity to discuss how the difficulty might be resolved.
Drugs
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what quantities of drugs have been seized by Her Majesty's Customs and Excise in each of the last three years.
Mrs. Gillian Shephard
The information is as follows: in 1989, 50, 935 kilos of cannabis were seized, in 1990, 24,896 and in 1991 21,796 kilos; in 1989, 337 kilos of heroin were seized, with 576 kilos in 1990 and 357 in 1991; 409 kilos of cocaine were seized in 1989, 561 kilos in 1990 and 1,061 in 1991.
Mr. Banks
Obviously Customs and Excise must be congratulated on its vigilance.
However, is it not time to consider the possibility of legalising soft drugs, especially cannabis?
After all, cannabis does much less harm to a person's health than nicotine, and yet cigarettes are legal.
It is the criminal activity surrounding the supply of illegal drugs that we should really worry about.
If we were to legalise soft drugs, that would no longer be a problem.
Mrs. Shephard
I am delighted that the hon. Gentleman congratulated Customs and Excise.
I remind him that its task is to enforce the law.
Would it be the policy of the Labour party to legalise those drugs?
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Winnick
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 16 January.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Winnick
In view of the evidence given yesterday should there not be a full and frank ministerial statement — which should come from the Prime Minister — of what was known inside the Government at the time about the supergun affair?
Bearing in mind the number of military items sold to the Iraqi regime by this country right up to the invasion of Kuwait and the highly critical comments made about the conduct of Ministers during the Gulf war, what right do the Government have to lecture hon. Members on the Opposition Benches over defence matters?
The Prime Minister
In so far as the Gulf war is concerned, the hon. Gentleman is referring to one of the most successful military operations ever undertaken by this country or any other.
It achieved its objectives more swiftly and with less bloodshed than anyone could possibly have imagined.
As to the earlier part of the hon. Gentleman's question, he knows that much of what he said was nonsense.
It has been dealt with often enough.
Mr. McGrady
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 16 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. McGrady
Could I remind the Prime Minister that one of the consequences of his Maastricht agreement is to prevent Northern Ireland from participating in the new cohesion fund, to the extent of losing tens of millions of pounds?
I am sure that he is aware of the total lack of adequate funding for roads, transport and the environment in Northern Ireland, especially now that the Secretary of State has imposed a total moratorium on all public spending in Northern Ireland.
Would he assure the people of Northern Ireland and the House that as soon as possible he will remedy that appalling error, and allow Northern Ireland to benefit from the new cohesion fund as a category 1 area?
The Prime Minister
There is, as the hon. Gentleman knows, a higher level of public expenditure per head of population in Northern Ireland — and rightly so — than anywhere else in the United Kingdom.
The establishment of the cohesion fund and eligibility to benefit from it were agreed by all the member states.
There is a misapprehension that Northern Ireland is the only category 1 area that will not benefit from that, but that fund is designed to help the poorest member states, not poorer regions or provinces within the more prosperous nations.
So, the hon. Gentleman does not understand the purpose for which the fund was devised.
Mr. Gwilym Jones
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 16 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Jones
Will my right hon. Friend assure the House that he has no plans to increase income tax and national insurance contributions for millions of ordinary taxpayers?
Does he agree that it is the height of irresponsibility to try to pretend that there can be a massive increase in spending from day one of a Government if the tax increases to pay for that are to be phased in?
The Prime Minister
I can also confirm to my hon. Friend that we have made no plans for a super increase in VAT, as the Opposition have apparently considered.
There is no doubt that the Opposition are now in a shambles over their tax plans.
Their muddled statements show that they cannot be trusted on tax; they shift their position from day to day.
The only thing that is certain is that a party that promises to spend and spend is a party that would have to tax and tax.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister tell us why his record on unemployment is even worse than that of his predecessor?
The Prime Minister
Everyone in the House and beyond regrets the fact that unemployment rises.
That is why we are persisting with policies that will create long-term, permanent jobs for the future.
We have put those policies in place — low inflation, lower taxes and lower interest rates.
Those are the only measures that will get people into work and keep them in work, which is the only proper policy to follow.
Mr. Kinnock
Unemployment has risen by nearly 1 million in the time that the hon. Gentleman has been Chancellor and Prime Minister, but still he refuses to do anything useful to stop that remorseless rise.
Is it not because he believes that 2.5 million unemployed is’ a price worth paying’?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman should not be so cheap over such a problem.
Unemployment is greater than a year ago in every country in EFTA and in every G7 country except the Netherlands.
French unemployment is at its greatest level ever.
United States unemployment is higher than for the past five years.
What the right hon. Gentleman might also have fastened his mind upon is the fact that reported job vacancies are rising, that the number of people placed in jobs is rising and that there are 500,000 more people in work than in 1979.
Those are some of the facts which the right hon. Gentleman should absorb.
Mr. Kinnock
The right hon. Gentleman is a dodger.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Kinnock
In the last year employment in Britain went down by 873,000.
Job vacancies are still 10,000 lower than they were this time last year.
When Sir Nicholas Goodison of the Trustee Savings Bank says that this is the worst recession in living memory, is it any wonder that the whole country knows that this is the Government of high unemployment?
The Prime Minister
Some people might say that on policy rather than on personal matters the right hon. Gentleman is a tax dodger.
He can give no lecture to us on unemployment.
Hon. Members
Withdraw.
The Prime Minister
His policies would cut jobs across the whole country.
Hon. Members
Withdraw.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I do not think that that was meant in a personal sense.
The Prime Minister
Indeed; I expressly said that, Mr. Speaker.
The right hon. Gentleman's minimum wage would increase unemployment by putting 2 million people out of work.
His plans to slash defence budgets by £6 billion would cost 100,000 more their jobs.
His tax on jobs would cost another 100,000.
He is the only person in opposition to plan for greater unemployment as a matter of policy.
Mr. Nicholls
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that if the upper earnings limit on national insurance contributions —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to settle down.
Mr. Nicholls
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that if the upper earnings limit on national insurance contributions were to be removed, it would punish not just somebody earning £20,280 a year but would punish anyone who earned £390 in a single week?
Does he agree that a proposal that would impose a massive tax burden on 4 million ordinary people could be produced only by a shower such as those who currently comprise the Opposition?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is quite right —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The House is in a very excited state.
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right.
I suspect that the Labour party simply did not understand when it drew up its policy that everyone would pay more national insurance contributions in a single week if they earned above one fifty second of statutory UEL.
The Independent pointed out, for example, that the Opposition's tax plans would mean’ the largest ever peacetime tax increase.’
The Leader of the Opposition promised explicitly that anyone earning less than £21,000 a year would not pay a penny tax extra in income tax or national insurance under a Labour Government.
Clearly, he was wrong about that.
He should admit it, and do so publicly.
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 16 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Canavan
Will the Prime Minister confirm that he personally was informed about British Steel's decision to close Ravenscraig over a fortnight before the official announcement last week and that instead of trying to reverse the decision, he and the Secretary of State for Scotland took part in a conspiracy of silence?
Will the right hon. Gentleman now, even at this late stage, intervene to try to stop the closure, bearing in mind the Government's responsibility for privatising the steel industry, thereby allowing a butcher such as Bob Scholey to betray the Scottish steel workers?
The Prime Minister
It is noticeable that the Labour party has not offered to keep Ravenscraig open.
I was informed that British Steel would be making a decision on the day that it made the decision — I was informed in confidence some days before that it would be making a decision on that day.
It was a commercial decision by British Steel.
It is clear, despite all their words, that Opposition Members would have done nothing different.
Interruption
Mr. Irvine
Does my right hon. Friend agree that defence cuts of £6 billion would lead to a massive loss of jobs in defence industries throughout the country?
Does he further agree about the hypocrisy of those who call on the one hand for the maintenance of defence contracts in public and, on the other, plan in private for defence reductions?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
Our policy, both for nuclear and conventional defence, is clear, has been set out in a number of documents and is properly costed.
The Opposition do not say where they stand, cannot say where they stand and cannot admit to the jobs that would be lost if their policy were carried out.
The Labour party conference has three times voted to cut £6 billion from the defence budget, and we can see the extent to which that would devastate the defence industry and the defence of this country.
Mr. Madden
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 16 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Madden
Might I ask the right hon. Gentleman a question about which I gave notice to his office earlier this morning?
Will he arrange for X-ray and metal detection equipment to be installed immediately at Armley prison in Leeds?
I ask for this following a serious breach of security at the prison last Friday, when a visitor inside the prison drew a knife and sought to attack another visitor.
As this is the latest in a series of serious breaches of security at prisons, will the Prime Minister call upon the Home Secretary, who has clearly lost control of his own Department and no longer enjoys the confidence of the public, to resign now or else sack him?
The Prime Minister
First, I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving me notice of the detailed point that he wished to raise.
Security at prisons holding category A prisoners is already very tight, with rigorous searching procedures.
In addition, however, we are providing X-ray equipment, as the hon. Gentleman has suggested we should.
A contract has been placed for the supply of this equipment to prisons that hold category A prisoners.
Devices have to be specially constructed, and they will be delivered as soon as possible.
In reply to the hon. Gentleman's last point, I can say that I have complete confidence in my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary.
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 16 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Evennett
Does my right hon. Friend agree that to base defence policy on defence cuts — the North Sea oil of the 1990s — is irresponsible and misguided?
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the Opposition Front-Bench spokesman on Treasury affairs has actually stated this as a belief —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman must ask a question about Government policy.
Mr. Evennett
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that Labour remains unsound on defence?
The Prime Minister
Yes, it is clear that, as my hon. Friend says, Labour would cut the defence budget to ribbons.
It is true that on defence Labour cannot be trusted.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Will the Prime Minister please answer the matters for which he has responsibility?
The Prime Minister
I am seeking to do precisely that.
It is perfectly clear that, while the defence of this country is the first priority of the present Government, it might not be the first priority of the Opposition if they were to make the defence cuts to which they have committed themselves.
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES OFFICIAL REPORT IN THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE FIFTIETH PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND [WHICH OPENED 25 JUNE 1987]FORTIETH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II SIXTH SERIES VOLUME 202 FIFTH VOLUME OF SESSION 1991-92 House of Commons Monday 20 January 1992 The House met at half-past Two o'clock PRAYERS Mr. Speaker — in the Chair Oral answers to questions
WALES
Education (Schools) Bill
Mr. Murphy
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales what consultations he has had with local education authorities in Wales regarding the provisions affecting Wales in the Education (Schools) Bill.
6
Mr. Rowlands
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales whether he will make a statement on the future of Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools in Wales.
The Minister of State, Welsh Office (Sir Wyn Roberts)
The provisions in the Education (Schools) Bill relating to the inspection of schools and information on their performance were trailed in the citizens charter and the charter for parents in Wales, copies of which were sent to all local authorities in Wales as well as to a wide range of bodies representative of education interests.
My officials have met representatives of the local education authorities to discuss various aspects of the new proposals and there has also been correspondence with the Department.
An announcement on the future role and organisation of Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools in Wales will be made shortly.
Mr. Murphy
Does the Minister accept that education in Wales owes much to the professionalism and the independence of the Welsh schools inspectorate, and that there is widespread hostility among both teachers and parents in Wales to the possible privatisation of that service?
Most importantly, why is the latest report on schools inspectors in Wales gathering dust on the Minister's desk?
The House has a right to know why he is suppressing that report.
Sir Wyn Roberts
Of course the inspectorate is highly respected in Wales, but the hon. Gentleman will know that it was never geared to carry out inspections with the frequency that we expect will result from the provisions of the Education (Schools) Bill and that we envisage in the parents charter.
What Labour Members say makes it sound as though they do not want parents to know what the schools that their children are attending are like.
With regard to privatisation, the hon. Gentleman must realise that if inspections are to be carried out with the kind of frequency that we have in mind, there has to be a considerable change in the inspection procedure.
The consultants' report is part of our wider consideration of the future role of the inspectorate.
It is an internal review, and we do not intend to publish it.
Mr. Rowlands
That is a disgraceful statement.
Was not the citizens charter supposed to be all about open Government?
The Minister has now said that he will not even publish the report.
Is that because the report does not substantiate the proposals in the Education (Schools) Bill, which is nothing more than English ideology that the Government are transmitting to Wales?
Why is the Minister slavishly following the English example when the Secretary of State for Scotland is not doing so?
His right hon. Friend is sustaining and expanding the Scottish inspectorate, so why is the Minister emaciating ours?
Sir Wyn Roberts
The hon. Gentleman is talking a lot of nonsense.
His concentration on the consultants' review is ridiculous.
Labour Members should consider what is said in the parents charter about inspection of schools in Wales.
It is as a result of that charter that we have to take steps to change the inspectorate.
Mr. Gwilym Jones
How often are schools in Wales inspected by HMI and what change in that frequency is my right hon. Friend seeking to achieve?
Sir Wyn Roberts
I cannot give my hon. Friend a precise answer to that question, but the inspection of a school in Wales is a fairly rare occurrence, taking schools as a whole.
The 58 inspectors spend only 65 per cent.
of their time inspecting and the other 35 per cent.
advising.
Again, I urge the House to consider the fact that we expect inspections of individual schools to take place on a four to five-yearly basis.
Labour Statistics
Mr. Ray Powell
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales if he will state the number of male and female unemployed in Wales for 1987, 1988, 1989, 1990 and to the present date.
The Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. David Hunt)
In December of each of the years set out in the hon. Gentleman's question, the figures are 97,800, 79,900, 64,100, 72,900 and 95,600 respectively for male unemployed.
For female unemployed the figures were 38,600 in 1987, 31,600 in 1988, 21,700 in 1989, 21,000 in 1990 and 26,000 in December 1991.
Mr. Ray Powell
Will the Secretary of State, with the Prime Minister, accept responsibility for the deplorably high level of unemployment in Wales?
They both go about the Principality boasting about their actions in terms of foreign investment in Wales.
They should be reminded that the major investors coming into Ogwr borough, and Bridgend in particular, were Ford of Bridgend, which was brought in under Jim Callaghan's Labour Government, and the Japanese company, Sony, which was also brought in by a Labour Government.
It was the Labour party and a Labour Government who created investment into Wales before the present Prime Minister was even elected to this honourable House.
If anyone should be boasting, it is those of us in the Labour party.
The sooner the Secretary of State and the Prime Minister come to the Principality, the better: let the voters there decide who should have the credit for what is happening in Wales and also what should be done to the Conservative party in view of the deplorable levels of unemployment to be found in Wales.
Mr. Hunt
I am delighted that the hon. Gentleman has given me the opportunity to report to the House the latest figures for inward investment.
The calendar year just finished, 1991, brought new record levels of inward investment to Wales from overseas and the rest of the United Kingdom.
I am delighted to report that those new levels consist of 183 projects recorded by Welsh Development International, promising about 17,000 jobs.
These are the highest figures ever.
Mr. Livsey
Will the Secretary of State note that unemployment in my constituency of Brecon and Radnor has doubled in the past 12 months?
Will he refute the Prime Minister's suggestion that inward investment has come into Wales as a result of lower personal taxation?
Will he agree that inward investment is due to the activities of the Welsh Development Agency, some of the lowest wages in Britain and high levels of skills, and that it is the quality of the Welsh work force as much as anything else that has brought inward investment into Wales?
Mr. Hunt
I find this very interesting.
I have been concentrating on a report of the Select Committee on Welsh Affairs on Inward Investment into Wales.
I thought that the hon. Gentleman was a signatory to the report.
I have read carefully the reasons given for the record levels of inward investment that has come into the United Kingdom, including Wales.
The Select Committee reported that overseas companies saw the attractions of the United Kingdom — a number of factors are set out — as including, in particular, a favourable tax regime.
Has the hon. Gentleman decided to change his mind?
Mr. Grist
Does my right hon. Friend agree that one of the best hopes for the future of south Wales is completion of the Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill, which opposition from so many Labour Members has put in jeopardy?
Mr. Hunt
Yes.
I hope that the Opposition will get their act together on the Bill and recognise that it represents enormous investment in Wales and something that will put Cardiff and Wales generally on the world map in a very big way.
Mr. Barry Jones
The Minister's answers are evasive.
They do not go to the heart of the questions.
I remind the Secretary of State of the haemorrhaging that has taken place, resulting in a severe loss of jobs in Wales for which he bears a heavy responsibility.
I refer to just a few examples.
At Ferranti in Bangor, there have been 250 job losses, which would be equal to about 2,500 jobs in eastern Wales.
Nearly 500 jobs have been lost in the steel industry at Shotton in less than a year.
As for apprenticeships in British Aerospace in Clwyd, more than 100 people may not be offered jobs by that great company because of the Government's failed economic policies.
We have also lost jobs in the cement industry and there are question marks over the Point of Ayr colliery.
Does the right hon. Gentleman realise that since the beginning of the recession unemployment in Wales has increased by more than 38,000, and that during that period he has brought forward not one new policy to help the economy?
He should be ashamed.
Mr. Hunt
I am pleased to announce this afternoon that since the last Welsh Question Time, there have been 13 new industrial projects — supported by £6 million of regional selective assistance which had been announced — 500 new jobs and the safeguarding of 300 others.
I am pleased also to announce a total of more than £6.5 million industrial investment by a further four companies, either expanding, modernising or setting up operations in Wales.
I believe that Wales continues to be less severely affected by the recession than the United Kingdom as a whole, but it cannot possibly shield itself from the recession both in the United Kingdom and in the rest of the world.
I have been following the hon. Gentleman carefully.
He has been wandering about Wales, giving a spending pledge here and a spending pledge there.
He has failed to recognise that the statutory minimum wage policy that he supports would lose Wales 70,000 jobs.
He has also failed to recognise that the Welsh people will have to pick up the bill for his spending policies.
Children's Homes, Gwynedd
Mr. Ieuan Wyn Jones
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales what representations he has received on the conduct of children's homes in Gwynedd.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. Nicholas Bennett)
Representations have been received from a former employee of Gwynedd county council and from hon. Members.
Mr. Jones
The Minister will be aware that certain allegations have been made about incidents in homes in Gwynedd, and in other parts of Wales, during recent months.
He will also be aware that Gwynedd has set up an inquiry into those incidents.
Is he satisfied with the conduct of that inquiry?
Will he ensure that, when the inquiry is completed, its findings will be published for the benefit of all concerned in Gwynedd?
Will the hon. Gentleman investigate the levels of remuneration paid to those who work in children's homes?
Should they not be paid salaries which accord with the status of the jobs that they perform?
Mr. Bennett
An inquiry has indeed been set up by Gwynedd county council, but I understand that it is currently suspended because of police investigations.
Obviously, I cannot comment on the inquiry because of those investigations.
I hope that Gwynedd county council will listen carefully to what the hon. Gentleman has said about publishing a report of the inquiry; I certainly expect it to publish one.
I have always made it clear that I take seriously any allegations of misbehaviour in any children's home in Wales.
That is why I directed Gwent county council to carry out a statutory inquiry into the organisation of the Ty Mawr home.
I understand that the report on that is to be published shortly.
I have also instituted an inquiry into the running of all children's home in Wales, and I shall publish the report of that within the next few days.
Kuwait and Bahrain
Sir Anthony Meyer
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales if he will make a statement about the Minister of State's recent visit to Kuwait and Bahrain.
Sir Wyn Roberts
I led a trade mission to Kuwait from 5 to 13 November, which gave Welsh companies the opportunity to develop trade links.
Twelve companies took part, several of which obtained firm orders, while other business is in the pipeline.
While in Kuwait, I represented the United Kingdom at the extinguishing of the last oilwell fire.
I also visited Bahrain, where 26 Welsh firms were represented by the Welsh Office and 10 other Welsh firms had exhibition stands, along with a large British contingent exhibiting at the Rebuild Kuwait '91 trade fair.
Sir Anthony Meyer
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on the evident, tremendous and burning success of his mission.
Could he give us any information on what that mission might represent in terms of increased business, especially for small and medium-sized businesses in Wales?
Sir Wyn Roberts
All the companies either represented by the Welsh Office or exhibiting in the two Gulf states were small or medium sized.
We secured orders worth £150,000 during the visit, and there are good prospects for further orders of about £800,000.
I hope that additional trade will flow from the mission in the longer term.
Mr. Denzil Davies
The Minister used the word’ extinguishing’.
Shall we not, before long, see the extinguishing — after 13 years — of the three Conservative Governments who have managed to create the current situation in Wales, where gross domestic product per capita is lower than in any other region?
After those three Conservative Administrations, Wales — alas — is now the poorest region in Britain.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The question is about Kuwait.
Mr. Davies
It is indeed, but it is also about trade between Kuwait and Wales.
In view of the developments that I have mentioned, why should the people of Wales vote for a fourth Conservative Government?
Sir Wyn Roberts
They will vote for a fourth Conservative Government, because since 1979 the record of the current Government and their predecessors in regard to Wales has been excellent.
We have transformed the Welsh economy.
We have increased the number of businesses in Wales, VAT registrations are up by 25 per cent., production industries are up by 60 per cent .
— twice the United Kingdom average — and the number of self-employed people has increased by 60 per cent.
as well.
The reason why we arrange trade missions such as the one that I led to Kuwait — six similar missions have been conducted — is our interest in stimulating orders for the new Welsh economy.
NHS Trusts
Mr. Alex Carlile
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales if he will indicate how many hospitals in Wales have applied for NHS trust status.
Mr. David Hunt
The Pembrokeshire national health service trust will become operational on 1 April 1992.
Last month I announced that applications had been invited from 14 units for NHS trust status in April 1993.
Mr. Alex Carlile
Will the Secretary of State explain to me, and to my puzzled constituents, what is the point of Powys health authority's applying for trust status, given that the entity which now constitutes the health authority would also constitute the trust?
Will he also tell us what the cost of a transfer to trust status would be?
A Welsh Office official was unable to answer that question at a recent conference in Llandrindod Wells.
Finally, will the right hon. Gentleman explain what the trust could do that the district health authority, under its present management, could not?
Mr. Hunt
There has been a positive move towards NHS trust status in Wales.
It now seems likely that 65 per cent.
of acute services could be trust-based by April 1993.
Powys health unit has been invited to prepare an application for trust status in April 1993.
Like the unit in Pembrokeshire, it has done that because it believes that it can satisfy the Secretary of State on four points: first, that such a move would show benefits for patients; secondly, that it would improve management capability; thirdly, that clinicians would be involved in management; and, fourthly, that the trust has a future of financial soundness.
Only if it had been clearly demonstrated to me that trust status would involve a positive move in that direction would I allow such status to be assumed.
There is, of course, no question of allowing any trust to leave the national health service.
Mr. Gareth Wardell
In view of the clear directive contained in the document’ Caring for People’that the Government expect health providers to set up NHS nursing homes, will the Secretary of State give a commitment that there will be health providers in Wales, and that trusts will establish such homes?
Mr. Hunt
It is very much for the providers to determine the future picture.
I believe that, in regard to care in the community, we in Wales are leading the way.
Many other parts of the United Kingdom view our progress with some envy.
As the hon. Gentleman will know, the local joint authorities — including the local authority, the health authority and the other key partners — are currently drawing up local plans for delivering services to the local community.
Mr. Burns
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the national health service management reforms, with the forthcoming trust status and record amounts of money being spent on the health service in Wales, will enable the health service there to build upon its success of treating record numbers of patients?
Mr. Hunt
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
If one compares 1979 with today, 34 per cent.
more in-patients are being treated in Wales, and the number of day cases is up 227 per cent.
Record numbers of patients have been treated, with record funding.
I pay tribute to all those who work in the national health service in Wales for having achieved these outstanding results.
General Needs Housing
Mr. Edwards
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales how many dwellings for general needs housing were completed in the Monmouth constituency by Monmouth borough council and by housing associations in 1981 and 1991.
Mr. Nicholas Bennett
In 1981, 67 social housing units were completed.
There are 108 under construction at the moment.
Mr. Edwards
I am grateful to the Minister, although he has not answered the question that I asked.
I asked him how many houses had been completed in 1991, and I will tell him the answer.
The local authority completed nil houses in 1991.
Housing associations completed 33.
The people of my constituency are appalled that Monmouth borough council has millions of pounds tied up from the sale of council houses and cannot use that money for housing.
Will the Minister use his powers to enable local authorities to provide houses for homeless people, whether through local authorities or housing associations, jobs for redundant construction workers, and new business contracts for the building companies which are going bankrupt?
Mr. Bennett
The hon. Gentleman is wrong.
Local authorities can use 25 per cent.
of their right-to-buy receipts for capital purposes and 75 per cent.
for redemption of debt on housing revenue account, and in Wales we have a special offer whereby local authorities which sell land for low-cost housing may use 100 per cent.
of receipts for capital purposes.
I am sorry that local authorities throughout Wales, whose total debt on housing revenue account amounts to £1.1 billion, redeemed only £14 million of that debt last year.
New Houses
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales what new initiatives he intends to introduce to increase the rate of new house building in Wales.
Mr. Nicholas Bennett
A wide range of measures has been introduced, including shared ownership, plots for sale, partnership schemes and flexi-ownership.
My recently announced initiative on bringing into use empty flats above shops will help to increase the total stock, as will the further reductions in mortgage rates announced last week and the suspension of stamp duty.
Mr. Flynn
What would the Minister say to a constituent of mine whose business has been wrecked by the Government-created recession, whose home is to be repossessed this week because the Government's rescue scheme is too late and inadequate, and whose family face bed-and-breakfast accommodation because the local council has no council houses to offer because the Government have cut council house building in Wales by 90 per cent?
Who is to blame?
Is my constituent right to feel embittered against the Government?
Mr. Bennett
The hon. Gentleman must recognise that we face a world recession.
It is taking place in France, Germany and the United States.
There has even been a reduction in Japan.
We have the benefit of a Conservative Government who will put the battle against inflation at the head of their priorities for dealing with the recession.
I am confident that we shall see the end of the recession in the next few months.
As for housing in Wales, which was the basis of the hon. Gentleman's question, in the last full financial year for which we have figures, 10,000 properties were built in Wales.
That means that since this Government came to power, up to the end of March 1990, a total of 117,000 new homes were built.
We have added to the housing stock in Wales by more than 10 per cent.
since 1979.
Housing for Wales, which is charged with dealing with social housing, is on target this year to build 3,500 houses and to invest £170 million in new social housing.
Mr. Hain
The Minister's reply is arrogant and insulting.
It takes no account of the massive rise in homelessness, of the mortgage repossessions in all our constituencies and of record waiting lists.
Welsh local authorities have almost half a billion pounds in capital receipts.
Why will not the Minister release that money, which could be used immediately to start building 100,000 new homes in Wales?
He should take responsibility for doing so or accept responsibility for his party's vote at the next election, when Labour will be returned.
Mr. Bennett
As I said in answer to the previous question, local authorities can use 100 per cent.
of their receipts if they sell land for low-cost home ownership.
The hon. Gentleman's authority — Neath — has a debt of £25 million on its housing revenue account, yet last year it did not redeem a penny of it.
Only a few months ago, Neath borough council complained that it did not have enough money for housing.
In 1990 and 1991, it did not apply for any money from the top slice programme — for enveloping, for group repair and area renewal, for the homelessness reserve, for the reserve for private or defective dwellings or for priority estates.
The hon. Gentleman should ask Neath borough council why, when money has been available, it has not applied for anything in the past two years.
Mr. Flynn rose
Mr. Speaker
Does the hon. Member have a supplementary question?
Mr. Flynn
No.
I wish to give notice that, because of the disgracefully inadequate —
Mr. Speaker
Does the hon. Gentleman wish to give the Minister notice of an Adjournment debate?
Mr. Flynn
That is precisely what I am trying to do, if I may.
I wish to give notice that, because of the Minister's disgracefully complacent answers, I intend to raise the crisis of housing in Wales on the Adjournment.
Small Businesses
Mr. Michael
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales what steps he intends to take to support the mall business sector in Wales and to encourage its expansion.
Sir Wyn Roberts
We shall continue to place a high priority on supporting the small business sector by a wide range of programmes of assistance implemented through the Welsh Development Agency, the Development Board for Rural Wales, training and enterprise councils, local enterprise agencies and the Welsh Office.
Mr. Michael
May we have a pause in the ministerial litany of self-praise and complacency to recognise the reality of the interest rate burden, the impact of stop-go, the abandonment of research and development, the neglect of training and education and the fact that, because of Government policy, the nightmare of bankruptcy and failure is faced daily by those who run small and medium-sized businesses in Wales?
With the threat of the election staring Ministers in the face, will the Secretary of State stop being complacent and persuade Cabinet colleagues to change their policies to ones that will create opportunity and stability for our business community in Wales?
Sir Wyn Roberts
The hon. Gentleman seems to be excelling in gloom and doom today.
My reply to him is the same as the one that I gave the right hon. Member for Llanelli (Mr. Davies), in which I said that VAT registrations had increased by 25 per cent.
since 1979.
The hon. Gentleman referred to the problem of high interest rates.
Yes, they are a problem, but we have had to impose them because of inflation.
As inflation is low, the prospects for the future are good, especially if the Government are returned to office.
We are the tax-cutting party; Labour is the tax-increasing party.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister was absolutely right to describe it as a’ spend, spend, spend’and’tax, tax, tax’party.
Sir Anthony Meyer
Does my right hon. Friend accept that, in particular, the tourist industry and many other small businesses in my constituency, which are dependent on flexible working hours, part-time arrangements and appropriate salaries to match, would be devastated by the Labour party's minimum wage policy?
Sir Wyn Roberts
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
The tourist industry employs 90,000 people in Wales on the basis that my hon. Friend described.
I can think of nothing more destructive than the Labour party's proposals.
Labour Statistics
Mr. Win Griffiths
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales how many men and women, full and part-time, were in employment in Wales and Mid-Glamorgan in (a) June 1979,(b) June 1987 and (c) the latest date for which figures are available.
Mr. David Hunt
The figures on the basis requested by the hon. Gentleman are not available for Mid-Glamorgan or for part-time male employees, but for Wales, taking September 1991 as the date for which the latest figures are available, there were respectively 618,000, 498,000 and 501,000 male employees in employment.
For the same dates, there were 250,000, 225,000 and 246,000 female employees in full-time employment and 165,000, 184,000 and 213,000 in part-time employment.
Mr. Griffiths
Does not the Secretary of State feel any remorse about those figures?
They show that male employment has gone down massively, that there are some additional jobs for female workers — full and part-time — but that the overall picture is one of deficit, despite the record investment based on the quality of the Welsh work force.
Is the right hon. Gentleman prepared to say whether he thinks that before the next election these figures will improve, or will they get even worse?
Mr. Hunt
I regret that the seasonally adjusted figure went up by 700 to 121,600 last month, but I remind the hon. Gentleman that in January 1986, the figure was over 170,000.
Since 1986 there has been a remarkable reduction, especially in the figure for the long-term unemployed.
In January 1986, that figure was 78,014.
It has now fallen 60 per cent.
to 31,207, but, of course, there is still work to be done.
However, I hope that the hon. Gentleman will recognise that earlier today I announced record inward investment figures for Wales, and we have every right to be proud of those figures.
Mr. Wigley
Does the Secretary of State notice that 12 months ago every vacant job in Wales was chased by nine unemployed people but that by last month 13 unemployed people were chasing each vacancy?
Over the same period, small countries such as the Netherlands and Portugal and, indeed, larger countries such as West Germany and Japan, had a reduction in unemployment, so it is not merely a worldwide factor.
Will he accept responsibility for the reduction in job opportunities in Wales and for the increase in unemployment?
What is he going to do about it?
Mr. Hunt
I was pleased about the lower rate of increase last month and I very much hope that that will be the trend.
Of course, there are problems, but we are far better able to negotiate those problems than we were.
I believe that Wales is much better placed to ride out the worldwide recession than it has been and I can give the hon. Gentleman this pledge: I and my ministerial colleagues will continue to do everything that we can to attract investment to Wales.
We have had remarkably good figures over the past year and we are determined to beat them in 1992.
Mr. Barry Jones
Has the right hon. Gentleman overlooked the job losses at Port Talbot steelworks — a great steelworks under immense pressure because of the recession engendered by his Government — and the continuing loss of jobs in the south Wales coalfields?
Should not the right hon. Gentleman now apologise for the false promises that he made in 1991?
Does he accept that his comment that the Welsh economy was extremely healthy smacks of the complacency of the do-nothing Government of which he is a member?
His Government's record on the Welsh economy will lead to the loss of the seats of his two ministerial colleagues.
Mr. Hunt
The hon. Gentleman's cracked record does not seem to recognise that we are now in the age of disks.
I am afraid that the Labour party is still in the 1960s and 1970s.
I very much hope that we shall never see a return to those bad old days.
In 1979, the steel industry in Wales employed 42,000 people.
Today, 18,000 people are employed producing 10 per cent.
more steel.
Those figures show the transformation in the Welsh economy and we are determined to see that continue.
The last thing that we want is a return to the spend, spend, spend — tax, tax, tax policies of the Labour party.
Welsh Language
Mr. Butler
To ask the Secretary of State for Wales what proportion of secondary school children in Wales are educated through the medium of Welsh.
Sir Wyn Roberts
The latest figures for 1990-91 show that about 15 per cent.
of secondary school pupils in Wales are being educated in Welsh-speaking schools.
Mr. Butler
Did my right hon. Friend see the survey in The Sunday Times which showed that some Welsh-medium schools offer excellent education — some of the best education in the whole of the United Kingdom?
Is not that a tribute to the quality of education within them?
Sir Wyn Roberts
I agree with my hon. Friend and with the comments in the article to which he referred.
The Welsh-medium schools provide a first-class education and I am happy to tell my hon. Friend that Welsh is being taught in eight out of 10 primary schools in Wales and in nine out of 10 secondary schools.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Racial Hatred
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Attorney-General how many prosecutions for inciting racial hatred there have been in each of the past two years; and if he will make a statement.
The Attorney-General (Sir Patrick Mayhew)
In 1990, there was one prosecution for an offence under part III of the Public Order Act 1986 and in 1991, there were four such prosecutions.
In 1991, proceedings were commenced in a further case, but they have not yet been concluded.
Mr. Marshall
May I thank my right hon. and learned Friend for that answer.
Although regretting the need for such prosecutions, may I congratulate him on the vigour with which he prosecutes those who peddle such odious doctrines?
The Attorney-General
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
’ Odious’is the word for the publications that infringe the Act.
I wish that it were possible to bring more of those who are responsible for them to justice, but, as my hon. Friend knows, because he makes a close study of such matters, it is often impossible for the police to identify those who are responsible.
Mr. Janner
May I first associate myself with the words of the hon. Member for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall) with whom I fully agree?
That the Government are now taking action is appreciated.
Will the Attorney-General please assure the House that such action will also be taken against people who do not normally reside here, such as Louis Farrakhan — if by mistake he or anyone like him is allowed in — if they come to this country to try to stir up racial hatred in this decent land?
The Attorney-General
The hon. and learned Gentleman is friendly in his remarks.
He should know that it is not the Government who take action in these matters, but the Attorney-General.
They are extremely important matters.
The hon. and learned Gentleman will know that I recently had the privilege of giving the Sir George Bean memorial lecture in which I set out in some detail to the Association of Jewish Ex-Servicemen and Women the basis for my approach to such matters.
It may be helpful to me to put a copy of that lecture in the Library.
Sunday Trading
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Attorney-General how many representations he has received since the beginning of December which have been critical of his reaction to Sunday opening of stores.
The Attorney-General
Including letters addressed to other Ministers and transferred to me, the answer is about 2,000.
Substantive replies have been sent in almost every case.
Mr. Hughes
Does the Attorney-General accept that the many letters protesting at his view about Sunday trading, as expressed in the House, suggest that the matter should be reconsidered by the Government, especially as the approach appears to be inconsistent and hypocritical?
On Sunday trading, the Government say that there is a risk that the European Court might rule against us, so they take no action.
On the environmental impact assessment directive, the European Commission sent a letter before action had been taken, accompanied by a personal letter.
The Government said then that although they have been told that they are in the wrong, they will do nothing about it.
Surely European laws should be either obeyed or disobeyed.
It should not be a matter of pick and choose, as the Government please.
The Attorney-General
It is a pity that the hon. Gentleman did not listen to my last answer.
If he had, he would have heard me say that it was for the Attorney-General to enforce the law, not the Government.
The answer on this subject that I gave in November made it perfectly clear that the decision is mine and nobody else's.
I think that those letters show a wholly understandable sense of frustration, but the House of Lords, before which an appeal is pending, has shown uncertainty about whether the provisions of the Shops Act 1950 remain part of our domestic law.
Accordingly, the House of Lords referred the issues to the European Court of Justice so that the House of Lords could answer that question.
I keep the matter under review, as I must, but in the circumstances I am not persuaded that the public interest requires me to take the necessarily large number of actions up and down the country.
Mr. Tony Banks
Action was taken on the poll tax.
The Attorney-General
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will contrive to listen to what I am saying on this complicated matter.
My jurisdiction is limited to taking action in the public interest.
Local authorities have a separate and specific jurisdiction conferred on them by the Act, and the course that they take is a matter for their judgment.
The environmental assessment aspect is a matter for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment, the relevant Minister.
Mr. Channon
Can my right hon. and learned Friend give us any estimate of the time that will elapse before the European Court gives its judgment on the matter?
Can my right hon. and learned Friend take any action to shorten that period and clear up what is a highly unsatisfactory situation, whatever view one takes on Sunday opening?
The Attorney-General
I agree that it is unsatisfactory.
The Government have asked the European Court at Luxembourg to expedite its hearing.
The best that I can say is that we shall receive the answer to the question that the House of Lords has asked in forthcoming months — I hope that the number involved will be few, not great.
Mr. Anderson
What is the Attorney-General's authority for saying that he cannot rely on Crown privilege in relation to cross undertakings for damages?
Is not it crystal clear that the Government are willingly in collusion with those stores that are using salami tactics bit by bit — before Christmas, between Christmas and the new year and after the new year — and which so handsomely contribute to Conservative party funds?
Surely, circumstances have now changed and any reasonable Attorney-General would respond accordingly.
The Attorney-General
I have not troubled to inquire whether any firm has contributed to the Conservative party.
It is a matter of total indifference to me, as it should be to the hon. Member for Swansea, East (Mr. Anderson).
If he chooses to use the word’ collusion’, and apply it to me in that context, he is attributing dishonourable conduct — he should be ashamed of doing so.
Sir John Farr
Will my right hon. and learned Friend consider advising local authorities — which still seem to be unaware of their present powers on which they can act and circulating information to them to tell them that if they want to come down on Sunday traders, the statute book in Britain already gives them that authority?
The Attorney-General
I understand my hon. Friend's point, but the section is entirely clear and I think that all local authorities are aware of its provisions, which place the primary duty of enforcing the Shops Act 1950 on them.
There is no shortage of advice available to local authorities to enable them to decide whether, in uncertain circumstances, it is politic for them to seek to start proceedings, whether criminal or civil.
That is for local authorities to decide, and it is not for me to offer them advice.
Mr. Fraser
Does the Attorney-General agree that the defence of using the treaty of Rome in relation to breaches of the Shops Act 1950 is pretty flimsy and slender?
As the European Court delays are providing a valuable premium for some people and holding up injunctive relief in this country, should not further representations be made to the European Court to deal with the problem as an injunctive matter so that certainty is quickly returned to the courts of this country?
The Attorney-General
We certainly want to know the answer and the House of Lords, which is dealing with an appeal in the B and Q case, also wants to know the answer.
The hon. Gentleman is a distinguished and experienced solicitor.
I do not know whether he wishes to reconsider what on earth he means by saying that it is a flimsy excuse: either it is part of the law, or it is not.
So long as there is uncertainty about the matter, that must have a bearing on whether enforcement proceedings are taken by the Attorney-General up and down the country in a necessarily very large number of cases.
I explained to the House in November that I do not consider that the public interest lies in my taking that very large number of proceedings up and down the country in those circumstances.
Whether local authorities take the same view in their own jurisdictions is a matter entirely for them.
’ Spycatcher’
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Attorney-General what progress he has made in identifying the total cost of the’ Spycatcher’litigation.
The Solicitor-General (Sir Nicholas Lyell)
The total cost to the Government to date, excluding the contempt proceedings and officials' time, is calculated at £2,221,503.
Mr. Banks
As the Solicitor-General said, that excludes officials' time, so the figure must be that much higher.
Is it not outrageous that so much British taxpayers' money should have been spent trying to suppress a book which in part told us about the treacherous activities of the security services in trying to undermine the democratically elected Government of Harold Wilson?
Will the Solicitor-General assure the House that similar treacherous activities will not take place when the next Labour Government are democratically elected under my right hon. Friend the Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock)?
The Solicitor-General
Whatever one thinks about the activities of the author, he was a former member of the security services.
These cases have the very valuable result of getting a clear decision from the House of Lords, upheld in this respect by the European Court of Human Rights which took nothing from that decision, that such former members owe a lifelong duty of confidentiality.
OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT
Iraq
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what additional resources will be made available to improve health care for vulnerable groups in Iraq.
The Minister for Overseas Development (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
I have recently approved an additional allocation of over £1 million in aid for vulnerable groups in both the north and south of Iraq.
Last week, I approved a further £345,000 for the British Red Cross.
On 8 January I called for a high-level meeting of donor countries to respond to the United Nations latest humanitarian appeal.
That has been favourably received.
Mr. Cohen
Has the Minister seen the statement made at the weekend by the Red Cross stating that without aid, the whole of Iraq faces massive starvation?
Has she seen the Quakers report which states that tens of thousands of children are in jeopardy and thousands will die because of the lack of essential medicines?
Is it not now time to lift the economic sanctions that are killing people, including children, in Iraq and to inject a huge amount of those essential medicines which are in short supply there?
Mrs. Chalker
First, I pay tribute to the British Red Cross and the many non-governmental organisations which have provided help in Iraq supported by money from the Government.
We shall continue to support them, as my main answer to the hon. Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) made clear.
However, with regard to the hon. Gentleman's request that we should lift sanctions, I am afraid that he is way out of line.
The needs of the Iraqi people can be met by the release of $1.6 billion of oil which would finance the purchase of essential humanitarian supplies to relieve that suffering.
We continue to help in the meantime, and at a diplomatic level, we are working extremely hard to have Security Council resolutions 706 and 712 implemented.
When that is achieved, the problems referred to by the Red Cross and the Quakers report will be substantially minimised.
Miss Emma Nicholson
In paying tribute to those excellent voluntary organisations whom the Government have grant-aided to help vulnerable groups in Iraq, does not my right hon. Friend the Minister agree that Saddam Hussein has ensured the continuing torment and lack of help for his people, particularly for the southern Shias in the marshes?
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend is right.
Saddam Hussein continues to ignore the needs of the Iraqi people, particularly those in the south who have had less publicity than the Kurds in the north.
Both need our help, but the help that they should be given is by their own Government, by the full implementation of resolutions 706 and 712.
We are doing our best to make progress in the talks so that the Iraqi people will get the benefit of the export of Iraqi oil in the near future.
Mr. Winnick
Is it not clear to the Minister that we should be concerned, as my hon. Friend the Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) has stated, about the plight of the people of Iraq and the starvation that is being caused?
Is it not the case that as long as Saddam Hussein rules that country — as long as that brutal and murderous despot continues in power — there will be absolutely no solution for people in that unhappy state?
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman knows that I believe that the Iraqi people will be safeguarded for the long term and enable the international community to give long-term development aid to that country only when Saddam Hussein is no longer at the helm in Baghdad.
It is a very serious situation.
The humanitarian groups have done extremely well.
Bearing in mind the £45 million which this country has given since April, I can assure the hon. Gentleman that we will continue to play our part.
However, their only true relief, as everybody in the House and in the country knows, is for Saddam Hussein to be replaced.
World Population Conference
Mr. Steen
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if the Minister for Overseas Development will attend the conference from 31 January to 1 February 1992 for European parliamentarians on action on world population, sponsored by the British parliamentary group on population and development.
Mrs. Chalker
I much regret that I will be unable to attend that conference because of my forthcoming visit to southern Africa.
My noble friend the Earl of Caithness has agreed to attend in my place.
My officials will play a major role in support to European action on world population.
I look forward to the conclusions of the conference with considerable interest.
Mr. Steen
The House is sorry that the Minister cannot attend the conference.
All European Members would have liked to pay tribute to the splendid work that she and the Government have done for overseas development.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the ever-growing problem of street children is a consequence of overpopulation?
Does she consider that some new initiative is needed to stem police brutality in countries such as Brazil — where there are 10 million street children — Guatemala, Mexico and other countries?
Would my right hon. Friend feel able to lead a crusade with other European countries to put pressure on the Governments of central and south America so that every child there has a home, food, clothing and education and is not allowed to fall prey to the worst excesses of human nature?
Mrs. Chalker
I agree that the situation for street children not only in Brazil and Guatemala but in certain other countries is extremely serious.
That is one good reason why we have been supporting several non-governmental projects in the region and why we have made representations to presidents and other leaders about the state of children in those countries.
It is difficult to provide advice on population planning in some Catholic countries, but I am pleased at the progress that we are beginning to make.
The more children who are born by choice and not by chance, the better, as we said in August of last year when working our our programme.
Sir David Steel
Although it is understandable that the Minister cannot be in two places at once, will she assure the House that her noble Friend will make a strong contribution to the conference?
Does she agree that some of our overseas development programmes have been vitiated by the rise in population in some of the countries concerned?
Mrs. Chalker
I can assure the right hon. Gentleman that my noble Friend will make a very strong statement of Government policy, even though I wish that I could do it myself.
Of course the increasing population in some countries is harming the progress that they could otherwise make on development issues.
However, it is good to note that because the contraception prevalence rate has increased considerably since 1985 in countries such as Bangladesh and a number of African countries, we are beginning to make more progress.
By spending more resources on this matter, as I intend to do, having tripled our programme in the past 10 years, I believe that we shall make still further progress, with the help of education, too.
Sir Charles Morrison
Although I fully understand why my right hon. Friend cannot attend the conference of Parliamentarians, will she tell the House now whether the Government support the recent call by Mr. Robert McNamara for a global commission on population in preparation for the 1994 United Nations conference on population?
Secondly, are the Government currently involved in giving advice or assistance to the Russian republics and to other east European republics?
Mrs. Chalker
In answer to my hon. Friend's first question, we believe that the UN conference on population in 1994 will be an important focal point and that all possible work to support it should be carried out.
We have not yet concluded whether that work should be in the form suggested by Mr. Robert McNamara or be carried out in other ways.
Nevertheless, we shall support such work.
In answer to the second part of my hon. Friend's question about population planning assistance to the former Soviet Union, although we have not been asked for such help, last week I agreed that £2 million-worth of medical aid should be spent in the republics of the former Soviet Union.
That aid is already going out, starting with a specific gift that was made today in Moscow.
Mrs. Clwyd
In so far as the population of Africa, and especially that of Somalia, is clearly at risk from internal conflict and where the aid agencies cannot deliver any assistance because of that conflict, is it not time for the British Government to urge the United Nations to take a more interventionist and far stronger role in resolving those disputes?
Mrs. Chalker
Having visited homes for abandoned children in Somalia a couple of years ago, I can well understand concern not only about young children in that country, but about all its people.
That was why, when meeting the United Nations new Secretary-General, Dr.
Boutros Ghali, last Monday, I took the opportunity to suggest to him the need for more action in Somalia.
James Jonah's visit on behalf of the secretary-general looks like producing some suggestions, but we shall continue to fund British non-governmental organisations that are providing relief in Somalia in the form of both food and medicines.
We hope that there will be peace soon so that we can do still more effective work.
House of Commons
Tuesday 21 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
HEALTH
Sunderland General Hospital
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many beds were available at the intensive care unit at Sunderland general hospital in (a) December 1990 and (b) December 1991.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
Five beds were available at the intensive care unit throughout both of the months named.
Mr. Mullin
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that, for most of last year, only four of the seven beds in the Sunderland intensive care unit were operating, that five are now operating, although there is a staff shortage, and that the future of the fifth bed is not clear?
Is he aware also that during that time scale many seriously ill patients had to be turned away and had to go to other hospitals and that patients using the unit had to be taken out of it prematurely so that others more seriously ill could take their place?
How does that square with the repeated claim that the national health service is safe in Tory hands?
Mr. Dorrell
It is true that, on occasions last year, there were staff shortages in the intensive care unit at the hospital.
The health authority has made it clear that it is initiating an inquiry to establish the levels of staffing and back-up staffing that are necessary to ensure that there are no shortages.
I am advised that there were no serious repercussions for any patient at Sunderland general hospital last year.
Mr. Devlin
Is my hon. Friend aware that Sunderland general hospital will receive an investment of £19 million this year, of which £11 million is to be spent on a new acute ward block?
That is part of Northern regional health authority's largest-ever capital investment, and it has been brought about by the Government.
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the local example in Sunderland of the greatest-ever capital investment programme taking place in the national health service.
The hon. Member for Sunderland, South (Mr. Mullin) might have mentioned that the local health authority has committed itself to eliminating all waiting lists of more than 12 months by the end of this calendar year.
HIV Infection
Mr. Strang
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make provisions comparable to those made to haemophiliacs to non-haemophiliacs infected with HIV as a result of national health service blood or tissue transfers.
The Minister for Health (Mrs. Virginia Bottomley)
We have every sympathy with the plight of those infected with HIV as a result of NHS blood or tissue transfer.
However, we have not been persuaded that it would be right to extend the special provision which has been made for the infected haemophiliacs.
Mr. Strang
How can the Minister justify the Government's callous attitude towards those who become HIV positive as a result of national health service treatment?
Surely she accepts that the Government were right to provide compensation for haemophiliacs who became infected through contaminated blood factor 8.
Surely she must appreciate that there is no logical or moral case for making a distinction between haemophiliacs and non-haemophiliacs in this respect.
That is the view of the Haemophilia Society and of the vast majority of hon. Members on both sides of the House.
Will the Government think again on this matter?
Mrs. Bottomley
Frankly, I find it extremely difficult to make judgments about any of the 5,451 AIDS sufferers, let alone the 16,828
HIV sufferers.
As the hon. Gentleman of all people will know, we must ensure that we have effective, first-rate services for all those suffering from HIV or AIDS.
We took the view that the haemophiliacs were a special case: they were doubly disadvantaged because of their hereditary condition and the onset of HIV, which compounded their problems.
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson
May I press my hon. Friend on this matter?
Does she agree that haemophiliacs and others who are given contaminated blood transfusions receive them from the national health service?
Does she agree also that we are talking of not one or two people but tens of people?
There are more than 1,000 haemophiliacs and nearly 100 others who received contaminated blood transfusions.
These major disasters are compounded by the fact that those people believed that the NHS would make them better.
How can my hon. Friend argue that compensation should be given to haemophiliacs because, sadly, they suffered a congenital disease and that a sick person who required a blood transfusion was in a different category?
The result is the same — great suffering for the individual and great suffering for his or her family, probably the onset of AIDS and, ultimately, death.
In those terms alone, have not the Government and the NHS a moral obligation to do something about the matter?
Mrs. Bottomley
With respect to my hon. Friend, I do not believe that it is ever possible to cut a hard-and-fast line.
Any case in which a patient suffers a medical accident is a great tragedy.
However, the House debated no-fault compensation and, like the royal commission involved, took the view that it could not be justified.
We made a difficult decision, and provided a generous settlement for haemophiliacs.
Although my hon. Friend makes persuasive and powerful arguments, I cannot accept that they are convincing reasons for moving the line.
Mr. Robin Cook
The Minister will be aware from her files that two of the 62 cases are my constituents.
Does she accept that it is impossible to explain to them why patients who are haemophiliacs are eligible for compensation but they are not — even though my constituents have the same condition, life expectancy and financial pressures?
It is impossible to do that because there is no logic to that argument.
If it is difficult to defend where the line is drawn, it may be that the line is drawn in the wrong place and that it should be drawn instead so that it includes all those who were infected because of NHS treatment — not just some.
Mrs. Bottomley
As the House knows, Labour has no difficulty making pledges that would result in untold expenditure.
The hon. Gentleman argues for no-fault compensation.
Where it can be established that there has been negligence, of course compensation is payable.
It is the job of the national health service to provide health care and treatment and to continue developing that treatment.
I cannot convince myself or the House that the hon. Gentleman's argument is right or persuasive.
I remind the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) that, this year, £200 million will be earmarked especially for those suffering from HIV or AIDS.
EC Health Treatment
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will introduce proposals whereby national health service patients could be referred to receive treatment in the EC.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
Under current European Community regulations, individual patients may be referred elsewhere in the Community for treatment in certain specified circumstances, with the prior authorisation of the Department.
Mrs. Gorman
Is my hon. Friend aware that some of our European partners, with a very high standard of health care, are offering to perform operations for which there is a demand in this country — such as hip replacement — at competitive prices?
One health authority is already negotiating with a French hospital, but it is under the impression that it may not yet make use of that facility.
Does my hon. Friend agree that such an arrangement would not only broaden the health services already made available to patients but achieve financial savings that could be ploughed back into the provision of other services?
Mrs. Bottomley
I urge my hon. Friend to examine more carefully the health arrangements in many European Community countries, because Britain is one of the few in which a patient may visit a general practitioner and receive hospital treatment free of charge.
That is rare in the rest of the Community.
Patients in France are expected to pay 20 per cent.
and patients in Belgium up to 25 per cent.
of the costs.
My hon. Friend should again examine the relative costings.
The figures that she gave referred to comparisons with the private sector, not the national health service.
I want to ensure that we build on the success of the first six months of NHS reforms so that no one will want to go anywhere but to his or her most immediately available hospital to receive NHS treatment.
Dr. Kumar
Will the Minister make the point that, rather than look for treatment to be provided elsewhere in Europe, the Government should provide hospitals in this country?
For the past 10 years, my constituency has been promised a hospital, but no progress has been made.
Mrs. Bottomley
I much regret that such a new Member of Parliament should have picked up the churlish habits of other Labour Members.
The hon. Gentleman's constituency includes the South Cleveland NHS trust hospital, which is a first-rate, second-wave trust.
As the report produced last week by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State made clear, patients are getting a first-rate service from NHS hospitals and ever-improving treatment from the hospitals.
Dame Jill Knight
The problem is not just that frequently patients in other European countries have to pay for their treatment.
They often receive a far lower standard of care than patients in this country.
Is not it a fact that doctors and nurses in France were on strike recently, and that in Italy patients have to ask relatives to bring in food because none is provided by the hospitals?
Relatives often have to provide non-medical care as well, and patients have to bring in their own blankets and bed linen.
Will my hon. Friend note that I, for one, want to receive the superior care that our patients receive?
Mrs. Bottomley
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
I seem to remember being told that the latest policy is to turn water cannon on the nurses; that does not strike me as the most helpful approach.
We do indeed have one of the best health services in the European Community, and my hon. Friend is right to emphasise its strengths.
The report that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State produced last week revealed that this year we are due to treat an extra 250,000 patients; we are cutting the number of long’ waiters’, and creating a service that is responsive to patient needs.
Those are all reasons for us to have pride in our health service, rather than denigrating the achievements of all our public-spirited NHS staff.
Mentally Ill People
Mr. McFall
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what recent assessment he has made of the adequacy of community care provision for people with serious mental illness.
Mr. Dorrell
I am today publishing an assessment of the case for hospital hostels for people with serious mental illness.
In recent years, we have established the capital loans fund and introduced the mental illness specific grant.
My right hon. Friend recently announced that the mental illness specific grant is to be increased by 50 per cent.
in the coming year, and he is today announcing that we are doubling the size of the homeless mentally ill programme in London.
This programme together provides over £100 million of new money for mental illness services in this country.
Mr. McFall
There could be no more tragically eloquent testimony to the fact that the Government's community care policies have failed than the sight of mentally ill people spilling on to the streets every moment.
Although it comes late, I welcome the comment by the Secretary of State for the Environment that that sight is an affront to society.
May I point out, however, that it is not only for the convenience of passing citizens that mentally ill people should be cleared from the streets?
What is required is adequate special accommodation, along with the necessary health facilities.
Will the Minister give a commitment that there will be no further discharges of patients from long-term hospitals until places have been found for mentally ill patients?
Will he also give an assurance —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Briefly, please.
Mr. McFall
Will the Minister give an assurance that mentally ill patients who were ejected before the Government's U-turn will be given a rightful place in society?
Mr. Dorrell
The hon. Gentleman is wrong in almost every particular.
First, he is wrong to assume that the policy to which he refers is espoused only by the Government: until now, there has been a bipartisan commitment to ensuring that mentally ill people receive care and facilities that are properly attuned to their needs.
Secondly, the hon. Gentleman asked for a change of policy that would ensure that, before people were discharged from long-stay hospitals, proper provision was made for them in the community.
That does not require a change of policy; it is the Government's policy.
It is our policy that no one should be discharged from long-stay hospitals without the existence of a care programme that defines that person's needs — and, furthermore, naming an individual key worker who will be responsible for ensuring that the person receives the care that he requires.
The fact is that the hon. Gentleman cannot support his assertions on the basis of the available evidence.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I remind the House that multiple questions lead to multiple answers and take up time.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
I warmly welcome my hon. Friend's announcement.
Does he accept, however, that — sadly — many of those who are sleeping rough in our cities and elsewhere have indeed been discharged from psychiatric hospitals and have slipped through the care package net?
Hundreds more are in our prisons, which are the wrong place for such people.
Will my hon. Friend ensure that there is a proper care package, properly drawn up, for every mentally ill patient who is discharged from a psychiatric hospital before such patients are discharged?
If that cannot be achieved, will he ensure that psychiatric hospitals do not close until the necessary arrangements can be made?
Mr. Dorrell
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his support for the document that we are publishing today on hospital hostels.
I agree with him that they have an important role to play in a fully integrated service for mentally ill people, but the House would mislead itself if it believed that those mentally ill people who find themselves on the streets are drawn from those patients who have been discharged from long-term care in hospitals.
The great majority of homeless people who are mentally ill have never been in our hospitals.
We need to ensure that the management of community care is improved to meet the needs of those who are discharged from hospitals and, more particularly, of those who have never been long-stay patients in our hospitals for the mentally ill.
Mr. Rooker
I welcome without qualification the Minister's statement and confirm that there is a bipartisan approach to this policy.
However, we want that policy to be activated and managed.
That is the difference between us.
We do not want to stand idly by and do nothing.
The Minister's announcement — which again I welcome without qualification — comes six years after the Audit Commission's report on care in the community, which in paragraph 28 highlighted the fact that then, six years ago, there were 37,000 fewer mentally ill and mentally handicapped patients than there were 10 years ago but that nobody knew where those who had been discharged were because nobody had done anything to find out what had happened to them.
For six years, the Government have not taken a blind bit of notice of the Audit Commission's report.
They have allowed their care in the community policy for ex-mental patients to amount to no more than people drifting within a community of hostels, in which one finds people who have fallen through the safety net and ended up homeless on the streets.
Mr. Dorrell
I find myself left wondering, if £100 million of new money is standing idly by, how much an action programme is going to cost the Labour party and when we shall see it properly costed.
Orthopaedic Treatments
Mr. Day
To ask the Secretary of State for Health by what factor (a) hip replacements and (b) all orthopaedic procedures have increased since 1979.
The Secretary of State for Health (Mr. William Waldegrave)
The latest figures for 1990-91 show the number of hip replacements up by 54 per cent.
from 28,788 to 44,477.
Latest information on all orthopaedic procedures from the hospital episode statistics is for 1989-90 and shows an increase of 18 per cent.
from 554,000 to 656,000.
Mr. Day
Does my right hon Friend agree that the figures confirm the tremendous advances that have been made in health care since the Conservatives came to power?
Does he agree that that is evidenced by the recent successful survey of the national health service?
Does my right hon. Friend agree also that the last Labour Government introduced such swingeing real cuts in the health service that, if they were returned to power, it would represent a real threat to those who require advanced orthopaedic treatment?
Mr. Waldegrave
My hon. Friend is right.
That is reflected in the fact that there are now about 100,000 more orthopaedic operations than there were in 1979.
The hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) recently said to the House, rather chillingly, that if Labour were re-elected it would treat the national health service as it did last time.
As Mr. Charles Webster, the national health service historian, recently told’ Newsnight’, that meant a splurge of spending at the beginning that was followed by the most desperate and dangerous cuts ever in the history of the national health service.
Mr. Colin Shepherd
Is my right hon. Friend aware that an enormous number of people in Herefordshire are very grateful for the spectacular increase in knee and hip replacements that has taken place in that health authority's area during the past 10 years?
It is an astonishingly successful programme.
However, with a higher age structure, compared with the national average, demand continues to outstrip supply.
In view of my right hon. Friend's waiting lists initiative, will he take special cognisance of that point and balance the distribution of that resource to reflect the age structure?
Mr. Waldegrave
My hon. Friend knows that one of the changes that we are introducing is much fairer funding of health authorities throughout the land to reflect, among other things, the age structure.
It is the duty of health authorities to meet the needs of local people by putting the money where it best serves those local needs.
Eye Treatments
Mr. Robert Hicks
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what plans he has for reducing waiting times in respect of eye treatments; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Dorrell
We are taking vigorous action to reduce waiting times for hospital treatment in all specialties.
Mr. Hicks
Is my hon. Friend aware that, for many years within the referral area of the Plymouth eye infirmary, people have had to wait excessively long periods not only for an initial eye examination but for subsequent treatment?
Will my hon. Friend tell us what action is being taken to improve the position in respect of new staff and new facilities and any benefits that might be derived from the new contractual arrangements?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is right to say that the ophthalmology specialty in Plymouth hospital has had excessive waiting lists.
I am pleased to be able to tell my hon. Friend that the new structures and management priorities of the health service led the health authority to appoint a new ophthalmology consultant last week to provide extra sessions to work through the waiting list.
The contracting system to which my hon. Friend referred has made it possible for the health authority to provide extra capacity for the specialty at Exeter hospital which will ensure that the waiting list can be worked off much more quickly than would otherwise be possible.
My hon. Friend's constituency experience demonstrates clearly the higher priority now attached to reducing waiting times and the management system that is necessary to deliver that objective.
Mr. Litherland
Is the Minister aware that the new cataract centre at Manchester royal eye hospital is dependent upon private patients to pay the £2 million loan for its refurbishment?
Does he agree that that will lead to preferential treatment for private patients and creeping privatisation?
Why on earth is his Department so scared of answering questions on this subject?
Mr. Dorrell
That question is not for the Government; it is for the hon. Gentleman and his party to explain to his constituents why it is in the interests of the patients of Manchester to remove private patients from NHS hospitals, to deny the NHS revenue that private patients bring and to deny benefits to NHS patients in general.
Mr. Hayes
Does my hon. Friend agree that, whether the Opposition like it or not, waiting lists are going down?
Will my hon. Friend pay tribute to the doctors, nurses and administrators who have made the reforms, the fundholders and the NHS trusts a success?
Will my hon. Friend ask the Opposition whether they will continue to embark upon their policy of abolishing those trusts?
If they do not give an answer, will my hon. Friend take the Leader of the Opposition out for an Italian meal?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the deafening silence of the Labour party when last week we announced success in reducing long waits for NHS treatment.
The House may be interested to know that, because we were seeking to look at the effect of NHS management reforms over the first six months, we did not draw attention to the fact that the number of people who have been waiting for more than one year on in-patient lists is 37 per cent.
down on what it was when we took office in 1979.
Infant Mortality
Miss Lestor
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will state the infant mortality rate for each of the last 10 years.
Mr. Waldegrave
The rate of infant mortality per 1,000 live births in England and Wales has fallen from 11.1 in 1981 to 7.9 in 1990.
The complete figures for the past 10 years will be published in the Official Report.
Miss Lestor
Although those figures are welcome, is the Minister aware that we do not compare well with our European colleagues and that our declining infant mortality rate is not as good as many of their rates?
Also, there are big differences between social classes and regions in this country in terms of the opportunities for children to survive.
Does the Minister consider it fair that, if a child is born in East Anglia, it has a far better chance of survival than if it is born in Yorkshire or in my region, where we recently lost five intensive care cots?
Is not it right that all children should have access to the latest technology, irrespective of where they live or the poverty of their parents?
Mr. Waldegrave
I do not think that it is right for the hon. Lady to knock the national health service in that way.
In fact, Britain's figures are rather good.
Some in Europe are better than ours, but we are better than some others and very much better than the United States.
She will also want to welcome the fact given in answer to the hon. Member for Peckham (Ms. Harman) that the percentage improvement among the poorest groups — what the sociologists call groups 4 and 5 — has been greater than that among the higher groups, so the gap is therefore narrowing.
That is very welcome.
I recently referred the subject of access to neo-natal facilities to the Clinical Standards Advisory Group, and we recently set up a confidential inquiry into stillbirths and deaths in infancy.
We are making steady progress, of which the country should be proud.
We should also be proud of the NHS's achievement in that respect.
Mr. Conway
Is my right hon. Friend aware of the improvements made in Shropshire, especially by the maternity unit of the Royal Shrewsbury hospital, where two thirds of the Conway brood were born?
Is he aware that that progress has been made not merely because of the skill of the consultants and of the nursing staff but because of the way they work together as a team?
Therefore, will he ensure that the district health authority does not break up that team in order to move it to Telford to try to keep an under-used district general hospital busy?
Mr. Waldegrave
I believe that steady progress is being made, as my hon. Friend says.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Eccles (Miss Lestor) for having tabled the question, which otherwise the Opposition might have accused me of having planted.
Following is the information:
@TCO920121000
GP Budget Holders
Sir Anthony Durant
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the progress of budget-holding general practitioner practices.
Mr. Waldegrave
The Government's introduction of general practitioner fundholding has been a clear success, a fact confirmed in the independent academic research undertaken by Professor Glennerster of the London school of economics reported today by the King's Fund.
To allow the advantages of fund holding to be enjoyed by more patients and doctors, I am pleased to announce that we are lowering the list size eligibility criterion from 9,000 patients to 7,000 patients for practices entering the scheme from April 1993.
Sir Anthony Durant
My right hon. Friend's announcement is to be welcomed by GPs who welcome the principle of managing their own funds.
It helps the NHS and its patients.
Is not it now time that the hon. Member for Peckham (Ms. Harman) apologised to the House for saying that GPs were not interested in fund holding?
Mr. Waldegrave

InterruptionIt is true that the hon. Lady said in column 687 a couple of years back on 15 March 1990 — that there was’ no support among GPs’—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
This takes a lot of time.
Mr. Waldegrave
She said that that was the position of all general practitioners of fund-holding practices.
Hon.
Interruption
Members opposite must get used to the idea that I shall read out what their Front-Bench spokesmen have said about fund holding.
The hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) associated himself with the sentence:’ I'll be surprised if budget holding does not collapse in the first year.’
He should have the grace to admit that he was wrong and the grace to clear up the muddle that has existed in his ranks since his colleague the hon. Member for Strathkelvin and Bearsden (Mr. Galbraith) recently announced that he was going to abolish fund holding.
I could not get a straight answer from the hon. Member for Livingston about this.
I think that the House needs to know whether he will abolish fund holding in the teeth of opposition from virtually every GP and from the British Medical Association.
Mr. Kennedy
Will not the fact that the percentage of GPs who hold their own budgets still remains a very small fraction of the total number of GPs — even after today's announcement — linked to the nature of the block contract system of an internal market, inevitably mean that, if we are to avoid a two-tier health service in terms of patient referrals, either all GPs must hold their own budgets or none should be budget holders?
The present two-tier structure is leading to a two-tier treatment of health.
Mr. Waldegrave
Like those on the Opposition Front Bench, the hon. Member for Ross, Cromarty and Skye (Mr. Kennedy) is out of date.
Professor Glennerster and others looked at the allegations and found no evidence of a two-tier structure emerging.
Professor Glennerster said that it was clear that the benefits won by GP fund holders were swiftly being transferred to the patients of other GPs, which is what we said would happen.
I think that the hon. Member, who belongs to a party that is supposed to believe in devolution, might occasionally support a practical piece of devolution.
Mr. John Browne
Will my right hon. Friend accept that GPs were encouraged to introduce computerisation partly by an offer of Government funds to refund the cost of that process and, in districts such as the Wessex health authority, those funds have not been fully forthcoming?
Will he agree to allow a carry-over into next year to ensure that those GPs who have introduced computerisation will be compensated by the Government, in accordance with the Government undertaking?
Mr. Waldegrave
I have been to a large number of conferences and met many general practitioners, including many from my hon. Friend's district.
I have found no such systematic problems, but if there are specific difficulties in some practices, those involved should discuss them with their regional health authority.
Mrs. Mahon
Why does the Minister continue to misrepresent the views of doctors?
Is he aware that the chair of the local British Medical Association branch in Calderdale recently publicly rebuked local Tories who were saying that GPs wanted to become fund holders?
Dr. Whittaker had to say that no doctors in Calderdale had applied to become fund holders in either the second or third wave.
Is it not about time that the Minister started to represent doctors' views properly?
Mr. Waldegrave
I am tempted to quote Oliver Cromwell and to ask whether the hon. Lady could conceive of the possibility that she might be wrong.
I am making the extension because of the pressure from general practitioners who have asked me to extend the list size.
People are queuing up to join the voluntary scheme.
Mr. Dykes
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the fund-holding system has been a spectacular success — so much so that many of the more trendy, intellectual GPs who were initially sceptical of it now welcome it more and more with open arms?
Will my right hon. Friend look again at some of the procedures for recording, note taking and keeping records, as some GPs say that the system is a little too cumbersome and bureaucratic?
Mr. Waldegrave
I am very sympathetic to comments like that.
The scheme will obviously be a permanent and beneficial part of health care in this country but is, I am sure, susceptible to improvement and further development, which I shall promote.
My hon. Friend correctly records the honesty of many general practitioners, some of whom were sceptical.
At his press conference this morning, Professor Glennerster said that, when he started his investigation, he was sceptical, but that he was converted by the evidence of his own eyes, and what he had seen and heard.
I only wish that the Labour party had the same openness of mind.
Mr. Robin Cook
If the Secretary of State does not believe that GP fund holding produces two-tier waiting lists, how can he explain the position in Manchester, where patients of fund holders are given eye treatment in a private wing, while patients of other GPs wait 13 months for an appointment?
If that is not queue-jumping, what does the Secretary of State call it?
How can he explain the position in Surrey and in St. Albans, where consultants are being placed under pressure by managers to give priority to GP fund holders because they bring extra money?
If the Secretary of State does not recognise that as an example of two-tier lists, what will he recognise as such?
I shall answer the Secretary of State's question.
Hon. Members
Ah.
Mr. Robin Cook
I welcome the fact that the Secretary of State is getting in practice and asking the questions to which I give the answers at Question Time, as it is a situation to which he shall have to become accustomed.
The next Labour Government will end GP fund holding, because we shall not tolerate a two-tier list system in which the length of time a patient waits depends on the size of the GP's budget.
There is a phrase for that policy — double standards.
The Labour party will clear it out of the NHS.
Mr. Waldegrave
I offer the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) my heartfelt thanks for giving what is almost the first straight answer that I have ever extracted from him.
I believe that he has, in a single word, delivered to us the votes of the majority of general practitioners in the country, for which I am most grateful.
I urge him to study the remarks of Professor Glennerster, who knows rather more about this matter than he does and has laid the two-tier rumours to rest once and for all.
Nurse Prescribing
Mr. Fishburn
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what progress is being made towards permitting nurse prescribing.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
My hon. Friend the Member for Chiselhurst (Mr. Sims) has introduced a private Member's Bill to allow nurse prescribing.
It has the Government's full support.
Mr. Fishburn
I thank my hon. Friend.
As, only a few months ago, she very charmingly killed a similar measure that I had introduced I doubly welcome her support now.
Does she now accept that allowing nurses to write prescriptions against a limited range of medical products is a liberalising measure that peels back one layer of the onion skin in the bureaucracy of health care?
Would she care to tell the House the costs and benefits of this measure, which will be welcomed so much by doctors, nurses and, of course, patients?
Mrs. Bottomley
The House and, indeed, the nursing profession are indebted to my hon. Friend, who pioneered this measure in the House.
I am very pleased that our hon. Friend the Member for Chislehurst (Mr. Sims) is now able to take it forward.
We did indeed commission a cost-benefit analysis by Touche Ross.
That has been published today, and there is a copy in the Library.
It shows that the cost is likely to be about £15 million a year, but the benefits will be improved patient care and a greater ability on the part of community nurses to use their professional skills to the full.
East Cumbria Health Authority
Mr. Martlew
To ask the Secretary of State for Health when he last met the chairman of the Northern regional health authority to discuss the financial budget of East Cumbria district health authority.
Mr. Dorrell
I have not discussed East Cumbria's budget with the chairman of the Northern regional health authority.
Establishing the budgets of district health authorities is a task delegated to the regional health authority.
Mr. Martlew
Will the Minister discuss with the regional chairman the formula base that is used for the distribution of money to the districts?
Is he happy with the fact that one of the deprivation factors that he has used relates to car ownership?
Does he realise that, in rural areas such as East Cumbria, many low-paid people need cars because public transport does not exist?
Last year this formula robbed East Cumbria and my constituents of many thousands of pounds.
Does not the Minister agree that it will be a travesty if the same formula is used this year and my constituents are therefore robbed of much more money that is needed for health in the area?
Mr. Dorrell
Some of my hon. Friends will be grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his advocacy of the rural cause.
He raises a subject that he has discussed with me.
I have told him that I agree that the way in which the region originally proposed to use car ownership raises some questions that have not yet been answered.
That is why the Department has written to the Northern region saying in effect,’ We hope you will take account of our reservations in the next year's allocations, either in the formula or in tempering the pace of change where you have yet to satisfy yourselves and us that the adjustment you propose is entirely reliable.’
Mr. Jopling
When my hon. Friend meets the chairman of the East Cumbria authority, will he congratulate him warmly on the fact that having, since 1982-83, secured a budget increase, after inflation, of almost 15 per cent.
and an increase in front-line staff of about 28 per cent., he has succeeded in securing a yearly increase of 42 per cent .
in the number of in-patients and an increase of 152 per cent.
in the number of out-patients?
That is a very remarkable achievement.
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend has drawn attention to the very distinguished record of that health authority.
He might have drawn attention also to the fact that the health service is planning to spend £36 million on a very substantial capital scheme at the Cumberland infirmary.
The health service in East Cumbria is developing fast, to the benefit of all patients — my right hon. Friend's constituents and those of the hon. Member for Carlisle (Mr. Martlew).
Healthy Eating
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how much is spent by his Department on advice to the public in respect of healthy eating.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
During the current financial year, some £2.7 million will be spent by the Department and the Health Education Authority on healthy eating advice.
Mr. Banks
Is it not time that the Government diverted rather more of their enormous advertising budget into advocating the eating of vegetables to promote health?
After all, the Minister is surrounded by a large number of them on the Conservative Benches.
If she were interested in such a campaign, she could perhaps use as the model for it our own dear Speaker, whose radiant health and youthfulness make him the perfect epitome of a diet based on vegetarianism.
Mrs. Bottomley
The hon. Gentleman's advice should be warmly taken by members of his own party.
May I suggest that he directs that advice to those who think that the right way forward is a £500 roadside snack at the Savoy to raise party funds?
It may also be helpful to those who dine at Italian restaurants and seem to suffer from Luigi's syndrome.
Sir John Stokes
Is it part of the Government's duty to advise us all on what we should eat?
Is my hon. Friend aware that I have lived for a number of years without any such advice, and I cannot believe that it is really necessary?
Mrs. Bottomley
My hon. Friend's view is worth having.
On the whole, the advice is in favour of a balanced and sensible diet, and I think that the public wants facts and not fads.
Mrs. Heal
Why will not the Minister introduce nutritional guidelines for school meals to ensure that the school meals service plays a vital role in child nutrition, as recommended in the Black report a decade ago?
Mrs. Bottomley
We have had the excellent report of the Committee on Medical Aspects of Food Policy, which has been extremely helpful.
A great deal of work is being carried out by the Health Education Authority, the Department of Health and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food to ensure that people have simple and effective information about healthy eating, and a great deal is being done on school meals, with the particular help of the wife of our own Secretary of State.
PRIME MINISTER
South Africa
Mr. Andrew Hunter (Basingstoke)
To ask the Prime Minister if he will make a further statement on his policies towards South Africa.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
I welcome the meeting of the Convention for a Democratic South Africa in December.
The Government will continue to encourage all parties to play a constructive role in the reform process.
In order to encourage the growth that the South African economy desperately needs, we shall continue to work for the removal of the remaining economic and financial sanctions.
Mr. Hunter
As many United Kingdom citizens live and own property in South Africa, or in other ways invest there, will my right hon. Friend discuss with President de Klerk the increasing violence there, and seek clarification on how the new South Africa can be built without the effective and practical renunciation of violence by all parties?
The Prime Minister
I agree with the thrust of what my hon. Friend said, and I shall have the opportunity to discuss that with President de Klerk when he visits London early next month.
I believe that all parties have a role to play in implementing the peace accord, but of course the South African Government have the primary responsibility for the impartial maintenance of law and order.
Mr. Robert Hughes
Will the Prime Minister throw his full weight behind the proposition that an interim Government should rule South Africa during the transition period to democratic elections?
As the situation is so delicate and as negotiations with the CODESA committees are currently under way, will he not — please not — do anything to damage that process by precipitate action on sanctions?
The Prime Minister
On the latter point, I do not think that precipitate action on sanctions is the point at issue.
One of the great difficulties faced by the South African Government and people at the moment is the need to see growth in their economy, which runs at present with no growth, as against a population growth of around 3 per cent.
a year.
That is leading to very real hardship for all the people of South Africa — most notably those in South Africa who have least — so I think that the progressive removal of sanctions is desirable for economic and social reasons, and I hope that that progressive removal of sanctions will take place.
On the earlier part of the hon. Gentleman's question, I wish to see progress made in South Africa.
I think that that can best be done through the constitutional conference rather than by remarks from across many hundreds of miles.
Mr. Robert Banks
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 21 January.
The Prime Minister
This morning, I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Banks
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is good news that, even in the teeth of an international recession, the Government have achieved reductions in interest rates, which means that the family man with an average, typical mortgage of £30,000 pays £100 a month less?
Does not that augur well for the home owner and the property market in 1992?
The Prime Minister
Yes, I do welcome the reductions in interest rates and, of course, in mortgage rates that we have seen.
In particular, I welcome the cuts in interest rates which three more building societies have announced this morning.
The background of lower interest rates and a continuing reduction in underlying inflation provide what we most need — the opportunity for steady, sustainable, non-inflationary growth.
Mr. Kinnock
Why is the United Kingdom the only economy in the European Community that is in recession?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is aware that a number of European economies either have been in recession or are moving towards recession at precisely the moment when the United Kingdom economy is poised to come out of recession.
The right hon. Gentleman will also know that there is a recession in many other parts of the world as a result of the general world trading conditions.
Mr. Kinnock
It is a pity that the Prime Minister did not answer the question that I asked.
Perhaps he should refresh himself with the facts.
Belgium, Denmark, France, Ireland and Italy all have growth rates of over 1 per cent., Spain, Portugal and Holland over 2 per cent. , and Germany and Luxembourg over 3 per cent .
They are all growing; our economy is shrinking by 2 per cent.
Is not that because this country and its people are paying the price for having a Government of unique incompetence?
The Prime Minister
No, Sir.
Almost every country of the industrial world is experiencing economic problems.
French unemployment has now reached its highest level.
Unemployment in the United States is at its highest level for five years.
In recent months, unemployment has risen in every European Community country except the Netherlands.
It is higher than a year ago in every EFTA country and in every G7 country except Japan.
The right hon. Gentleman cannot live in a cocoon and overlook those facts.
Mr. Kinnock
On the subject of cocoons, the Prime Minister should acknowledge that the USA, Japan, Australia and Canada are not actually in the European Community.
In this country, under his Government, unemployment is going up faster, investment is lower and production has fallen more than in any other European country.
Will the right hon. Gentleman answer the question?
Why is that happening only in Britain under his Government?
The Prime Minister
The fact of the matter is that it is not, as I have explained to the right hon. Gentleman on many occasions, happening only in this country.
If the right hon. Gentleman is so concerned about unemployment and recession, why does he not acknowledge the impact that his minimum wage would have upon unemployment?
Why does he not acknowledge what the £6 billion-worth of cuts in defence would do to employment?
Why does he not acknowledge what the impact of his tax on savings would do to investment?
Why does he not acknowledge what his strikers charter would do to industrial relations?
Why does he not acknowledge what his party's attitude to inward investment would do to jobs in the north-east, in Wales, in Scotland and in many other parts of the country?
The policies that the right hon. Gentleman follows will ensure a long-standing and deep recession in this country.
Mr. Riddick
Is my right hon. Friend aware of policy proposals which would introduce a new payroll tax on every job in this country, policy proposals which would reintroduce secondary picketing, and policy proposals which would introduce a minimum wage which would put literally hundreds of thousands of people out of work?
Is my right hon. Friend aware that those policy proposals go under the somewhat misleading title of’ Labour's help to the unemployed’?
Mr. Speaker
The Prime Minister should answer the first part of that question, but not the second.
The Prime Minister
We have no plans to introduce any such policies.
Industry knows that such policies would be absolutely disastrous to it and knows from what source those policies would come, which is why its hostility to the Opposition's policies is so severe.
Mr. Vaz
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 21 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Vaz
Does the Prime Minister recall that, on 26 February 1991, I met him to discuss the case of my constituent, John Hall, who is seriously ill with leukaemia, an illness contracted while he was serving on Christmas island?
At the meeting, the Prime Minister told me of his personal knowledge of the suffering of cancer victims and of their families and friends.
He also told the Minister of State for the Armed Forces that he hoped that the matter would be expedited as quickly as possible.
Almost a year later, nothing has been done.
John Hall has spent the last year receiving chemotherapy and blood transfusions in order to stay alive.
Will the Prime Minister please show some compassion and award John Hall and the other nuclear test veterans the compensation that the House and the country believe they richly deserve?
The Prime Minister
I am not sure that the hon. Member for Leicester, East (Mr. Vaz) renders Mr. Hall's case particular assistance in raising it in this fashion.
I cannot go into the details of Mr. Hall's case.
What I can say to the hon. Gentleman is that the Government are willing to consider any claim where any evidence can be adduced of exposure to radiation.
We are conducting a validating study into the background of this, and as soon as it is complete, we can reach a general policy conclusion.
Until then, I simply have no evidence on which to base a response to individual cases such as Mr. Hall's.
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 21 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Taylor
Has my right hon. Friend had time to consider the tax implications of an extra £35 billion of spending pledges?
If any Government were to bring in these pledges, they would either have to dishonour them and thereby deceive the public, or income tax payers at all levels of income would need to cough up and pay more to fund them.
Is it not true that spending pledges such as those made by Labour politicians would mean that nothing would happen?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Before the Prime Minister answers, let me repeat that a Member must ask questions about matters for which the Prime Minister is responsible; he cannot answer for Labour party policies.
Answer the first part, please.
The Prime Minister
The implications of such spending increases are either that borrowing would rise to unprecedented levels, and no doubt interest rates with them, or, alternatively, that taxes would rise to a remarkable extent.
It is noteworthy that those who advocate these policies also themselves concede in surveys that they would welcome an increase in the basic rate of tax as well as other tax increases.
Mr. Ashdown
Does the Prime Minister recall that the cause of reconciliation in Northern Ireland was tragically set back in the aftermath of the 1974 election?
Will he agree that it would be appalling if we were to allow history to repeat itself after this election?
Will he therefore support a cross-party approach to Northern Ireland affairs during the election and unequivocally reject any partisan trading with the Anglo-Irish Agreement in a way that would reverse the peace process after the next election?
The Prime Minister
This party stands four square against terrorism, and we have set out our policies from this Dispatch Box on many occasions.
I see no imminent change.
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 21 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mrs. Gorman
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is a diabolical liberty for people to suggest that they can increase people's taxes by the underhand method of raising national insurance contributions, as is proposed by the Labour party?
Is it not true that the choice for the British people is between our party, which calls for lower taxes and greater spending by the people, and the Labour party, which wants to take people's money and spend it itself?
Is not that robbing Peter to pay Paul?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes her point in her own individual manner.
As I have said before, if people advocate spending and tax increases, they should be prepared to defend them.
The Labour party knows that its spending and taxation plans have been rumbled — and they dislike it.
Mr. Barron
Is the Prime Minister aware that, this morning, the Selby group of the British Coal Corporation announced more than 1,100 job losses at four coal mines?
Will he get his right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Energy to take action now, as he has been urged to do by the European Energy Commissioner, to stop pit closures in this country, given that we produce the cheapest deep-mined coal in the European Community?
How long will the country continue to lose jobs and to lose access to the great national asset of our coal, given that the Government want to sell off British Coal overnight at a cheap price, for the benefit of the Treasury?
The Prime Minister
I am sorry to hear of the job losses to which the hon. Gentleman refers, but the only secure future for the coal industry or, indeed, for any other industry, is for it to produce something that people want at a price that people can afford.
That is the only long-term future for the coal industry.
Several Hon. Members
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I ask the House to calm down.
I cannot even hear the words,’ point of order’.
I shall take Mr. Andrew Faulds first.
Mr. Andrew Faulds (Warley, East)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
If, in your judgment, Sir, a question is out of order, how can it be in order for the Prime Minister to have a response?
Mr. Speaker
What I said to the Prime Minister was that he should answer that part of the question to him that was in order.
Mr. Bruce Grocott (The Wrekin)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Opposition Members can fully understand why Conservative Members do not want to ask the Prime Minister questions about Government policy, but can you confirm that the purpose and function of Prime Minister's Question Time is to ask the Prime Minister questions about the performance of his Government?
Opposition Members would welcome the opportunity to debate Government and Opposition policies during the general election campaign, but, given that the Prime Minister does not have the guts to call an election, can you please ensure that, during the few remaining weeks of the Government's period of office, Prime Minister's Question Time will be used to ask the Prime Minister questions about Government policy?
Mr. Speaker
In my judgment, the election campaign started when we came back from the Christmas recess — Order.
It has ever been thus.
If the hon. Gentleman will think back to days gone by, he will remember that such questions have been perennial in the few weeks before a general election.
However, I say again to the House — and especially to Government Members that they should ask questions relating to the Prime Minister's responsibility —
Interruption
Mr. Ian Taylor (Esher) rose
Mr. Speaker
No, please sit down.
The first part of the question that was asked by the hon. Member for Esher (Mr. Taylor) was in order, but the second part was out of order, as was the second part of the question asked by his hon. Friend the Member for Colne Valley (Mr. Riddick).
Mr. Phillip Oppenheim (Amber Valley)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Surely it is in order for Conservative Members to put various policy options to the Prime Minister, and surely what really provoked the rabble opposite to make such a din is that they are embarrassed at the sound of their own policies.
Mr. Speaker
Outlining options is in order.
Mr. Ian Taylor
Is it not in order for Back Benchers at least to ask the Prime Minister whether the policies that are being promoted by the Opposition will most emphatically not be adopted by this Government?
The Opposition are worried about their own policies.
Mr. Speaker
I have already said that options are in order.
House of Commons
Thursday 23 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HOME DEPARTMENT
Crime
Mr. Hardy
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what is his estimate of the number of crimes committed in 1991.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
A total of 5.1 million notifiable offences were recorded by the police in the 12 months to the end of September 1991, the latest period for which firm figures are available.
Mr. Hardy
Does not that answer confirm that the increase in crime in the past 12 years has been greater both in proportion and in number than the increase in crime over the previous 12 centuries?
Will not the millions of victims of crime feel that the 1979
Conservative law and order policies are humbug?
Do not the upholders of law have daily experience of the fact that the greedy society so desired by Conservative Members must inevitably be a bad one?
Mr. Patten
The Home Office research and statistics department is excellent and produces very good figures, but unfortunately we do not have on record the figures for 12 centuries ago.
However, I advise the hon. Gentleman that crime has increased throughout the western world during the past half century.
The hon. Gentleman should first reflect on the fact that, in his own area of South Yorkshire, the figures to which I have referred show that the incidence of sexual and violent crimes has been going down, not up.
He should further refer to and reflect upon the continuous Labour search for excuses for crime rather than for the introduction of any sensible policies to deal with crime.
In the end, it is down to a person's individual choice whether to be bad and to commit crime.
That cannot be blamed on social factors.
Sir Geoffrey Finsberg
Would my right hon. Friend care to estimate what percentage of those interesting crime figures are the result of members of the Labour party asking people to break the law?
Mr. Patten
I referred earlier to the excellence of the Home Office research and statistics department when I explained that we do not keep crime figures for the past 12 centuries.
My hon. Friend has raised an interesting thought; perhaps I should ask the Department to look into it.
Mr. Hattersley
Why has crime in this country risen by an average of 6 per cent.per year since the war, but by 18 per cent .— three times the usual average — in the past two years?
Mr. Patten
Being assaulted by the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) on such issues is rather like being attacked by a bread and butter pudding.
It looks very substantial on the surface, but when one looks below the surface, one finds nothing of any substance.
The right hon. Gentleman's question contains its own answer.
If the right hon. Gentleman would only himself address the causes of crime, he would realise that they would certainly not be solved by the suggestion made at the Labour party press conference this morning — that we should empty our prisons to pay for more police.
That is what was said by the Labour party which in 1979 left the police forces of this country 8,000 under strength.
Mr. Graham
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I will not take a point of order.
However, as we shall have to live with each other for the next few months in an electioneering atmosphere, I refer hon. Members to’ Erskine May’on moderation in language.
Public Order Act 1986
Mr. Janman
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he has any plans to meet the chief constable of Essex to discuss proper implementation of section 39 of the Public Order Act 1986 in the Thurrock parliamentary constituency.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
No, Sir.
My right hon. Friend has no such plans.
The implementation of section 39 is an operational matter for the chief constable.
Mr. Janman
Is my hon. Friend aware of the ever-increasing frustration and anger among hundreds of my constituents in Grays, Tilbury and South Ockendon, who almost on a weekly basis have to put up with large invasions of mobile itinerants on land near where they live?
At the very best, the itinerants create a great deal of filth and rubbish, which the landowner or the council has to clear up.
At the worst, they have an unfortunate impact on the local crime figures.
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is a disgrace that chief constables across the country have declared a policy of not invoking section 39 if a civil remedy is available to the landowner?
Does he agree that the law should be changed so that the police have a duty rather than just a power to act under section 39?
Mr. Lloyd
I am aware that a great many people suffer a great many problems because travellers, illegal trespassers and wandering folk settle on land.
Section 39, however, is specifically designed to deal with aggravated trespass.
It is not designed to undermine the Caravan Sites Act 1968, which requires local authorities to provide official gipsy sites for those who normally resort to the area.
If a local authority does what it is supposed to do under those Acts, it has access to the criminal law to deal speedily and effectively with those who settle unlawfully on land.
Mr. Sayeed
I hear what my hon. Friend says, but does he understand that there is a particular problem with certain councils, such as Avon county council?
In the 23 years that that council has been in existence, it has not complied with the 1968 Act.
As a consequence, section 39 is useless because the council will not move people off its land.
Therefore, it is essential that people who live around the land, and are thus directly affected, should be protected under section 39 so that they can use the law to move people on.
Mr. Lloyd
My hon. Friend makes the point: it is his local authority's duty to comply with the 1968 Act and not for the chief constable to bend section 39 of the 1986 Act.
Sunday Trading
Mr. Alton
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a further statement on the operation of the Sunday trading laws.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mrs. Angela Rumbold)
It remains uncertain whether the Sunday trading provisions of the Shops Act 1950 continue to form part of our law.
But as my right hon. and learned Friend the Attorney-General explained in answer to a private notice question from my hon. Friend the Member for Orpington (Mr. Stanbrook) on 27 November 1991, those provisions are not therefore suspended.
Parliament has placed the primary responsibility for their enforcement on local authorities and it is for them to decide their own course of action.
For our part, we intend to bring forward proposals for reform of the Sunday trading law once the legal position is clear.
Mr. Alton
Does the Minister recall telling the House that the four criteria for the reform of Sunday trading were that it should be practicable, enforceable, and acceptable to the country and that it should command the support of the House?
Yesterday the ten-minute Bill introduced by the hon. Member for Ogmore (Mr. Powell) was overwhelmingly given its First Reading with a majority of 200, with all-party support.
Does not the Minister think that it is time to ensure that that Bill is put on the statute book to safeguard what Churchill once described as the greatest of British institutions?
Mrs. Rumbold
I understand the anxiety of the House about the state of Sunday trading.
I read the ten-minute Bill yesterday.
I apologise for not being on the Front Bench for the debate.
The result was interesting and certainly one which I shall study carefully.
However, it would be foolish to introduce legislation before we know the outcome of the European Court of Justice declaration.
Mr. Harry Greenway
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the Government's position puts all the responsibility as to whether to prosecute on local authorities?
Many authorities find that enormously expensive.
Are the Government prepared to put up money to assist local authorities if they decide to prosecute in the interests of what they believe ought to be the law, and in fact is the law?
Mrs. Rumbold
It has never been the case that central Government would indemnify local authorities for expenditure when they are already given money through the revenue support grant to enable them to undertake their responsibilities, and that is not a way forward.
Nevertheless, local authorities may enforce the law as it stands.
Mr. Loyden
Is not the Minister passing the buck?
There is widespread concern and strong opinion throughout the country that the Government are handling this issue most inappropriately.
When will the Government take decisive action and end the hell of a mess in that section of industry?
Mrs. Rumbold
I understand the hon. Gentleman's frustration, but it is not so easy as Opposition Members keep asserting.
If legislation were introduced at this point it is possible that it would fall foul of the decision by the European Court of Justice and thus be impracticable and a waste of public funds.
Mr. Harris
While accepting that the tremendous European complication about this cannot just be wished away, will my right hon. Friend take note of yesterday's vote and appreciate that a significant number of Conservative Members voted for that Bill.
A factor for some of us in so doing was the fact that we have been saddened and sickened at the supermarkets' attitudes in exploiting the European difficulty.
When studying possible reforms and changes in the law, will she consider that the decision to open on Sunday is taken not by local supermarket managers but nationally by their boards, and that if there is any change in the law they should be the ones to be prosecuted?
Mrs. Rumbold
The Minister of State, my right hon. Friend the Member for Oxford, West and Abingdon (Mr. Patten), was on the Front Bench yesterday and has reported to me the content of the ten-minute Bill and the vote.
I fully understand the considerable cross-party support for what was said in the ten-minute Bill, but it is important that we wait a few months to see where the European Court comes down.
It will not take long and the Government will then be able to take all those factors into account.
One would hope that major retailers will be clear in their minds about their activities and the consequences that may accrue.
Mr. Randall
How many of the major companies that broke the law at Christmas and were not prosecuted are contributors to Conservative party funds?
Mrs. Rumbold
The last time I debated Sunday trading with the hon. Gentleman, he made the perfectly ludicrous suggestion that his party would have a conference on the matter.
It does not seem to me that there is any need for me to answer his silly question on the subject.
Murder (Provocation)
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the law relating to provocation as it affects cases of murder.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Kenneth Baker) rose —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us not have a debate across the Chamber below the Gangway.
Mr. Baker
I am aware of concerns that have been expressed about this aspect of the law.
The defences to murder have been reviewed on several occasions, most recently in 1989 by the House of Lords Select Committee on Murder and Life Imprisonment.
There has been no recommendation to change the rule that provocation applies only where the defendant acts with a sudden and temporary loss of self-control.
Any change must not make it easier for a defendant to escape conviction for murder in cases where there is a planned or revenge killing.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my right hon. Friend for his interest in the subject.
Is he aware that among women serving life sentences in Bullwood Hall women's prison for murdering their husbands there are several whose lack of command of English meant that they were not aware that there was anywhere that they could run to, that some women who had tried to run away from extreme brutality were dragged back by their families, and that some were terrified of leaving their children with a brutal partner, and that therefore they had to wait until they could do something about it and were driven to commit murder?
Technically, they did not qualify for the defence of provocation, but their cases are heart-rending and should evoke a change in attitude towards the type of defence that women in those circumstances can claim.
Mr. Baker
My hon. Friend has been to see me about this matter with a group of colleagues.
I am sure that she will appreciate that I cannot comment on individual cases, particularly those among the ones that she has mentioned that might come before me.
I understand the concern that has been expressed in the House and in the country about this.
However, I cannot condone, as a response to violence, the killing of the person who does that violence.
There is concern about the law in this area and I believe that the arguments on it are finely balanced.
Before we rush into changes to the homicide law, we must ensure that such changes do not do more harm than good.
I assure the House that I shall keep this matter under the most careful review.
Mr. Ashley
I welcome the fact that the Home Secretary received a deputation and undertook to consider taking on my Bill.
I accept that the right hon. Gentleman could not go any further at that time, but is he aware that his argument that a change in the defence of provocation might allow for revenge killings is wrong and invalid because juries would not accept it in the case of revenge killings?
Will he bear it in mind that the law as it stands does great injustice and that many women are suffering life sentences that they should not be suffering?
Will the Home Secretary think again, please?
Mr. Baker
I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman for the way in which he presented his case to me, although I hope that he did not take away from our meeting any belief that I was totally persuaded by the argument that he put forward.
The House of Lords Select Committee looked into this matter just two years ago.
I am sure that the right hon. Gentleman will recall that the Committee recommended that the defences of provocation and diminished responsibility and the offence of infanticide should be retained.
This is an important matter, particularly as it affects violence, and violence more perpetrated on the woman than on the man.
One must not open up the possibility for either partner in a marriage or a relationship to murder their partner, not as a result of a sudden, temporary loss of control, but as a result of a careful, well thought out and premeditated plan.
That is why the balance of the argument in this matter is so fine.
Europol
Mr. Dykes
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department when he next expects to meet his European Community counterparts to discuss further progress in the Europol proposals.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
Outline proposals for the establishment of Europol were approved at the meeting of the European Council in Maastricht in December 1991.
Those proposals are now being developed and the United Kingdom has been in the forefront of police co-operation in Europe to combat the growing evil of international crime.
Officials from all member states will be meeting regularly to develop the proposals and I shall be meeting my counterparts in June to review progress.
Mr. Dykes
I thank my right hon. Friend for that encouraging response and for the work that he and his colleagues are doing on this.
Does my right hon. Friend accept that to some extent there is a link between ever closer co-operation among police forces and Community arrangements with Interpol?
The public should be spared some of the more bureaucratic checks and delays at ports and airports that will occur, for example, at Dover and elsewhere, when there are too many uniformed officials stopping people unnecessarily.
There is a certain linkage, although there are many difficulties.
As we are only a year away from the start of the single market, will my right hon. Friend reassure the public that unnecessary bureaucratic delays will not occur at our ports and airports, to the annoyance of the public?
Mr. Baker
That goes rather wide of the question.
I should make it absolutely clear that from 1 January 1993 we shall continue to maintain our frontier controls, particularly on matters of international crime, drugs and immigration.
One does not want to occasion unnecessary delay in exercising those controls, but they must be sufficiently firm and rigorous to ensure that criminals who try to get into the country are detected and that illegal immigrants are similarly detected and prevented from entering the country.
Mr. Enright
Is the Home Secretary aware that there is considerable concern that the sort of co-operation that exists regarding the police is not subject to proper democratic scrutiny?
Will he ensure that all discussions that take place are opened up for us to criticise and assist?
Mr. Baker
As far as the police are concerned, I and my fellow Ministers are answerable to the House.
There is a good co-operation between the British police and police forces on the continent because more and more crime — particularly drugs crime — crosses frontiers.
A vast amount of drugs are coming into Europe from north Africa, from central Asia through the Balkans, and from South America.
It is important that we work closely with our European partners on this.
For example, we have 30 drugs liaison officers — British police and Customs officers — in more than 19 countries.
The key factor is the exchange of information to deal with international crime.
Traffic Wardens
Mr. Rathbone
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what encouragement he is giving police forces to recruit and use traffic wardens for traffic control duties, particularly to meet seasonal needs.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
The recruitment of traffic wardens is the responsibility of individual police authorities and their deployment is an operational matter for individual chief officers.
Mr. Rathbone
I thank my hon. Friend for that information.
Can he give some information about the way in which the Government can encourage the greater recruitment of traffic wardens up to full complement in police forces and encourage the better use of those wardens so that they make the best possible contribution to the maintenance of traffic flow and the release of police officers for the control of crime?
Mr. Lloyd
The Home Office funds 51 per cent.
of traffic warden service costs through the police grant.
As my hon. Friend no doubt knows, under the Road Traffic Act 1991, local authorities will be able to seek power to recruit and deploy their own parking attendants in designated areas, and any fines levied go to local authorities to help defray the costs of that service.
Bail Offenders
Mr. Thurnham
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what measures he intends to take to deal with repeated offenders who commit crimes while still on bail; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. John Patten
We are examining carefully the evidence from a number of recent studies by the police and others of the extent of offending on bail, and considering, in consultation with the Association of Chief Police Officers and others, what further action might reduce offending by people released on bail.
We will announce our conclusions in February.
Mr. Thurnham
Does my right hon. Friend agree that more could be done in the first instance to prevent offences?
Is he aware of the excellent work being done by Crime Concern?
Will he produce his White Paper on the subject soon?
Is he aware that one Bolton youth was arrested 30 times last year for car crimes?
Mr. Patten
The answer to the first of those three points is that the Home Secretary will shortly be publishing his promised and much looked forward to paper on criminal prevention.
The answer to the second is that I agree that Crime Concern, which enjoys all-party support in the House, does excellent work.
The answer to the third is that the Criminal Justice Act 1991 introduced new guidelines which can be passed from the magistrates to the social services to ensure that from October this year juveniles can be remanded in custody under certain conditions not previously available to the courts.
Mr. Lewis
Is the Minister aware that not only juveniles but adults are committing crimes while on bail and that many crimes now being committed by adults while on bail involve firearms?
Does he agree that it is time we had a real clampdown on the possession of firearms throughout society, remembering that the problem will not be cured unless the Home Office takes strenuous action in relation to the legal as well as the illegal holding of firearms?
Mr. Patten
I agree with the hon. Gentleman about the recent rise in the number of crimes involving firearms.
There were about 9,000 last year, of which about only 4 per cent.
involved replica firearms.
We have the toughest sentences available in any country in western Europe for the carrying of firearms.
Carrying a firearm in the commission of a crime can attract up to a life sentence.
New sentences became available to the courts with the passage of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, and quite right too.
Mr. Barry Field
May I draw my right hon. Friend's attention to the delegation that I led to the Lord Chancellor to consider the problem of bail bandits and light sentencing by Crown courts, and to the concern in my constituency that the Hampshire police authority is short changing the Isle of Wight in terms of the number of constables on the beat?
Mr. Patten
The answer to my hon. Friend's last point is that when the Secretary of State made his announcement about the additional real 1,000 police coming on stream this year, he said that 80 per cent.
of them should go straight on to the beat.
The answer to his first point is that it is absolutely clear that a number of people who break their bail conditions are remanded in custody when they are brought back to the court; but that happens in only about six out of 10 cases, and in four out of 10 cases when those who break their bail conditions are brought back to the court, it seems that they are no longer remanded in custody but are again let out on bail.
Mr. Hattersley
On the subject of repeated offences, will the junior Minister now say why crime has risen on average by 6 per cent.
each year since the war but rose by 18 per cent.
last year?
Mr. Patten
There are a number of reasons for crime.
You, Mr. Speaker, would not permit me to give a full answer to the right hon. Gentleman's question, which reminds me of a minute that I sent out, when I went to the Home Office in 1987, to the then permanent secretary.
It simply said,’ Please, what causes crime?’
Reasonably enough, I have never had an answer.
The decisions of individual men and women to commit bad acts is what causes crime.
It is no good the Labour party seeking again and again — as it did this morning — excuses for why people offend.
Rather, it should look for ways of dealing with those people when they have offended and ways of preventing offending.
Mr. Shersby
Has my right hon. Friend had a chance yet to read the excellent report submitted to him by the chief constable of Northumbria about the problem of constant reoffending on bail?
Is he aware that that problem is made worse by a small hard core of young criminals who offend again and again, but that that is not always known to the justices?
What action does my right hon. Friend intend to take?
Mr. Patten
As I said in answer to the main question, in the announcement that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and I will make in February, we shall be able to give a fuller answer than I can give now.
We have in the Home Office a copy of the very helpful report by the chief constable of Northumbria and we have also been greatly assisted by the work of the members of the Police Federation, who have co-operated in the analysis of the serious problem of offending on bail.
Life Imprisonment
Mr. Trimble
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether he will make a statement on the guidelines for the period of imprisonment to be served before prisoners sentenced to life imprisonment will be released on licence.
Mrs. Rumbold
The main considerations in deciding whether to release such a prisoner are whether he or she has been detained long enough to satisfy the requirements of retribution and deterrence for the offence and whether the potential risk to the public is judged to be acceptable.
Mr. Trimble
The Minister will be aware of my concern about the period of imprisonment served by persons who murder members of the security forces.
A clear disparity exists between the guideline in England and Wales of 20-plus years' imprisonment and the practice in Northern Ireland of about 13 years' imprisonment before murderers of soldiers and policemen are released.
Does the Minister agree that if that issue came before the European Court of Human Rights, under the reasoning in the Dudgeon case, the court would almost certainly hold that it is contrary to the anti-discrimination article in the convention to have two different regimes operating within one country?
Would it not, be advisable, therefore, to have a uniform regime — which need not necessarily be the same as either existing regime — rather than wait until such a system is imposed on us?
Mrs. Rumbold
What the European Court of Justice may decide is a matter of pure speculation.
In essence, the matter is for the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland.
Mr. Stanbrook
Is my right hon. Friend aware that in some classes of cases, retribution and deterrence are never satisfactory?
In the case of terrorist crimes, it is about time that we had a sentence of indefinite imprisonment until terrorism ends.
Mrs. Rumbold
My hon. Friend is right.
We regard murders committed in this country by terrorists as deserving a minimum of 20 years' imprisonment for those people.
That marks the public's revulsion at acts of gratuitous violence against innocent victims.
No matter for how long a period lifers are detained, the Home Secretary will release those people only if he considers that it is safe to do so.
Parliamentary Representation
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what representations he has received about the level of parliamentary representation from England; and if he will make a statement.
Mrs. Rumbold
In the past 12 months, we have received four letters on this subject from hon. Members.
A private Member's motion was debated in the House on 8 March 1991.
Mr. Dunn
I wish to put two propositions to my right hon. Friend: first, the English are under-represented in the House; and, secondly, the Scots are over-represented here.
If my right hon. Friend agrees with either or both contentions, what will the Government do about that?
Mrs. Rumbold
Occasionally, when I am ironing, I consider the possibility of having a constituency which is called Mitcham, Morden and Mole Valley.
That is not, however, a possibility, because my right hon. Friend the Member for Mole Valley (Mr. Baker) represents an area a little bit down the road in the county of Surrey.
I am told that the same considerations of constituency difficulty, demography and geography would apply to rearranging the constituencies within Scotland.
It is for that reason, I believe, that the Government have decided that we should maintain the present system.
Mr. Harry Ewing
Is the Minister aware that the hon. Member for Dartford — Perhaps the hon. Member for Dartford (Mr. Dunn) will pay attention for a moment.
Is the Minister aware that the hon. Gentleman is quite right to worry about the level of representation in England because every time a Tory is defeated in Scotland he flees the country, comes down here and tries to get a Tory seat?
I refer, for example, to the hon. Member for Southend, East (Sir T. Taylor), Ian Sproat, Michael Ancram, and Gerry Malone.
Interruption
The problem for the hon. Member for Dartford is that, once he has been defeated at the next election, he will be replaced as a candidate by the hon. Member for Stirling (Mr. Forsyth).
Mrs. Rumbold
The hon. Gentleman might reflect on the fact that those Scotsmen who come down here to represent English constituencies are the best of the Scotsmen, who choose to come down here to represent one of the 523 constituencies in this country.
Mr. Ian Bruce
My right hon. Friend will know that there has been a large influx of people into Dorset, including many people from Scotland and from Wales.
If my hon. Friend will look at the recommendations already coming from the Boundary Commission, she will see that it recommends that there should be eight rather than seven seats in Dorset.
That would have some benefit in the forthcoming election if she could push it through.
I wonder whether she can.
Mrs. Rumbold
The whole House will be very relieved to know that such a matter is not entirely in a Minister's hands.
I understand that, if that change occurs, the Conservative party will certainly benefit by an extra constituency.
Mr. Maclennan
Does the Minister accept that when the wishes of the people of Scotland are reflected in the decision to set up a Scottish parliament, it will indeed make sense to reduce the representation of Scots in the House?
Does she recognise that the inequity and injustice done to her party through, for example, no Conservative Members of Parliament being returned in 12 Glasgow constituencies would be redressed by the granting of proportional representation throughout the United Kingdom?
Mrs. Rumbold
I am not persuaded by the hon. Gentleman's arguments that to have proportional representation would necessarily persuade Glaswegians to vote Conservative.
I hope that the Government's policies will persuade Glaswegians to think carefully about whether to vote Conservative in the next general election.
Sir Peter Emery
Seriously, as the Boundary Commission proceeds with its report over the next 10 years, would not it be correct to ensure that all parts of the United Kingdom had the same proportion of representatives?
That would solve the whole problem.
Mrs. Rumbold
As my hon. Friend knows, this matter has been discussed quite recently within both the Government and the Home Affairs Select Committee.
Equitable representation is very hard to achieve.
When the Boundary Commission looks at these matters over every 10 years or so, demography and demographic conditions have to be considered, and it is less easy than it appears on paper simply to provide consistency in terms of the demographic relationship of the people living in the country and the number of Members representing them in the House.
Inevitably, it would mean that there would be more and more people coming into the House to represent constituencies unless some kind of control were exercised.
Mr. Darling
I think that the Minister is saying that the Government's view is that the basis of representation should remain the same — in which case, I am glad.
Will she tell some of her hon. Friends that a recent independent study has shown that if the basis of representation in Scotland were equated with that in England, the Conservative party in Scotland would cease to be an endangered species and become an extinct species?
Some of the remarks made by Conservative Members show the foresight and planning of the dodo.
Mrs. Rumbold
I suspect that these matters will be discussed on a number of occasions in the future, but the Opposition should not be too complacent about the attitudes and voting patterns of those north of the border for ever and a day.
Vehicle Security
Mr. Illsley
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what representations he has received from motor car manufacturers regarding their intentions to improve motor car security.
14
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on initiatives taken to improve vehicle security.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
I have had three meetings with car manufacturers.
I will be meeting them again in March.
I have urged manufacturers to fit to all new cars dead-locks, immobilisation devices and visible identification numbers.
I am pleased that they have responded very positively.
Car crime, principally by young males, accounts for nearly 30 per cent.
of all recorded crime.
Our major crime prevention campaign this year will be against car crime, and the courts will soon have available the additional penalties under the Aggravated Vehicle-Taking Bill.
Mr. Illsley
I am grateful for that reply.
When the Home Secretary meets the car manufacturers in March, will he impress on them the seriousness of the situation and consider compelling them to fit such devices as standard, bearing in mind that, last weekend alone, £100,000 worth of damage was caused by car theft in my constituency?
Mr. Baker
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's support.
When I first met the car manufacturers, they did not appear to be taking the matter very seriously at all, but my last meeting with them revealed that they are now much more prepared to make their cars more secure.
I agree entirely with the hon. Gentleman.
Whether we can make it compulsory for cars to be fitted with such devices is a matter for the European Commission.
My Department and the Secretary of State for Transport have already made submissions to the Commission that a standard high level of security — as high as we have in Britain — should be enforced across Europe.
Mr. Roger King
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on his initiative in talking to the manufacturers about improved vehicle security.
Will he tell the House what support he has had for his additional measure, the Aggravated Vehicle-Taking Bill, which will surely go a long way towards stopping the theft of motor vehicles?
Will he assure the House that he has had the unreserved support of the Opposition during the passage of that Bill?
Mr. Baker
Regrettably, we did not receive very much support because, in Committee, the Opposition voted against the major proposals in the Bill.
That is the trouble with the Labour party: one has to distinguish between its rhetoric and reality when it comes to law and order.
This morning, the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) said that he wanted to see more policemen on the beat, yet when he was a member of the last Labour Cabinet he cut the number of policemen and left the police force under strength.
Mr. Sheerman
Will the Home Secretary confirm that he is about to launch a £5 million campaign involving the glitzy television commercials that have been his trademark in every office of state that he has held?
Is not it a fact that he never learns from experience?
Last year, his May campaign — national crime prevention week — cost £4.5 million, yet the three-months' figures for crime following that expenditure showed an upsurge in crime.
When will the Government spend less on advertising and more on the police and crime prevention?
Mr. Baker
We have increased expenditure on crime prevention and the police much more than the previous Labour Government, who cut it by 3 per cent.
I can confirm, however, that on 11 February I shall announce a major campaign — car crime prevention year.
It will be a highly successful campaign and will cost £5 million.
It will be supported by BMW, Citroen, Ford, Honda, Peugeot, Renault, Rover, Toyota, Vauxhall, Volkswagen and Volvo and most of the major insurance companies in Britain.
They are uniting with us to reduce crime.
The hon. Gentleman again raised the question of law and order.
I shall be only too pleased to fight the next election on the basis of the record on law and order and to show that we have a very much better record than the last Labour Government.
Mr. Favell
In reply to the main question, my right hon. Friend said that he had had discussions with motor vehicle manufacturers.
Has he had any discussions with motor vehicle insurers?
Many criteria are used to determine motor vehicle insurance premiums.
Should not anti-theft devices be one of them?
As someone who has recently paid an enormously increased premium, I think that that would be an excellent idea.
Mr. Baker
I met the insurance companies of Britain on three occasions.
In October, they issued a new set of tariffs which provide that a car owner who suffers a loss has to make a larger contribution and introduce the principle and concept of a premium reduction for certain security devices.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Before we proceed to Prime Minister's Questions, may I remind the House of what I said on Tuesday?
Questions on matters of policy should relate to policy options available to the Prime Minister.
They should not consist of invitations to comment directly on the policies of other parties in the House, for which the Prime Minister has no responsibility.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 23 January.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Barnes
The Prime Minister has cut 110,000 training places in the past year.
Furthermore, training schemes do not produce the skills or the qualifications for the jobs that are needed in Britain at this time.
Is that because, as the Prime Minister said in another interview with Sue Lawley, from his point of view qualifications’ are wholly useless’?
The Prime Minister
Despite the unfavourable economic climate, both youth training and employment training continue to help young and unemployed people on a very substantial scale to go into further training and further education.
Very large numbers of young people are being helped.
We are investing enormous sums in training, in enterprise and in vocational education — two and a half times as much, after taking account of inflation, as was invested by the Labour party when it was last in government.
Romford (Visit)
Sir Michael Neubert
To ask the Prime Minister whether he has any plans to make an official visit to Romford.
The Prime Minister
I am making a series of visits to all parts of the country, and very much hope to include Essex among them.
Sir Michael Neubert
Will my right hon. Friend be assured that any time that he cares to come to Romford, Essex men and Essex women will throng the streets in their thousands?
In the meantime, will he give my constituents an assurance that he welcomes the report of the three wise men on primary education, and that the Government fully subscribe to the importance of the three Rs?
Will he confirm that it is our top priority to get back to the basics in education and to sweep away the leftist progressive teaching methods that, having been put to the test, have failed?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend couches his invitation to visit Essex in irresistible terms.
The report that my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State published yesterday is extremely important.
It challenges some of the teaching methods that have been used in recent years and it suggests that schools should concentrate on commonsense, practical teaching.
I believe that that is what parents want and that it is the best way to ensure that children are taught the essentials.
We certainly hope that both schools and teachers will adopt the proposals in the report.
Engagements
Mr. Matthew Taylor
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 23 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Taylor
The Prime Minister will be well aware of the appalling environmental problems in the Fal estuary arising from the water pollution after the closure of the Wheal Jane mine.
I do not think that people in Cornwall want to allocate blame at the moment, but they do want to ensure that the environmental clean-up is carried out both in the short term and the long term without hold-ups.
Will the Prime Minister ensure that there are no financial problems at any stage in ensuring that the long-term and short-term clean-ups take place?
The Prime Minister
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we set up the National Rivers Authority specifically to respond in the first instance to the sort of pollution incidents to which he refers — this one is a very serious incident.
The NRA has been closely monitoring the situation since the mine closed.
It had developed contingency plans before the incident and put them into effect when water in the mine began to overflow.
I am sure that the NRA considers that it will be able to deal with the problem with the resources that it has.
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 23 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Coombs
Has my right hon. Friend seen the reports from the German chambers of commerce which show that German industry has invested £7.8 billion in this country in recent years?
Does not that demonstrate that low taxation, low inflation and good industrial relations are the basis for strong investment, including inward investment; and does it not also show that the future of this country is excellent under this Government?
The Prime Minister
I have seen the report to which my hon. Friend refers.
I have also seen the important comments of the CBI, which set out the fact that Britain now attracts nearly half of all the inward investment from Japan that comes to the European Community.
I believe that, by investing here, German and Japanese companies and those of other countries have shown their confidence in the British economy.
It is a shame that some of the gloom and doom-mongers in this country do not share that confidence.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister confirm that under his Government the British economy is in its longest recession since the second world war?
The Prime Minister
I will confirm to the right hon. Gentleman, as I am sure that he will be pleased to hear what the European Community has to say, that the United Kingdom is the only country where signals of a sustained economic recovery are discernible, by contrast with a tendency towards gradual slackening of growth continuing in Germany, France, Italy, Spain, the Netherlands and Portugal.
Mr. Kinnock
Slightly closer to home, is the right hon. Gentleman aware that the British chambers of commerce today report that this is the seventh consecutive quarter in which the United Kingdom economy has suffered from recession, with levels of economic activity continuing to decline?
Is not it clear that the recession caused by the Prime Minister's policies is continuing because of the Prime Minister's paralysis?
The Prime Minister
The British chambers of commerce are clearly wrong about the seventh consecutive quarter.
That would imply that the recession started in the second quarter of 1990, which it clearly did not, because output rose between the first and second quarters of 1990.
I notice also that the president of the chambers of commerce said that British industry and commerce were on’ an improving trend of slowly and steadily climbing out of the recession’.
Mr. Kinnock
Will not the Prime Minister refer to the report and listen to the voices of business and commerce from all over the country when they say:’ A worsening position on employment expectations,’— higher job losses —’and a major down-grading of business confidence, however, give no cause for comfort in this survey’?
How can the Prime Minister be so complacent and so indolent when he is receiving advice that something now needs to be done?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman was clearly not listening.
I quoted from the president of that particular group of chambers of commerce.
The report itself says:’ an improving trend of slowly and steadily climbing out of the recession.’
The right hon. Gentleman should look at other surveys and forecasters.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and the International Monetary Fund both forecast recovery.
What is equally clear among business men is that they have no enthusiasm whatever for a Labour Government.
A survey of the top hundred British companies showed that 63 per cent.
of them believed that recession would get worse under a Labour Government, and not one of them believed that it would get better.
Sir Robin Maxwell-Hyslop
Will my right hon. Friend find time today to tell the House of the decision made yesterday to restore to Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia the gold deposited for safe keeping in the Bank of England but misappropriated by the then Labour Government with the support in the Division Lobby of the leader and Chief Whip of the Liberal party at that time?
The Prime Minister
I can certainly confirm to my hon. Friend that when I met President Landsbergis yesterday I was able to indicate that we would be returning the gold.
As the House well knows, the Labour Government in 1967 ordered the gold to be sold.
The then Conservative Opposition roundly opposed that, and I am delighted that this Conservative Government have been able to correct that smear of dishonour.
United Nations
Mr. Cryer
To ask the Prime Minister when he next expects to pay an official visit to the United Nations.
The Prime Minister
I shall chair a meeting of the United Nations Security Council on 31 January.
Mr. Cryer
Will the Prime Minister confirm that 140 nations have signed the United Nations nuclear non-proliferation treaty, including Tory Canada?
Why cannot this Tory Government honour their pledge under the treaty to get rid of nuclear weapons, which will mean the withdrawal of Polaris — which is literally cracking up — and the saving of £10 billion on Trident, to be spent on the national health service to care for lives instead of threatening them with mass murder?
If nuclear non-proliferation —
Hon. Members
More, more.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is very unseemly.
Mr. Cryer
Quite so, Mr. Speaker.
If nuclear non-proliferation is good enough for the rest of the world, why is not it good enough for us?
The Prime Minister
We seek to promote non-proliferation and disarmament, and that will be one of the matters to be discussed at the United Nations Security Council meeting that I shall chair next week.
But I must say to the hon. Gentleman who suggests that it would be appropriate at present for this country to scrap its nuclear weapons and Trident that to do so would leave the country wholly defenceless.
That may be the view of the hon. Gentleman.
It may even be the view of right hon. Gentlemen opposite in their secret hearts.
It is not the right policy for this country, it is not the policy of the Government and I hope that the Opposition will make clear how many of their members support that policy of unilateral nuclear disarmament rather than a policy of secure defences for this country.
Mr. Bellingham
When my right hon. Friend visits the United Nations, will he raise the issue of the RAF aircrew who were shot down over the Gulf, some of whom came from west Norfolk?
They were tortured, humiliated and abused in gross contravention of the Geneva convention.
Is it time that the perpetrators of the crime were brought to justice?
The Prime Minister
I strongly share the view expressed by my hon. Friend.
I do not think that it is a matter for discussion at the special Security Council meeting next week; it is certainly a matter which remains on our agenda.
Engagements
Mr. Douglas
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 23 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Douglas
The Prime Minister's view of an expanded Europea, Community, composed of many states in eastern Europea together with existing members, is extremely attractive, but will he contrast that with the instability within the United Kingdom because the aspirations of a nationwide Scotland are frustrated by its being unable to secure its independence and membership of the Community?
Will he take steps to have that issue ventilated in a multi-question referendum of the people, which could perhaps be held in harmony with the general election?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for what he had to say about the European Community.
That is the right way forward for this country, the European Community and the wider Europe which I hope in due course will join the Community.
The hon. Gentleman spoke about devolution.
The Union has served Scotland and England well.
In terms of a debate, he will be aware that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland has called for debates in the Scottish Grand Committee and I hope that everyone will contribute to them.
Mr. Mans
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 23 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Mans
Will my right hon. Friend encourage the Chancellor of the Exchequer not to increase the top limit on national insurance contributions because of the plight in which that would place many of my constituents and people in neighbouring Blackpool who earn under £15,000 a year but during the holiday season earn more than £400 a week?
The Prime Minister
I am sure that my right hon. Friend the Chancellor will need no such encouragement.
The policy suggested by my hon. Friend would hit many people on modest incomes who have bonus or overtime earnings and who occasionally earn above £390 a week.
Such an impost would be quite contrary to the policies of the Government and the Conservative party and we shall not introduce any such policy.
House of Commons
Monday 27 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
ENERGY
Petrol Prices
Mr. Cox
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will make a statement on present petrol prices in the United Kingdom.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. Colin Moynihan)
Petrol prices are currently estimated to be about 48p a litre for four-star and about 44 p a litre for unleaded petrol.
Mr. Cox
I thank the Minister for that reply.
He will be aware of the recent increases in petrol prices and the effect that they have had on the entire day-to-day life of the country.
Can he tell the House something about the agreement made on 13 December by his right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment, which I understand will lead to a 6 per cent.
increase — the equivalent of 12p per gallon — in the price of petrol, to come into force in 1993?
The agreement was signed in Brussels with other Euro-Ministers.
Mr. Moynihan
To my knowledge, no such agreement was made.
Of course, I will look into the specific points that the hon. Gentleman made and ask my right hon. Friend to reply.
The hon. Gentleman mentioned prices.
They are set by the market and reflect international trading conditions.
The recent increases were in line with movements in the Rotterdam spot market.
Sir Anthony Meyer
If prices reflect international conditions, can my hon. Friend explain why in Britain, almost uniquely, there is no differential between petrol and diesel prices?
Mr. Moynihan
I accept that at present diesel prices are only about p a litre below unleaded prices.
As I am sure that my hon. Friend is aware, the reason for that is that the demand for gas oil, which is equivalent to diesel, is high at this time of the year because it is used for heating.
That high demand tends to push up prices.
Energy Efficiency
Dr. Kim Howells
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will give the amounts allocated to encourage improvements in energy efficiency among industrial and domestic electricity and gas customers in 1991-92.
The Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. John Wakeham)
Public expenditure on energy efficiency benefiting such customers will total over £1 billion in 1991-92.
Expenditure by supply utilities is a matter for these companies.
Dr. Howells
It is not just a matter for the utilities, because, of course, energy efficiency is important to all of us.
Is it not the case that when the Government privatised the electricity and gas companies they created not a range of companies which could induce real competition for the benefit of customers and the environment but large companies with near monopoly supply status which are not in the least interested in energy efficiency?
They are interested in maximising profits from sales of electricity and gas.
That cannot be good for the environment.
Mr. Wakeham
That is not a fair analysis of the position.
A great deal of competition is available to the whole range of industrial customers which was not available before.
At the end of the transitional arrangement there will be competition throughout the whole of the industry.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman will welcome the suggestion of the Office of Gas Supply that an E factor should be introduced into the gas tariff formula to fund cost-effective investment in energy efficiency.
We shall await with interest further developments in that, as well as Professor Littlechild's intiative in publishing a consultation document on energy efficiency in the electricity industry.
We shall follow that with great interest.
Mr. Dickens
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Government have increased the budget of the Energy Efficiency Office to £59 million?
Is not that a massive 40 per cent.
increase in the money that we give to that office?
Does not that show a total commitment to the preservation of energy?
Mr. Wakeham
Yes, indeed.
Further increases are planned for 1993-94 and for 1994-95.
By and large, energy efficiency is profitable for the user of electricity.
Therefore, many of the Government's intiatives using those funds suggest ways in which energy consumers can save energy.
Mr. Alan W. Williams
Why does not the Government give the regulator the power to direct electricity-generating companies to use their massive profits to invest in home insulation and to improve the energy efficiency of industry?
Mr. Wakeham
The regulator, whose task has been laid down by Parliament, is perfectly entitled to come to me if he thinks that his powers are not enough.
He does not share the hon. Gentleman's view that he should have further powers to achieve his objectives.
Energy-intensive Ratio
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what has been the change in the United Kingdom's energy-intensity ratio since 1983; and what are the corresponding figures for the rest of the EC and with Japan.
Mr. Moynihan
Latest available OECD figures show that between 1983 and 1989 the United Kingdom's energy ratio improved by 11 per cent.
— more than any other European Community country or Japan.
The improvement for the EC as a whole was 4.2 per cent; for Japan it was 7 per cent .
Mr. Arnold
Will my hon. Friend quantify the savings to this country as a result of a number of relevant programmes being run by the Government?
Mr. Moynihan
Savings resulting from the Energy Efficiency Office's programmes alone have led to a current annual energy saving worth more than £500 million a year.
Mr. Rost
My hon. Friend has identified the potential of £10 billion worth of energy saving a year which is cost effective.
Can he give any sign of the time scale that he hopes will be achieved and what impact that would have on the energy ratio that he has just quoted?
Mr. Moynihan
I cannot give my hon. Friend a precise timetable.
It is the Government's view that if we can implement the package of energy efficiency measures, not least through, for example, the home energy efficiency scheme, additional resources for the energy management assistance scheme, the best practice programme and our regional and publicity activities, we shall be well on the way to achieving significant additional savings.
Coal Mines
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy how many pits were open in (a) January 1986 and (b) January 1992.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory)
British Coal had 133 producing collieries in operation at the beginning of the financial year 1986-87, which produced 88 million tonnes of coal.
There are currently 53 collieries in operation, which are expected to produce 68 million tonnes this financial year.
Mr. Mullin
Does the Secretary of State recall the letter sent by Mr. Ian MacGregor, the former chairman of the coal board, to every miner in June 1984, which described as’ absolutely untrue’the claim by mine union leaders that the Government planned to reduce the number of working pits to under 100?
The letter said:’ I state categorically and solemnly that you have been misled.’
Was Mr. MacGregor lying, or did he not know?
Should not the Minister give mineworkers an apology?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The chairman of the coal board made a fair assessment of market conditions at that time.
The hon. Gentleman will know that the British coal industry must respond to a competitive environment.
The best way to secure future jobs and future collieries is to win the largest possible share of the electricity-generation market, and the contracts are to be renewed next year.
Mr. Butler
Would any of the pits that have been closed still be open but for unfair competition from Germany?
Why are the Germans allowed to subsidise their coal production so much?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The European Commission is in dispute with the German Government over the level of their production subsidies, but I assure my hon. Friend that imports from Germany are minimal and that the real competition for the British coal mining industry comes from other fuels.
Mr. Eadie
Is the hon. Gentleman not aware that the miners of this country feel betrayed by the Government?
Is he aware that they posed me the question,’ Is anybody in the Government prepared to stand up and fight to defend the coal industry?’
Is he further aware that they feel that the chairman of British Coal acts as if he is a clone of the Government?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I am by no means gloomy about the prospects for British Coal, but its future success and security depend on its becoming more competitive and productive so that it can secure a large part of the British energy market in years ahead.
That can be delivered by the industry, rather than by the words of politicians.
Mr. Janman
Does my hon. Friend agree that it would be wrong to keep uneconomic pits open by trying to protect them from competition from imported coal?
Does he agree that it would be totally wrong to start imposing levies or some form of import quota on coal coming into Britain, partly because that would jeopardise hundreds of jobs in the electricity industry, notably at two power stations in my constituency?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My hon. Friend makes several fair and valid points.
If we were to force the electricity-generating companies to take coal in volumes and at prices that they do not want, the certain consequence would be higher electricity prices for the domestic customer and for the rest of British industry, which could in turn be bad for long-term job prospects.
Mr. Dobson
Will the Minister tell us why the Government insist on making British miners redundant when they work in the most efficient collieries in western Europe?
Can he name any other industry in Britain that is twice as efficient as its west German counterpart, but which, nevertheless, is suffering from job losses?
Finally, why will the Government not allow the extra European funds to be spent in the coalfields to make up for the jobs that have been lost?
Is it not true that the Government want to divert that money to keep down the poll tax in Wandsworth and Westminster?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
On European Community funds, I regret that Commissioner Millan is not releasing the RECHAR money, which we could well use in areas affected by colliery closures.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that since the Government took office all the redundancies in the British coal industry have been voluntary and that the terms offered to miners affected are among the most generous in British industry and can reach £37,000 per man affected.
Oil Industry
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what he is doing to promote opportunities for the British oil industry in winning orders and contracts overseas.
Mr. Wakeham
Last November, I visited Vietnam, Hong Kong, Japan and Korea in order to promote the United Kingdom's wide-ranging expertise in the energy sector.
I hope that my visit provided opportunities for the British oil industry to take part in the development of oil and gas fields in that region.
Mr. Hughes
Does my right hon. Friend accept that that news should be welcomed on both sides of the House?
Is it not the case that on the trip he was identifying markets, boosting British business, ensuring that British companies can take advantage of that business and, in the end, creating jobs back here at home?
Mr. Wakeham
Yes, after 25 years of successful development of the North sea, our expertise is some of the best, if not the absolute best, in the world.
It was important that in my visit to Vietnam, for example, I was accompanied by British business men from British Petroleum, Enterprise Oil, Shell, Lasmo, British Gas and Barclays bank.
They all believe Vietnam to be a good market for British expertise and jobs to follow.
Mr. Dalyell
Before the Secretary of State sets sail to be Governor of Hong Kong, will he exercise his subtle and calming qualities on behalf of the 5,500 British expatriates, many of whom are Scots engineers working in the oil industry in Libya?
Will he look at last Monday's Adjournment debate and see that there is another side to the story, before we start, heaven knows, on sanctions that will hurt the 36 British companies in Libya, which are led, by for example, Brown and Root, and which could lead to something worse in the form of another strike?
Mr. Wakeham
The hon. Gentleman is also talking of events in the aftermath of the Lockerbie tragedy.
There are people who are required to appear before the courts either in Britain or in America, and all civilised people will wish to see that happen.
As the hon. Gentleman invites me to read the Adjournment debate, I will.
Dr. Michael Clark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that as we are leaders in many forms of oil technology we have every reason to expect that we shall get some good export orders for that technology?
Will he join me in congratulating the Petroleum, Science and Technology Institute in Edinburgh on its work on propagating Britain's ability in the oil industry?
Mr. Wakeham
Certainly, that institute is of the highest international standard and it is doing good work here and overseas providing advice and assistance.
I am pleased that my right hon. Friend the Member for City of Chester (Sir P. Morrison) had a lot to do with its founding when he was a Minister in this Department.
Mr. Doran
Does the Secretary of State agree with the recent criticism that the British offshore supplies service industry is failing to take advantage of world opportunities?
It has a comfortable market here with the North sea at its doorstep.
The huge world market out there was worth $330 billion between 1989 and 1992, but the industry has won only a small share of that business.
No amount of globe trotting by the Secretary of State will sort that problem out.
What will he do about that at home?
Mr. Wakeham
The hon. Gentleman is being unfair to the North sea supplies industry.
The total world value of those markets is about £40 billion a year and one third of all of the orders won by United Kingdom suppliers are for overseas markets.
That is worth about £2 billion a year of the overseas markets won by the industry serving the North sea.
That is a very creditable record.
More can be done and more is being done and we shall encourage the industry to go out and get more business wherever it is; but it has made a good start.
Home Energy Labelling
Mr. Burns
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what progress the Government have made in establishing a standard assessment procedure for home energy labelling.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The Government have introduced a standard assessment procedure for rating the energy performance of homes.
I am pleased to say that both the leading organisations which carry out home energy labelling, the National Energy Foundation and MVM-Starpoint, have agreed to incorporate the procedure into their labels.
That will enable consumers to make direct comparisons between labels.
Mr. Burns
I thank my hon. Friend for his extremely helpful reply.
Will he accept that it is of particular interest to householders in Chelmsford because they accept that home energy labelling will lead to substantial energy savings?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I know that my hon. Friend has a long-standing interest in promoting energy efficiency in his constituency.
These developments will help all those buying a home, moving house or taking a house to rent to choose dwellings that will not only save money on their fuel bills, but help to improve the environment.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
Given the importance of home energy labelling in saving energy and the Government's excellent record of funding an eightfold increase in expenditure in the past 12 years, will my hon. Friend consider the possibility of incorporating energy labelling with other initiatives undertaken by the National House-Building Council so that new homes have adequate levels of energy labelling and, therefore, energy efficiency?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Yes, we believe that the recent moves would give greater assistance to the organisations that are undertaking energy efficiency assessments of homes, including new ones.
I urge all those considering the purchase of a house — including brand-new houses — to look carefully at the energy efficiency or otherwise of those dwellings.
An authoritative energy-labelling system will assist them to do that.
Coal Output
Sir Trevor Skeet
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what was the output per man year in British Coal's mines in (a) 1978-79,(b) 1983-84 and (c) 1990-91.
Mr. Wakeham
The output per man year in British Coal's mines was 448 tonnes in 1978-79, 470 tonnes in 1983-84 and 1,181 tonnes in 1990-91 — an increase of 163 per cent.
over 11 years.
Sir Trevor Skeet
Although the trend in the figures is most gratifying, thanks to the enormous investment by the Government, does my right hon. Friend agree that British Coal is still not competitive with coal from Australia, South Africa, Colombia and the United States?
Much additional work has to be done to increase productivity further.
Mr. Wakeham
I agree with my hon. Friend.
The Government have supported the coal industry since 1979 with a total investment of £17 billion and productivity has improved, particularly in recent years.
As the hon. Member for Holborn and St. Pancras (Mr. Dobson) said, productivity of British mines is the highest in Europe, but major exporting countries such as Australia and the United States achieve higher productivity.
British Coal therefore needs to continue its efforts to raise productivity still further.
Mr. Redmond
Does the Secretary of State accept that the improvement in productivity is partly due to the fact that the number of registered disabled people employed by British Coal has fallen?
Is he aware that that figure is now 0.4 per cent., which is way below the guidelines laid down in legislation?
Does he intend to prosecute British Coal for its failure to maintain the percentage of registered disabled people employed in the industry?
Mr. Wakeham
On the general point, I do not believe that the substantial improvement in productivity has arisen through a reduction in the number of disabled people in the mines.
The hon. Gentleman is being neither reasonable nor fair to the management or work force in British mines and is not taking account of the pain and suffering through which some of them had to go to achieve that improvement.
I shall not necessarily take the hon. Gentleman's figures on the disabled as being correct, but I shall certainly make inquiries of British Coal to find out what the position is, and I shall write to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Batiste
However successful British Coal is in the future in building on its outstanding success in recent years and improving productivity, one of its basic problems is that it can sell only coal.
Should not one of the objectives of our privatisation programme be to give British Coal, or whoever the private company may be, the freedom to produce electricity from its coal and to sell that electricity through the national grid?
Mr. Wakeham
My hon. Friend makes an interesting suggestion.
However, the form and shape of privatisation will not be determined until after the general election.
Those who have any doubts about it should note that there is scope for further improvements in productivity.
I have received an encouraging report from Boyds, the US mining engineering company, which has reviewed British Coal's colliery operations and found much scope for further productivity improvements.
It concludes that British Coal should be able to compete with the price of imported coal while continuing to improve safety standards.
Mr. Barron
The whole House will want to congratulate the British miners on doing everything that has been asked of them over a number of years and achieving that massive increase in productivity.
The generators are now buying coal at 3 per cent.
less than before privatisation.
Given that 70 per cent.
of the generators' costs is the cost of British coal, will the Secretary of State explain why the cost of electricity for more than 21 million households has risen by 40 per cent.
during the same period?
Mr. Wakeham
It represents some 25 per cent.
of the cost of electricity.
Electricity prices have fallen by some 2 per cent.
in the past seven years, compared with an increase of 22 per cent.
in real terms under Labour — or 2 per cent.
every six weeks.
Overhead Power Lines
Mr. Hague
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy when he expects to announce the terms of the inquiry into the plans by the National Grid Company to erect new overhead power lines in North Yorkshire and Cleveland.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The public inquiry will start in Northallerton on 19 May.
My Department is writing to all those who have been registered as objectors to the applications, with details of the arrangements.
Mr. Hague
I thank my hon. Friend for announcing the inquiry today.
Is he aware that my constituents remain strongly opposed to the proposed overhead power lines and are rightly concerned at their impact on the rural landscape?
Will he confirm that the inquiry will be wide ranging and will pay close attention not only to the environmental impact of the proposed lines but to whether they are needed at all for the national grid to meet its licence standards?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I am well aware of the views of many of my hon. Friend's constituents in this matter.
I assure them that both the issues mentioned by my hon. Friend will be considered at the public inquiry.
Mr. Dobson
Does the Minister think that it is satisfactory for the people of Teesside to be faced with an application for a power station, another for a gas plant for the power station, and a separate application for the overhead line?
Would not it have been more sensible to request all those concerned with the project to put forward their plans together and subject them all to just one public inquiry?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I am quite satisfied with the structure and scope of the inquiry as announced.
Mr. John Greenway
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the terms of reference for the public inquiry that he has announced today will allow the inspector the option of recommending that my right hon. Friend refuse the National Grid Company's application?
Does he agree that the private sector electricity industry makes it ever more important that safeguards should be built in to the process so that the need factor and the environmental impact are taken into account?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The National Grid Company has a number of statutory obligations, including that of running a co-ordinated and efficient transmission system.
The need for those new lines to discharge that obligation will be considered by the inquiry.
I agree that it is an advance to have the industries in the private sector, regulated by the public sector, rather than having ownership, operation, regulation and the planning system all in the Government's hands.
Scottish Coal Industry
Mr. Norman Hogg
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he has any plans for the expansion of the coal industry in Scotland; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The future size of the coal industry in Scotland will depend on the success of British Coal and other mine operators, including the Monktonhall mineworkers' consortium, in producing coal at competitive prices.
Mr. Hogg
Is the Minister aware that there were more than 17,000 people employed in the Scottish coal industry in 1984, but by 1989 that figure had fallen to 3,480 and it will be even smaller now?
Will the Minister commit himself and the Government to the development of the coal industry in Scotland and say more about the Government's intentions for Monktonhall, lest Yorkshire face the same problems as Scotland, as the Bishop of Durham made clear this weekend?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
There are still considerable quantities of good-quality coal in Scotland and I am confident that the industry will be able to make a success of producing coal at competitive prices.
As regards Monktonhall mineworkers' consortium, it is encouraging that a group of ex-mineworkers have applied to British Coal to take over the pit, and I hope that they can make a success of it.
Mr. Hood
The Minister's enthusiasm sounds a bit hollow, especially as the Government ran away from Monktonhall and the idea of developing the Scottish coalfields.
If the Government have any interest in coal, the Minister must agree to reconsider the franchise and develop the coal industry, which produces low sulphur coal and is highly efficient.
The Scottish coal industry is waiting to be developed, not vandalised as the Government have vandalised the coal industry in general.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Since 1979 the Government have given £17 billion to the British coal industry by way of grant and write-offs.
In return, we require the industry to become productive and efficient so that it can win the largest possible share of the future market for electricity generation.
I am confident that it will rise to that challenge, which must be faced whether the industry is in private or public hands.
Mr. John Marshall
Does my hon. Friend agree that the figures given demonstrate clearly that nationalisation has failed the Scottish coal industry and that the only hope now is that it will be privatised in the imminent future?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The future of the industry will be best served in private ownership.
That is why, after the next election, we shall introduce firm proposals for returning the industry to the private sector.
Electricity Supply
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what are his plans to assist with the repair and protection of the electricity supply in the event of severe weather conditions.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Repair and protection of electricity supply in the event of severe weather conditions is the responsibility of each of the regional electricity distribution companies.
Mr. Barnes
That is an inadequate answer, given that more than a year ago there was a severe weather crisis throughout the country, especially in the east midlands district where 2 million people were without supplies, some of them for a considerable period.
The Government did nothing and have apparently learnt nothing from the experience.
They should have declared a state of emergency and ensured that Bellwin money was made available to councils so that they could take emergency action.
Why have the Government learnt nothing from the experience, and why are they proposing to do nothing if a crisis emerges shortly, as it could?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
No distribution network in the world could have survived without damage the severe weather which struck that part of Britain in December 1990, but the regional electricity company concerned, with help from other companies and from overseas, did what it could in the circumstances to connect those who were temporarily cut off.
It is an insult to the many managers and workers who responded so well for the hon. Gentleman to imply that they were less than efficient and hard working in those difficult circumstances.
Mr. Sayeed
Will my hon. Friend take this opportunity to pay tribute to the workers in the electricity industry who, despite foul weather and difficult circumstances, managed to restore supplies so swiftly?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My hon. Friend is entirely right.
The subsequent report on the incident showed that the company, its staff and workers responded magnificently in the difficult circumstances.
I do not believe that any more could have been done — certainly not if the company had still been in the public sector.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
Will the Minister consider holding a meeting with representatives of Hydro-power, which serves the most isolated communities in Scotland which are subjected regularly to the most severe weather conditions?
Is he aware of the severe difficulties experienced in late December and early January when people in remote communities — often elderly people living alone — were without power for more than 48 hours, despite the best efforts of workers to reconnect power?
Surely the Government have a responsibility to investigate mechanisms to reduce failures to a minimum.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
No system in the world can be wholly immune to bad weather conditions, but there are always lessons to be learnt.
The report into the East Midlands Electricity Company, in the light of the severe storms of 1990, has been made widely available so that other electricity companies can learn from that experience.
Deep-mined Coal
Mr. Hardy
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy by what proportion productivity has been improved in deep-mined colleries operated by British Coal during the last three years.
Mr. Wakeham
Poductivity in deep mines operated by British Coal improved by 29 per cent.
in the last three years to December 1991.
Mr. Hardy
Can the Minister tell the House of any other industry in Britain that could equal the productivity achievement of British miners?
Is he concerned about the rewards for that achievement — the brutal loss of employment, the economic devastation of the coalfields, the adverse effect on our balance of payments, which will get worse, the excessive and inevitable energy dependence, and the deceitful diversion of funds from the coalfields as a result of the Government's approach to the European money that should be available to us?
Mr. Wakeham
I repeat that the European Community money should be for the benefit of coal communities, and we very much regret that the European Commission has not released the funds.
It is not the Government who are blocking the money — it is the European Commission.
I have been the first to pay tribute to improvements in productivity in the coal industry, but they must continue if the industry is to provide, as I believe that it can, the bulk of supplies to fossil-fuel generators in the years to come.
If the hon. Gentleman believes otherwise, he is inviting electricity consumers to pay over the odds for their electricity.
Mr. Morgan
Does the Secretary of State agree that despite the tremendous advances in productivity made by the employees of British Coal, the perverse reward that the Government give them is to squeeze the British coal industry between the upper and nether millstones?
The upper millstone consists of the new gas plants, which are protected by their 15-year contracts.
The nether millstone is the nuclear industry, which is protected by the mysterious ENOR — the existing nuclear operating regime — which protects the nuclear industry so that all its power stations will run whenever they are available to run, a condition which may be applied to Sizewell B as well.
Mr. Wakeham
I have made it abundantly clear that the licences of the regional electricity companies require them to purchase from the cheapest suppliers.
If the cheapest supplies are from gas, they will purchase gas; if it is coal, I would expect them to use coal-fired methods.
Mr. Simon Hughes
The Secretary of State has something of a reputation for being the Lord Whitelaw of the Government.
Will he use his experience and wisdom to sort out the ridiculous dispute affecting the coalfield communities and the money that is due to them?
The technical obstacle relates to ring-fencing of local government money.
Will the Secretary of State ensure that the substantial sum that the European Community wants to give us, and which the coalfield communities want to receive, is given now when it is needed?
Surely the right hon. Gentleman has the wisdom to sort that out.
Mr. Wakeham
I do not think that it is wisdom that is required but if I can do anything, I will.
The position is clear: the United Kingdom has paid its contributions to the Commission, and the Commission has the money.
We are entitled — and we expect — to get that money back.
Carbon Dioxide Emissions
Mr. Mans
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what is his estimate of the level of carbon dioxide emissions that are saved in the United Kingdom every year by the use of nuclear power.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
If the electricity currently provided by nuclear power stations were to be generated by coal, the United Kingdom would emit about 55 million tonnes more carbon dioxide, increasing total emissions by about 10 per cent.
per year.
Mr. Mans
If the Government decide to run down the nuclear industry, apart from the loss of 120,000 jobs in the north-west, in the area that I represent, would it be possible to meet the Government's target for reduced carbon dioxide emissions by the year 2005, let alone by the year 2000, under the Labour party's policy?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
It would not be possible to meet our environmental obligations by shutting down the nuclear industry.
It is also true that the two main Opposition parties have energy policies which are flatly contradicted by their environmental policies.
DUCHY OF LANCASTER
Duchy Visit
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster when he next plans to visit the duchy.
The Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (Mr. Chris Patten)
I am chairing a meeting of the duchy council on 29 January and I plan to visit the county palatine on 7 March.
I very much look forward to both engagements.
Mr. Arnold
When my right hon. Friend visits the county palatine, will he hold a meeting with tenants and perhaps point out to them that a standard rate of 35p in the pound, which was described as preposterous by the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith), was the rate levied by the last Labour Government?
Mr. Patten
My hon. Friend is, of course, entirely correct.
I believe that the last Labour Government but one put up taxes in eight Budgets.
The last Labour Government put up the standard rate to 35p.
The shadow Chancellor, the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith), was a member of that Government.
As my right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary said with characteristic understatement:’ Dogs bark, cats miaow and the Labour party puts up taxes.’
Mr. Grocott
Is it too much to expect that the Lord President, on one of his journeys away from the capital, will take the opportunity to apologise unreservedly to the people of this country for his gross error of judgment in imposing the poll tax?
As that key area of his governmental responsibilities so far was such a monumental disaster, does he not think that people would be well advised in the weeks ahead to treat any of his judgments, prophesies or predictions with derision?
Mr. Patten
I shall certainly put that point to my right hon. Friend the Lord President when he comes to the Chamber a little later to answer questions.
Speaking for myself as Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, I am sure that it is a safe prediction that bills for local government services will be higher in local authorities where Labour is in control and that the standard of service will be lower.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Would my right hon. Friend care to come to the county town of Lancaster to see how outstandingly well our schools, under local management, are spending their money now that they have been freed from an extravagant county council which never had the right priorities and always deprived our schools of the money that they should have had?
Mr. Patten
I very much agree with my hon. Friend that local management of schools has been a great success.
It has given parents and teachers much more responsibility for running their own schools and has freed the schools from the dead hand of local education bureaucracy in many places.
Blackpool
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster if he has any plans to visit Blackpool.
Mr. Chris Patten
I have no plans to visit Blackpool in the immediate future.
Mr. Skinner
Is the Chancellor aware that not so long ago I met a chap in Blackpool who said to me,’ When you see that Chancellor of the Duchy, tell him that I want to give him a piece of my mind: not only is the poll tax three times higher than the rates, but I have lost my job, my wife has been waiting for an operation for two years, my daughter has lost her maternity grant through this Tory Government and my son has lost his income support — so when you see the chairman of the Tory party, will you tell him that I want to meet him to discuss this matter at the top of the Blackpool Tower?’
Mr. Patten
It sounds as though the high point of that person's career was his encounter with the hon. Gentleman.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman had the opportunity to tell the gentleman that he might well see me in future as I shall be returning to the town in which I was born.
Mr. Burt
Is my right hon. Friend aware that some three weeks ago I spoke to the business community in Blackpool, who expressed concern about the possibility of local government reform?
One thing in particular that frightens the business community is the possibility of an elected regional assembly for the north-west, with powers to tax, which would inevitably be dominated by the cities of Liverpool and Manchester, to the detriment of everyone else in the area.
Will my right hon. Friend take this opportunity to inform the House that that is certainly not one of the options for local government reform that he is considering?
Mr. Patten
We are certainly not considering that option, which would produce a further layer of government, another regiment of politicians, another army of civil servants and even higher taxes from a Labour Government; fortunately, however, there will not be a Labour Government.
Mr. Winnick
When the right hon. Gentleman next takes the opportunity to visit Blackpool, will he refer to the fact that according to the Government's own figures which have been supplied to me, 38 per cent.
of all pensioners have incomes below £70 per week?
Will the Chancellor bear it in mind that Labour is determined that justice shall be done for our retired people, despite all the smears, accusations and Government lies which come daily from Tory central office?
Mr. Patten
I very much agree with those Labour spokesmen who argued in the past that we should look, above all, at pensioners' net incomes.
I would point out how much better pensioners have done under this Government than under our predecessor in terms of pensioners' net incomes.
I would also point out how much their savings would be clobbered by the inflation that would be unleashed by a Labour Government's economic policies.
Duchy Visit
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster when he next intends to visit the duchy.
Mr. Chris Patten
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer I gave to my hon. Friend the Member for Gravesham (Mr. Arnold) some moments ago.
Mr. Bowis
When my right hon. Friend is next in the duchy, will he make a point of meeting the management and employees of Coats Viyella and reassuring them that under the Conservative party in government there will be no question of a national minimum wage and that it will not be necessary for them to consider moving 10,000 employees — one third of its work force — to jobs abroad?
However, to keep those jobs here, we must have a Conservative Government.
Mr. Patten
I noticed that the chief executive of Coats Viyella was quoted yesterday in one newspaper as saying that —
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
And Ford.
Mr. Patten
I will return to Ford, if I get the opportunity — which I hope will now be afforded me.
The chief executive of Coats Viyella said that he thought that there were 10,000 jobs at risk in his firm from the Labour party's proposals for a statutory minimum wage.
Many of those jobs are in the north-west.
I noticed also that the chief executive of Courtauld's said that the Labour party's proposals for a statutory minimum wage would lead to big job losses.
We all know that Labour's proposals for a statutory minimum wage would have devastating consequences for job prospects right across our country.
I guess that in referring to that issue in the past few weeks we have been guilty of understating the size of the problem.
Mr. Enright
When the —
Hon. Members
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.
Mr. Tony Banks
It is a non-job anyway.
Mr. Enright
I nearly called him the chairman of the Tory party — I apologise.
When the Chancellor next visits the Duchy of Lancaster, will he kindly explain why the Government are cheating on the RECHAR money and thus depriving the coalfields of Lancashire and Yorkshire of funds that are rightly theirs?
As the Chancellor's friends should know, the Government have been warned every year — from the days of Mr. Vredeling until the present time — that additionality is essential, and that this country is breaking the rules.
Mr. Patten
I observed the way in which the Commissioner concerned applied the rules when he was Secretary of State for Scotland.
I shall take great pleasure in saying to those to whom the hon. Gentleman wishes me to speak — here comes the opportunity that I mentioned earlier — that, as the chairman of Ford in Britain observed yesterday, Labour's economic policies would prove suicidal for our economy.
32
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster when he will next visit the county palatine.
Mr. Chris Patten
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave to my hon. Friend the Member for Gravesham (Mr. Arnold) some moments ago.
Mr. Marshall
When my right hon. Friend next visits the duchy, will he point out that under our NHS reforms a record number of patients are being treated there by a record number of doctors and nurses, and that waiting lists are falling?
Will he also point out that the only threat to the progress being made in the duchy comes from those who propose the introduction of a national minimum wage, and the abolition of competitive tendering and charging in the NHS?
Taken together, those measures would cost the NHS £1 billion.
Mr. Patten
I could not have put it better myself, so perhaps I should not try.
I shall confine myself to mentioning that under the present Government NHS spending has increased as a proportion of gross domestic product.
I hope that even at this late stage Labour will support the GPs' contract, GP fundholding and NHS trust status for hospitals, all of which are proving so successful.
HOUSE OF COMMONS
Refreshment Facilities
Mr. Hain
To ask the Lord President of the Council when he expects results from the feasibility study on refreshment facilities for visitors to the House.
40
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Lord President of the Council what progress has been made to improve catering facilities for Members' parties visiting the Palace of Westminster.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
The newly formed Catering Committee is expected early next month to consider two consultants' reports on the architectural feasibility and management implications of converting the premises of the former St. Stephen's tavern into a refreshment facility for groups of Members' visitors.
I understand that the Committee will be asked to work for a decision by Easter.
Mr. Hain
As the Lord President will be aware, visitors to Wales are always given a warm welcome and a nice cup of tea, but coachloads of my constituents visiting the Houses of Parliament are cold-shouldered and cannot obtain refreshments anywhere.
I understand the right hon. Gentleman's response, but would it not be a far better idea to use Westminster Hall for the purpose, providing chairs and tables there?
After all, until the last century Westminster Hall was used for royal banquets and coronation feasts; surely it would be possible for people to order a nice cup of tea there.
Mr. MacGregor
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his first remark about visitors to Wales.
Certainly when I went there recently I was given a very good reception, which pleased me very much.
The hon. Gentleman will probably know that the authorities who deal with Westminster Hall do not consider that the use that he has suggested for it would be appropriate; nor, I think, would the vast majority of hon. Members.
The Catering Committee will be considering whether what used to be St. Stephen's tavern could help by providing facilities for visitors.
Mr. Jessel
Can my right hon. Friend improve the refreshments provided not only for visitors but for Opposition Members, who seem rather subdued and depressed today?
Mr. MacGregor
When my hon. Friend began his question, I intended to say that it was a matter for the Catering Committee, but I am no longer sure that it is.
I well understand why Opposition Members are looking rather depressed today, but I do not think that it has anything to do with catering facilities in the House.
Mr. Grocott
Can the right hon. Gentleman confirm that during the deliberations of the Select Committee on Broadcasting, Etc. — with all of whose arrangements we have been happy so far — parts of the Palace of Westminster were discovered that no one knew existed, including the area above Central Lobby?
Is it not high time that a proper review was carried out of exacty what space exists throughout the Palace, so that we can use it well for the benefit of our constituents and for other purposes?
Mr. MacGregor
The hon. Gentleman and I visited the part of the Palace to which he has referred.
I think he would agree that it is not a suitable location for the provision of refreshments for visitors.
The right step is for the Select Committee on Catering to consider the proposals, as it will do shortly.
Mr. Harry Greenway
Will my right hon. Friend be sure to ask for a branch of the kiosk in any new catering facility for visitors, and will he make sure that it has House of Commons fudge and humbugs on sale?
The main kiosk has had none of these since before Christmas.
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend might like to put that point to the Select Committee on Catering.
Lockerbie
Mr. Dalyell
To ask the Lord President of the Council if he will set up a Select Committee to consider the investigations into the Lockerbie air disaster.
Mr. MacGregor
I have no plans to do so.
The Lockerbie air disaster is regularly discussed in the House — including Government statements, when appropriate — and I recall that the hon. Member had the Adjournment debate on this very subject just last Monday.
Mr. Dalyell
What is a Member of Parliament to do when, having been lucky enough to be given an Adjournment debate by you, Mr. Speaker, and having given a copy of his entire speech to the Foreign Office at 9.45 in the morning, the Minister — in this case the Minister of State, the hon. and learned Member for Grantham (Mr. Hogg)— makes no attempt whatever to answer the deeply serious issues that have been raised?
Is it surprising that in respect of foreign affairs this is the most ill-informed House of Commons that I have known in my 30 years here?
Or is it possible that the Government are contemplating a repetition of the 1986 strikes on civilian targets in Benghazi and Tripoli?
If so, the House of Commons ought to discuss the matter.
Mr. MacGregor
I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman's premise that the House is ill informed in respect of these matters.
Indeed, there have been many Government statements.
The hon. Gentleman will know that the generally accepted purpose of Select Committees is the monitoring of individual Departments.
It would be possible for one of the existing Select Committees to consider the issue, if it so wished.
Back Benchers (Parliamentary Time)
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Lord President of the Council what representations he has received about the allocation of parliamentary time for private Members.
Mr. MacGregor
I have not received any representations about the allocation of parliamentary time for private Members.
The general point is, of course, being considered by the Select Committee on Sittings of the House, chaired by my right hon. Friend the Member for Westmorland and Lonsdale (Mr. Jopling).
Mr. Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend accept that, whatever changes are made to the sitting hours, it would be a retrograde step — a step detrimental to the rights of Back Benchers — to introduce legislation to reduce them?
As it is, Back Benchers have precious little time and it should not be reduced further.
Mr. MacGregor
It is, of course, a matter for the Select Committee on Sittings of the House to make recommendations in the first place.
Thereafter, it is for the House to decide upon those recommendations.
The point that I made to the Committee is that if we wish to reduce the hours of the House or change the sitting times — that is still an open question — it is important that we consider how the time of the House is used at present and to make reductions pro rata.
However, I entirely agree with my hon. Friend that the opportunities for Back Benchers to introduce Bills are very important, and I am sure that the Select Committee will keep that very much in mind.
Parliamentary Channel
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Lord President of the Council if he will make arrangements for Members to receive output from the parliamentary channel introduced as from 13 January 1992.
Mr. MacGregor
As making the parliamentary channel available in Members' rooms would be tantamount to supplying a clean feed direct from the Chamber, it would be for the Select Committee on Broadcasting, Etc. in the first instance, to approve such a proposal.
There are, however, technical problems which look like precluding the provision of this service for all Members before 1994.
I hope to arrange for the Broadcasting Committee to consider the issue at an early date.
Any eventual recommendation to proceed would be a matter for the House as a whole to decide.
Mr. Banks
Will the Lord President tell the House what the technical difficulties are?
It seems absurd that, while extended coverage of our proceedings is now available, Members cannot have a sound and vision feed to their rooms.
The idea that this Chamber is a place to which we all come to be influenced by the ebb and flow of debate and the oratory of Members is totally ridiculous.
Why should we come to the Chamber to be bored rigid when we could be bored rigid in the comparative comfort of our own offices?
Mr. MacGregor
It would be technically possible now for some Members' offices to be given the feed.
The real problem is that this building does not have the necessary cable ducts.
Given the nature of the building, the provision of ducts is a very complex task.
At the moment, consultants are looking into the matter in detail, and their report will be put before the Broadcasting Committee for its consideration.
However, it seems likely from the preliminary indications that it would not be possible to complete the work until 1994.
Sir John Stokes
Does my right hon. Friend agree that there are possibly far too few people in the Chamber and, even more important, far too few in the Smoking Room, the most vital part of the House of Commons?
If hon. Members are going to be glued to their television sets, as apparently some are at home, there will be even fewer of them about anyway.
Mr. MacGregor
I agree with my hon. Friend that it is extremely important to bear in mind the key significance of the Chamber and the Smoking Room.
We must take that into account.
On the other hand, many hon. Members want such a facility directly available to them and we are examining that.
Question Time Rota
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Lord President of the Council whether he has any plans to change the rota of departmental and Prime Minister's questions; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. MacGregor
I have no immediate plans for any significant changes in the question rota at this stage in the Parliament.
Mr. Skinner
Is it not a tidy state of affairs when the best that the 370-odd Tory Members can deliver in this place every Tuesday and Thursday and at other Question Times is a tirade of abuse about what Labour would do?
Why do they not have the guts to tackle their own Government about cuts in services?
Then there was that bleating Prime Minister on’ Desert Island Discs’saying that he would love to get away from Question Time on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
If he is that much of a wimp, why does he not get out of the road and let us take over?
Mr. MacGregor
I thought that the hon. Gentleman had a sense of humour, but it appears not.
With regard to answers in the House, over the whole range of government, we have indicated the considerable improvements including a considerable increase in expenditure on our priority areas in the public services.
It is legitimate to spend some time — I well understand why the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) is so sensitive about this — examining the tax and expenditure proposals of the Labour party.
There is no doubt that that has been happening in the country at large and that they have now been rumbled.
That is why the hon. Gentleman is so concerned.
Mr. Burns
The Opposition may not like it, but does my right hon. Friend believe that there is a case for allowing a small part of parliamentary time for the Leader of the Opposition to be questioned?
He always puts his foot in it and tends to cause more confusion when he opens his mouth than when he keeps it shut.
Mr. MacGregor
I do not think that it is necessary to provide any more parliamentary time for that.
House of Commons
Tuesday 28 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
Education and Training
Mr. Sayeed
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what was the proportion of 16 and 17-year-olds in full-time education or training in (a) 1979 and (b) the most recent year for which figures are available.
The Minister of State, Department of Education and Science (Mr. Tim Eggar)
There has been a dramatic improvement in staying-on rates since 1979.
In 1989-90, 75 per cent.
of 16-year-olds participated in full-time education or youth training schemes, compared to 46 per cent.
in 1979-80.
Corresponding figures for 17-year-olds were 58 and 29 per cent.
respectively.
If part-time provision is included, the figures rise to 86 per cent.
of 16-year-olds in 1989-90.
Mr. Sayeed
Does my hon. Friend agree that assessing ability only in terms of academic achievement sells young people short?
Is not one reason for the remarkable increase in the number of young people in training — from 6,000 in 1979 to 260,000 today — the fact that we have returned to the common-sense recognition that vocational training is of considerable value and more closely reflects the abilities of many young people?
Will my hon. Friend explain how national vocational qualifications help vocational training?
Mr. Eggar
I completely agree with my hon. Friend.
It is terribly important that this country takes vocational training seriously.
We need to motivate young people, whatever their aptitude or ability, to acquire further qualifications if we are to have a competitive and well-motivated work force in the 1990s and the next century.
National vocational qualifications are a critical element in motivating youngsters and ensuring that their achievements are recognised rapidly.
Mr. Skinner
Has the Minister considered whether it would make more sense if young men and women from working-class families who leave school at 16 or 17 and are thrown into slave labour schemes where they earn a little over £20 a week, but who want to stay on at school, could stay on and be paid a sum equivalent to what they would get on training schemes?
As a result, they would be better educated and would not be thrown on the scrap heap.
Mr. Eggar
I should have thought that the hon. Gentleman would apologise to the House for the last Labour Government's appalling record.
In 1979, only 46 per cent.
of youngsters stayed on in full-time educational training.
That figure has now risen to some 86 per cent., which shows the Government's achievement.
The hon. Gentleman should recognise that.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
Does my hon. Friend agree that the welcome improvement in staying-on rates may be related to the quality of education in schools?
Is not it significant that the 10 authorities with the worst staying-on rates are all Labour controlled and that many of them also figure among the 20 authorities whose students have the worst GCSE results?
Mr. Eggar
I very much agree with my hon. Friend.
It is extraordinary that the Labour party consistently complains about resources and other matters yet is not prepared to point the finger where is should be pointed — at the performance of Labour-controlled local education authorities, as evidenced in staying-on rates and examination results.
The Labour party should worry more about the quality of education offered by the education authorities that it controls, rather than going through its political rhetoric.
School Buildings
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what proposals he has to enable local education authorities to improve the fabric of school buildings.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Michael Fallon)
We have provided £1.8 billion worth o annual capital guidelines and capital allocations to local education authorities and governors of voluntary-aided schools since 1990-91.
It is for them to ensure that those substantial resources are used effectively.
Mr. Evans
Is the Minister aware that that sum will in no way meet the amount needed for the enormous backlog of repairs to schools in England, Wales and Scotland?
Is he aware that in St. Helens, of the two bids submitted, £1 million was requested to meet health and safety requirements and £1 million was requested for essential repairs?
The authority was allocated £587,000.
Does the hon. Gentleman acknowledge, therefore, that a number of schools have not yet been made safe for pupils?
Is not that disgraceful?
Mr. Fallon
I increased the allocation to St. Helens for improvement work from £311,000 last year to £556,000 this year.
St.
Helens' overall allocation was low because it did not bid for new places and put any proposals to tackle its serious surplus place problem.
Some 6,900 surplus places exist there.
That includes more than one quarter of secondary school desks, which are empty.
Mr. Madel
Will my hon. Friend confirm that, when the Education (Schools) Bill becomes law, local education authorities will still have an absolute right to inspect the schools that they maintain, whenever they want to, so that they are always aware of the maintenance that needs to be done?
Mr. Fallon
Not to inspect schools, no, but LEAs will retain reserve powers to ensure that the budget delegated is managed appropriately.
Under the Education Reform Act 1988, if an authority believes that a budget is mismanaged it has the ultimate power to withdraw it.
Mr. Loyden
The hon. Gentleman's suggestion that there is some relationship between surplus school buildings and the fabric of schools is nonsense.
There are many surplus buildings in Liverpool, but that does not affect the way in which the local authority can carry out necessary improvements, particularly to inner-city schools.
Mr. Fallon
I was simply making the point that there is a cost in keeping a school desk empty — in St. Helens it amounts to about £1.5 million every year.
It is perfectly open to LEAs to obtain higher capital allocations from my Department by putting forward sensible proposals to rationalise their school provision.
Standardised Testing
Mr. Amos
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the implementation of standardised testing in schools.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Kenneth Clarke)
Testing is the key to raising standards in our schools by providing clear information about pupils' progress.
Effective annual tests of seven-year-olds are already in place.
Tests of 11, 14 and 16-year-olds will follow in the next three years.
Mr. Amos
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that last year's testing of seven-year olds showed that our schools need less play and more learning, less discovery and more teaching, less mixed ability and more setting, less child-centred education and more whole-class subject teaching?
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the best way to raise standards in our schools is to provide more testing and to make the results of those tests publicly available — both of which the Labour party opposes?
Mr. Clarke
Yes, I certainly accept that.
The results show an unacceptably wide difference between the performance of the very best and that of the very worst.
They show that those tests have nothing to do with the amount spent per pupil in individual authority areas — some of the biggest spenders were right down at the bottom.
They also show that results do not necessarily have anything to do with socio-economic circumstances or anything of that kind.
I share my hon. Friend's belief that the answer lies in the sort of suggestions that he made and which have been revealed in the report of the three wise men.
Mr. Flannery
Does the Secretary of State understand that the testing of seven-year-olds does not quite mean that?
He needs to be more careful.
An academic year has three terms and children enter school at various stages in that year.
Many of the children who are tested are only six.
The results over two to three years will include those for children who missed out two terms and who were tested before the age of seven — they will account for a large percentage of the results.
The Secretary of State has got it completely wrong.
Daily assessment has gone on for all these years, with tests occasionally being undertaken — that is a reality.
If testing is to be done, it should be done properly.
The test for seven-year olds should not include children who have not yet reached that age.
Mr. Clarke
First, the good news.
I am delighted to hear my hon. Friend.
I meant the hon. Gentleman, but he almost became my hon. Friend because of his grudging acceptance of the principle of testing.
It is certainly true, as he says, that tests for seven-year-olds are a shorthand way of describing the progress of those at a particular stage.
Some of them have spent more terms in schools than others — which must be borne in mind when looking at the position of an individual pupil — but all those factors even out in the local authorities.
For example, the performance of the hon. Gentleman's authority, Sheffield, was markedly inferior to that of Rotherham, although the discrepancies of the sort that he described do not exist in those two authorities.
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
Do not we owe it to all our children, right across the country and irrespective of their primary schools, to identify their needs, strengths and weaknesses at an early age?
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the Labour party is a party of slow learners?
Not only has the Labour party not realised that GCSE results at 16 in Labour-controlled authorities are some of the worst, but it has learnt nothing — it still opposes standardised testing from the age of seven.
Mr. Clarke
I agree that it is essential to get the basics of primary education right, because until a child has mastered them it has no possibility of gaining access to the rest of education.
I agree also that it is absurd to suggest that there is anything wrong with national testing of pupils' progress at certain ages, both to inform parents and to inform localities about the performance of their schools.
It is extraordinary that that has been resisted even before we have received the first results.
Mr. Straw
Is the Secretary of State aware that one of the most damning conclusions of the report on primary education which he published last week was the evidence that standards of reading among seven-year-olds have slumped since 1988, over precisely the period when Ministers have produced one change after another in the system of standardised testing for seven-year-olds?
Is the right hon. and learned Gentleman ashamed of that record — of the fact that the reading standards of seven-year-olds have slumped by up to five months?
Is he ashamed of the fact that every month he has been in office reading standards of seven-year-olds have fallen?
Why is it that the Government promised higher standards of education in 1979, 1983 and 1987 but the results of 13 years in office have been lower standards of education?
Mr. Clarke
I seem to recall that the hon. Gentleman was one of those who until recently persistently argued that standards in our schools were not falling and that he resisted pressure for changes in teaching methods and other ideas designed to correct the fall.
He merely strengthens the conclusions of the three wise men, who think that there may have been some recent decline but who certainly did not atribute it to the national curriculum, as the hon. Gentleman did.
They reject that argument.
The hon. Gentleman has no evidence for asserting that standards have dropped month by month.
If he is beginning to share the public anxiety about standards in our schools, he should be ashamed of himself for having resisted each and every reform that has been aimed at reversing the trend and improving them.
University Education
Mr. Darling
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what percentage of the population attended university education in (a) England and Wales and (b) Scotland in 1990-91.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Alan Howarth)
Separate age-participation indices for universities only are not calculated, nor are separate indices for England and Wales; but taking higher education as a whole, provisional data for the 1990-91 academic year show that 19.3 per cent.
of young people entered higher education in Great Britain compared with 26.5 per cent.
in Scotland.
Mr. Darling
The hon. Gentleman might do well to remember that Great Britain includes Scotland.
I think that he meant England and Wales for one part and Scotland for the other.
Does the hon. Gentleman agree that, given the higher participation rate in Scotland and the importance of the four-year degree there, it would be right to allocate proportionately more resources to the Scottish Higher Education Funding Council?
If he does agree, how much more does he propose to allocate?
Mr. Howarth
The division of Universities Funding Council funding will be decided in due course in consultation with all the Departments concerned, but my hon. Friend the Minister of State, Scottish Office, always a powerful advocate for Scottish interests, has said that Scotland will receive a fair share of those resources.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Does my hon. Friend agree that our achievements in that aspect of education could not be better illustrated than by that which pertains in Nottinghamshire, where the university now has the highest ratio of applications to available places and where Nottingham polytechnic, which is soon to be a university, is planning to increase its capacity over the next couple of years to 16,000 student places?
Is not that real success in higher education?
Mr. Howarth
As a Nottingham Member, my hon. Friend is justly proud of the higher education opportunities for his constituents in their own home city where we have a fine polytechnic and a magnificent university.
I readily join him in paying tribute to the remarkable achievements of the academic and other staff in those institutions of higher education in terms of the wonderful opportunities that they are offering to more and more of our young people and to people of all ages.
Mr. John D. Taylor
Scottish universities now take many students from the Republic of Ireland and Scotland has to pay the full tuition fees for all those students.
Given that the Republic of Ireland does not pay the tuition fees of the few Scottish students in the Republic, is that additional burden on Scottish universities taken into account and are larger grants made available to those universities on that basis?
Mr. Howarth
The right hon. Gentleman is alluding to the arrangements for the support of students in higher education that apply within the European Community.
All relevant factors are taken into account by the funding councils when they decide how to allocate resources.
Grant-maintained Schools
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how many schools have applied for grant-maintained status.
Mr. Eggar
I am delighted to say that, to date, 315 schools have opted for grant-maintained status.
Mr. Evans
I thank my hon. Friend for that answer.
Is not it a fact that the Labour party would throw out of the window all the grant-maintained schools and return them to the control of its friends in the town halls?
Is not it also a fact that pupils in the worst authorities, run by Labour, have the worst GCSE English and maths results?
That is what would happen to education if that lot ever gained control.
Mr. Eggar
The Labour party is dedicated to lowering standards.
One of its latest pledges is to destroy our A-level system.
My hon. Friend is right that the Labour party would be prepared to overrule parental ballots and to take grant-maintained schools back into the throes of LEA control, which is exactly what parents have voted to escape.
Mr. Tony Banks
The Minister has just appointed two of his own governors to Stratford school in my constituency.
Given the national publicity surrounding that school and the instability and chaos there, what procedure exists for schools that lose or have removed from them their grant-maintained status?
Mr. Eggar
It would be wise if the hon. Gentleman actually looked at the record of Stratford school.
When Newham had finished trying to destroy that school, it had about 300 pupils, but there are now almost double that number.
When Newham's custody of that school ceased, the standards of education were appallingly low, but Her Majesty's inspectors now report a significant improvement in educational standards there —
Mr. Tony Banks
Answer the question.
Mr. Eggar
Those are the real facts about Stratford, not the black propaganda that the hon. Gentleman wishes to put around.
Mr. Pawsey
Does my hon. Friend agree that the principal attraction of grant-maintained schools is not the additional funding that they receive but the greater independence from the LEAs that they then enjoy?
Does he further agree that, following the re-election of the Conservative party to office after the next general election, there will be an avalanche of applications from state schools seeking grant-maintained status?
Mr. Eggar
I completely agree with my hon. Friend.
I know that he has first-hand experience of the benefits of GM schools, as the school that used to be known as Wold Newton transferred to grant-maintained status a few months ago and is showing the way and what can be achieved as a result of a move to grant-maintained status.
Ms. Armstrong
Will the Minster confirm that if the bribes that the Secretary of State reinforced in terms of capital allocations for grant-maintained schools last week were extended to meet the right hon. and learned Gentleman's other pledge to extend that to every possible school, the cost would be the equivalent of more than one penny on VAT?
Mr. Eggar
The hon. Lady is somewhat confused.
I have not heard even the chief Opposition Treasury spokeman talk in terms of putting one penny on VAT.
Perhaps the hon. Lady should go for a tutorial with him to understand how VAT is collected.
As to her other point, I can say only what I said to her about her calculations on nursery school resources.
She is not even at level 1 in maths, and should get some help.
Torrells School, Grays 6
Mr. Janman
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science when he intends to make a decision on the application for grant-maintained status from Torrells comprehensive school, Grays, Essex.
Mr. Eggar
Not later than the end of February.
Mr. Janman
My hon. Friend will be glad to know that my constituents, particularly those who are parents at this school, will be pleased to hear that he will make a fast decision.
He will be aware that the parents at the school voted by a ratio of nearly 3: 1 for grant-maintained status.
I am sure that he will wish to join me in congratulating the governors, the headmaster and the parents involved in the school on their wisdom in applying for grant-maintained status so as to free themselves from the bureaucracy and interference of the local education authority.
Will he ensure that the decision that he makes is a positive one?
Mr. Eggar
I have listened carefully to my hon. Friend.
I stand by what I said — I shall do my utmost to get a decision by the end of February.
I welcome the commitment that has been shown by the head of the governing body, but I cannot give any hint of the decision that I will be taking by the end of February.
Mr. Leighton
Will the Minister have a care with Torrells school in view of the mistake that he made with Stratford school?
Is he aware that Father Reilley, the chairman of the governors, has already been disposed of, that the new chairman had a brawl with the head teacher, to which the police had to be called, that the chairman has purported to sack the head teacher and that the Department has intervened and had correspondence and has appointed new governors?
Do we have —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The question is about Torrells school.
Mr. Leighton
Do we have local management of this school or is it run by the Department?
Mr. Eggar
The hon. Gentleman probably needs a geography lesson.
Stratford school is not in Essex, as he should know.
With regard to what he said about Stratford school, if he had taken rather more interest in the school when it was in the control of Newham and insisted on the school keeping up to reasonable standards and if he now put pressure on Newham LEA to ensure that it raised standards in schools, he would be doing more for his constituents than he is by his performance today.
City Technololgy Colleges
Mr. Cryer
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the current number of established city technology colleges.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
Thirteen city technology colleges are already established, and two more will be open by autumn next year.
The extension of CTC principles and practice into the rest of state education is also under way.
I announced on 15 January the establishment, with the joint support of British Aerospace, of Hutton grammar school in Lancashire as the first voluntary-aided technology school.
We are receiving many worthwhile bids from schools wishing to become technology schools in response to the announcement we made of the availability of capital funds for this purpose.
Mr. Cryer
Is not it the truth that CTCs have emerged only as a result of the lavish use of taxpayers' money to prop them up?
Will the Secretary of State accept that in Bradford, the capital expenditure on one CTC is roughly the equivalent of the whole of the capital expenditure for one year awarded by the Government, but Bradford public schools are in dire need of expenditure?
Is not it true that the Government's attitude towards CTCs is private affluence and, towards the rest of the education system, public squalor?
Mr. Clarke
The Mickey Mouse figures on CTC expenditure that critics in Bradford tend to use compare capital expenditure on schools starting from scratch with that for existing schools that do not have to be built.
The funding of CTCs is on a par with that of other local education authority schools, and their recurrent funding will not be different from that of other schools in their areas.
CTCs offer education opportunities to children of all abilities — particularly those drawn from the most deprived parts of the cities that they serve.
It is unbelievably churlish if, for ideological reasons, the hon. Gentleman remains hostile to the best innovation in Bradford for years, while defending a local authority that had the worst results in the country in the recent tests for seven-year-olds.
Mr. William Powell
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the establishment of city technology colleges — not least among them, Brooke CTC in Corby — provides a model for the future normal state schooling system?
Will he take urgent steps to ensure that the spread of city technology colleges is accelerated as quickly as possible?
I welcome my right hon. and learned Friend's school technology initiative, and hope that he will favour Our Lady and Pope John school in Corby for funding under that scheme.
Mr. Clarke
I am closely following the progress of Brooke CTC, the site of which I visited only recently.
I know how popular and successful it has become.
I agree with my hon. Friend that the next important consequence to flow from the CTC programme is that the benefits of all the curriculum development work undertaken by CTCs will spread to the rest of the education system.
The technology initiative is an important element in that.
Mr. Simon Hughes
Whatever the difference of view held across the House, given that CTCs are funded by public money, will the Secretary of State take urgent steps to give parents whose children are refused admission to them the same right of appeal that is available in respect of all other publicly-funded schools?
Mr. Clarke
I view CTCs as exemplifying the principle of parental choice that operates in many other parts of the education system.
I will certainly consider the hon. Gentleman's point, because it is our aim to put CTCs on a level with others in regard to funding and other aspects.
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for raising such a point, rather than displaying the ridiculous opposition that we have seen from Labour, which still seems pledged to getting rid of some of the finest schools in the state education system.
State Schools, West Norfolk
Mr. Bellingham
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what recent representations he has received in connection with state schools in west Norfolk.
Mr. Fallon
We have received representations about capital funding for several schools in west Norfolk.
Earlier this month, I saw a deputation that opposed Norfolk education authority's proposals to close Bradenham voluntary controlled primary school, led by my hon. Friend the Member for Norfolk, South-West (Mrs. Shephard).
Mr. Bellingham
Will my hon. Friend the Minister pay tribute to the professionalism of Norfolk teachers and in particular to those who work in small, rural primary schools?
He will be aware of the important role that such schools play in local communities.
Will my hon. Friend confirm that, unlike the Labour group on Norfolk county council, he believes in small primary schools?
Will he confirm that, provided they can deliver the national curriculum, they will continue to have an important role in modern education?
Mr. Fallon
Yes.
I am happy to pay tribute to those teachers and to the well-run Norfolk education authority.
It was one of the first to introduce local schools management, which paved the way for a series of applications for full grant-maintained status.
Special Schools
Mr. Janner
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science whether he will make increased provision for special schools.
Mr. Fallon
The local authority finance settlement for 1991-92 allows for local authorities in England to spend nearly £17.5 billion on education — 16 per cent.
more than the 1990-91 settlement.
The settlement for 1992-93 allows for spending of over £18.7 billion, a further increase of 7 per cent.
Given good management, that should be sufficient to enable LEAs to provide for children with special educational needs.
Mr. Janner
Is the Minister aware of the special need in all such schools for nursing cover of the kind currently provided through the health authority?
Is he further aware that many special schools, including the excellent Weston Park school in my constituency, are worried about the threat to that cover?
If it is not to be provided by the health authority, will the Government give an assurance that the schools themselves will be empowered and funded to offer the nursing care that children with special needs require?
Mr. Fallon
I shall certainly consider that point.
Total spending per pupil on special schools and related provisions is currently running at a level four times higher than on pupils in ordinary mainstream schools.
Mr. Haselhurst
Is my hon. Friend aware that needs and expectations in regard to special types of education seem to be rising all the time?
It is felt that resources do not always match every kind of special need that may occur, especially in rural primary schools.
Does my hon. Friend consider that it is time to take a fresh look at the whole question?
Mr. Fallon
It is for local authorities to allocate their priorities.
We have encouraged those who introduced local management of schools first to look again at their schools, and to ensure that the right balance exists between the funding of secondary schools and that of primary schools.
Cleveland Schools (Maintenance)
Dr. Kumar
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what representations he has received about the level of expenditure on maintenance for Cleveland's schools; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Fallon
None, Sir.
Dr. Kumar
Is the Minister aware that Cleveland's schools need a £50 million maintenance programme?
His Department has not allocated a single penny to that programme for 1992-93.
Is that part of the disgraceful, phoney citizens charter?
Mr. Fallon
As I increased Cleveland's capital allocation from £2.9 million to £3.8 million, I cannot accept what the hon. Gentleman says.
Indeed, the allocation for improvement work in Cleveland's schools has risen from £90,000 this year to £1.4 million next year.
Mr. Harry Greenway
When considering the principle and amount of funding for schools in Cleveland, will my hon. Friend also consider the funding of schools in Ealing?
Today, the Department approved grant-maintained status for five schools in wealthy, middle-class and less wealthy areas in that borough.
Are we not being taught the lesson that parents want independence for their schools — whether or not they are in the state sector — because that is the best way of achieving the best possible education for children in Ealing, Cleveland and everywhere else?
Mr. Fallon
Indeed.
I congratulate those schools on obtaining grant-maintained status.
Ealing has led the way, and I hope that it will not be too long before other education authorities such as Cleveland follow.
Mr. Fatchett
Is it not sad that no Cleveland Conservative has been able to come and represent the children of Cleveland today, and that that task has had to be left to a Conservative from Ealing?
Is the Minister aware that 18 schools in the Cleveland authority area were built before 1914 and that in the current financial year Cleveland has received only a quarter of its capital allocation?
It is therefore not surprising that thousands of children in Cleveland's schools are being taught in sub-standard conditions — which must have an effect on education standards.
Is it not about time that the Government invested in Cleveland's schools?
Or are we seeing yet another example of the application of double standards, with Ministers providing no money for the public sector, while sending their own children to school in the private sector?
Mr. Fallon
I do not see how either the hon. Gentleman or his hon. Friend the Member for Langbaurgh (Dr. Kumar) can describe the £3.8 million allocation for Cleveland as’ no money’.
The plain fact is that there are steps that Cleveland should be taking to improve the way that it manages education spending.
Cleveland has some 20,000 empty school places, and spends some £80 per pupil on its central administration, while only £40 per pupil is spent across the border in North Yorkshire.
Seven-year-olds (Testing)
Mr. Squire
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the results of testing seven-year-olds.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
The national and local results of the tests of seven-year-olds which I published on 19 December give, for the first time, a clear picture of how our seven-year-olds are performing.
We should remember that over 70 per cent.
of seven-year-olds did reach the targets for that age in English, mathematics and science.
However, the wide fluctuations in the performance of individual local education authorities cannot be fully explained by variations in social and economic circumstances or by variations in spending on education, and show that there is plenty of scope to improve standards.
Mr. Squire
My right hon. and learned Friend will know that school children in my borough of Havering came fifth overall in the national listings.
That is a considerable achievement.
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that my local Labour party is circulating a leaflet, from which I shall now quote —
Hon. Members
No quotes.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Paraphrase, please.
Mr. Squire
In deference to you, Mr. Speaker, I shall do so.
According to the leaflet, testing at seven is harmful and impractical.
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that our talented children deserve better than a Labour council, let alone a Labour Government?
Mr. Clarke
My hon. Friend is certainly right.
The publication of the results allowed tribute to be paid to the local authorities whose results were good and where the hard work of teachers was showing results.
The publication of results need not be taken as a threat to a good education system.
I also share my hon. Friend's regret that some people still seem to think that one can teach a national curriculum sensibly without testing children's progress in an organised fashion.
I am astonished that for so long we decided that the results of such tests should be kept secret from the public.
It is a great pity that such reactionary ideas are still harboured by the Labour party in Havering and elsewhere.
Mr. Matthew Taylor
I am glad that the Minister recognises that the results confirm previous studies — including those by Her Majesty's inspectorate — that most children, teachers and schools are getting or offer a good education.
Will he commission a report to consider in detail and with expertise the fluctuations to which he referred rather than, as he has, jumping to his own conclusions about why such fluctuations should exist?
After all, some areas include children with special needs and some do not; in some areas children have English as a second language and in others they do not; and, as he admits, teachers have had problems with the tests themselves.
Will he commission such a report?
Mr. Clarke
I do not think that we have had such a clear picture before of the extraordinarily wide variations between different parts of the country.
I believe that the publication of these results will cause people to focus on the reasons for the low standards in some places, except for hon. Members representing Bradford and Newham — the two lowest scoring local authorities — whose reaction is that one should not have such testing and that it is merely a problem forced on the local authority.
The report that I commissioned to get a debate going on why some schools were failing was commissioned from three people whose expertise has not been challenged and nor, as far as I know, have most of their conclusions.
However, I agree with the three wise men and with the hon. Gentleman.
The vast majority of teachers are working extremely hard to achieve good results under the national curriculum and our aim is to get all schools up to the standards of the best.
Dr. Hampson
Did my right hon. and learned Friend notice that last summer the independent report into Leeds primary schools showed clearly that the schools that had had enhanced resources and more teachers could not show a positive correlation between extra resources and higher standards and, moreover, that the report highlighted the problem of teaching methods?
It said that far too many teachers had the perception that unless they followed the good practice set down by local authority advisers, their career prospects in the city would be blighted.
Mr. Clarke
I agree with my hon. Friend.
The report by Professor Alexander into the Leeds primary school experience should be read carefully by anyone who is interested in primary school methods.
There was a project that led to considerable extra expenditure in primary schools which was closely steered into the dogmatic application of a version of teaching methods and which had harmful consequences in schools.
It showed not only that there was no correlation between expenditure and results but that the rather ridiculous pursuit of ideology involving child-centred education led to a reduction in standards because of the pressure on teachers.
Mr. Straw
Is the Secretary of State aware that according to figures provided in a parliamentary written answer by the Minister of State about the proportion of seven-year-olds reaching the highest level of attainment — level 3 — Labour-controlled Haringey is equal top and that Labour-controlled Merton, Camden and Hackney are in the top five placings, streets ahead of Tory Wandsworth which is the source of so much dogma about Tory education policies?
Will the Secretary of State now applaud those London Labour boroughs for their excellent results?
Mr. Clarke
When I announced the results I paid tribute to places such as Wigan and St. Helens
Hon. Members
And Hackney
Mr. Clarke
and to Hackney if the figures are accurate for level 3 attainments.
The hon. Gentleman resisted publication of the information on which he now relies.
He reduces it to this petty party political level and then he makes excuses for all the lowest-performing local authorities, which are Labour-controlled, and resists any idea that we should address the teaching methods that have so badly let down children in Newham, Bradford and all the other areas in the bottom 20, almost all of which are Labour controlled.
University Teaching Buildings
Mr. Morgan
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what consultations he has had with the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals regarding capital expenditure on new university teaching buildings.
Mr. Alan Howarth
My right hon. and learned Friend and I meet the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals from time to time on a range of matters, including the capital and recurrent funding needs of the universities.
Mr. Morgan
Is the Minister aware that the Government are cramming more and more university students into the same buildings as a consequence of the fact that they are trying to have people obtain degrees on the cheap?
Does he realise that, for example, in University college, Cardiff it is proposed to put an extra 1,000 students into the humanities building over the next three years?
Does not he realise that there is a serious danger of recreating the student ferment of 1969?
This time, however, it will not be about the great philosophical issues of class warfare and who should run the world; it will be simply about where students can sit to hear a lecture.
Mr. Howarth
Our policy is to promote wider participation and more opportunity in higher education.
At the same time, we are asking for reasonable management efficiency gains on the part of institutions.
University capital investment in 1992-93 — money provided by the taxpayer — will amount to £216 million.
By any standards that is a very significant sum.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Ronnie Campbell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 28 January.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Campbell
Is the Prime Minister aware that people in my constituency of Blyth Valley eagerly await the RECHAR money?
As there is a split in his Cabinet will he get off his backside, stop swanning around that desert island and have the money paid?
The Prime Minister
I agree with the hon. Gentleman that the RECHAR money has been paid by Britain into the European Community and that we should have it back.
I hope that Commissioner Millan will release it speedily.
Sir William Shelton
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that we already see benefits flowing from the citizens charter?
I refer, for instance, to shorter hospital waiting lists and to school performance league tables.
Will my right hon. Friend tell the House what future benefits — proven benefits — the people of this country will see flowing from the citizens charter?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
We are determined to get the best possible value for the enormous amount of public money that is available at present.
In addition to the improved information and guidance systems that we have already set up, there will be much more flexible opening hours in the case of tax offices, benefits offices and employment service offices, and a much more detailed and personal service for the taxpayer, who has the cost of those services compulsorily extracted in taxes from his or her pocket.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister now give a categoric assurance that he will not impose any increase in VAT?
Will he please answer yes or no?
The Prime Minister
We have no plans to increase value added tax.
Mr. Kinnock
Why cannot the Prime Minister give a straight answer to a straight question?
Is he aware that the words he has just used are exactly the same as those that were used by his predecessor just before her Government increased VAT?
Why cannot he tell us now what his plans are?
Or is he trying to forget that the Government have increased VAT five times in 13 years?
Is not that why everyone has good reason to know that Tory Governments mean higher VAT?
The Prime Minister
There will be no VAT increase.
Unlike the Labour party, we have published our spending plans and there is no need for us to raise VAT to meet them.
So that the right hon. Gentleman is in no doubt, I tell him that I have no plans to raise the top rate of tax or the level of national insurance contributions.
Mr. Kinnock
It is time that the Prime Minister came clean with the country.
In view of the record of Conservative Governments in always putting up VAT and in view of the Prime Minister's promises on other aspects of policy, how can he pretend that his intention is not to put up VAT?
Do not a Tory Government make VAT rises a certainty?
The Prime Minister
Before the right hon. Gentleman carries that fib any further, does he recall a further and earlier prediction about value added tax?
I quote:’ Labour foresees 60 per cent.
VAT.
VAT could rise to 60 per cent.
if radical tax changes are introduced by a new Tory Government.’
The right hon. Gentleman may recall that prediction by his right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) before the previous election.
That was also the time when the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook claimed that Labour would win by a landslide in the 1987 election.
He was wrong on both points then and he is wrong now.
Mr. Gerald Bowden
Does my right hon. Friend agree —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to settle down.
Mr. Bowden
Does my right hon. Friend agree —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Bowden
Does my right hon. Friend agree that a party's commitment to public services is best judged by its record in government?
Will my right hon. Friend consult our right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment to ascertain who controls the 20 authorities that have the highest community charge, the highest rent arrears and more vacant properties than any other authorities?
Does my borough of Southwark feature among them?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes a sound and fair point.
All too often, Labour-controlled councils provide shoddy services at far too high a cost.
I well recall the Opposition saying,’ If you wish to see what a Labour Government would be like, look at Labour local government.’
Mr. Ashdown
On the subject of predictions, and while the Prime Minister reflects today on the gloomy report by the Confederation of British Industry, does he recall on new year's day this year saying on Radio 4 that in retrospect, we would look back and say that the economic recovery had already started?
In retrospect, does the Prime Minister agree that he might spend less time talking up false economic dawns and more time taking action for economic recovery?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is becoming a professional gloom monger.
When we look back to the present, it will be perfectly clear that in many sectors of the economy, the recovery has indeed started.
Mr. Onslow
Does my right hon. Friend remember that when the investment income surcharge was abolished in 1984, the then Chancellor of the Exchequer described it as an unfair and anomalous tax on savings and on the rewards of personal enterprise?
What would he say today to anyone who was stupid enough to recommit himself to reintroducing it, as Labour has done?
The Prime Minister
I would certainly find that extraordinary.
I would find it even more extraordinary from a party that claims to care about investment, yet clearly has no understanding that investment comes from savings.
Mr. Livingstone
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 28 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Livingstone
Given the commitment in the citizens charter to parental choice in education, will the Prime Minister agree to meet a small delegation of parents from William Gladstone school which has an excellent academic record and an expanding roll but which faces closure as Brent council wishes to sell the school because of its site value?
The Prime Minister
I am sure that my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State will be happy to see the hon. Member concerned.
Mr. Michael Morris
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the greatest service he can continue to do for the British public is to keep inflation below 5 per cent?
Is he further aware that the public remembers that inflation under Labour was 15 per cent., 20 per cent .
and 25 per cent?
In order to keep the level of inflation down, will he have a look at what is happening with the six major grocery chains, the increased share of the margins that they are getting and the fact that their margins are now twice the level found in the major grocery chains throughout Europe?
The Prime Minister
As my hon. Friend says, inflation is low and we are determined that it will stay low.
He will recall that inflation never fell below 7.4 per cent., and that for only a very brief period, while the Labour party was in Government.
I will certainly look at the point that my hon. Friend has mentioned.
Ms Hoey
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 28 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Ms Hoey
Before the Prime Minister retires to his desert island, taking with him his Trollope and a very large section of my constituency — without my permission — will he give a clear and simple statement about what he will offer to pensioners so that they can retire with some luxury?
Will he match Labour's commitment to pensions?
The Prime Minister
A commitment to pensions means nothing if it is not matched by a commitment to low inflation.
Mr. Devlin rose —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Member has not asked a question of the Prime Minister for many months, and not in this Session, unlike some other hon. Members, now shouting’ Marginal seat.’
Mr. Devlin
Has my right hon. Friend had an opportunity to look at the study in The Financial Times on 6 January which pointed to the fact that the northern region has very much benefited from the economic restructuring of the 1980s and is now coming out of recession faster than any other part of the country, due to the success of the regeneration programmes that the Government have put in place in the region?
The Prime Minister
I have seen that myself in visits to the north.
There is no doubt that the north has seen the start of many good things in this country and I am certain that it will be the same again with the economic recovery.
Mr. McKelvey
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 28 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. McKelvey
Can the Prime Minister confirm that last Wednesday he had lunch with Lord Rothermere?
Did he take the opportunity on that occasion to co-ordinate the campaign of lies and vilification that the Rothermere press has been conducting against the Labour party?
The Prime Minister
I took the opportunity to enjoy an excellent luncheon.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Sir John Farr
As my right hon. Friend prepares himself for the important meeting with President Yeltsin later this week in London, will he take the opportunity of seeing what can be done to deal with the massive threat which still exists from all the different independent Russian states?
The Prime Minister
As my hon. Friend says, this will be an important opportunity to discuss with President Yeltsin both the international difficulties posed by the break-up of the old Soviet Union and the extent to which the west might usefully help the Russian Republic in the difficulties that it faces at present.
I anticipate that both those matters will be on our agenda.
Mr. Bernie Grant
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 28 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Grant
Will the Prime Minister join me in congratulating Labour-controlled Haringey council and the children, teachers and parents of Haringey on the fact that our schools came joint top in English, maths and science in the level 3 standard assessment test and top in the individual subject of science?
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that that is a remarkable achievement, bearing in mind the fact that Haringey is an inner-London borough and has all the associated problems?
Is not he ashamed at the remarks of his predecessor and of his ministerial colleagues who have constantly criticised Haringey's education policy and have cut its revenue support grant?
Will the right hon. Gentleman see to it that Haringey receives an increase in its revenue support grant and standard spending assessment as a result of its excellent work in educating the children at its schools?
The Prime Minister
I am delighted to hear what the hon. Gentleman says.
I am especially pleased to hear that he now supports the tests introduced by my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science.
I can tell from what he said that he is a strong supporter of the parents charter, without which those results might not have been fully known.
Mr. Conway
Will my right hon. Friend take time to congratulate British industry on the fact that it has achieved record exports in the past quarter, that 27 of the top 50 European companies are British and that Britain exports more of its national product than Japan?
Are not those successful British companies sick and tired of being talked down by the doom-monger Labour party?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right.
Yesterday's trade figures showed clearly that export volumes were at record levels even in a worldwide economic downturn.
My hon. Friend was also right about some Opposition Members talking down the economy.
The Leader of the Opposition said in his letter to supporters at the beginning of this year that Britain had a £20 billion trade deficit, when the truth was that the deficit fell by a half and the right hon. Gentleman's figures were wholly wrong.
Perhaps he will now write again to his supporters and correct his error.
House of Commons
Wednesday 29 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
SCOTLAND
Ravenscraig
Dr. Reid
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland what further action he intends to take in connection with the announced closure of Ravenscraig.
13
Mr. Robertson
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will itemise the assistance offered to north Lanarkshire since June 1991.
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
We have already taken action to strengthen and diversify the Lanarkshire economy.
I have announced very substantial additional resources, through Scottish Enterprise, for the Lanarkshire development agency.
Those resources are being deployed on a wide range of infrastructure projects, major environmental works and training and business development schemes, following the recommendations of the Lanarkshire working group.
I have also announced that, subject to the agreement of the European Commission, the Government intend to set up an enterprise zone in north Lanarkshire.
Dr. Reid
It was obvious from that answer that the Secretary of State has nothing whatsoever to say about steel.
Is he aware that next week my hon. Friend the Member for Motherwell, South (Dr. Bray) will visit the United States to look at the latest technological developments in steel production — thin slab casting?
Is the Secretary of State aware that we welcome the fact — however small the step may be — that, with the approval of the Scottish Office, representatives of Scottish Enterprise will accompany my hon. Friend?
Does the right hon. Gentleman realise that we need much more than that?
We need a public commitment today from the Government that they will be prepared to give technical and financial assistance to any buyer that wished to develop thin slab technology at Ravenscraig.
The Labour party has already given that pledge on behalf of a future Labour Government.
Will the right hon. Gentleman publicly give that pledge?
Mr. Lang
As the hon. Gentleman knows, Scottish Enterprise has already investigated thin slab casting in the United States of America.
It would be naive of any Opposition Member to think that British Steel had not carefully considered the possibilities of that type of development, which requires a plentiful scrap supply and low energy costs.
I am quite sure that British Steel will have considered that and will weigh it up as well as any other possible developments.
British Steel must decide whether it is a sensible project on which to embark.
Mr. Robertson
I warn the Secretary of State for Scotland that, when it comes to the urgent task of providing resources for the regeneration of the Lanarkshire economy, he will not be able to hide behind the arrogant and imperious people who run British Steel.
During the last couple of months that he holds that office, he will be judged harshly on what he does.
Will the right hon. Gentleman stop juggling and manipulating figures and pretending that large-scale assistance has already been given to Lanarkshire?
Will he exclude hospitals and existing road-building programmes from the calculations?
Will he turn his mind to the serious short-term problems: first, the problem that will be caused for the existing development project by the delayed decision on an enterprise zone and, secondly, the problem that the Lanarkshire development agency and Scottish Enterprise will have because of the Government's obsession with annuality in the money that they give.
If the right hon. Gentleman turned his mind to those problems, that would be a constructive contribution.
Mr. Lang
I am sorry if the hon. Gentleman does not think that there is a vast amount of economic development going on in Lanarkshire as a result of Government initiatives.
It is time that he visited his constituency and had a look around.
No fewer than 13 of the 16 sites identified by the Lanarkshire working group for development as locations for new industrial activity are already being developed as a result of the extra resources and the extra commitment of the Government.
We are determined to help Lanarkshire to diversify to attract new jobs all the time.
Sir Hector Monro
Does my right hon. Friend agree that general anger was expressed in the House last week at British Steel's decision to close Ravenscraig?
I welcome the many offers of support and the money available to various agencies in Scotland, as well as the fact that it is hoped to establish an enterprise zone in Lanarkshire.
Will my right hon. Friend consider appointing a supremo to co-ordinate all those opportunities, to bring new jobs as quickly as possible to Scotland later this year?
Mr. Lang
As my hon. Friend knows, the Under-Secretary of State for Scotland with responsibility for industry — my hon. Friend the Member for Eastwood (Mr. Stewart)— has co-ordinated the work of the Lanarkshire working group, which has brought together many local authorities, public bodies and private sector bodies.
They produced an extremely effective report, which identified a large number of projects which could usefully be established to help Lanarkshire.
Some 60 of those projects have now been implemented.
Lanarkshire development agency now fulfils the co-ordinating role to which my hon. Friend referred.
House of Commons
Thursday 30 January 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NORTHERN IRELAND
Trust Ports
Mr. Barry Field
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what progress he has made in privatising the trust ports in Northern Ireland.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Richard Needham)
A proposal for a draft Order in Council, which would provide the necessary powers to enable any of Northern Ireland's trust ports to be privatised, is currently under preparation.
It is scheduled for publication in the summer at which time all interested parties will have an opportunity to comment.
Mr. Field
I welcome my hon. Friend's answer, but will he ensure that the employees of the trust ports have an opportunity to purchase shares and partake in the wealth created, thereby furthering the Government's privatisation proposals and the extension of share ownership?
Does he agree that those policies have constituted one of the successful planks of the social revolution in this country since 1979?
Mr. Needham
I can certainly confirm that it is our intention to ensure that the legislation contains proposals such as my hon. Friend suggested, just as there are in the legislation that applies to the rest of the country.
I have no doubt that the hon. Member for Wigan (Mr. Stott) will oppose our present privatisation proposal with the same degree of enthusiasm that he opposed the privatisation proposals introduced on Monday.
I doubt whether he will have an opportunity to meddle in the affairs of the Northern Ireland ports, but, were he to do so, as he comes from Wigan his knowledge of the pier might be of assistance.
Mr. Beggs
What is the present level of grant paid to each of the port authorities in Northern Ireland?
What change will be made to the level of grant paid to those ports which move from trust status to the private sector?
When will we have a level playing field in Northern Ireland with fair competition between all ports?
Mr. Needham
We shall have a level playing field as long as the present Administration are able to continue their privatisation policy.
The proposals adopted by the EC mean that 75 per cent.
of grant is available to publicly owned or trust ports and, under the European regional development fund rules, 50 per cent.
is available to privately owned ports.
That is a matter for the EC and the Commission to decide, not the Government.
Rev. Ian Paisley
The Minister will have noted that other people have joined the anti-privatisation lobby in relation to electricity, as he will have discovered on Monday.
There is great concern in Northern Ireland, especially following a report from a Committee of the House on land in the harbour region which was sold off cheaply when Harland and Wolff was privatised.
Will the Minister assure the House that, whatever privatisation plans he has for the trust ports, there will be no recognition of those people who seem to have an interest in cashing in on the endeavours for their own ends?
Mr. Needham
The Government have an obligation to Parliament and to the taxpayer to ensure maximum proceeds from any privatisation of land.
Whether that happens ultimately will be a matter for the Public Accounts Committee to judge.
There is great potential in the land around the port in Belfast and it is important that, when that land is sold, it is sold to a company capable of developing it to the best advantage of the people of Belfast and Northern Ireland.
New Roads, South Antrim
Mr. Clifford Forsythe
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what the total figure will be for new road schemes in the Antrim, South constituency for (a) 1992-93,(b) 1993-94 and (c) 1994-95.
Mr. Needham
Following an adjustment in planned expenditure, it is now intended to spent £0.5 million in 1993-94 on the construction of a slip road from the M2 motorway to ensure that it is in place when the new Antrim hospital opens.
No expenditure will be incurred on major road schemes in the other two years.
Mr. Forsythe
I thank the hon. Gentleman for that very good reply.
As he knows, the decision made at an earlier stage not to complete the slip road was considered to be ludicrous.
Is he aware of the difficulties experienced on the part of the A26 that has not yet been dualled?
Is he further aware that a number of patients from a wide area — indeed, from as distant as Larne — will be going to the hospital, meaning that good roads are essential to serve the hospital?
Mr. Needham
I thank the hon. Gentleman for his opening remarks.
My hon. Friend the Minister who is responsible for health in Northern Ireland is not able to be here today because he is on duty in the Province.
He and I have had a series of meetings about the provision of the slip road, and he reminded me of an undertaking that I had given when Minister responsible for health matters a few years ago.
So together we moved heaven and earth to ensure, in a difficult year, that the necessary money was made available.
I appreciate the point that the hon. Gentleman makes about the A26.
He will be aware, bearing in mind the other pressures we have on the budget this year, how difficult it has been to get a higher priority for roads.
So long as I am responsible for transport in Northern Ireland, I shall continue to fight that corner as best I can.
RUC Special Branch
Mr. John Browne
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the staff resources available to the special branch of the RUC.
The Minister of State, Northern Ireland Office (Dr. Brian Mawhinney)
In the particular circumstances of Northern Ireland, this information is confidential.
Mr. Browne
I accept the need for secrecy in the matter.
Is the Minister satisfied that the present staffing levels are sufficient to carry out the necessary pre-emptive intelligence work?
When will the agreed 441 new RUC people be recruited?
Dr. Mawhinney
The Secretary of State announced in November, as my hon. Friend says, that the Chief Constable's request for 441 additional police officers would be met.
The recruitment of those officers began immediately, and my hon. Friend will be pleased to know that more than 100 additional RUC and RUC reserve recruits were taken into training in December.
Mr. Maginnis
I am full of praise for the work that is being done by special branch in the RUC.
Is the Minister aware that the best return for that good work is not being achieved in that shortcomings in the law allow the higher echelons of terrorist organisations — their command and control structures — to remain free to walk the streets with impunity, despite the fact that the RUC has provided high-grade intelligence about those people?
Is he further aware that, in the wake of the Nelson trial, it is important to ensure that absolute primacy of the RUC in delivering law and order to the people of Northern Ireland?
Dr. Mawhinney
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for the compliment that he paid to the special branch and to the RUC.
I am sure that it is shared on both sides of the House, as it is from the Dispatch Box.
If the hon. Gentleman, who is a considerable expert in these matters, thinks that specific aspects of the law should be addressed, I shall be happy to hear from him.
Mr. Mallon
Does the Minister agree that in any society, the public interest requires a system of law enforcement and justice that all can support and in which all can have confidence?
Does he believe that that is possible in Northern Ireland, when some sections of the security services are colluding with terrorists, when they are using terrorists as agents while they are involved in terrorist activity and when some members of the security services are handing out confidential security documents as though they were pen-pal photographs?
What changes will he and the Secretary of State demand so that the integrity of the law can be protected from some of those who are charged with enforcing it?
Dr. Mawhinney
I listened carefully to the hon. Gentleman's remarks, the latter part of which related to a court case that has not yet been concluded, so it would be inappropriate and imprudent of me to comment on it now.
My answer to the first part of his question is that in the few weeks that I have had my present portfolio, two or three times in public I have stated my firm belief that it is in the interests of the people of Northern Ireland, the police and the security forces — indeed, in the interests of all of us — that the law be applied even-handedly and that those responsible for applying the law should do so.
Mr. McNamara
Can the Minister assure the House that he entirely supports the primacy of the police in all security matters?
If so, will he now state to the House that the police are, and should always be, in control of all intelligence operations in Northern Ireland?
So that all sections of the community can have confidence in the security forces, will the Government undertake to make a statement to the House after the conclusion of the Nelson case?
Dr. Mawhinney
I have already made my position clear in regard to the Nelson case, and I have nothing more to add.
As for the primacy of the police, the view of Ministers is that that is not in question.
Economic Prospects
Mr. Trimble
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the future prospects for the Northern Ireland economy.
Mr. Needham
Although Northern Ireland's economic prospects are closely linked to those of the rest of the United Kingdom, the Northern Ireland economy has fared better than that of almost any other United Kingdom region in recent years.
As the national economy moves out of recession, Northern Ireland is therefore well placed to take advantage of the economic upturn.
Mr. Trimble
As the Minister says, the Northern Ireland economy is closely linked to that of the rest of the United Kingdom.
Experience has tended to show that its pattern moves somewhat behind that of the United Kingdom in terms of time.
The rest of the United Kingdom now seems to be beginning to move out of recession; is it not true that Northern Ireland is about to move deeper into it?
Would the Minister care to comment on a recent report by Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte — a firm of consultants on which the Government normally rely — which states that industrial output is likely to decline by between 2 and 4 per cent.
this year, and that unemployment may increase by some 10,000 as a result?
Mr. Needham
That may have been true until the current recession, but the hon. Gentleman is entirely wrong about the present circumstances.
Whereas in the past Northern Ireland was always the furthest point on the beach that the tide reached, and therefore the first point that it left, on this occasion we entered the recession later and weathered it better.
The unemployment figures demonstrate that Northern Ireland was the only part of the United Kingdom that experienced no increase in unemployment; the Cambridge econometric forecast shows that last year it was the only region that experienced any growth, and that this year it is likely to be one of four regions that will experience growth.
Coopers and Lybrand Deloitte is probably the worst of a lot of very bad forecasters.
For example, it forecast an increase in unemployment of 3,000 for 1986-87; in fact unemployment fell by 6,800.
It forecast a decrease of 5,000 for 1987-88; in fact, the decrease was 7,800.
It forecast a fall of 3,000 for 1988-89; the actual decrease was 9,500.
Perhaps economic forecasters and consultants should consider the beam in their own eye before criticising the Government's figures.
Rev. William McCrea
My constituency has the second highest unemployment in the United Kingdom.
Does not the Minister realise that the unemployment figures in the Province are deplorable?
Young people face lengthening dole queues.
Will the Minister tell the House and the people of the Province what measure he intends to take to assist people over 45 whose age condemns them to humiliating interviews and, indeed, rejection?
Many of them have done excellent work in the past.
Mr. Needham
The Government's job training programme includes a series of measures to assist those over the age of 25, and to ensure that they can receive an element of training.
The same applies to the young unemployed.
I agree with everything that the hon. Gentleman has said about the unacceptable level of unemployment in Northern Ireland.
I do not wish to convey a sense of complacency; I am merely saying that the Northern Ireland economy has done very much better in the latest recession — and would have done better still had it not been for the appalling IRA atrocities that make inward investment so difficult.
Mr. Jim Marshall
This was the first time that I have heard the Minister quote figures with any satisfaction.
I clearly understood why when I heard how they confirmed his view of the economy in Northern Ireland.
He is an isolated figure in the Government because he is the first Minister whom I have heard speak highly of the work of the Cambridge school.
Perhaps he should get in step with the rest of the Government.
Does the Minister agree that if those projects that are partly funded by the European Community fund do not proceed this year, there is a danger that there will be some damage to the economy of Northern Ireland?
Does he further accept that this arises from the Government's refusal to accept European Community rules on additionality?
If he accepts both those propositions, what pressure is the Northern Ireland Office putting on the Government to conform to those European Community rules?
Mr. Needham
The Government have always abided by, and agreed with, the additionality rules as far as they apply to Northern Ireland.
It is unacceptable to us that there should be any withholding of funds due to Northern Ireland.
As the hon. Gentleman has rightly pointed out, those funds are of importance to us in the provision of our capital infrastructure, although they are not totally significant.
I can quote a final figure to the hon. Gentleman, as he enjoys my quoting figures.
It is that, according to the Department of Employment figures, if the Labour party's economic proposals for a minimum wage were put into effect it would cost some 2 million jobs, of which 50,000 would be in Northern Ireland, where we have a large number of women workers in the clothing, textile and garment industries.
The hon. Gentleman's advancement to the ministerial Dispatch Box would be a disaster for employment in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Andrew MacKay
Will my hon. Friend further underline that the greatest threat to the economic prosperity of both the Province and the Republic of Ireland is terrorism?
Will he emphasise again and again that the victims of terrorism are not just those who are maimed, injured and killed but the many people who are put on the dole because terrorism deters investment from elsewhere in Europe?
Mr. Needham
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
All of us who have been involved in trying to increase employment in Northern Ireland know the damage that terrorism does to our chances of achieving that aim.
The hon. Member for Foyle (Mr. Hume) has, much more eloquently than I could, told us of the damage that it does and the effect that it has on the young people of Northern Ireland because it gives them a future of either migration or unemployment.
That is the hideous hypocrisy of the IRA's campaign.
Housing Executive
Mr. McGrady
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the funding of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive.
Mr. Needham
The total resources available to the Northern Ireland Housing Executive in 1992-93 will be around £483 million.
These substantial resources will enable the executive to continue the progress that it has made in recent years in improving housing conditions in Northern Ireland.
Mr. McGrady
I thank the Minister for his reply.
Does he agree that the cut of £19.9 million from £262 million in the 1992-93 budget is a dramatic reduction given that the proposal for the programme of building and house repairs in Northern Ireland agreed by the Government was already the lowest in the history of the Northern Ireland Housing Executive?
Is he aware that there are 23,000 people on the waiting list — 10,000 in urgent need — and that urban regeneration will be set back?
Allied to this is the disastrous state of the building and construction industry.
Can I encourage the Minister to do the double by restoring the funding so as to enable much-needed house building and repairs to go ahead, and at the same time give the necessary financial boost to the devastated building and construction industry?
Mr. Needham
The hon. Gentleman knows full well that the record of this Government on housing in Northern Ireland since 1979 is without parallel.
Any visitors who come to the Province can see the quality of public housing in Northern Ireland.
The urgent waiting list has reduced from some 18,800 in 1981 to 9,900 in 1991.
The amount of new housing in Northern Ireland, as everyone can see, has changed the housing situation from one of the worst in Europe to one of the best in Europe.
That does not mean that we do not still have problems in rural areas.
The hon. Gentleman knows well that the Government must order their priorities and he knows the extent of construction needed after buildings have been bombed.
Therefore, we must all continue to point out that the bombing of houses, bridges and roads inevitably impacts on our ability to find funds elsewhere.
The construction industry in Northern Ireland is not in a disastrous decline — private house building has maintained its growth rate and has the best record anywhere in the country.
Mr. Kilfedder
A colossal number of Housing Executive dwellings in my constituency are in urgent need of renovation — I am thinking of the housing estates at Tullycarnet, Ballybeen, Groomsport, Bangor and Holyrood.
May I urge the Minister to give sufficient funds to the Housing Executive to enable the work to go ahead without further delay?
Mr. Needham
I have explained to the hon. Gentleman why the funding for the Housing Executive is not as easy this year as it has perhaps been in former years.
I take his point about maintenance and I shall of course draw it to the Housing Executive's attention.
It is the Housing Executive's responsibility to determine how it spends the funds that the Government make available to it.
I say again that in Northern Ireland the Housing Executive has spent a great deal more per capita than is the case elsewhere and that can be seen by anyone who visits public sector housing in Northern Ireland.
Mr. William Ross
Will the Minister ensure that when the Housing Executive engages in new build it will incorporate in every scheme a large number of two-bedroomed bungalows and a number of houses especially built to cater for the needs of the disabled?
That would allow a tremendous movement of people from under-utilised accommodation to smaller accommodation and would allow many people who have been on the waiting list for council houses for many years to be moved into smaller accommodation.
It would create a domino effect across the board.
Mr. Needham
I am interested to hear the hon. Gentleman's suggestion.
I am sure that the Housing Executive will want to consider it and I shall personally bring it to its attention.
Mr. Stott
There is no doubt about the high quality of housing stock that has been built by the Housing Executive in Northern Ireland and every time I see it I am envious and wish that I had some of it in Wigan.
Will the Minister confirm what my hon. Friend the Member for South Down (Mr. McGrady) said, which was that the Housing Executive has lost about £19 million of funding for 1991-92 and that that will have a serious effect on new build?
It is alleged that those cuts are occasioned by the additional costs of dealing with terrorism.
Will he confirm that the Housing Executive believes that during the period 1992-95 it will lose a further £50 million from its anticipated budget if the cuts are not restored?
That would have a disastrous effect on waiting lists in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Needham
Every year that I have been Minister with responsibility for housing — it is now six years — the Housing Executive has suggested an amount which it hopes that the Government will give it, while knowing perfectly well that it will not get all that it asks for.
The figures to which the hon. Gentleman refers are not those proposed by the Government but those which the Housing Executive says that it could spend.
The actual reduction is about £7 million.
Although I should have preferred there to be no reduction, the fact that the priorities within the Northern Ireland block are law, order and security inevitably means that there are consequences which fall to other matters, and housing is one.
The important point is that on which the hon. Gentleman put his finger — the quality of housing in Northern Ireland.
As it improves and as housing unfitness is reduced, there is less need to spend so much on it, which allows resources to be spent elsewhere.
Investment
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what is his estimate of the value of inward investment in Northern Ireland since 1979.
Mr. Needham
Since 1983 selective financial assistance totalling £104 million has been offered to projects with a total forecast investment of nearly £320 million.
Comprehensive figures for non-assisted projects and for the years 1979-83 are not available.
Mr. Coombs
It would be idle to speculate on what the figures might have been if it were not for the security situation.
Can my hon. Friend say whether the recent bombing campaign has had any impact on prospects for future investment, and whether any new initiatives are under consideration to boost the figures further?
Mr. Needham
All the statutory agencies in Northern Ireland do whatever they can to boost investment.
Clearly, the recent bombing campaign in Northern Ireland does not help our attempts to attract inward investment, but all parties in the House, as part of a Northern Ireland team, work together on ways of trying to get more investment.
We have been most successful in the past few years in attracting investment from 18 countries.
The IRA campaign leaves an image which is a travesty of the reality of life in Northern Ireland.
People who visit always seem astonished by the normalcy of the life of the vast majority of the people most of the time.
It would sometimes help if that normalcy were a little better portrayed by the likes of such as the BBC and by those journalists who earn their living by reporting only violence.
Mr. Corbett
Does the Minister agree that the best prospect of reaching and sustaining adequate inward investment will arise only when right hon. and hon. Members representing the people of Northern Ireland put aside their petty differences and continue talks with the Secretary of State to bring the violence in the Province to an end?
Mr. Needham
Whatever differences may or may not exist, it is erring on the side of arrogance to suggest that they are petty.
The differences are deep and go far back into history, but while I have been a Minister dealing with the economy and the environment I have always had the greatest possible collaboration from all the parties in Northern Ireland, which have always worked cheek by jowl with one another and with me for the benefit of all the people of Northern Ireland.
I commend the politicians of Northern Ireland for doing that.
Rev. Ian Paisley
Will the Minister keep in mind the fact that there is a roadblock on investment in the construction industry because of the problem of landlocking?
There is a big case of investment being held up in Ahoghill, and it is also being held up in Carrickfergus, and other places, too.
Will the Minister undertake to consider that problem seriously?
Mr. Needham
Yes, Sir.
Mr. Mallon
I hope that I shall not embarrass the Minister if I commend him again for his imaginative efforts and the time that he has spent abroad trying to develop inward investment.
When he considers the figures for the past 10 years, does he have any plans for structural changes involving inward investment teams, especially in the United States?
While we await the outcome of the general election, does he have any plans to discuss with the Northern Ireland parties how best we can all further inward investment?
Despite what are often called our petty differences, inward investment is something on which we all agree.
Mr. Needham
I should very much like the opportunity to discuss with the hon. Gentleman and his hon. Friends, and other colleagues from Northern Ireland, how we can introduce a strategy for promoting inward investment over a longer time scale than that hitherto adopted.
If the hon. Gentleman's words were an invitation to me, I shall take up that invitation.
I commend the hon. Gentleman for his work on the link between Pittsburgh and Newry.
That is a good case history, which shows a way forward by building confidence between potential overseas investors and parts of Northern Ireland.
I am sure that we can build on that and that it will be ever more successful.
Security
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the security situation in Belfast.
Dr. Mawhinney
The security situation in Belfast is kept under constant review and the size and disposition of the security force effort there are adjusted as necessary.
In recent weeks, a number of additional measures have been introduced and the security forces have had considerable success in disrupting planned terrorist activity.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my hon. Friend for his reply.
May I pass on to him some of the comments made to me by people I know in Belfast?
They have welcomed the increased presence of our defence forces in their beleaguered city.
May I draw to my hon. Friend's attention a report in the Sunday Express pointing out that paramilitaries convicted of bombing and murder are sheltering in the Republic are drawing more than £2 million per week in dole money and social security, paid for by the British taxpayer, while many would face reconviction if they returned to Ulster?
Will my hon. Friend please look into the matter because those people are living off the system that they seek to destroy with their bombs and bullets?
Dr. Mawhinney
I know of my hon. Friend's deep interest in the affairs of the Province and I thank her for it.
I am aware of the speculative piece to which she refers.
An individual's entitlement to social security benefit, including whether or not he or she receives benefit, is confidential information.
I confirm that all claims to benefit are treated strictly in accordance with the law, and benefit would not be paid to any person unless the entitlement was valid.
Mr. A. Cecil Walker
Will the Minister comment on the proposal to close the strategically placed Royal Ulster Constabulary station at Springfield parade in north-west Belfast?
Dr. Mawhinney
No, but if the hon. Gentleman has views that he would like to express to me on that closure, I should be delighted to hear from him.
Mr. Hume
Will the Minister ask the hon. Member for Billericay (Mrs. Gorman) to get her facts right and stop promoting bias in the House?
Will he remind her that 98 per cent.
of all people convicted of crimes of violence in Northern Ireland are residents of Northern Ireland?
Dr. Mawhinney
The hon. Gentleman has made his own effective point in his own effective way.
Having read the article, I admit that aspects of it caused my eyebrows to rise.
Mr. Wilkinson
Can Her Majesty's Ministers use the time before there is any question of political talks resuming to take the initiative in the security situation in Belfast and elsewhere in the Province?
For normal political life to be maintained in Northern Ireland, is it not critical to defeat terrorism, and must not that defeat come before political changes or constitutional arrangements?
Dr. Mawhinney
My hon. Friend makes a fair point, but he would wish to put it in the context of the fact that security policy works alongside political, economic and social policy.
There is no quick fix to defeat terrorism in Northern Ireland.
My hon. Friend should be in no doubt, however, that we have that commitment.
May I encourage him by telling him that the Chief Constable's view is that four out of every five planned terrorist incidents in Northern Ireland are thwarted before they take place?
Last year, we took 400 people to court charged with terrorist-related offences, including 38 for murder.
My hon. Friend will have welcomed the substantial arms and explosives finds in Belfast just a few weeks ago.
Rathlin Island
Ms. Hoey
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what progress has been made in providing Rathlin island with mains electricity.
Mr. Needham
Preparations to provide mains electricity on Rathlin island are progressing satisfactorily, and supply is expected to be available to consumers in September.
Ms. Hoey
I am pleased at the progress on that issue, but may I ask the Minister now to look urgently at the decision to allow a Scottish ferry company to run the ferry between Rathlin and Ballycastle?
Does he realise that the islanders have run the ferry for many years and that until this year they received not a penny of subsidy, unlike the Scottish ferries?
Why does he wish to take away the Rathliners' jobs?
Will he please look at this urgently and change his decision?
Mr. Needham
Absolutely no decision of any sort has been made as regards the introduction of Cal-Mac.
The hon. Lady knows those ferry owners as well as I do.
I have made it perfectly clear to the ferry owners in Rathlin that we shall do nothing without discussing it with them and the islanders' development and community association.
Those discussions have been going on with everyone involved.
We need to ensure that we get a ferry between Rathlin and Ballycastle which can operatate the whole year round and open the island much more to tourist traffic and economic development.
We are having the ferry company over to see how it works, but no decision has been made.
We shall look at this very carefully and have discussions with the current owners and with everybody on the island before anything is decided.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
Does my hon. Friend accept that there will be a welcome across the House for his response to the questions?
It is important to have both mains electricity and improvements to the harbours at Ballycastle and Church Bay.
There will be a great welcome for the fact that there will be discussions with Richard Green and others who have kept Rathlin linked to the main part of Northern Ireland all these years.
Mr. Needham
I thank my hon. Friend, and give to the House the absolute commitment that nothing will be done on Rathlin island without the fullest possible co-operation with all the islanders and their association.
Nothing will be imposed by the Department of the Environment without my having the closest opportunity to discuss all this with the islanders and their representatives myself.
Military Conflict
Mr. Hain
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement about the prospects for an early settlement to the military conflict in Northern Ireland.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Brooke)
The actions of terrorists in Northern Ireland cannot be dignified with the description’ military conflict’.
Peace will come when the terrorists realise, as they must, that they will never be allowed to prevail.
Mr. Hain
There is widespread admiration for the Secretary of State's persistence in tackling paramilitary terrorism and for his patience over the political talks.
May I put to him the comments on BBC television this week of the commanding officer of bloody Sunday, Lieutenant Colonel Derek Wilford, who said that the present Government's policies and those of their predecessors had failed completely?
Is there not a case for an entirely new agenda of constitutional talks, involving all elected representatives of both north and south, to agree a solution to this crisis?
Otherwise we shall have 23 more years of killing and destruction.
Mr. Brooke
I am conscious how, whenever we come to one of these sad anniversaries in Northern Ireland, those who have participated in Northern Ireland affairs in the past make their contributions to the current debate.
As for talks, the party leaders and I issued a statement earlier this week.
I think that there is hope and expectation on the part of us all that we shall be able to come back into talks after the general election.
Mrs. Ann Winterton
Does my right hon. Friend accept that to deal with military conflicts in the Province British troops must be able to deal with the Irish Republican Army in a professional, military way, without their hands being tied behind their backs for political reasons?
Does he further agree that people in the Province deserve equally high standards of security and protection from terrorism as those who live on the mainland?
Mr. Brooke
I have already remarked on the phrase’ military conflict’.
As to my hon. Friend's comment that the security forces should be allowed to operate without constraint from political considerations, I can give a categorical assurance that no such restraint for political reasons will be imposed.
The security forces will, however, always operate under the rule of the law.
Mr. Molyneaux
Does the Secretary of State remember that in Northern Ireland Question Time on 12 December he and I shared a concern about the build-up of munitions and arms as far south as Limerick for trans-shipment to Northern Ireland, as unfortunately happened?
Does he feel that he might try to persuade Mr. Collins at their next meeting to devote a little more time to the containment of that particular problem rather than wasting it on demands that a policeman accompany every Army patrol in Northern Ireland, presumably to ensure that the Special Air Services remember to say’ please’and’thank you’to any civilian they may encounter?
Mr. Brooke
I had the opportunity to discuss the matter that the right hon. Gentleman has raised at the conference this week.
The Minister of Justice, who of course accompanies the Minister for Foreign Affairs to these conferences, is fully seized — as is the Commissioner of the Garda — of the necessity to identify the whereabouts of the arsenal because of its profound value to the IRA.
Mr. John Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the current security situation in Northern Ireland illustrates the irresponsibility of those who oppose the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act?
Mr. Brooke
I have said before from the Dispatch Box that the attitude of other parties in the House to that Act is a matter for them rather than for me.
Mr. McNamara
Will the Secretary of State assure the House that after the election and in the event of my right hon. Friend the Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) forming a Government, the right hon. Gentleman will support that Government in seeking to revive the talks on the basis of the three strands that have been the basis of his patient talks over the past two years?
At the conclusion of the Nelson case, will the Secretary of State make a statement to the House about the supremacy of the rule of law in Northern Ireland?
Mr. Brooke
I hesitate to correct the hon. Gentleman's pronunciation, but in my day I fought the constituency of Islwyn which is now represented by the Leader of the Opposition, and I can tell him that it is pronounced’ Issloin’.
In the unlikely event of an alternative Administration being returned to power and seeking to get talks started, on the basis of my experience over the past two years I wish the hon. Gentleman well.
In response to the hon. Gentleman's second question, my hon. Friend the Minister of State, Northern Ireland Office, made it perfectly clear that we will not make any comment whatever on that case while it is proceeding.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Martyn Jones
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 30 January.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
I have been asked to reply My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has been having important discussions today with President Yeltsin, who is on his first visit abroad as President of an independent Russia.
My right hon. Friend will be meeting President Bush this evening after my right hon. Friend's arrival in New York to chair a meeting of the United Nations Security Council.
Mr. Jones
I am sorry that I so rattled the Prime Minister with my question at the previous Prime Minister's Question Time that he has not come to the House today.
As the Institute for Fiscal Studies spring budget report shows that Government borrowing is likely to reach £20 billion next year, will the right hon. Gentleman confirm or deny that the Prime Minister and his Chancellor have reneged on their promises to balance the books?
Mr. MacGregor
The hon. Gentleman will have to await the Budget statement on matters relating to his question.
As is absolutely clear, we have made our spending plans public.
They are set out in detail and we have indicated how they are paid for.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister made that clear on Tuesday.
I note that the report to which the hon. Gentleman refers says:’ Labour, if elected, would have little scope for increased spending in the early years unless it were willing to increase taxes by more than it has indicated.’
The country now says,’ And how!’
Dr. Goodson-Wickes
Does my right hon. Friend agree that too often we lose sight of the fact that the national health service was born as a result of co-operation between three parties?
Does my right hon. Friend further agree that the founders of the health service would be horrified at the resistance to the reforms so ably carried out by the Government for the benefit of patients throughout the country?
Mr. MacGregor
I entirely agree.
It is clear that we have not only substantially increased expenditure on the national health service but that we are the only party proposing credible reforms, the results of which are already showing.
I assume that that is why a consultant, who is the nephew of a distinguished former socialist in the House, said yesterday:’ I do not believe the health service would be safe in Labour's hands.’
Mr. Hattersley
When the Prime Minister said on Tuesday that if the Conservatives were re-elected they would not increase VAT, was he giving the House and the country a categorical assurance?
Mr. MacGregor
My right hon. Friend made the position absolutely clear on Tuesday.
Mr. Hattersley
Is the Leader of the House aware that the Prime Minister also made the position categorically clear on 6 April, when he said:’ No honest Government could give a categorical assurance that they would not increase VAT.
No Government ever has, and no Government ever will.’
Was the Prime Minister telling the truth last Tuesday or last April?
Mr. MacGregor
What my right hon. Friend said on Tuesday is:’ There will be no VAT increase we have published our spending plans and there is no need for us to raise VAT to meet them.’
That is absolutely clear, and it is in clear contrast to the position of the Labour party, which maintains its high spending policies and is all over the place in deciding how to finance them.
Mr. Hattersley
It is absolutely clear that the Leader of the House has either no authority or insufficient courage to say whether that promise was categorical or whether it was what the country believes it to have been — evidence of a Prime Minister panicked into making a promise that he has no intention of keeping.
Is not the truth about Tory policy on VAT revealed in the party's latest campaign document — that the way to raise taxes is’ Wait until they spend the money as that is the right moment to tax them’?
Mr. MacGregor
I repeat that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister made the position absolutely clear, as we have done on many occasions.
It is also clear that in the last two weeks the whole country, as it heard different voices and different noises, has wondered who is speaking for the Labour party.
Indeed, on Sunday the right hon. Gentleman was proposing that Labour's recession package should be introduced after the recession had ended.
Mr. Dykes
Has my hon. Friend noticed that in recent weeks, as the public have been able to assess our present policies and our future policy offerings, there has been a very sharp and noticeable increase in our opinion poll ratings?
That is not just a coincidence.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the opinion poll improvement in the past few weeks reflects not only our excellent policy range but the fact that the election is getting closer and the best is yet to come?
Mr. MacGregor
I agree that as we unfold our positive policies over the next few weeks, and as the electorate sees more and more of what Labour is offering — or not offering — what my hon. Friend has suggested will come about.
Mr. McAvoy
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 30 January.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. McAvoy
The Cabinet is split from top to bottom over the Prime Minister's policy of using Common Market grants for tax cuts instead of for the provision of help to deprived areas.
Will the Leader of the House confirm the report in yesterday's Financial Times that the rules for allocating this money were changed in 1988 with the approval of the Government, and will he give an immediate assurance that the new rules will be obeyed?
Why should Britain's areas of highest unemployment suffer because of Tory party internal divisions?
Mr. MacGregor
There are no internal Tory party divisions.
The position on the particular issue to which the hon. Gentleman refers is that for some years now we have pursued the same policy that the money has been, in the formula applied, additional and is reflected in higher public spending plans, and that it is for the Commissioner to honour the pledge that we have had for years past.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
Has my right hon. Friend noticed in the past few days the widespread support for our plans to seek better-quality services from councils?
Has he noticed that much advice has been given to us on how that should be done?
Some of the advice is bizarre.
Will he confirm that he will reject advice to use as a role model councils such as Lambeth, Liverpool, Hackney and Southwark — in other words, councils which have high borrowing, rotten services and high community charges and which have lost control of their housing stock, and all of which are run by the Labour party?
Mr. MacGregor
It is clear that nearly all of the 10 worst councils in terms of rent collection and houses left empty are Labour controlled.
It is also clear that many of the high-spending authorities are Labour.
The country will draw its own conclusion that under a Labour Administration there are great inefficiencies, high spending and high taxation.
Mr. Kilfoyle
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 30 January.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Kilfoyle
Further to the question from my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), and given the obvious confusion among Ministers about the implications of their electoral promises for the future level of value added tax, can the Leader of the House conjure up the actual figure for value added tax when his Government came to office in June 1979, and the level now as they go out of office?
Mr. MacGregor
We have, of course, in addition undertaken a considerable change
Hon. Members
— Answer.
Mr. MacGregor
I intend to answer.
We have undertaken a considerable change from direct to indirect taxes, which is absolutely right because it enables many more people to spend their money as they wish.
That is the policy which we have pursued consistently, with the result that direct taxation has come down substantially.
However, we did not have the very high rates on many goods such as television sets, which are described as luxury goods but are essentials for many people — rates which we inherited and which I understand that the Labour party would consider again.
May Day
Mr. Barry Field
To ask the Prime Minister what plans he has for the future of the May day bank holiday.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
The Government have no plans to change the present public holiday arrangements, although we shall continue to keep the situation under review.
Mr. Field
Why do we not throw off this hangover of socialism and instead celebrate a free enterprise day, a British export day or, better still, a low taxation day?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that those who think that high taxation is the answer to recession are about to try to convince the electorate that suffocation is a form of first aid?
Mr. MacGregor
On the question about May day being a bank holiday, I can give my hon. Friend some comfort.
Although I know that my hon. Friend is interested in switching it to the autumn, we have no plans to do that because there are different views about it.
I think that he will agree nevertheless that on May day, instead of celebrating socialism, we now celebrate the end of socialism.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
Will the Lord President of the Council, as a fellow Scot, tell me whether he has had the opportunity to study in depth the implications of the ICM opinion poll?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Sadly, the question is about May day.
Engagements
Mr. Bellingham
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 30 January.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bellingham
Will the Leader of the House find time today to plan a journey from south Norfolk to north-west Norfolk to look at the local health services?
He is welcome to bring with him Sir Roy Griffiths.
He will see that a number of general practitioner practices have become fundholders, that a local NHS trust has already reduced waiting lists by 1,200 in the last year, and that a district authority is about to merge with a neighbour to give itself more clout.
Are not those the results of Tory policies working for the benefit of patients?
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend is right.
The same is happening in west Norfolk, as well as throughout the country.
As a result of the reforms, already in a very short period we see improved services, shortened waiting lists, and so on.
Interestingly, we are also seeing increasing support for the reforms from the medical profession itself and increasing take-up of them.
Mr. Redmond
Will the Leader of the House convey to the Prime Minister the request that he restore to Back Benchers —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I do not know what the hilarity is about, but please carry on.
Mr. Redmond
— the right to examine Government legislation and that he stop the appalling use of the guillotine which stifles it?
Mr. MacGregor
We shall be discussing that matter in a short while.
I shall make plain our position on today's business.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 30 January.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Coombs
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is evidence of the growing success of the Government's education reforms that this year 28,800 people have enrolled for teacher training courses — 20 per cent.
more than last year and the best figure for 15 years?
Is that not in stark contrast with the cynical disregard for educational standards shown by those Labour Members who filibustered on the parents charter Bill last night?
Mr. MacGregor
Later today we shall be able to debate further the great improvement in standards that we are achieving as a result of our reforms.
My hon. Friend draws attention to one of them.
I am delighted with the considerable increase in the number coming forward for teacher training.
It reflects the fact that we have considerably improved the salary prospects and career prospects of teachers as a result of all the steps that we have taken in recent years.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 30 January.
Mr. MacGregor
I have been asked to reply.
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bennett
Will the Leader of the House confirm that although few people in Britain would expect the Prime Minister to match President Yeltsin bottle for bottle, they will find it odd that the Government insist on increasing or doubling Britain's nuclear fire power when both the Russians and the Americans see good reasons for cutting theirs?
Mr. MacGregor
The hon. Gentleman raises an important issue and I want to make the position clear.
We welcome the proposals to reduce the super-power arsenals.
They are wonderful news for all of us.
We must hope that the current plans are implemented.
But let us be perfectly clear about the scale of what is involved.
The present arsenal of the former Soviet republics is 27,000 warheads, and it will take them many years to implement the current proposals.
Even at the end of that process, they will have thousands of nuclear weapons.
Our deterrent involves one boat on patrol at all times with no more than 128 warheads.
So the scale is very different.
I believe that the whole country thinks that with the uncertainties in the world — in the middle east and elsewhere, as well as in the Soviet Union — and looking ahead to the next 10 years, it is essential that we maintain our minimum credible nuclear deterrent.
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES OFFICIAL REPORT IN THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE FIFTIETH PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND [WHICH OPENED 25 JUNE 1987]FORTIETH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II
SIXTH SERIES
VOLUME 203 SIXTH VOLUME OF SESSION 1991-92
House of Commons
Monday 3 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
SOCIAL SECURITY
National Insurance
Mr. Gwilym Jones
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what would be the weekly cost to someone on one and a half times male average earnings of abolition of the national insurance upper earnings limit.
The Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Tony Newton)
Someone earning £490 a week, which is about one and a half times average male earnings, would pay an extra £9 per week in national insurance contributions if the upper earnings limit was abolished.
Mr. Jones
Does my right hon. Friend agree that abolishing the upper earnings limit would hit well over 3 million people — for instance, policemen, health service workers and those in seasonal occupations — merely because overtime bonuses or profit-related pay would take their earnings over the average in any particular week?
People in those categories certainly should not be described as rich.
Mr. Newton
It is absolutely true that a large number of people who could not remotely be described as rich would be hit by the proposal.
What is more, they would receive absolutely nothing in return in the form of benefits: they need to be aware of that.
Mr. Skinner
Is the Secretary of State aware that millions of people have been hit by the actions of his Department over the past 12 years?
The Department has taken away the earnings-related supplement, and have got rid of death and maternity grant and income support for 16 and 17-year-olds who would not work on the Tory Government's slave labour schemes.
Most of those measures were introduced by the present Prime Minister.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Is the hon. Gentleman's question about national insurance upper earnings limit?
Mr. Skinner
Absolutely — and it is the Secretary of State's Department that is guilty of taking benefits away from millions of people who would have benefited if the Labour Government's policies had been maintained over the past 12 years by this tawdry, rotten Tory Government.
Mr. Newton
I am aware of two things.
First, all the groups to whom the hon. Gentleman has referred were hit much harder by the policies of high taxation and raging inflation over which the Labour Government presided.
Secondly, all the groups who are considered to be priorities by both the Government and the Opposition — low-income pensioners, low-income families and disabled people — have benefited significantly from what the Government have done in recent years.
2
Mr. Tim Smith
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what would be the estimated cost to business if the lower earnings limit for employers' national insurance contributions were abolished.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Michael Jack)
We estimate that abolishing the lower earnings limit would cost business around £175 million a year in extra national insurance contributions.
Mr. Smith
Does my hon. Friend agree that, given the substantial extra burden that will be placed on employers, well-meaning proposals to extend the benefits of the national insurance system to low-paid employees would have the opposite effect to the one intended, as most would lose their jobs?
Mr. Jack
My hon. Friend, in his usual perceptive way, has put his finger precisely on the import of such proposals.
It is interesting to note that they come from the same stable that brought us the national insurance surcharge.
It is also interesting to note that, when Labour was last in power, the combined contribution to the national insurance scheme by an employee earning £52 a week and his employer was £10.40, while under the present Government it is £3.43.
Mr. Flynn
Will the Minister confirm that the present Government have introduced higher taxes than any other Government, and that they have increased national insurance contributions for those on average and low pay by a massive 40 per cent?
Is it right that someone earning £200,000 a year should pay only 1 per cent.
in national insurance?
Should not such people bear their share of the burden?
Mr. Jack
It is amazing that the hon. Gentleman, who professes knowledge of social security matters, has not alluded to the fact that we restructured the national insurance scheme.
I do not know where he has been for the past few years, but we have reduced the rates on lower earnings so that people now pay on average about £3 a week less in national insurance.
Disability Working Allowance
Mr. Madel
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what alterations he is considering to the disability working allowance scheme before it is introduced; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
None, Sir.
The disability working allowance scheme, which will come into effect from April, will provide a radical new opportunity for disabled people who can and wish to work.
Mr. Madel
Can my right hon. Friend confirm that this very welcome new allowance will be extensively publicised and that the allowance itself is not taxable?
Mr. Scott
Yes.
The disability working allowance — like its companion benefit, the disability living allowance — will be tax free.
It will be extensively publicised on television and in the press through mail shots and other methods of communication.
Incidentally, we shall introduce into our advertising campaign efforts to ensure that the information available can be well interpreted by those with sensory disabilities.
Mr. Alfred Morris
What is the Government's response to the increasingly strong feeling among disabled people that this measure is not an appropriate one for tackling their now, by common consent, quite shocking employment disadvantages?
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that the DWA, with its very high marginal tax rates — as high as 94 per cent., leaving disabled people with only 6p in the pound of their additional income as workers — simply substitutes a new poverty trap for the employment trap, making some disabled people actually worse off for earning more?
Mr. Scott
Hardly anyone will be worse off if they are on disability working allowance.
For example, a couple with two children aged six and 11 would still be entitled to DWA if they had a net income of £189 a week.
I believe that this is an important benefit.
It has been widely welcomed by the organisations of and for disabled people outside the House.
One of its most important aspects is that people who go on to DWA will retain their underlying entitlement to any benefit which they may have had before they went on to DWA and that they will not have to requalify, if they fail in their efforts to work.
Unemployment Benefit
Mr. Gregory
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security how many unemployment benefit claimants there were in York in June 1987 and currently; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Jack
In June 1987, unemployment in York was 5,542.
In December 1991 it was down to 3,816.
Mr. Gregory
I thank my hon. Friend for those figures.
Does he agree that, if my calculation is correct, that is a reduction of 31 per cent.
and that the reverse would be the case if we were to move from our free enterprise and initiative policy to a policy whereby state nationalisation took over Northern Electric in York, Yorkshire Water, British Telecom and other similar companies?
Is it not right that there would be a reversal of the excellent figures that my hon. Friend gave?
Mr. Jack
As somebody who, as a child, was brought up in the city of York, I have nothing but praise for the excellent way in which my hon. Friend has represented his constituents.
I can confirm that a 31 per cent.
reduction in unemployment is the correct figure.
My hon. Friend has done much to boost the employment opportunities in York by championing the railways, tourism and other industries from which the city draws its economic well-being.
The people of York will have noticed the mocking smiles on the faces of Opposition Members when I referred to my hon. Friend's record.
Community Care Grants
Mr. Cousins
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what was the number and size of community care grants in Newcastle upon Tyne in the six months April to October 1991.
Mr. Scott
Between April and October 1991, Newcastle upon Tyne district office awarded 1,250 community care grants, worth over £290,000.
Mr. Cousins
Will the Minister confirm that the office in Newcastle upon Tyne is in the habit of pricing its community care grants in two well-known catalogue shops and that unfortunately it failed to spot in April 1991 that the Government had increased value added tax?
The result was that a constituent of mine — and no doubt many hundreds of others who have just been referred to by the Minister as being included in the 1,200 people who received grants — was short changed and not given the full amount.
A disabled constituent of mine was short changed by more than £2 in his community care grant for an orthopaedic bed.
Will the Minister investigate the matter urgently and ensure that the Department of Social Security office in Newcastle upon Tyne is made aware of the fact that the Government increased VAT last April?
Mr. Scott
Of course I shall examine the matter urgently and refer it to the Benefits Agency.
Given its urgency, I am surprised that the hon. Gentleman did not write to me about such a detailed case, which would have enabled me to deal with it earlier.
Mr. Bradley
The Minister clearly has no understanding of the damage that the social fund is inflicting on thousands of the poorest people in cities such as Newcastle and Manchester.
In 1991, 68 per cent.
of applicants were refused community care grant and just over 50 per cent.
were given a budgetary loan, which they had to repay from their meagre benefits.
When will the Department publish the review of the social fund, which we have long awaited, and when will he restore the right of the poorest in our society to a grant for essential items such as clothing, furniture and cookers, which have been denied them under the current system?
Mr. Scott
I contest the hon. Gentleman's assertions at the end of his supplementary question.
The social fund has given extensive help to people in real need.
Some 60 per cent.
of applicants are refused community care grant because they do not meet the basic criteria.
We have not received the report of the social policy research unit at York, but when we do we will publish it urgently.
Pensioners (Incomes)
Mr. Burns
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what proportion of pensioners are in the top half of the income distribution; and what was the comparable figure for 1979.
Mr. Newton
Twenty eight per cent.
of pensioners were in the top half of the income distribution in 1987 compared with 24 per cent.
in 1979.
Mr. Burns
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
Will he confirm that pensioners are worried about a return to the rampant inflation of the mid-1970s and, although it does not directly affect people who have reached state retirement age, a 9 per cent.
tax being put on the savings of people who are saving for retirement?
People considering retiring early would be caught by that punitive tax.
Mr. Newton
Pensioners were among those who were hardest hit by the rates of taxation and inflation of the 1970s.
I am grateful for my hon. Friend's second point, because it is not yet widely understood by the three quarters of people who go into retirement with savings of their own that, as they approach retirement, their ability to build up those savings would be subject to a 9 per cent.
tax as a result of one of the Opposition's proposals.
Mr. Frank Field
If a higher proportion of pensioners are now in the top half of the distribution, who has taken their place in the lower half, and why?
What part have the Government's unemployment policies played in that?
Mr. Newton
I do not think that there is any question of the Government pursuing a policy of unemployment, as the hon. Gentleman well knows.
The increased number of pensioners in the top half of the income distribution is the result of pensioners' average net incomes rising by a third or more in real terms because of the policies of the Government.
Mrs. Roe
Does my right hon. Friend agree that many people confuse the level of the state pension with the amount of money that pensioners have available to pay all their weekly bills?
Is not it true that the majority of pensioners have extra income from savings, from an occupational pension or from other benefits such as income support?
Mr. Newton
Yes, indeed.
As I said earlier, more than three quarters of recently retiring pensioners now have income from savings, and more than 60 per cent.
of them also have income from occupational pensions.
In both cases, the incomes have risen substantially.
Mr. Allen
Will the Secretary of State concede that many people are doing better, which we welcome, because of the state earnings-related pension scheme which was introduced by the Labour Government?
The people who are not doing well are those without additional income on lower incomes, such as single pensioners, who have lost the equivalent of £15 a week, and married couple pensioners, who have lost the equivalent of £25 a week.
Will the Secretary of State take this chance — one of his last — to apologise to pensioners for what he has done?
Mr. Newton
I make two points: first, the incomes of pensioners in the lowest quintile have risen by 15 per cent.
in real terms over this period, and those pensioners will have benefited further since those statistics were compiled by the increases amounting to a third of a billion pounds that have been made in income support premiums in the past three years.
Secondly, it is not SERPS that is the major factor in this increase but the increased income from savings and occupational pensions.
Mr. Harris
Do not the figures given by my hon. Friend underline the point that many pensioners are well off— and we welcome that — and that that is a justification of the Government's policy of targeting extra help on those who really need it?
When will the Opposition grasp that simple fact?
Mr. Newton
Certainly one of the satisfactory developments of recent years is that, taken as a whole and on average, pensioners' living standards have been rising.
As I have said repeatedly, there remain a number of people for whom we think it is right to do more, and we have been doing more through the income support premiums.
Benefits (Greater London)
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what was the total number of people in the Greater London area receiving social security benefits in 1978-79 and the total in 1990-91.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security (Miss Ann Widdecombe)
Statistics for the number of recipients of all benefits are not collected on a regional basis.
Mr. Banks
It does not surprise me that the Minister does not want to know the facts.
She must know that, by any standards, the number of people in London who have been impoverished since 1979 has more than doubled.
She knows that and the statistics are at least available from the Library but not with the precision that she could have given if she had chosen to give them to the House.
I have never seen so many unemployed and homeless people begging on the streets of London.
Thanks to the Prime Minister, 16 and 17-year-olds cannot claim social security.
I suggest that, instead of choosing the mad scene from Lucia di Lammermoor for his desert island disc, the Prime Minister would have done better to have chosen something from the Beggar's Opera because there is a whole chorus on the London streets which could join in.
Miss Widdecombe
May I suggest that, for sheer consistency in the way in which the Opposition present their numbers, they should perhaps choose the Grand Old Duke of York as their theme.
The hon. Gentleman can no more claim that poverty has doubled in London than he can claim that for Great Britain as a whole.
Because we have taken more people into the net by raising income support and making other improvements, more are now assisted through the benefits system.
Mr. Bowis
Is it not a fact that more and more generous benefits covering many different needs are available to people in London and elsewhere?
Does my hon. Friend agree that one statistic that needs to be found is that of the number of Londoners who would lose if the upper earnings limit on national insurance contributions were to be removed?
Miss Widdecombe
Indeed.
Given the average salary in London, I imagine that there would be an extensive loss if, as my hon. Friend says, that policy were to be implemented.
What is more — as my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State said earlier — no compensating benefit would be received by those who would be hit by the abolition of the upper limit.
In fact, it would turn Beveridge on its head and use the national insurance system as a tax system.
Retirement Pension
Mr. Winnick
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what recent representations he has received over the level of the retirement pension.
Mr. Newton
We regularly receive representations and inquiries from a wide range of interested organisations and individuals about the level of the retirement pension.
Mr. Winnick
Will the Secretary of State take this opportunity to confirm an answer recently given to me by a junior Minister — it is in Hansard, of course— to the effect that a large number of pensioners — nearly 40 per cent .
— have incomes of £70 or less out of which they pay about £10 to £15 in rent?
Is it not a fact that if the link with earnings had not been broken by his Government 10 years ago — indeed, nearly 12 years ago — a married pensioner would be £28 a week better off this April?
That is what the country is concerned about, not the lies, smears and distortions organised by Tory central office and the Tory press against the Labour party.
Mr. Newton
Such calculations take absolutely no account of the increased taxation and inflation which would have resulted from the pursuit of the policy that the hon. Gentleman is advocating.
I leave with him the thought, especially as Labour is apparently committed to adding another £9 a week to national insurance contributions for 3 million or more people, that if such a policy had been pursued, contributions for an employee on average earnings and his employer would now be about £9 a week more than they are.
Mr. Ashby
My right hon. Friend referred to the increase in the incomes of pensioners as a result of savings and of occupational pensions.
Can he give any idea of what the level of occupational pensions will be by the turn of the century?
Mr. Newton
I will not attempt to predict what will happen on that front between now and the end of the century because that will depend on many factors.
I can tell my hon. Friend that pensioners' incomes from occupational pensions — for those who have them — rose on average from £13.90 a week in 1979 to £27.70 in 1988.
That is a virtual doubling of the income from occupational pensions over that period.
I expect to see the trend continue if sensible policies continue to be pursued.
Mr. Meacher
Will the right hon. Gentleman tell us what representations he has received from the employees and pensioners of the Maxwell Communication Corporation and AGB companies about the level of their pensions?
Is he aware that, due to his culpable negligence in sitting for 19 months on regulations under the Social Security Act 1990, which would have protected pensioners in the event of a company wind-up, thousands of pensioners now stand to lose most or all of their pensions for which they have contributed for up to 35 years?
Does not he think it right that all such pensioners should receive compensation when they have lost so much pension due to his complacency and reprehensible laxity?
Mr. Newton
I presume that the hon. Gentleman thought it right to return to the matter in the House having notably failed to achieve the result for which he hoped by an overheated press release to the same effect which he issued at the end of last week.
He knows that he has deliberately raised unnecessary alarm among many thousands of pensioners by the way in which he has presented the matter.
It is simply not the case that pensioners in such schemes will get nothing or will be left penniless, as the hon. Gentleman well knows.
Under existing regulations, if there are not sufficient assets to secure the guaranteed minimum pensions — that is the equivalent of what the pensioners would have got under the state earnings-related pension scheme — the guaranteed minimum pensions can be and would be underwritten by the Government.
Mr. Ian Taylor
Will my right hon. Friend refuse the invitation from the Opposition to treat pensioners as a political underclass?
Will he remember that more and more people reaching retirement age wish to have independence in their own hands, which means that they must be in receipt of policies that encourage that independence, including savings, during their working career?
Mr. Newton
That is absolutely right, and nothing has more clearly revealed the Opposition's attitude to people's wishes in the matter than their persistent hostility to the 4 million or more people who have taken out personal pensions for exactly that reason.
Social Fund
Mr. Morgan
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what proposals he has to ensure a more equitable distribution of resources for the social fund.
Mr. Scott
Each annual allocation of funds to district budgets has been designed to redistribute resources in a progressively more equitable way.
As part of our routine annual review of allocations, we shall continue to consider how best to ensure that funds are targeted where they are most needed.
Mr. Morgan
Does the Minister accept that the distribution of resources under the social fund is extremely inequitable and difficult to get right?
Will he also accept the Opposition's view that, with the social fund, the Prime Minister first demonstrated on a national scale his dangerous incompetence?
That incompetence later extended to the economy when he was promoted.
Does the Minister agree that, in the present state of affairs, some parts of the country have too much money in the social fund and still have money over after meeting all claims, low and high priority, which are legitimate?
Some areas can meet only high priority claims, whereas other areas can meet low and high priority claims but have no money over.
Is not it an example of what is wrong with the country that the Prime Minister was promoted for trying to reinvent the Lady Bountiful in his first major act as Minister in 1988?
Mr. Scott
I do not claim — and I do not suppose that the Prime Minister would — that the social fund is perfect.
I do claim that it is better than any of its predecessors in meeting exceptional need in exceptional circumstances.
I recognise the local pressures which the hon. Gentleman perceives, but I reiterate that we endeavour to see that the resources allocated reflect the need in the localities.
That is why South Glamorgan had an extra 10 per cent.
allocated in August 1991 and another £50,000 in loans only a week or so ago.
We try to ensure that any surplus resources are reallocated sensibly and flexibly.
Mr. Hind
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that if he were to convert all loans under the social fund to grants, as has been promised by the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher), the cost would be about £130 million and would greatly prejudice the operation of the social fund as it now works?
Mr. Scott
I certainly understand my hon. Friend's point.
I have heard suggestions that that will be Labour party policy, but I have not heard whether the shadow Chief Secretary to the Treasury agrees with such a policy.
Dr. Kumar
If the Minister genuinely believes in the equitable distribution of the social fund, may I invite him to review cold weather payments, because the senior citizens in my area of east Cleveland have lost out during the past week?
In addition, how are cold weather benefits assessed in the first place?
Mr. Scott
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will take the trouble both to read my announcement about the improvements in cold weather payments this year and to go to the Library to see how those allocations are made.
All the information is there for him to find.
In one of our coldest winters for the past 20 years, the system has been operating successfully and flexibly.
I believe that the linkages to the meteorological stations have operated more effectively than hitherto.
If the hon. Gentleman wishes to make a particular point about his locality, he should write to me about it and I shall ensure that account is taken of his views.
Disability Living Allowance
Sir David Price
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what arrangements he has made to ensure that existing recipients of attendance allowance and mobility allowance receive disability living allowance in April.
Mr. Scott
All attendance allowance beneficiaries aged under 65 and all mobility allowance beneficiaries will transfer automatically to the equivalent level of disability living allowance.
We are writing to all existing claimants to let them know how the change will affect them.
We are also inviting claimants who currently receive only one of the two existing benefits, and consequently will transfer to only one component of DLA to consider claiming the other component.
Sir David Price
Will those in the third category, who are claiming extra money to help with personal care and who do not currently receive attendance allowance, have their claims determined by an adjudication officer or a medical practitioner?
Will social factors be given equal weight with medical factors when determining such claims?
Mr. Scott
My hon. Friend makes a valid point.
We shall be substantially demedicalising — to use my word — the whole process for claiming both the disability living allowance and the disability working allowance, and moving to judgments made by adjudication officers.
That, in itself, will be an important step forward, but perhaps even more important is the fact that, because of the change, there will for the first time be a proper appeals procedure for those who need help with care.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
In attempting to ensure that people are made aware of the DLA, which is something that we all want, will the Minister ensure that there is effective and efficient management?
Although I realise that he cannot know of a particular incident that has been drawn to my attention today, is he aware that information has been sent to deceased claimants, thus causing a great deal of distress to the families concerned?
If that was an isolated incident I am sure that the Minister will join me in apologising for it, but will he look at distribution methods to ensure that such incidents do not happen on any scale?
Mr. Scott
I certainly apologise for distress caused by any such incident.
We have sent out more than 1 million letters to individual customers to advise them of the change that we are making and the benefits inquiry line has provided back-up information for those who have received such letters.
We are doing our best, but I suppose that when something of this scale is embarked upon, it is almost inevitable that the occasional mistake will be made.
I repeat that I am sorry if any distress has been caused.
Mr. Thurnham
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that spending on disability benefits by this Government has increased by over 150 per cent., in contrast to the policies advocated by the Labour party, the priorities of which are pensions and child benefits?
Mr. Scott
I believe that the Government can be proud of their record on benefits for disabled people over the past 12 years.
My hon. Friend has rightly drawn attention to the progress that has already been made.
The introduction of the two new benefits will help more than 300,000 people at a cost of about £300 million.
Disability Working Allowance
Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security when the new disability working allowance will come into operation.
Mr. Scott
Disability working allowance will start on 7 April.
The new benefit will be widely publicised from this week onwards.
Claims can be made from 10 March 1992.
Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith
Is my right hon. Friend aware that this new benefit will be widely welcomed?
Will he confirm that if we had adopted a scatter-gun approach to benefits, as the Labour Government did, the substantial improvements in help for the disabled since 1979 would not have been possible?
Can he say by how much the groups affected by the scheme will have benefited in those years?
Mr. Scott
As an earlier supplementary question made clear, we have increased expenditure on long-term sick and disabled people by 150 per cent.
during the period of this Government at an annual rate of about £550 million compared with about £350 million under the Labour Government, using real-terms figures.
Therefore, we have made substantial progress.
What is more, we have sought to identify areas of disability that in the past have not had the attention that they deserve, and to meet them with the new benefits.
Mr. Simon Hughes
What will the Minister say to people who will receive the new allowance from April when they learn that last Friday a Conservative Back Bencher talked out the Civil Rights (Disabled Persons) Bill?
Was that done with implied or expressed connivance of the Government?
In any event, will the Minister condemn it?
Mr. Scott
If the hon. Gentleman took pains to read my speech on Friday and see my remarks, he would understand my approach to the matter.
The Bill came on second, had less than two hours debate and, according to the normal customs and practices of this House, did not receive a Second Reading.
We should see how well efforts to encourage and persuade employers to take note of the needs and the abilities of disabled people to contribute to their enterprises do, before we consider the need for further legislation.
National Insurance
Sir Fergus Montgomery
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security how many (a) men and (b) women pay national insurance contributions at the upper earnings limit.
Mr. Jack
On average, 3 million men and nearly 500,000 women who are employed or self-employed will pay national insurance contributions at the upper limit during 1991-92.
Sir Fergus Montgomery
Does my hon. Friend agree that any proposal to abolish the upper limit on national insurance contributions would mean that millions of people who could never remotely be regarded as rich would pay a great deal more in contributions and get nothing extra in benefits?
Mr. Jack
My hon. Friend raises an interesting point.
It is interesting that he talks of people getting nothing for their additional contributions in the very week when the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) writes an article in a magazine in praise of the contributory principle — indeed, in praise of Beveridge in this the 50th anniversary of his excellent proposals.
Mr. Meacher
The hon. Gentleman is very efficient.
Mr. Jack
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman says that I am very efficient because that is what we in the Department of Social Security strive to be.
We now know that the Opposition's approach to national insurance would mean a something-for-nothing society.
My hon. Friend points to a further interesting fact: although the figures that I gave were 100 per cent.
correct, I would estimate that during five years of any Parliament as we see earnings increase perhaps an additional 500,000 people would be swept into this disreputable proposal from the Labour Benches.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
Has my hon. Friend considered consulting people such as members of the Secondary Heads Association to see whether all the heads of comprehensive schoools in my constituency would relish the idea of paying an extra 9 per cent.
from their earnings, if the upper limit were removed?
While he is at it, he might consult about increased levels of taxation, because secondary heads will not like that.
Mr. Jack
I should be delighted if my hon. Friend's constituents would care to drop me a note with information on their individual salaries.
I could do a little costing exercise for them.
I am sure that they, like senior nurses, managers, middle managers and other experienced teachers, will all think carefully about what my hon. Friend the Member for Altrincham and Sale (Sir F. Montgomery) has said.
He has put before the House an illustration of how the Labour party wants to increase the cost of national insurance.
Even under the old Labour scheme somebody on £130 a week would pay £26 in national insurance — employers and employees contributions combined — whereas under the Conservative proposals somebody on the same earnings would pay only £19.24.
We will stick by our national insurance arrangements.
Pensioners (Savings)
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what is the average pensioner's income from savings.
Miss Widdecombe
The latest figure, for 1988, shows that the average pensioner's income from savings is £19.90 per week.
Mr. Bowis
Does my hon. Friend agree that many pensioners have built up savings throughout their lives, partly from income and, occasionally, from redundancy payments, and that it is rare that that income from savings is unearned?
Is she aware of the great unease among pensioners about the fact that an additional surcharge may be put on their fairly modest level of income from savings?
Will she confirm for those pensioners that their savings are safe with us?
Miss Widdecombe
Indeed, I would say that savings in general are safe with us.
Those who are most likely to be affected by the Labour party's proposals to surcharge savings are those who are just coming up to retirement.
They will want to save, but they will not enjoy the exemptions provided to pensioners.
They have reached the crucial point at which they can save because they have discharged other liabilities, but they will find such saving difficult.
On savings, the one thing that we do not want is a return to the Labour Government's policies of the 1970s.
We do not want to see pensioners' or anybody else's savings eroded by the inflation levels sustained by the then Labour Government.
It is worth noticing that since the Government came to power, pensioners' income from savings has risen by 8.6 per cent.
It would be a dim prospect for them if we returned to the policies of the Labour party.
THE ARTS
Arts Sponsorship
Mr. Burns
To ask the Minister for the Arts what steps he is taking to improve sponsorship of the arts.
35
Mr. Sims
To ask the Minister for the Arts if he will make a statement on the operation of the business sponsorship incentive scheme.
The Minister for the Arts (Mr. Tim Renton)
The business sponsorship incentive scheme has been a great success and I am giving further encouragement to sponsorship of the arts by increasing its budget by £1 million a year to £4.5 million.
From April this year, second-time sponsors will be matched by £1 of BSIS money to every £2 of extra sponsorship.
Businesses that have sponsored for more than three years will also be brought back into the scheme.
Mr. Burns
Does my right hon. Friend agree that although business sponsorship of the arts is extremely important and welcome, it would be just as beneficial for the arts, particularly local theatres such as the Civic theatre in Chelmsford, if we had a national lottery to which everyone could contribute to help to raise funds for the arts?
Can he confirm whether he will use his immense powers of persuasion to try to obtain a manifesto commitment to a national lottery?
Mr. Renton
I am grateful to my hon. Friend and to Chelmsford borough council for their regular support of the Civic theatre.
I agree with my hon. Friend about the usefulness of a national lottery.
I am glad that my hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department gave a warm welcome to the principle of a national lottery when he spoke in the House the other day.
I am sure that the revenue from such a lottery could, for example, be useful for the repair of existing theatres and in helping to commission new arts buildings in the years ahead.
Mr. Sims
I am disappointed that my right hon. Friend was not able to accept my invitation to attend the concert of the Royal Choral Society on a European theme at the Festival hall on 7 March, particularly as I hope to take part in it.
However, I understand his commitments.
Is he aware that that concert is possible only because it is being sponsored by St. Ivel with a matching grant from the Association for Business Sponsorship of the Arts — ABSA?
That is a good example of the continuing success of the scheme.
Mr. Renton
I am very sorry that I will not be able to attend the concert at which my hon. Friend will be singing.
He always sings in close harmony in the House, and I am sure that his voice will be harmonious on 7 March.
I am grateful for my hon. Friend's comments, because the significant fact about St. Ivel's sponsorship is that it is a perfect example of sponsorship working very well and of the use of the business sponsorship incentive scheme, which I just mentioned.
Mr. Robert Sheldon
I accept the valuable role played by the Minister, but does he accept that, although sponsorship is valuable, even more important is the fact that institutions such as the Royal Opera House cannot go much further in the sponsorship race and will require funding?
Will he now look at those matters seriously because, in the present recession, those institutions are in a grievous plight about which the Minister must do something?
Mr. Renton
I thank the right hon. Gentleman for recognising the value that I have put into the arts.
I appreciate his comment.
However, we have just had the third record increase in the amount of money that the Government have given to the Arts Council of Great Britain, which is directly responsible for passing on such moneys to the Royal Opera House, the Birmingham Royal Ballet and other companies.
The increase for the year that has just begun is 14 per cent.
— a further £27 million.
I am delighted that that has happened, because it shows the Government's firm commitment to the cause of the arts throughout the country.
Mr. Tony Banks
I believe that the Minister will soon come to the London borough of Newham on an official visit to hear about our arts policy.
I hope that that does not come as a total surprise to him, as it appears to.
His visit will give us an opportunity to show him the problems in getting sponsorship from businesses in an area like the east end of London.
The recession is one of the problems and the sheer absence of businesses is another.
Will the Minister therefore consider a way to equalise national sponsorship from business, so that areas with few opportunities can derive some of the benefits from areas with ample opportunities?
Mr. Renton
The reason why I consulted my brief was because I am to visit the Young Vic shortly and I was not certain whether the hon. Gentleman would appear on the stage or in the audience on that occasion.
He is a natural actor and I thought that he might have a part in the play.
May I remind him that the London Arts Board, which has just taken over from Greater London Arts, is settling down well to the work of funding arts associations throughout London.
It is extremely well led by Clive Priestley as chairman and Tim Mason as director.
I hope that the London borough grants scheme, which got into such a terrible muddle last year, will do much better this year in awarding available money to London boroughs.
British Library
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Minister for the Arts if he will meet the chairman of the British library to discuss resources.
Mr. Renton
I meet the chairman of the British library regularly.
Our discussions include the library's resources and other matters of interest ot the board.
Mr. Cohen
Will the Minister confirm that the British library's acquisitions budget has been cut by 41 per cent.
in real terms, resulting in thousands of scientific periodicals no longer being stocked?
Are not the Government bungling the building of the new British library, with expensive delays and omissions?
In particular, is not the lack of reading space a fiasco, with the new reading room providing only 7 per cent .
more space than the old one?
In those circumstances, is not Treasury pressure to sell off the spare land on the site a national disgrace?
My last point —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
One question please.
Mr. Renton
The acquisitions budget for 1992-93 will be £250,000.
The question of spare land is the subject of a study by the British Library Board into what the British library's needs will be after the new St. Pancras building has been opened in 1996 and how needs may be satisfied.
No land will be sold before 1994 and there is every intention of having a serious study before then.
I regret the hon. Gentleman's remarks about the British library, because it will be a great new building.
There are difficulties at present, particularly with regard to paintwork and shelves in the new basement, but, once complete, it will be one of the finest buildings built in this country this century.
Mr. Fisher
Will the Minister now answer my hon. Friend's excellent point about why the Government have cut the acquisitions budget of the British library by 41 per cent.
in real terms in the past four years?
If the British library is, as the Minister said, the greatest English language library in the world, why are the Government not providing acquisition money or adequate transitional money?
Why has the Minister deliberately blocked the money promised by his predecessor, the right hon. Member for Shoreham (Sir R. Luce), who promised in May 1990 that the Government would make money available for works of art for the opening of that new building?
The Government are neglecting what should be a great jewel in the British crown.
Mr. Renton
I understand why the hon. Gentleman may be frothing at the mouth at the thought that, after all the years that he has spent preparing as shadow arts Minister, were the Labour party to be elected — horror of horrors — it would not be him but Melvyn’ Time to Dance’Bragg who would be Labour's arts Minister.
That must be a disappointment.
There would be loud applause for the suggestion from Labour Back Benchers, but he has my sympathy.
We are giving grant in aid next year of £65.4 million to the British library —
Mr. Steen
A great deal of money.
Mr. Renton
As my hon. Friend says, it is a great deal of money.
How the British library decides its acquisitions budget, as distinct from other parts of its budget, is up to that organisation.
But it is receiving a large amount of money — in addition, it receives £61 million specifically for the new St. Pancras project.
Museums and Galleries (Improvements)
Mr. Steen
To ask the Minister for the Arts if he will report on the museums and galleries improvement scheme.
Mr. Renton
I am very pleased to announce that, thanks to the generosity of the Wolfson Foundation and family charitable trust, the museums and galleries improvement fund has been extended for a further two years to 1995-96.
It is already supporting more than 100 projects.
Mr. Steen
The whole House will want to congratulate the Minister on wresting the 14 per cent.
increase in the arts budget from the Treasury.
That will have a dramatic effect across the country as the money can be spent on all sorts of arts projects.
I hope that the Minister will ensure that the 14 per cent.
increase goes to arts projects — the museums and galleries improvement schemes and other proposals that his Department funds — and is not caught up in too much bureaucracy.
I am particularly interested in the project in Dartington.
Mr. Renton
I thank my hon. Friend; I know of his interest in Dartington hall and the Cookworthy museum in Kingsbridge.
I insisted that the large increase that I was able to give to the Arts Council of Great Britain be matched by a reduction in the administration costs between the council's headquarters and the regional arts boards.
That meant that last year £1 million was knocked off the total administration budget so that as much as possible of that handsome increase should go to the artists and performers, not just in metropolitan London but throughout the country.
CIVIL SERVICE
Executive Agencies
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service if he will make a statement on the’ next steps’programme.
The Minister of State, Privy Council Office (Mr. Tim Renton)
’ Next steps’is progressing well.
We plan to launch at least a dozen more agencies in April, when 50 per cent.
of the civil service will be working fully on’ next steps’lines.
Agencies are achieving targets and are at the forefront of delivering the better services called for by the Government's citizens charter.
Mr. Mitchell
Is it not absolutely clear that the’ next steps’agency approach of the 1980s proved extremely successful in improving accountability, promoting a better service to the public and giving agency employees greater job satisfaction?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, in the 1990s the citizens charter, particularly the charter mark, should continue and intensify those excellent developments?
Mr. Renton
Yes, I agree.
I certainly hope that every executive agency will apply for a charter mark, which will be seen as a clear reward to those in public service who provide customer satisfaction, which all too often in the past has been sadly missing.
That position has already changed with the executive agencies, and the improvement will be rewarded with the charter mark.
Mr. Flynn
Is the Minister aware of the increasing acts of violence and threats against Benefits Agency staff by claimants?
Is he aware that there has been at least one case in which, having seen a name badge, a claimant looked in the phone book and traced the Benefits Agency employee to his home.
Is it not about time to bring to a halt the silly idea which threatens the safety of Benefits Agency staff?
Mr. Renton
I am surprised to hear the hon. Gentleman say that.
I have been to the Benefits Agency in my constituency, where the manager and staff made it plain to me that if staff were concerned about their safety they would not wear a name badge — but most of them want to because they want to be able to be identified by the public, so that if someone rings up a week later he can identify the person to whom he spoke a week before.
I suggest that the hon. Gentleman talks more to the Benefits Agency in his constituency to persuade its members of the wisdom of adopting this course.
Public Appointments Unit
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service if he will make a statement on progress in increasing the number of women registered with the public appointments unit.
Mr. Renton
Yes, Sir.
The number of women registered has increased from 18 per cent.
of the total in 1986 to 33 per cent.
in 1992.
There are now clearly 2,000 women on our list.
I welcome this increase.
Mr. Coombs
I am sure that all hon. Members will welcome that increase, although there is clearly still a long way to go to reflect the fact that women constitute 51 per cent.
of the population.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, just as the number of women on the list has increased, it is also important to increase the number of women appointed to various positions in the public service?
Can he reassure the House that there is no risk of discrimination against women who possess excellent qualities when appointments are made to such positions?
Mr. Renton
Yes, I can certainly give my hon. Friend that assurance.
Of course it takes time for the increased number of women on the list to work through into actual appointments, but one of the purposes behind the Prime Minister's initiative was to see that they did work through into actual appointments.
Every Whitehall Department now has a nominated Minister who is specifically responsible for promoting equal opportunities in public appointments.
Mrs. Dunwoody
If the Minister cannot tell us how many women have been appointed, will he tell us a statistic that I am sure that he will know?
How many of the extra women on the list are card-carrying members of the Conservative party?
Mr. Renton
Unlike the Labour party and the Militant Tendency we tend not to have card-carrying women, but I can tell the hon. Lady, although I was not asked this question, that precisely 50 per cent.
of those appointed to public bodies as a result of public appointments unit nomination this year are women.
Sir John Stokes
Does my right hon. Friend agree, in the calmness of being on his own, that all this is just trendy nonsense?
What we want in the public service are the best people, irrespective of whether they are men or women.
Mr. Renton
I am sure that my hon. and gallant Friend, whom I have known for many years and for whom I have a great affection, would agree that about half the best people are women.
Unions (Morale and Recognition)
Mr. Fisher
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service when he last met representatives of civil service unions to discuss morale and recognition.
Mr. Renton
I meet civil service trade union representatives from time to time to discuss a variety of issues.
It is the job of managers in Departments and agencies to achieve our aim of having an efficient, effective and well-motivated civil service.
Mr. Fisher
When the Minister next meets the trade unions will he explain to them why the Government threatened not to recognise trade unions representing employees on Ministry of Defence property when those trade unions are affiliated to the Labour party?
Will he remove that slur on the loyalty and patriotism of those employees and give a categorical assurance that there is nothing incompatible about membership of the Labour party and membership of the trade unions in question?
Mr. Renton
Of course I give the hon. Gentleman that assurance.
He knows the answer very well: the instance that he has mentioned was a matter for the Ministry of Defence, which looked further into the matter and decided not to pursue it.
Dr. Marek
If that is so, will the Minister go a bit further?
The Universities Funding Council is resisting recognition of civil service unions.
Professor Graeme Davies, its chief executive, says that he does not want any unions in his building.
What can the Minister do about such’ ignorant and proud of it’behaviour?
Mr. Renton
The hon. Gentleman knows well that the UFC is not one of my responsibilities.
I am surprised by what he says; if he cares to write to me or to the Secretary of State for Education and Science I will certainly have the matter looked into.
Executive Agencies
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service what initiatives are being taken to introduce private sector practices into agencies.
Mr. Renton
The’ next steps’initiative is making use of the best and most appropriate management practices from all sectors, such as contracting out, recruitment of chief executives from the private sector, performance pay, publication of reports and accounts, customer surveys, trading funds, and financial flexibility to carry money between financial years.
Mr. Bowis
Does my right hon. Friend agree that most museums in the private sector have opening hours that suit the wishes of the public — the consumers and customers — whereas museums in the public sector tend to have opening hours that suit the wishes of the trade unions?
Will he see what he can do to persuade the public sector to follow the private sector's practice in this case?
Mr. Renton
I take my hon. Friend's point about the independent museums.
In defence of some of my clients in the national museums and galleries, I should point out that, for example, the Victoria and Albert museum has been able to extend its opening hours.
One of the reasons why it has been able to do so is its policy of charging for special exhibitions.
Therefore, I regret Labour's stated intention of abolishing all museums charges, because that would remove from museums the opportunity to be flexible about staying open later, to improve services and generally to meet the added requirements of the public.
Civil Servants
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service how many civil servants in employment at the latest date are (a) men or (b) women.
Mr. Renton
All of them.
Mr. Skinner
Will the Minister confirm that when the Property Services Agency is privatised, many men and women will lose their jobs?
Will he also condemn the scandalous proposal that when the PSA is privatised, up to £85 million of taxpayers' money should be handed over by the Government to Tarmac, which will take it over, so that any proposed redundancies of men and women in the PSA will be paid not by the privatising company but by the taxpayer?
Since that is nothing short of a swindle, should not the Minister stop it?
Mr. Renton
The hon. Gentleman's remarks about the privatisation of PSA are fanciful and ridiculous in the extreme.
Speaking of that, I wonder just what the hon. Gentleman had in mind when he tabled this question.
Even with his fancifulness, it is hard to imagine the civil service employing anyone who is not either a man or a woman.
House of Commons
Tuesday 4 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
DEFENCE
Low Flying
Mr. Kirkwood
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what recent representations he has received on low flying; and if he will make a statement.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence Procurement
(Mr. Kenneth Carlisle)
My Department has recently received a numbe of representations from hon. Members and the general public on matters relating to military low-flying training.
Mr. Kirkwood
May I add to those representations the ones that have been made to me locally by committees responsible for organising the summer common riding festivals in the central Borders and Scotland?
It does not take much imagination to understand the effect of a Tornado flying at 250 knots and at 250 ft, on a cavalcade of 200 horses on top of the Border hills.
Will the Minister consider increasing the current exclusion zones of 1 nautical mile to about 5 nautical miles in order to give those cavalcades some protection?
Mr. Carlisle
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving me notice of his question.
I have considered the point carefully.
As he knows, we are always ready to give an avoidance of 1 mile on each side of the tracks used by these riders.
The problem is that there are 75 ridings a year and to give a wider berth would concentrate our low flying over other parts of the countryside to the detriment of the inhabitants there.
We have had few complaints from those taking part in the ridings and nearly half the ridings take place at weekends when there is little low flying.
I do not believe that the case has been made for a change in our policy.
Mr. Quentin Davies
Do my right hon. and hon. Friends agree that if we are to have an effective Royal Air Force, it is essential that our pilots are given the best possible training, including training in operating at below the level of enemy radar?
Do my right hon. and hon. Friends agree that the magnificent and heroic performance of our pilots in the Gulf thoroughly vindicates the training programme that we have had up to now?
Will they accept that in Lincolnshire, where we have more RAF stations than any other part of the country, there is wide appreciation of those facts?
Mr. Carlisle
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for the realistic way in which he faces the problem.
In Lincolnshire we are proud of the role of the RAF and its life in our county.
It might be helpful to know that it is planned that low flying by jets will decline by about 30 per cent.
over the next three years.
In the worst-affected areas, such as the Lake District, the Borders and Wales, we are establishing community relations officers to provide a closer link with local people.
Trident
Mr. Salmond
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the progress of the Trident programme.
3
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence when he now expects to place the order for the fourth Trident submarine.
The Secretary of State for Defence (Mr. Tom King)
The Trident programme continues on time towards its in-service date at an estimated final cost of £10,518 million.
This marks a further small reduction against last year's estimate and an overall real reduction of £3 billion against the original 1982 forecast.
We plan to place the order for the fourth Trident submarine with VSEL at Barrow as soon as contract negotiations have been satisfactorily completed.
Mr. Salmond
Does the Secretary of State accept that the debate on Trident in Scotland is not on whether we should have three or four boats or on the number of warheads per missile but on whether we should proceed with expenditure which, over its lifetime, could amount to £23,000 million on a useless, dangerous military white elephant?
Does the Secretary of State accept that there has not been, is not and will not be a majority in Scotland for the Trident missile system and that, ultimately, its deployment will depend on the consent not of the Westminster Parliament but of the Scottish people, and it will not be forthcoming?
Mr. King
I have not met many Scottish people who wish to be left exposed to the nuclear blackmail that could come from the huge nuclear arsenal which will remain for many years on the continent and in Russia.
The Scottish people whom I meet who work in the shipyards at Yarrow take pride in building ships for the Royal Navy whose orders would presumably be lost to them if they had the pleasure of being represented by an SNP policy.
I do not think that the 23,000 people presently involved in the Trident programme think that their efforts are wasted.
They are proud of their contribution to the essential safeguarding of our country.
Mr. Arnold
What does the Secretary of State believe to be the Russian assessment of our Trident programme and, indeed, their assessment of British public opinion on the subject?
Mr. King
The whole world had the opportunity of hearing on television what President Yeltsin thought.
He said that the number of nuclear weapons at the disposal of the United Kingdom was not comparable with theirs and that, therefore, the matter was not worth discussion.
The Opposition have complained for years that our determination to maintain an essential minimum safeguard for our country with a nuclear deterrent was somehow an obstacle to the necessary task of reducing the overblown nuclear arsenals of the super-powers, but President Yeltsin dealt with their arguments in one wholly destructive answer.
Mr. Home Robertson
Will the Secretary of State confirm that fully two thirds of the costs of Trident have already been spent or contractually committed by the present Government?
Will he further confirm that the consequences of the Scottish National party's policies would be to deprive many hundreds of people of their employment at Rosyth and on the Clyde while still leaving Scotland at risk from the consequences of a nuclear attack on Barrow or on the north of England?
We would have all the risk but none of the advantages.
Mr. King
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's support which I take to be absolutely unequivocal support for the Trident programme.
I wish I thought that his colleagues were beginning to share that idea — perhaps we have an alliance here.
Not all the expenditure is committed.
The hon. Gentleman and his colleagues can save money if they do not believe in the nuclear deterrent, and it is high time that they told the country what their priorities are.
Mr. Franks
The Secretary of State will be aware of the further 600 redundancies announced yesterday in the shipyards in Barrow which will bring to 4,500 the number of jobs lost since’ Options for Change’was announced about 18 months ago.
Will he therefore take this opportunity to emphasise the employment aspect as well as the strategic importance of the fourth submarine?
Will he also note the observations of Barrow Labour party which has described the Opposition's promise to give work equivalent to that involved in a fourth submarine as ignorant and ill-informed?
Mr. King
Clearly, I heard with disappointment the announcement made by VSEL yesterday.
I note that 10,400 are presently employed.
It is a disappointment that there are to be 600 redundancies, but there is a continuing significant level of employment in defence at Barrow which is dependent on it and which has been sustained by the Government's commitment to a strong defence.
I weep for Barrow's prospects were there conceivably any change in Government, because the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) has said that the Opposition would replace a cancelled fourth boat with equivalent work only to be denounced by his own candidate in Barrow who used the words’ ignorant and ill-informed’.
Mr. O'Neill
Will the Secretary of State explain to the House the confusion that arose yesterday following the Prime Minister's statement on the United Nations meeting?
The confusion arose between the subsequent press briefings given by the hon. and learned Member for Grantham (Mr. Hogg), the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, and the Prime Minister's statements about what were likely to be the maximum number of warheads on the Trident programme.
Although I recognise that for obvious reasons the Secretary of State will not want to be locked or painted into a figure of 512 as the maximum, which is what it would be, will he tell the House whether, in the light of last week's discussions with President Yeltsin and the changes that have taken place since Christmas, the Government are now considering the minimum deterrent to be somewhat lower than they had previously considered it necessary to be?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman knows the situation perfectly well.
We have never gone beyond the statement that we will have a maximum of 128 warheads per submarine.
That is our position and that is where we remain.
We have also made it absolutely clear that we will ensure that our deterrent is effective and absolutely credible, and that it puts real fear into any potential aggressor about the damage that he could suffer if he were to attack this country.
That is our position and we have made it absolutely clear that we will do that within the terms of operating a minimum deterrent, which is obviously the sensible way to go.
The hon. Gentleman seems to be totally ignorant of and unable to adjust to President Yeltsin's announcement in which he made it absolutely clear that our determination to maintain a minimum deterrent is no obstruction to the determination that he and President Bush have to reduce the nuclear arsenals of the super-powers.
Defence Expenditure
Mr. Paice
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what estimates he has made of the effect on the reactive capability of United Kingdom defence industries of a reduction in defence expenditure to the Western European Union average.
The Minister of State for Defence Procurement (Mr. Alan Clark)
We have no intention of reducing defence expenditure to the WEU average; we have made no estimate of the implications of such a reduction.
Mr. Paice
I thank my right hon. Friend.
Does he agree that in this very uncertain world, if such a reduction were to take place, it would seriously jeopardise this country's ability to defend itself?
That policy would destroy hundreds of thousands of jobs in defence industries, including many in my constituency, yet it has been endorsed on no fewer than three occasions by large majorities at the Labour party conference.
Mr. Clark
Yes, that is right.
That policy has been endorsed by majorities of more than 2 million pounds —— members on each occasion.
It is especially interesting that, leaving aside the damage that such a policy would do to the services by wiping out 10 frigates, four submarines and four squadrons of Tornados, there has never been a suggestion in any of the texts that money would be returned to the taxpayer.
In every resolution, there has been a reference to making the money available for other’ social and economic priorities’, thus confirming that the Labour party is the party of high taxation.
Labour regards reducing taxes and defending ourselves as equally sinful.
Interruption
Mr. Rogers
It is a bit hypocritical both for the questioner and for the Minister, who is a representative of the Government of unemployment, to criticise potential job losses under a Labour Government.
The Secretary of State has presided over the loss of hundreds of thousands of jobs in the defence industry in recent years.
Since June 1990
Hon. Members
Question!
Mr. Rogers
Since June 1990, 74,000 jobs have been lost in the defence industry.
Since the Prime Minister came to power, 1,000 jobs have been lost each month.
Some 4,500 jobs have been lost in Barrow.
What a bunch of hypocritical mealy-mouthed people!
When will the Minister stop the cuts in the defence industry or at least set up a defence diversification agency to help people such as those in Barrow who will be put out of work?
Mr. Clark
It is always interesting to note that the moment one reminds Labour Members of their party's commitment to high taxation, they lose control of the argument completely and deliver tirades along the lines of that to which the hon. Gentleman has just subjected the House.
We regret very much the fact that there have been job losses in the defence industry — of course— and the figure is 25,000 — If the hon. Gentleman will not even listen to the reply to his argument it is his loss.
The total losses have been of the order of 25,000, but the fact remains that there are still more than 140,000 people directly involved in the defence industry and more than 120,000 indirectly involved.
Every one of those workers knows exactly what his likely fate will be should the Labour party ever return to power.
Interruption
Mr. Wilkinson
Is not it a strong strategic interest of the United Kingdom to maintain an effective and comprehensive defence industrial base, in case international circumstances change?
In that regard, does my right hon. Friend support the WEU proposal of a European surveillance satellite system to engender confidence and ensure that arms control measures are adhered to?
Mr. Clark
It will be increasingly important to ensure that all surveillance is comprehensive and very widely directed.
In no sector is that more important than in the field of nuclear proliferation.
All countries that are committed to non-proliferation and all the signatories to the treaty must be prepared both for greater resources to go into the inspection process and to submit to greater surveillance.
Nuclear Weapons
Mrs. Fyfe
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what steps he is taking to encourage non-proliferation of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Tom King
The greatest immediate risk of proliferation follows the disintegration of the Soviet Union with its massive nuclear stockpile and large number of nuclear scientists.
We are actively involved in discussion with all the former Soviet republics where nuclear weapons are at present located — particularly with Russia.
We are also giving full support to the implementation of United Nations Security Council resolution 687, for the elimination of the Iraqi nuclear weapons programme.
Mrs. Fyfe
I thank the Secretary of State for that answer.
Does he want the British public to realise that 128 warheads per submarine equals 512 warheads for four submarines, and that that equates to 2, 560 Hiroshimas?
Even if he seeks to deploy fewer warheads per boat than the maximum possible, why should not other countries follow his example and say that that is also their ideal of a minimum deterrent?
Does non-proliferation apply to everyone else but not to us?
Mr. King
The hon. Lady seems quite unaware of the fact that, not long ago, I announced from the Dispatch Box what is effectively a halving of our sub-strategic nuclear weapons.
NATO will now restrict itself to only one nuclear system, as opposed to the Soviet Union — or Russia now — with three, and we in NATO can point to the fact that we will soon have about one tenth the number of nuclear warheads that we had 10 years ago.
I hope that the hon. Lady will recognise the changes that have taken place.
I remind her that, following President Yeltsin's recent visit and the welcome changes in connection with what is a hugely large arsenal of nuclear weapons, the top priority of proliferation at present is to ensure that we take action in the ways that I described in my answer.
The fact that the hon. Lady rose with a prepared supplementary, ignoring the significance of the massive problems of the time, does her little credit.
Mr. Nicholls
Does my right hon. Friend agree that even if one ignores what is happening in the former USSR, there are other countries in the world that are potential aggressors and which either have nuclear capacity or may be near to acquiring it?
Would not it be the height of folly to give away our own independent nuclear deterrent while any potential aggressor has the ability to strike at us?
Mr. King
I entirely agree.
I was asked about proliferation.
We have to face the fact that there is a bigger risk of nuclear proliferation at present than the world has ever known.
As a result, while the right approach is to take the most positive steps that we can to help to deal with that problem, we have a duty to our own people also to ensure that we maintain that elementary, basic, minimum safeguard of our own nuclear deterrent.
Anybody who dreamt of surrendering that basic safeguard at this time would be doing the gravest disservice to current and possibly to future generations in Britain.
Mr. O'Neill
May I welcome the attempts that the Government are making, in conjunction with the Russians and the Confederation of Independent States, to reduce and dismantle the nuclear weapons arsenals?
That is a most welcome and urgent step.
In the current discussions about the size of the nuclear arsenal, is the Secretary of State still committed to bringing on stream another replacement for the WE177 free-fall bomb?
Although that may not be against a literal interpretation of the wording of the nuclear non-proliferation treaty, would not such a move be a gross affront to the potential proliferators who are reconsidering the need to indulge in the acquisition of nuclear weapons?
Would it not be better for the country and for the nuclear proliferation process for the Government to abandon their next generation of air-launched cruise missiles?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman's supplementary question ignored the fact that we are talking about NATO policy.
In fact, we are talking about a proposed change in NATO policy, that is what matters — not about a unilateral decision by the Government — which was agreed at the London NATO summit.
We are considering the options at the moment, and I have nothing to add to that.
Mr. Dickens
Will my right hon. Friend please confirm that it is absolutely necessary for us to have a minimum deterrent so that the people of the United Kingdom are safe?
In terms of that deterrent, is it not right that when a submarine is cruising anywhere in the world's oceans, any potential aggressor who attacks the United Kingdom will stand the risk of unacceptable and devastating retaliation from us?
Mr. King
I am grateful to my hon. Friend; that is precisely the point.
Indeed, that is precisely the point which was so clearly recognised by President Yeltsin.
We have criticised the building-up of such a huge nuclear arsenal, but my hon. Friend may have noticed that President Yeltsin is talking of reducing the number of warheads to 2,500, which he regards as reducing to a deterrent.
We believe that it is right to have a minimum deterrent so that no potential aggressor can think that this country could be attacked and that they could be unaffected by any retaliation.
Ex-Service Personnel (Housing)
Mr. Bill Michie
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what plans he has to consult local authorities on housing requirements for ex-service personnel.
The Minister of State for the Armed Forces (Mr. Archie Hamilton)
In consultation with the Department of the Environment and the Scottish Office, which are represented on MOD's housing task force, my Department has recently been in contact with all local authorities, seeking information on their arrangements for the provision of housing for ex-service personnel.
Mr. Michie
The Minister has said that his Department has contacted the local authorities, but when will the Government accept that the local authorities have the strategy and the enabling powers to make provision for housing, especially for the homeless and perhaps for some of the 40,000 personnel who will be leaving the armed forces in the near future?
Why is the task force in consultation with the Housing Corporation but refusing to consult the local authorities which have that power?
Is it not a fact that the Government still have such a bigoted bias against local authorities that they will even put at risk the future housing of our ex-service families?
Mr. Hamilton
Let me first put the hon. Gentleman right about the figure of 40,000 — 40,000 is the number that we have put on the reduction of personnel in the Army, but much of that reduction will be achieved by natural wastage.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that about 30,000 people leave the armed forces every year anyway.
We are expecting in excess of 10,000 redundancies, which will be spread over three years.
We must put those numbers in perspective.
On the housing task force, we feel that the representatives of the Department of the Environment are well aware of the position of the local authorities in relation to housing.
Their representations have been valuable.
In addition, Lady Anson, the chairman of the Association of District Councils, has been in touch with my noble Friend the Under-Secretary of State for the Armed Forces.
Sir Giles Shaw
Does my right hon. Friend accept that his contact with the Housing Corporation must be the best way forward and can be usefully developed?
Will he further accept that service men are looking for the opportunity to obtain a rung on the ownership ladder and that the Housing Corporation and its satellite housing associations can most assuredly provide that?
Is my right hon. Friend confident that nationwide assistance will be available to enable those excellent people to be rehabilitated in our community?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes.
We are in touch on that.
The question arises whether some of our married quarters may be sold to housing associations who will give priority to service men.
Many different options are being considered.
My hon. Friend might be interested to know that we sent out a questionnaire to 5,293 people who volunteered for redundancy and 76 per cent.
of them returned it.
Of those people who had volunteered for redundancy, 49 per cent.
already owned their own homes and another 34 per cent.
intended to buy.
Therefore, the majority of those who are to be made redundant will either have their own homes or will buy them shortly after.
Mr. Cartwright
When the Minister next talks to the local authorities about this issue, will he point out that many of them no longer give rehousing priority to ex-service personnel, but expect them to go through the normal homeless families procedures?
Does he agree that that is a pretty poor way in which to treat people who have given their lives to the service of their country?
Mr. Hamilton
I absolutely accept everything that the hon. Gentleman says.
One of our concerns is that our ex-service men should not be in temporary accommodation.
That is why we are considering the use of our married quarters to ensure that that does not happen.
Sir Peter Emery
Will my right hon. Friend consider further the approach that I have made to the Secretary of State that vacant married quarters in civilian areas around army camps should be co-ordinated into my right hon. Friend's scheme?
If they are to remain empty at any particular time short-held leases could be used so that the barracks could be used for local housing rather than stay vacant.
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, this has always been a problem, but it has become worse recently, I am afraid, because of the people who have been made redundant and who have come back from Germany.
The stocks of empty houses may be larger at this time.
I take that point and we are keeping in close contact with local authorities.
Mr. Boyes
Does the Minister accept that there is a real need and opportunity for bold and radical measures?
Local housing authorities have been starved of cash for a number of years by the Government.
However, local authorities and the Ministry of Defence have empty sub-standard housing on their books.
Will the Minister release MOD votes to allow local authorities, in collaboration with the MOD, to bring empty housing owned by the local authorities and the MOD up to acceptable standards and then transfer it to local authority control for the express purpose of providing homes to ex-service personnel?
Or will this Government's ideological opposition to council housing prevent them from doing that?
Mr. Hamilton
Most of what is being done by my Department
Hon. Members: Reading.
Mr. Hamilton
It is a blank piece of paper.
Most of that work is carried out in conjunction with housing asociations and is financed by the Housing Corporation.
On the whole, we would prefer to dispose of blocks of married quarters to housing associations rather than to local authorities.
We do not exclude that possibility, but we find that when we talk to local authorities that they do not have the money to buy married quarters in the first place.
’ Options for Change’
Dr. Goodson-Wickes
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what further consultations he has had regarding’ Options for Change’, in the light of the disintegration of the Soviet Union.
Mr. Tom King
We have set out our plans in’ Britain's Defence for the 90s’and we are proceeding to implement those over the next four years.
I do not propose future reductions in the light of the disintegration of the Soviet Union, and given the continuing instability in Europe and elsewhere.
Dr. Goodson-Wickes
Can my right hon. Friend assure the House, nevertheless, that the validity of the arguments behind’ Options for Change’will be kept under constant review, not least because of the disintegration of the Warsaw pact, followed by the emergence of new power structures within the Soviet Union?
Mr. King
I appreciate that concern.
One of the bases that underpinned’ Options for Change’was the disintegration of the Warsaw pact, the establishment of independence in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland and other former allies, the reunification of Germany and the disappearance of East Germany.
We did not anticipate the rapid disintegration of the Soviet Union.
There are some who advocate that, now that that has happened, the world is somehow a safer place.
We do not believe that that is correct.
We believe that the world is passing through a period of considerable instability and therefore we do not propose further reductions in our defence forces.
Sir Patrick Duffy
In any further consideration of’ Options for Change’will the Minister take into account lessons from the Gulf war such as heavy lift, better intelligence especially on targeting, mine counter-measures, which may have inhibited an amphibious operation, and, above all, fire from friendly forces, which underlines the need for the IFF — identification, friend or foe — system which has so far eluded NATO?
Mr. King
I am glad to confirm that these lessons have been learnt from our consideration of the Gulf conflict.
They have been discussed by both NATO and the Western European Union.
Heavy lift and enhanced intelligence capability are two very specific matters that have been considered in those forums.
Defence Contracts (Devon)
Mr. Speller
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will visit factories in north Devon which have been involved in defence contracts and seek to maintain this link.
Mr. Alan Clark
I should be very happy to do so.
Mr. Speller
I thank my right hon. Friend for his brisk but satisfactory reply.
Will he please bear in mind the fact that it is essential that, where possible, we buy from British manufacturers across the country?
May I commend to him a visit to north Devon and ask him to remember Coutant's of Ilfracombe and firms like High Temperature of South Molton, Hobart's, CQC and others?
It is important that we retain these excellent companies even if some of the swords become ploughshares.
Mr. Clark
My hon. Friend makes a very good point.
All the firms that he has mentioned contribute to the employment of the 130,000 people who are directly concerned with the defence industry.
He did not mention Cray Marine, a firm in his constituency that provides the Torpedo-handling system for the type 23s.
That firm will have welcomed the recent announcement of an order for a further three of these ships.
Mr. Ashdown
When the Minister visits north Devon will he consider the matter of British equipment and pay a visit to RAF Chivenor, which is waiting for the SAR Westland helicopters that have been on order for two years?
The Minister promised that this order would be taken care of shortly after the new year.
Surely that time has arrived.
The Minister should remember that Westland will hold its annual general meeting on 13 February.
An order announced now would not only fulfil the SAR requirements but also be very welcome to Westland.
Mr. Clark
I am glad to confirm that an announcement about this order will be made shortly.
Important though the right hon. Gentleman is, he is not yet in a position to issue invitations to visit Royal Air Force stations.
Dame Janet Fookes
If my right hon. Friend is going on a tour I hope that he will not forget our mutual home territory on Plymouth, which is very anxious indeed to maintain close links with the armed services.
It has provided excellent service in the past, and wishes to do so in the future.
Mr. Clark
I visit Plymouth every weekend.
Plutonium
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if there are currently any contracts with the Atomic Energy Authority for research into the fabrication of weapons components using plutonium; and whether any such work has been carried out at Harwell.
Mr. Kenneth Carlisle
There are no contracts with the AEA for research into the fabrication of weapons components using plutonium.
We do place contracts with AEA, which exploits its expertise in a range of matters, including plutonium handling.
Mr. Skinner
Why is it that £40 million is being spent on the 220 building at Harwell?
Does this have something to do with the transfer of work on Trident warheads from Aldermaston, which is not big enough?
Is not the cry of every potential bomb-making third-world country that its nuclear work is entirely civil, even though it is, in fact, for defence purposes?
It is time Britain gave a lead by stopping its nuclear proliferation.
Mr. Carlisle
The hon. Gentleman excites himself without cause.
Most of the work that is done at Harwell is for the civilian sector.
Indeed, the refurbishment of the 220 building results from AEA's commercial considerations and is not necessitated by Ministry of Defence contracts.
The answer to the hon. Gentleman's question about the Ministry is the one that I have just given.
Far more interesting is whether the hon. Gentleman and his Back-Bench colleagues support Labour's new nuclear defence policy — so far as anyone can understand it.
Mr. Marlow
My hon. Friend will be aware of reports coming out of Russia of grave concern about the maintenance and decommissioning of the vast ex-Soviet nuclear stockpile.
Is it possible for us to provide facilities, skills and help from the Atomic Energy Authority to help them with that difficult problem?
Mr. Carlisle
My hon. Friend raises a very important point.
Safety is always paramount to us in those matters and we are in discussion with them to see how best we can help.
Territorial Army
Mr. Wallace
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what representations he has received about the future strength of the Territorial Army in Scotland.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
A number of representations have been received.
Mr. Wallace
Can the Minister confirm that they included representations to ensure that any rundown in the Territorial Army in Scotland will not mean there being insufficient units in Scotland, to the point at which the TA will lose the goodwill of the scattered communities, particularly in the highlands and islands, in terms of recruitment?
Did he also receive representations about 15 Parachute regiment to the effect that it should be allowed to continue at its five locations in Scotland?
Will he take this opportunity to confirm that sufficient resources will be made available to ensure that full establishment is maintained at each of those locations for men and resources, for training and administration?
Mr. Hamilton
I am always fascinated to hear Liberals going on about resources being made available for defence, when they are committed to cutting them by 50 per cent.
by the end of the century.
I am never sure how their inquiries fit in with that commitment.
The reduction in Scotland will be 13 per cent.
compared with a United Kingdom average of 17 per cent.
So Scotland is being treated well under the measures.
The geographical spread will be very much a question of how the highland and lowland TAVRAs — the Territorial Army volunteer reserve associations — decide to allocate their resources.
My hon. Friend has made it clear that no willing volunteer will be turned away and that anybody who wants to continue to serve with the TA will be able to do so, maybe not with the unit in which he is now serving, but with another unit.
Mr. Bill Walker
Does my right hon. Friend agree that Scotland's contribution to the armed forces, including the TA, far exceeds its proportion of less than 9 per cent.
of the United Kingdom population?
That has been recognised by the Government.
That is why Scots who are interested in military and other matters will always be best served by a Conservative Government.
Mr. Hamilton
That is absolutely right.
It is amazing what we hear from Opposition Members, when they intend to cut defence expenditure.
The effect that that would have on Scottish defence would be devastating in terms of procurement and the employment of people in the armed forces.
Dr. Reid
Is it not a fact that on 3 July last year the Minister of State told my hon. Friend the Member for East Lothian (Mr. Home Robertson) that the recruitment figures for individual battalions in Scotland would not be released on the ground of security, yet when it suited the Secretary of State's purpose, he was prepared to release figures showing 67 per cent.
recruitment to 15 Parachute regiment?
Can he therefore confirm that either the Secretary of State has breached the security rules or that the excuse of national security has been used merely to cover the fact that the Government made the decisions on political rather than on military grounds?
Is that not why there is so much concern in Scotland among supporters of the regiment?
Is he aware that there will be a wide welcome for my assurance that an incoming Labour Government will review each and every one of these decisions to ensure that the size and structure of the regiments in Scotland and throughout the United Kingdom reflect our military needs, and not the political expediency of the Tory party?
Mr. Hamilton
If the hon. Gentleman is suggesting that a review of defence by an incoming Labour Government, should we happen to have such an Administration, would mean more money being spent on defence, I am a Dutchman.
Defence Hot-lines
Dr. Michael Clark
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what offer of assistance he has given to the member states of the former Soviet Union to assist in establishing defence hot-lines.
Mr. Tom King
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister agreed with President Yeltsin in London last week that a secure direct telephone link between No. 10 and the Kremlin should be established.
I also discussed with Marshal Shaposhnikov the ways in which we could establish clearer links between us and our staffs.
I hope to make a further announcement about that very shortly.
Dr. Clark
Does my right hon. Friend accept that unambiguous communication is just as important now as it was during the cold war, and perhaps even more important?
Will he also accept that the newly independent states of the former Soviet Union may from time to time have some apprehension, and that there may be need to give them reassurance?
Mr. King
That is precisely why my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary visited each of the nuclear republics of the former Soviet Union.
With regard to the need for direct and close contact, I do not think that we could have had a clearer example of that than the visit of President Yeltsin and the very straight talking between my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and the president.
In one very short and clear comment, President Yeltsin demolised all the arguments of the Labour party that somehow our deterrent is an obstacle to the reduction of the nuclear arms of the super-powers.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Sir George Gardiner
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Sir George Gardiner
Does my right hon. Friend agree that to suggest that there is one kind of school that can cater for the needs of all kinds of pupils is an example of the naive theorising that has caused so many problems in education, which we are seeking to address today?
Will he continue to press for diversity in education through grant-maintained schools, through city technology colleges and through local management of schools responsive to parents' wishes?
The Prime Minister
I agree with the premise underlying my hon. Friend's question.
We will certainly continue to encourage diversity through grant-maintained schools, CTCs and locally managed schools, all of which give greater opportunity and choice to parents and pupils.
We will continue to offer that choice.
Mr. Kinnock
At the time when the Prime Minister said that if his policies’ were not hurting, they were not working,’did he realise that those policies would cause the longest recession since the 1930s?
The Prime Minister
We have taken action to ensure that we come out of this recession in a way that will ensure sustained recovery.
As the Governor of the Bank of England said only yesterday,’ the conditions are now in place to underpin a sustained recovery.’
Mr. Kinnock
Having caused the longest recession since the 1930s, does the Prime Minister agree with the words of his right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer, who said last month:’ the policy would not have been different even if we had known the outcome.’?
The Prime Minister
Caused the recession?— Did we cause it in the United States, in Sweden, in Japan, in Australia, in New Zealand?
If the right hon. Gentleman believes all that, he is certainly not capable of leading his party, let alone this country.
Mr. Kinnock
There is no question of doubt that this Government caused the recession in this country.
Since the Prime Minister made the statement that I quoted, nearly 1 million jobs have been lost, there have been over 100,000 repossessions and 80,000 businesses have been lost, in those two years.
This Government caused the recession, they continued the recession, and now they have not got a clue how to get out of the recession.
The Prime Minister
What the right hon. Gentleman has to say —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The Prime Minister
What the right hon. Gentleman has to say is economic illiteracy.
If the right hon. Gentleman is genuinely concerned about recovery, what does he think that higher taxes would do to it?
What does he think that his jobs tax would do to it?
What does he think that his investment tax would do to it?
What does he think that his minimum wage would do to it?
The policies which the right hon. Gentleman pursues would mean perpetual recession for this country.
—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Will hon. Members please settle down?
Chancellor Kohl
Mr. Hunter
To ask the Prime Minister when he will next meet the Chancellor of Germany; and what issues he intends to discuss with him.
The Prime Minister
Chancellor Kohl and I are in frequent contact by telephone to discuss matters of mutual interest.
I expect to meet him again soon, but I have no immediate plans to do so.
Mr. Hunter
Has my right hon. Friend noticed the extent to which the German economy has suffered from the worldwide slowdown and the fact that German output has decreased during the past two months for which figures are available?
Does not that conclusively show that economic difficulties are not confined to the United Kingdom, as the Opposition try to claim?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend's question is more apposite than he might have imagined.
He is entirely right.
I have noticed that fact, even if the Opposition have not.
Again, the Governor of the Bank of England noted yesterday that the recession has proved unexpectedly persistent in north America and that in continental Europe, Japan and elsewhere economic activity has slowed and unemployment has begun to rise.
Only the Opposition adopt their typical stance.
They ignore other countries' difficulties and concentrate solely on those in this country, to the damage of our interests.
Mr. Radice
After the two opt-outs negotiated by the Prime Minister at Maastricht, does Chancellor Kohl still think that the Prime Minister is a good European?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman had better ask Chancellor Kohl that question.
I have enjoyed the closest possible co-operation with Chancellor Kohl in the past year and I intend to continue to do so in the same capacity in years to come.
Engagements
Mr. Lee
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Lee
The massive growth at Manchester airport since the Government have come to power — a 1,100 per cent.
increase in fixed assets — has given a tremendous boost to the economy and pride of the north-west.
Indeed, the north-south divide has now ceased to exist as an issue.
When my right hon. Friend next has a free Saturday, will he fly up to Manchester, look at what has been achieved by the airport, and then pop over to Old Trafford to watch a first-class football side in action?
It will win the first division championship, just as my right hon. Friend will certainly win the next general election.
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend will forgive me if I do not respond to one part of his question.
Manchester airport, however, is a success story.
It has benefited especially from the growth in the liberalisation of air services and, as a result, three times as many passengers now use the airport as when the Government came to office.
That is a direct result of liberalisation introduced by the Government.
The concept of a north-south divide was always too simplistic and sweeping.
Many areas of prosperity and some of difficulty exist in each and every part of this country —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us have less barracking.
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Cohen
Is the Prime Minister aware that, in my constituency of Leyton, unemployment has risen by 84 per cent.
in the past 18 months?
As last night the Governor of the Bank of England backtracked over the duration of the slump, will the Prime Minister now institute an urgent programme of recovery?
Failing that, will he explain to my unemployed constituents why the Government consider them a’ price worth paying’?
The Prime Minister
Clearly, the hon. Gentleman was not listening a few moments ago when I quoted directly the Governor of the Bank of England saying that the conditions necessary to underpin a sustained recovery are now in place.
Mr. Allason
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that a review is to be undertaken of the use by the security and intelligence agencies of informants and other sources?
When he receives that final report, will he bear in mind the fact that the security intelligence agencies rely on the use of informants, and the intelligence that they receive will never be any good unless a measure of protection can be granted to those sources?
The Prime Minister
We do, of course, constantly keep these matters under review and I believe that it is important that we continue to do so.
Mr. Winnick
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Winnick
Is the Prime Minister proud of the fact that since the Government came into office in 1979 nearly 2.5 million full-time jobs in manufacturing have been lost, 34 jobs for every hour this wretched Government have been in office?
In view of the devastation, the unemployment and the misery caused to our people, is it any wonder that the Prime Minister is so reluctant to hold the general election?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is joining the Opposition trend of seeking to talk down what manufacturing and other industries are doing.
He should remember that export volumes of manufactured goods grew faster than in the United States throughout the 1980s, that manufacturing grew faster than in France or Italy during the 1980s, and that Britain exports a larger proportion of its national product than Japan, a point recognised by even the Scottish National party.
Mrs. Peacock
Will my right hon. Friend join me in sending congratulations to a Yorkshire manufacturing company, Spring Ram plc, which at the end of the month will open two new factories in my constituency, creating 400 new jobs, which is at present building two new factories in Barnsley which will create 400 new jobs, and which has a plan to create 1,100 new jobs in Bradford over the next four years?
The Prime Minister
I am delighted to send my congratulations to my hon. Friend's constituents.
There are, of course, many other companies up and down the country which are similarly investing and growing, and laying the foundation for prosperity in the 1990s.
Mr. Carr
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Carr
Can the Prime Minister tell the House how he squares his vision of a classless Britain with the experience of a constituent of mine from Fulwood, who was told last May that she needed a hip replacement but that she would have to wait 14 months for the operation under the national health service, and who was told that she could have had the operation immediately had she been able to cough up £4,300?
The Prime Minister
There were no hip replacements available just a few years ago.
It is now a relatively routine operation available in the national health service.
Hip replacements are becoming more widely available month after month.
That is the direction in which we must go to provide the best health service, the best opportunities and the best element of the classless society that I have talked about.
Mr. Norris
Does not my right hon. Friend agree that the last thing that business needs is for business rates to be brought back under the control of uncapped, loony Labour authorities who will send rates sky rocketing, as they did during the early 1980s?
Will he give the House a pledge that such a crazy proposal will never be included in a manifesto issued by the Conservative party?
The Prime Minister
I can give my hon. Friend that undertaking.
It is well known to every hon. Member that under the old system, councils could put up rates by more than the rate of inflation.
They did and, among other evils, they forced many jobs out of inner city areas by doing so.
Those who doubt that might remember the rate rise of Labour-controlled Ealing council of 57 per cent.
in 1987.
They might also recollect the wriggling of the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) on television the other day on precisely that problem.
It would be a problem, he said.
It would be a problem not just for the Labour party but for business men up and down the country.
Mr. Andrew Welsh
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Welsh
Since the Government have supported independence in Russia, Lithuania and other parts of the world, when the people of Scotland democratically and peacefully vote for independence, what will the Government say to them?
The Prime Minister
This Union has served both Scotland and England well, and I would not wish to see it undermined.
The proposals of the Labour party, the Liberal Democratic party and the Scottish National party would undermine that relationship that has served us so well in the Union.
Devolution is not just a matter for Scotland; it is a matter for the whole United Kingdom.
If an Assembly were given tax-raising powers, how would that fit in with the other fiscal arrangements?
What would the increased taxation do to prosperity in Scotland?
The hon. Gentleman should put a fair proposal before the Scottish people, not the half-baked one that he has made.
Mr. Gregory
Will my right hon. Friend —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman has not yet asked a question of the Prime Minister.
Mr. Gregory
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the Government will continue as the party of denationalisation, and confirm to the electorate of York that the Conservative party will not take away the shares of those who have invested in Northern Electric, British Telecom and other such denationalised companies?
The Prime Minister
I can give that assurance to my hon. Friend.
The denationalisation programme has been good not only for the consumer, but for share owning and the improvement of both investment and wealth in this country.
We believe in those propositions and we shall continue to support them.
Mr. Ieuan Wyn Jones
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 4 January.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Jones
I am sure that the Prime Minister will have enjoyed reading the Western Mail last Saturday, where he will have seen the results of a telephone survey showing that the people of Wales now support the setting up of a Welsh Parliament by a margin of four to one.
When will the Prime Minister acknowledge that the aspirations of the Welsh and Scottish people cannot be sidelined for ever, and when will Parliament act?
The Prime Minister
I seem to recall that there was a referendum once before on devolution in Wales when there appeared to be a majority in favour.
But the reality was that the referendum showed that there was no majority, and the people of Wales recognised that it would be in the best interests of their country and the United Kingdom to sustain the present arrangements.
Security Forces
Mr. Kevin McNamara (Kingston upon Hull, North)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker, on matters appertaining to the rule of law, the primacy of the police and confidence in the security forces in Northern Ireland?
You will recall, Mr. Speaker —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That matter is for the Government, not me.
Mr. McNamara
Mr. Speaker, you will recall that at Question Time last Thursday the Government were twice asked to make a statement on the subject at the conclusion of the Nelson trial.
I had privately written to the Secretary of State about that.
The matters related to the honesty and integrity of the British Army, connivance in terrorist offences, the role of the police and security forces, and plea bargaining to prevent full public scrutiny of the issues in the House and before the British public.
May I ask you, Mr. Speaker, to seek some way to force, make, persuade or otherwise cajole the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland who has responsibility for such matters to make a statement to the House?
Mr. Speaker
I have received no request for a statement, but the hon. Gentleman's point of order will have been heard by those Ministers with responsibility for such matters.
House of Commons
Wednesday 5 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS
Central America
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what monitoring of the ceasefire in El Salvador and the Central American peace process is being undertaken by him.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Tristan Garel-Jones)
Our embassies in all the countries of Central America keep a close watch on developments throughout the region, especially the progress of the peace process.
Through the United Nations we support the work of the United Nations observer mission in El Salvador which has the task of monitoring all the elements of the recent peace agreement there, including the ceasefire.
Mr. Corbyn
Will the Minister join me in welcoming the ceasefire which is under way in El Salvador and the prospects that it brings for a long-lasting peace?
Does he recognise that the underlying social problems within the region — in Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador as well as Nicaragua — are the basis of many of its problems?
Will he ensure that the vast amount of aid which has been sent into the region for military purposes will in future be for peaceful purposes so that the region's social injustices are dealt with as rapidly as possible?
Mr. Garel-Jones
Certainly, I very much welcome what the hon. Gentleman said.
Indeed, the Prime Minister sent a message of congratulation to President Christiani when the peace agreement was reached.
Through the United Nations and the European Economic Community we shall certainly be doing all that we can to encourage the social reforms — for example, the reform of land ownership — to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
We very much hope that such reforms will underpin the peace process.
Mr. Jacques Arnold
Does not President Christiani of El Salvador deserve widespread support, bearing in mind the fact that he was elected by the people of that country and that he has to cope with the violence of unruly military officers and also the murderous activities of the Farabundi Marti Front for the Liberation of the Nation?
May I welcome the action of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister in giving the president his direct support.
Mr. Garel-Jones
Yes.
The Government have suppor-ted the process throughout.
My hon. Friend may be aware that the prosecution of a number of military officers involved in the assassination of Jesuit priests was assisted by a team sent from Scotland Yard.
That was much appreciated by the El Salvadorean Government and helped to bring the perpetrators of that murder to justice.
Mr. Foulkes
Is the Minister aware that for once— perhaps surprisingly — the House is united in welcoming the agreement and in congratulating all those involved, including the FMFLN for their part in the peace process?
We are also interested in what the priorities are now for demilitarisation and reconstruction, and I ask the Minister specifically to approach our American colleagues to ask them to convert the substantial military aid that has until now been given to El Salvador into civilian aid to help with that reconstruction.
Also, will the United Kingdom take the lead in ensuring that the next elections are full pluralist, democratic elections in which all elements of El Salvador society can participate fully and freely?
Mr. Garel-Jones
Yes.
I welcome what the hon. Gentleman says.
As he will be aware, in June the United States Government had a sum of, I think, $21 million which had been earmarked for military aid set aside for the very purposes that the hon. Gentleman suggests.
I understand that a further sum is now to be transferred from military aid to the promotion of the work that he suggests.
I expect Britain and the European Economic Community to be standing ready to support the elections and the democratic process in El Salvador.
India
Mr. Watts
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs whether he will make a statement on United Kingdom relations with India.
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Douglas Hurd)
Our relations with India are now excellent.
During m recent visit I had discussions with the President, the Prime Minister, and five other senior Cabinet Ministers.
The atmosphere throughout was friendly and purposeful.
Among other matters we discussed Kashmir and human rights.
We shall continue to support the Indian Government's courageous economic reform programme both bilaterally and at the IMF.
The Indian Government have said that they appreciate our continued close co-operation in the fight against terrorism.
We hope to complete work soon on an extradition treaty and an agreement on the confiscation of the assets of terrorists and drug traffickers.
Mr. Watts
I welcome my right hon. Friend's encouraging report of his visit to India.
He will be well aware of the grave concerns of many of my constituents about reports of infringements of human rights in Kashmir and the Punjab.
Will he tell the House a little more about what representations he made to the Government of India on those important matters?
Mr. Hurd
I underlined, as we have done before, our deep concern about abuses of human rights by Indian security forces in Punjab and Kashmir.
It is fair to say that the greatest violators of human rights across the world are terrorists, but I stressed the fact that it was important for the Government of India to be more open in dealing with the accusations.
I suggested that they might allow Amnesty International to play a bigger part in investigating those accusations.
At the same time, I welcomed the Indian Government's decision to hold elections in the Punjab, and I hope that all parties there will feel able to take part.
Mr. Vaz
I welcome the Foreign Secretary's visit to India, but will the right hon. Gentleman reflect on the speech that he made in Luton at the end of last year?
He unwisely criticised the Governments of both India and Pakistan in most undiplomatic terms.
Does not the right hon. Gentleman accept that Kashmir is an issue primarily to be decided between those two Governments?
Does not he feel that unwise comments such as those that he made do not help an already difficult situation?
Mr. Hurd
I did not find that any of the people to whom I talked in Delhi, either formally or informally, took that view.
Our relationship with India, especially with the present Government of India, is such that we can talk about what is on our minds, and on the minds of many of our constituents, without causing offence.
I shall not repeat what I said to the Government of India, but it is perfectly fair to say that it was well taken.
At the same time, it is fair to point out to the Government of Pakistan, as we do, that is is not right or sensible for violence to be encouraged across frontiers.
Sir John Wheeler
Will my right hon. Friend continue to build on the excellent relationship between the Government of the United Kingdom and that of India, especially on the question of the vale of Kashmir?
Will he urge on the Government of India the importance of allowing independent observers and visitors into that region, and of taking up Pakistan's offer that independent observers should be stationed along the line of control, to deal with the movement of people and the problem of terrorism, as well as the human rights issue?
Mr. Hurd
It is important, as I have said, that all practicable steps be taken to prevent violence from being encouraged across the frontier.
I agree with my hon. Friend's first point.
I made a point of saying to the Indian Ministers whom I met that, just as they had announced elections in the Punjab, so it would be excellent if they could start a political process in Kashmir so that there would be people representing the Kashmiris with whom the Government could talk.
Mr. Kaufman
In recent months I have had the opportunity to go to Kashmir by arrangement with both the Pakistani Government and the Indian Government, and I have seen the profound suffering among Kashmiris of both religions — Hindu and Muslim.
Having seen the devastation in that beautiful valley that has resulted from the conflict, and having seen the impact of terrorism, which I deplore both there and here, may I say to the Secretary of State that while, of course, the matter must first be decided between India and Pakistan, no settlement can be acceptable that is not acceptable to the people of Kashmir, both Muslim and Hindu?
Mr. Hurd
The right hon. Gentleman and I approach the problem from somewhat different angles, but I do not disagree with his conclusion.
He is right that any settlement must be based not just on discussions between India and Pakistan, as provided for in the Simla agreement, but on the political process in Kashmir.
Mr. Stanbrook
Did my right hon. Friend say that there might be a new treaty of extradition with India?
If so, would that not be a retrograde step, considering that, at present , all extradition arrangements within the Commonwealth are governed by reciprocal legislation?
Mr. Hurd
I do not think that it would be a retrograde step.
The matter has been under negotiation, off and on, for several years now, as I remember from my time at the Home Office.
Such a treaty would help reassure the Government of India that, within what is possible under the laws of the United Kingdom, we are anxious to co-operate with them in dealing with terrorism.
Commonwealth of Independent States
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on his recent visit to the Commonwealth of Independent States.
7
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs whether he will make a statement on his recent visit to Russia, Ukraine and Kazakhstan.
12
Mrs. Irene Adams
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what discussions he had with the leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States during his recent visit on United Kingdom relations with the members of the CIS.
Mr. Hurd
I visited Kazakhstan, Ukraine and Russia from 16 to 18 January.
I held useful talks with the three Presidents Nazarbaev, Kravchuk and Yeltsin as well as with Ministers of their Governments.
In each country my talks centred on the serious economic situation and military issues including proliferation.
I also had a good talk on international topics with Mr. Kozyrev, the Russian Foreign Minister.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my right hon. Friend for that reply.
I welcome the reports that I have read in the newspapers of the latest version of the guns-for-butter strategy, whereby the republics give us their old guns or nuclear weapons in exchange for our Common Market surpluses.
Will my right hon. Friend assure the House, however, that, before large amounts of financial aid are made available, he will make it clear to the Russian people and Government that it is not Governments but people who create wealth?
For that reason, the Russians will need to have a community in which there is private property, freedom from regulation and low taxation, with the opportunity for people to accumulate wealth and invest it.
Will my right hon. Friend ensure that the Government make that clear to the Russian people before advancing large sums?
Mr. Hurd
I think that President Yeltsin is already making that clear.
These are lessons that the Russian people are learning fast and hard; it is not at all easy for them.
We believe that the macro-economic major help to which my hon. Friend refers should come through the International Monetary Fund and should be the result of a reform process with which the IMF is associated.
That is why we are pressing so hard for Russia, Ukraine and other republics to be admitted to the IMF as soon as possible.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the immediate and generous sending of food aid, particularly to Moscow and St. Petersburg, is enormously welcome?
Does he further agree, however, that there are many cities, towns and villages in the former Soviet Union with less famous names which also need urgent food aid?
Will my right hon. Friend do what he can to ensure that they receive that food aid from the United Kingdom?
Mr. Hurd
Yes.
It was a point that President Yeltsin made strongly to us.
In parallel with the American emergency air lift recently announced, we are offering a supply of badly needed aid to Ekaterinburg, formerly Sverdlovsk — the kind of city of which my hon. Friend is thinking — and details of that British aid are now being worked out.
Mr. Macdonald
Will the Government reciprocate President Yeltsin's announcement last week and declare that British nuclear missiles will no longer be targeted on Russian cities or any cities in the former Soviet republics, including Moscow?
That may be only a symbol, but it is an important one.
Mr. Hurd
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister discussed our nuclear deterrent with President Yeltsin in London on Thursday.
The hon. Gentleman will have seen what President Yeltsin said as a result.
I believe that he understands more clearly than before the minimum nature of our deterrent — and that we intend to keep it.
Mr. Kaufman
Regarding that point, when the right hon. Gentleman saw President Yeltsin did he explain to him why until very recently this Government have said that a minimum effective deterrent is 512 nuclear warheads and why they are now saying that an effective deterrent could be fewer than 192 nuclear warheads?
Mr. Hurd
The right hon. Gentleman is confused between boats and warheads.
We have always said that four boats are the minimum.
That is now the difference between us and the Labour party.
The difference used to be much wider — before the right hon. Gentleman changed his tune.
Formerly, he was in favour of the abolition of Trident, but he is now in favour of three boats.
We believe that four boats are the minimum, but have always said that on those four boats the maximum would be 128 warheads per boat.
That is what my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister said again yesterday.
Middle East
Sir Dennis Walters
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on progress towards achieving a middle east peace settlement.
12
Sir David Steel
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on progress in the middle east talks.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Douglas Hogg)
The issues dividing Israel and the Arabs are complex and wil inevitably take much time and effort to resolve.
There has neverthelss been slow but steady progress towards a middle east peace settlement since the Madrid conference last October.
I look forward to a further round of bilateral negotiations between Israel and her Arab neighbours soon.
There is now a chance to secure a comprehensive settlement based on security for Israel, justice for the Palestinians and peace for all who live in the region.
I urge both sides to seize it.
Sir Dennis Walters
After the early promise of Madrid, the peace talks have been disappointingly slow.
To assist progress, will my hon. Friend and the EC consider telling Mr. Shamir that they will take economic action unless Israel stops its illegal settlement programme in the occupied territories and abides by the Geneva convention, which is being systematically broken?
Mr. Hogg
It was always inevitable that the talks would be slow.
The issues involved are extraordinarily difficult and their resolution is complicated.
I agree that the settlement policy that is being pursued by Israel is a serious obstacle to the conclusion of a peace settlement.
I entirely agree that the Geneva convention — the fourth convention — applies to the occupied territories.
We shall impress both those things on Mr. Shamir.
Sir David Steel
Is the Minister aware that I returned this morning from a short visit to four countries in the middle east?
Does he accept that the recent Moscow round of talks has two universal consequences?
The first is the conclusion that it does not do any good for any delegation to stay away from any part of the process and that all parties should hang in there and keep the discussions going with as much momentum as possible.
Secondly, although it is understandable that the external leadership of the Palestine Liberation Organisation may be excluded at the moment, it is not understandable that the Palestinian leaders in Jerusalem should be excluded from the process.
Mr. Hogg
I entirely agree with the right hon. Gentleman that it is undesirable for any delegation to stay away.
I very much regret that both the Syrians and the Lebanese stayed away from the multilaterals and that, although present, the Palestinians did not join in in a positive way.
On the question of representation within the Palestinian delegation from the diaspora, which is the point that the right hon. Gentleman is addressing —
Sir David Steel
From Jerusalem.
Mr. Hogg
From east Jerusalem, so be it.
The agreement on Palestinian representation was put together carefully before the Madrid talks.
I should be reluctant to see the balance changed because that may destabilise the talks.
There is greater scope for a change in the context of the multilaterals than in the context of the bilaterals.
Clearly, the views of Palestinians with east Jerusalem must be represented some way or another.
Mr. Adley
Following the question by the right hon. Member for Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale (Sir D. Steel), is there not essentially a double standard when one delegation can bring whomsoever it likes to the talks, whether those people were born in the Soviet Union or the United States, and another delegation is told whom it can and whom it cannot bring?
How does my hon. and learned Friend expect Palestinians to feel that they will get a fair crack of the whip while they are subjected to those double standards?
Mr. Hogg
I understand the thinking behind my hon. Friend's point.
In the abstract it has a great deal of force.
That said, it is most important to get the parties to start the process of negotiation.
For that purpose one must sometimes accept a composition of a team or delegation that in abstract terms is different from that which one would wish.
The real objective is to get the talks started.
Mr. Ernie Ross
As part of the Minister's continued opposition to settlements, can he say how the British Government, as a member of the troika, will discharge their responsibilities under the recent protocol signed with Israel and the European Economic Community to ensure that none of the money will go to any Israeli projects with any connection with settlements on the west bank or Gaza?
Mr. Hogg
We shall have to consider the modalities when the time arises.
I re-emphasise that the policy of settlements in the occupied territories is a serious obstacle to a peace settlement.
I hope that the Israelis will desist.
Indeed, if they were to announce their decision to desist, it would be an important confidence-building measure that could lead to others — for example, the suspension of the Arab boycott.
Sir Robert Rhodes James
Is my hon. and learned Friend aware of the strong opinion of all parties within Israel that the peace process is irreversible, that there is a desire to compromise and that certain comments from certain Members of this House are not helpful?
Mr. Hogg
My hon. Friend brings a great deal of expertise to bear on this issue.
I know that he paid a useful and constructive visit recently.
I agree with him about the irreversibility of the peace process.
That is correct.
Mr. Anderson
The Minister has said that the settlements policy pursued by the Israeli Government is a major obstacle to progress in the peace talks.
Will he therefore take this opportunity of welcoming the positive statement recently made by Mr. Shimon Peres, the leader of the Israeli Labour party, that if elected in June he would put a freeze on the settlements in the occupied territories.
Mr. Hogg
I certainly welcome any statement made by any Israeli politician to the effect that if in government he would put a freeze on the settlement policy.
I would hope that that would be the policy of Mr. Shamir's Government should they be re-elected in June.
EC Membership
Mr. Gill
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what definition of the geographical extent of Europe will be used when considering the applications of other countries to join the Community.
Mr. Garel-Jones
The treaty of Rome provides under article 237 that’ any European state’may apply to become a member of the Community.
The treaty does not define how this is to be interpreted geographically.
Mr. Gill
In thanking my right hon. Friend for that answer, may I ask him to have regard to the stresses and strains that already exist in a predominantly Christian European Community and to consider whether they would be increased if we admitted to the Community nations with a predominantly Islamic culture?
Mr. Garel-Jones
My hon. Friend will no doubt be aware that a Turkish application to join the Community has been received.
Indeed, the Commission has given its opinion.
In so far as geographical definitions can be made, we have defined Turkey as a country which could be a member of the Community and for our purposes Turkey is regarded as a European country.
Mr. William Ross
At one time people used to talk about Europe ending at the Urals, but, given the extent of the former USSR, that is no longer a reasonable definition.
Given the tremendous wealth in the far eastern regions of the former USSR, should we not consider them part of Europe if we are to try to expand the European Community for the benefit of all mankind?
Mr. Garel-Jones
I think that most hon. Members would agree that probably it is difficult to determine a strict geographic definition of Europe.
The Community already has a substantial agenda for enlargement before it — an agenda in which Britain has been in the lead.
Under that agenda we already have five applications on the table — two from EFTA countries and three from southern Mediterranean countries.
We also have association agreements with three eastern European countries — Poland, Czechoslovakia and Hungary.
That will give us plenty to work on in the next decade, and that is probably as far as we should look for the time being.
Mr. Knapman
If we are to make further progress with our EC neighbours, surely we need to build on sure foundations.
Such foundations would be laid by further progress towards a non-protectionist free market.
Has my right hon. Friend made any progress in that direction?
Mr. Garel-Jones
My hon. Friend will be aware that the single market was an initiative originally pushed by the United Kingdom Government.
It is due to reach its completion during our presidency in the latter part of this year.
Its completion will be one of the leading priorities of the British presidency next year.
Mr. Robertson
The Government talk about the enlargement of the Community and apparently have included it as one of their objectives for the British presidency next year.
How does that sit with the fact that the Austrian application lay on the table for two years before the British Government said a word of welcome to that country?
When will the Government realise that enlargement will not be acceptable just as a slogan for the Tory re-election campaign, but that it means saying now, and clearly, that the EFTA countries are needed in the Community and that early membership for central and eastern European countries, according to realisable targets, should be a priority to which we are committed?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The House, the country and the rest of Europe are well aware that my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs.
Thatcher) led the charge on enlargement and that that particular banner has been taken up with enthusiasm by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and my right hon. Friend the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary.
It is well known in the EFTA countries and in those of central Europe that Britain has been perhaps the strongest advocate of enlargement.
We will continue to be so.
President Yeltsin
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on his last meeting with President Yeltsin of Russia on matters relating to United Kingdom relations with the former Soviet republics.
Mr. Hurd
In a long meeting with President Yeltsin in Moscow on 20 January I discussed economic reform, security questions including non-proliferation, the Commonwealth of Independent States, and relations between Britain and Russia.
On 30 January I took part in the Prime Minister's discussions with President Yeltsin, following which the British-Russian joint declaration and an agreement on consular posts were signed.
In the words of the joint declaration, the two countries have opened a new page in their relations.
Mr. King
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, had this country adopted the supine, innocents-abroad foreign and defence policies of the Opposition parties, the reforms and changes that have taken place in the Soviet Union would not have resulted in President Boris Yeltsin being the president of Russia?
Does he also agree that only by standing shoulder to shoulder with our American and NATO allies have we been able to win the war against communism in the Soviet bloc?
Does he agree that we must now win the war of economic survival by those countries and that this country is well placed to meet that objective?
Mr. Hurd
There are kind and unkind ways of making that point.
The kindest way is to say that, had we followed the advice so loudly and frequently given by the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) and his colleagues seven or eight years ago, it is highly probable that the hammer and sickle would still be flying over the Kremlin and, more importantly, that the Soviet armies would be massed in Europe.
I agree with my hon. Friend that perhaps a moral can be drawn from that.
Mr. Tony Banks
Does the Secretary of State share many people's concern about the fate of some 100,000 Soviet or ex-Soviet nuclear scientists who seem to be voting with their feet, particularly those who appear to have the skills to dismantle the 27,000 or so warheads, and the possibility that those skills may be lost?
What discussions has he had with Mr. Yeltsin about that serious matter, and what steps will Europe and the United States take to try to secure the services of those nuclear scientists in the Soviet Union?
Mr. Hurd
We discussed that point with President Yeltsin and it is very much on his mind.
He takes the understandable view that it is for him to take the first steps in Russia, which he is doing to keep the scientists in Russia.
The same is true of the other republics.
However, he knows that several countries, including Britain, are willing to help in that process.
Mr. Temple-Morris
During my right hon. Friend's discussions, did he have a chance to discuss the appalling slaughter that is going on between Armenians and Azeris, not least over the Armenian conclave of Nagorny-Karabakh?
What can the United Kingdom do to help, and in what context does President Yeltsin's pronouncement about some form of United Nations' supervision offer good news for the future?
Mr. Hurd
The Russians are certainly trying to bring the two sides together for talks and end the fighting, but, so far, they are finding it a hard row.
My hon. and learned Friend the Minister of State who went to the conference on security and co-operation in Europe meeting in Prague last week was able to take an initiative and arrange for the CSCE to send a human rights team to the two republics to see whether it can help matters.
The fighting is extremely worrying, and anyone who has listened to the comments of my noble Friend Lady Cox on the subject must be deeply worried by it.
Mr. Cryer
What is the Secretary of State doing about nuclear non-proliferation?
Instead of indulging in childish comments about the number of nuclear weapons, what does he say to the 140 non-nuclear nations who signed the nuclear non-proliferation treaty?
Does not he have some regard for them?
Why does not he tell Russia and the other former Soviet Union countries that we want them to get rid of nuclear weapons?
Would not it be a good idea if the United Kingdom, instead of embarking on the Trident programme, abandoned it and withdrew Polaris to demonstrate our solidarity and support for the vast majority of the world's nations which are signatories to the United Nations nuclear non-proliferation treaty?
Mr. Hurd
I am sorry that the hon. Gentleman is so far behind the evolution of his party's policy.
It is now in favour of three Tridents, but Opposition Members do not seem to have got that point yet.
The hon. Gentleman draws attention to the non-proliferation treaty.
The right answer is that all those who have signed the treaty should abide by it, the safeguards in the treaty applied to signatories such as Iraq should be strengthened, and countries that have not signed it should be encouraged to do so.
Baltic Republics
Mr. Cash
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs how he intends to develop relations with the Baltic republics.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
We intend to develop relations actively.
We are giving practical help in consolidating their independence, building up democratic systems of government and rebuilding their economies.
The bulk of our assistance is being directed through the European Community technical and emergency assistance pro-grammes.
We have also committed over £900,000 to projects through the know-how fund.
We sponsored their UN membership applications.
We pressed in the European Community for early trade and co-operation agreements: these are now being negotiated.
We are supporting early IMF membership.
Finally, we are resolving the Baltic gold question, in a prompt and effective manner, which will give an important boost to the Baltic economies.
Mr. Cash
Is my hon. and learned Friend aware of the importance that the Baltic states attach to financial autonomy?
Does he agree that one of the most useful ways in which we can give them know-how is to tell them how we managed, in the light of the Maastricht agreement, to reject the principle of monetary union?
Is he giving them advice, along the lines that he described, to ensure that they manage to implement the sensible planning that comes from being able to run their own affairs, as they obviously wish to do?
Mr. Hogg
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the connection between the maintenance of a democratic system and a change in economic structures.
That link must underpin that country's forward policy.
But the most important action that it can take is to enter into a programme with the IMF as soon as possible, on the back of which it will gain access to many western funds.
Mr. Flynn
Will the Minister extend the application of the know-how fund in the Baltic states to the environmental problems that they have inherited, in particular the devastation left by the oil shale industry in Estonia?
Mr. Hogg
As I made clear to the House when I answered the main question, the know-how fund has been heavily used in the Baltic republics, on which about £900,000 has been spent.
I think that the sort of environmental problem to which the hon. Gentleman referred is so great that it is probably best dealt with by multilateral institutions.
Mr. William Powell
May I say how welcome is the strong support that Great Britain has given to the Baltic states?
Is my hon. and learned Friend aware that in the Baltic states today the problems of lack of food and hunger are just as serious as, if not more serious than, those in the big cities of the former Soviet Union, but that they receive little attention?
Will my hon. and learned Friend ensure that everything is done to enable food supplies to be extended to the Baltic states as well as to Russia?
Mr. Hogg
My hon. Friend has made a sound point.
He will know that £32 million of emergency food aid has been agreed through the EC mechanisms.
Mr. Trimble
The Minister will be aware of the substantial minorities in each of the Baltic states, some of which, prior to the recognition of their independence, were being used to impede that development.
In respect of those minorities, has any suggestion been made to revise the frontiers of the Baltic states?
Has it been thought necessary to make any special provision to protect the position of those minorities?
Mr. Hogg
The hon. Gentleman makes an important and serious point.
There are ethnic minorities in all the Baltic republics.
An encouraging agreement has been made between the Lithuanian Government and Poland on the ethnic Poles in Lithuania, which we support.
There is a greater problem in relation to Estonia and Latvia, where there are substantial numbers of ethnic Russians.
In the capital, Riga, ethnic Russians are in the majority.
There are no proposals to vary frontiers.
As the hon. Gentleman will know, we believe that frontiers should not be changed, save with the wholehearted consent of all the relevant parties.
The issue of ethnic and minority rights is probably best addressed through the mechanism of the conference on security and co-operation in Europe.
All three states have acceded to the CSCE.
Iraq
Sir George Gardiner
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what is his latest information on Iraq's nuclear capability; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
The inspection reports of the International Atomic Energy Agency, circulated as United Nations Security Council documents, provide the most detailed information on Iraq's nuclear capability.
Copies of the first eight IAEA inspection reports are available in the House of Commons Library.
The IAEA has issued a press statement on the latest inspection, the ninth, a copy of which will also be placed in the Library.
Sir George Gardiner
In view of the assessment by a nuclear expert from the United Nations Commission that Iraq has the technology and the means to produce up to four nuclear weapons a year, is my hon. and learned Friend satisfied that the United Nations inspection procedures are adequate to prevent the manufacture of those weapons?
Is he satisfied that an effective deterrent system is in place to prevent their deployment?
Mr. Hogg
There are perhaps two important questions wrapped up in my hon. Friend's remarks.
I think that the intrusive system of inspection that we have introduced through recent Security Council resolutions is probably adequate, provided that it is vigorously enforced, to prevent the Iraqis from developing a weapon.
One cannot be certain about that; one can only express an opinion as to the probability.
A different point — again a very important one — relates to the general powers of the IAEA and to its ability to monitor civil programmes to prevent covert programmes.
There we are working hard to boost the inspection powers of the IAEA to try to address problems of the kind that were thrown up in Iraq.
Mr. Janner
Does the Minister agree that Iraq remains, whether now or in the foreseeable future, a potent, potential peril not only to its neighbours but to world peace?
Is not it a pity that when we had the chance we did not finish the job?
Mr. Hogg
I think that Saddam Hussein is much less potent than he was, but I accept that it is a brutal regime and that it poses a threat to world peace.
The question whether we should have proceeded with the Gulf war is another issue, but I remind the House of the repeated statements by my right hon. Friend, President Bush and others as to the limited purpose of that operation.
We were acting under the authority of the Security Council for the purpose authorised by the Security Council, and that did not extend to the invasion of Iraq otherwise than for the purpose of driving it out of Kuwait.
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
Will my hon. and learned Friend take the opportunity to pay tribute to the United Nations inspectors in Iraq who suffered harassment while carrying out a vital duty on behalf of us all?
May I wish my hon. and learned Friend well in getting proper safeguards over the vexed problem of undisclosed sites?
Mr. Hogg
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
The House will know that 46 British inspectors have been involved in the process of inspection within Iraq.
Certainly I pay tribute to them and to their colleagues from other countries.
On the second part of my hon. Friend's question, yes, it is important to enhance the verification and inspection powers of IAEA.
I hope that we shall succeed in doing that, especially with regard to special inspections of previously undeclared sites.
Mr. Galloway
According to Mordechai Vanunu, who is serving 18 years in solitary confinement, Israel has more than 200 nuclear warheads capable of reaching even the Soviet Union.
Why is Israel allowed to have nuclear weapons — the same abuse of international treaties — but Iraq is not?
Mr. Hogg
We are very anxious to promote a total dismantling of weapons of mass destruction in the middle east.
Nuclear Weapons
Mr. Patrick Thompson
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on developments in reducing nuclear weapons in Europe since 1983.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
Since 1983, as a result of both NATO's resilience and its willingness to respond rapidly to change, significant progress has been made in reducing nuclear weapons.
The 1987 intermediate nuclear forces treaty eliminated all United States and Soviet ground-based intermediate range nuclear missiles.
Last autumn President Bush and President Gorbachev announced the elimination of ground-based, short-range nuclearweapons, an undertaking which the leaders of the Commonwealth of Independent States has agreed to honour.
The United Kingdom is also playing a full part by halving our sub-strategic stockpile.
President Bush's recent initiative on strategic arms takes this a step further, and my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister made it clear last week that we welcome President Yeltsin's commitment to deep cuts in super-power arsenals.
Mr. Thompson
My hon. and learned Friend's reply is very welcome.
Does he recall the debate that took place some years ago about the deployment of cruise missiles?
Does he recall that resulting NATO policy has been successful?
Does he also recall the attitude of some Opposition politicians and, indeed, many local councillors in Norwich who actively opposed NATO and its policies at that time?
Does he share my hope that a lesson has been learnt from that?
Mr. Hogg
I rather doubt whether the lesson has been fully learnt by Opposition Members, but the reference to’ some Opposition politicians’is too general; we ought to make it more particular.
The right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) was a strong opponent of the deployment of cruise missiles.
Had that policy prevailed, I doubt whether we would have had even the INF treaty.
Mr. James Lamond
Does the Minister recall the remark made by President Yeltsin the other day which so delighted the Prime Minister — that Britain's nuclear weapons were irrelevant and of no consequence in the discussions about nuclear disarmament?
Does not that remark demonstrate that we never had an independent nuclear deterrent, as neither President Yeltsin nor anyone else in the Soviet Union accepted it as a deterrent; and that we have poured tens of billions of pounds down the drain trying to maintain that mystique?
Mr. Hogg
That question merely illustrates the fact that the Labour party is historically a party of unilateral disarmament and that, by prejudice and policy, it is to a considerable degree still a party of unilateral disarmament.
Mr. Ian Bruce
Does my hon. and learned Friend agree that the out-of-date nuclear systems that we are withdrawing from Europe have ensured that Europe is a very much safer place, and that the minimum deterrence that we are planning with Trident should be supported by hon. Members on both sides of the House, in practice as well as in theory?
Mr. Hogg
I certainly agree.
That is why I deplore the various policy statements made by the right hon. Member for Gorton in the past opposing the deployment of Trident.
That was an entirely wrong policy, and I think it time that he apologised to the House for having espoused it.
Hong Kong
Mr. Michael J. Martin
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what is the policy of Her Majesty's Government on the number of seats that will be directly elected to the Legislative Council of Hong Kong in 1995.
Mr. Hurd
Before I answer the question, Mr. Speaker, perhaps you will allow me to record the shock with which the Government and, I imagine, the whole House heard of the tragedy of the deaths of 21
Vietnamese in the Shek Kong camp in Hong Kong on 3 and 4 February.
Our sympathy goes to the bereaved and the injured.
As for the question on the Order Paper, we have two linked objectives.
First, we want steady progress towards a greater degree of democracy in Hong Kong.
Secondly, we want this progress to be sustained without interruption after the transfer of sovereignty in 1997.
In order to achieve that, it is obviously necessary to discuss arrangements for the next elections — the 1995 elections — with the Chinese Government when the time is right.
Mr. Martin
Since Tiananmen square, the Hong Kong community has been very worried about the future.
I hope that every step will be taken to negotiate the best possible deal for a democratic future for Hong Kong.
Will the Minister make sure that such assurances are given to the hard-working community in Hong Kong?
Mr. Hurd
Most people in Hong Kong have two ambitions, which are not always easy to reconcile.
The hon. Gentleman mentioned the first; in my original answer, I showed how we intend to work towards it.
The second is the desire that the transition between now and 1997 and thereafter should be smooth and that the principle of two systems in one country should be honoured.
We repeatedly emphasise that point to the Chinese Government, as my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister did to Mr. Li Peng in New York last week.
Sir Peter Blaker
Will my right hon. Friend convey to the Governor of Hong Kong my congratulations and those of the House on the skilful and successful way in which he has conducted the affairs of Hong Kong in difficult circumstances for the past five years?
Will he confirm that contrary to some suspicions expressed in various parts of the media and by some politicians, the major factor in the mind of Her Majesty's Government when forming their policy towards Hong Kong is protecting the interests of Hong Kong and its people?
Mr. Hurd
My right hon. Friend is quite right in what he says about Sir David Wilson and also about his second point.
We try to make it clear to people in Hong Kong and to the Government of China that the main component in our relationship with the People's Republic of China must be Hong Kong and carrying the 1984 agreement to success.
Mr. Loyden
What are the impediments to the universal franchise for Hong Kong?
Mr. Hurd
That it would come to an abrupt end in 1997.
Commonwealth of Independent States
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what recent international initiatives have been sponsored by the United Kingdom concerning the Commonwealth of Independent States.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
The United Kingdom is supporting the applications of states from the Commonwealth of Independent States to join the United Nations and the IMF.
We are consulting closely our western partners and allies to ensure that the many economic and security questions arising from the dissolution of the former Soviet Union are tackled in an orderly fashion.
We have invited all the members of the CIS to open full diplomatic relations.
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer has launched a new scheme to bring to Britain for work experience 1,000 secondees from the CIS.
We supported the accession of the CIS states to the conference on security and co-operation in Europe.
Mr. Taylor
My hon. and learned Friend has listed a series of initiatives taken by the Government in relation to the member states of the CIS.
Is not it important, especially in the economic negotiations, that the leading role of the International Monetary Fund is stressed, but that we should be cautious about the way in which the IMF responds to the various questions raised by members of the CIS?
The sums involved are potentially huge, and we are anxious that they are properly spent and that the reform programmes are in place.
Mr. Hogg
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend's emphasis on the involvement of the IMF in the economic reconstruction of Russia and the other republics of the CIS.
On the back of such IMF programmes, it will be possible to give yet further assistance to the republics of the CIS.
Mr. Dalyell
On security, is not the most urgent initiative to try to help the republics with the leaking trigger mechanisms of many of the nuclear devices on their territory?
Should not we as a practical matter offer them the facilities of Burghfield and Dounreay to do something about the beryllium and other toxic compounds which are doubtless leaking from ill-maintained equipment?
Even the manuals have been taken away by those who have found jobs in Iran and elsewhere.
Mr. Hogg
There are at least two priorities that we need to address.
First, there is the question of making safe the many missiles and warheads that were spread throughout the CIS.
Secondly, there is the question of scientists with particular knowledge.
On the latter point, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister made it plain in his statement that we shall explore further with Russia and the other republics how best we can assist in the provision of employment for the scientists within the CIS to prevent them from going abroad.
There are also important questions about the handling, safeguarding and transport of missile systems.
A team will go out to Russia from this country during the week beginning 10 February to see what part we can play in that process.
Mr. Couchman
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs whether he will make a statement on the recent Washington conference on aid for the republics of the former Soviet Union.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs attended the conference and co-chaired the working group on food.
The conference was a success and will help the west to translate its assistance into effective action on the ground.
Active follow-up with the former Soviet republics is now well in hand.
Mr. Couchman
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for that answer.
Did the subject of the know-how fund and the question whether there might be Russian secondees to British financial, legal and insurance firms as part of the effort arise?
Mrs. Chalker
Neither the know-how fund nor the announcement of the places for 1,000 secondees was part of the Washington conference.
However, the know-how fund is doing extremely good work throughout the former Soviet republics, where we have been asked for that help, as it is in the rest of central and eastern Europe.
The 1,000 places which my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced the week before last are already being found and offered by British industry and British institutions.
We shall forward the work for the 1,000 secondees to come to this country as speedily as we can.
Dr. Kim Howells
Does the Minister agree that one of the most positive actions that the Government could take would be to encourage the republics of the former Soviet Union to cut arms expenditure?
Does she agree that we should build on the remarkable achievement of the Kazakhstani people who, before the break-up of the Soviet Union, succeeded in closing the main nuclear test site in Kazakhstan?
Would not an extension and strengthening of the nuclear test ban treaty be a means of helping the Soviet people?
Mrs. Chalker
The most important thing that Kazakhstan could do would be to sign the non-proliferation treaty.
Of course, all the republics of the former Soviet Union would do well to turn their energies to creating growth in their economies.
We shall do our best to help them, but the west cannot solve the problems of the CIS for it.
We are involved in an exercise of partnership through sharing know-how with those republics in a wide variety of different areas, but any changes must necessarily be made by the republics themselves.
United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
Mr. Paice
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what are the Government's objectives for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Mark Lennox-Boyd)
The Government's objectives for UNCED are the signature of global conventions on climate change and biodiversity; a statement of principles on forests; a comprehensive plan for the 21st century; a short earth charter of environmental principles; and reinforcement of existing international environmental institutions.
Mr. Paice
I am sure that the House very much hopes that the Government's objectives are achieved because they will be a major step towards solving the issues of the international environment.
Does my hon. Friend agree that that approach contrasts greatly with the latest approach from Brussels, which is that international bodies should be involved in deciding even where we erect a front porch?
Mr. Lennox-Boyd
It is clear that progress at UNCED will be made by all the participants that attend.
It will be a matter for each national Government to play their part in trying to bring about those objectives.
House of Commons
Thursday 6 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FOOD
Nutritional Supplements
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what steps his Department is taking on proposals for new EC legislation or regulations on nutritional supplements; and if he will make a statement.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Maclean)
We are currently consulting all the interests concerned on a Commission discussion paper on possible controls.
Our response to the Commission's paper will be formulated in the light of that detailed consultation.
Mr. Canavan
Is the Minister aware of the continuing concern among natural health therapists and others about the inadequate consultation so far by the Government on this important matter and of the allegations of serious omissions and inaccuracies in the Denner report, which was supposed to be based on previous consultations?
In view of the fears expressed about the possibility of serious restrictions being placed on the availability of certain nutritional supplements as a result of the new EC regulations, will the Minister give us an assurance that the Government will conduct far wider and genuine consultations on the discussion paper that has been produced by the European Commission?
Mr. Maclean
I assure the hon. Gentleman that we conducted wide discussions on Dr. Denner's excellent report which was the basis for consultation.
We consulted more than 160 separate organisations on that.
We now have an EC discussion paper and we shall consult all those organisations as well.
Everyone — and anyone — is invited to make representations to us.
I urge people to talk to us as quickly as possible so that we can have meaningful discussions in the EC.
We shall continue to consult organisations as the negotiations progress.
Mr. Ashby
Is not the problem for my hon. Friend that there are so many diverse views on nutritional supplements that it is hard to know from which set of experts one should take advice?
From which set of experts will he take advice in this respect?
Will it be the organised medical practitioners as we know them today or those who are practising in the area?
Their views are as relevant as anyone's.
Mr. Maclean
I accept that many experts have a relevant view here.
Let me state a couple of fundamental principles that we hold dear.
We believe that anyone who wants to buy mineral pills or vitamin supplements has the right to buy them, provided that they are safe.
On the other hand, I strongly believe that if people consume a normal, adequate and balanced diet, they should receive almost all the vitamins that they need, unless they are under doctor's orders.
As I said to the hon. Member for Falkirk, West (Mr. Canavan), we shall consult widely all the various interests and, no doubt, other European countries will receive representations from manufacturers, from users and from suppliers.
Agricultural Employment
Mr. Eadie
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement about levels of employment within the agricultural industry.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Curry)
The 1991 census of agricultural holdings showed that the number employed in agriculture in June 1991 was 628,000, a decline of 2 per cent.
from June 1990.
Mr. Eadie
I thank the Minister for the information that he has given the House.
Does he agree that farmers and farmworkers are the backbone of rural communities?
Is he aware that this year their numbers have declined by about 9,000?
Is the Minister also aware that, in my area of Lothian, since the Government gained office, roughly one third of farmworkers have lost their jobs?
Will the hon. Gentleman tell us what he proposes to do about that?
Mr. Curry
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman recognises that increasing productivity in agriculture has been a feature in the past, both in good years and in bad.
Employment has gone down only 11 per cent.
in 10 years and a great deal of that is due to higher productivity.
The hon. Gentleman asked what we would do about that fall in employment.
The first thing we must do is to defeat the MacSharry proposals that target British farm workers, and particularly those relating to sheepmeat, which represent a direct attack on those who work in British agriculture — not merely those who own or rent farms but those employed on them.
That is our first priority.
Sir Jim Spicer
Does not my hon. Friend agree that the whole thrust of the proposals, as they are currently based, directly discriminates against efficiency?
Will he undertake that when he and my right hon. Friend the Minister go to Brussels next week for that crucial meeting, they will continue to fight for British agriculture as a whole and not bend over backwards to please MacSharry, as the Opposition would do?
Mr. Curry
I give my hon. Friend that pledge with a great deal of enthusiasm.
We have always fought for all the people employed in British agriculture, whatever their status.
It is particularly important that we have the support of everyone in the House.
We must recognise that many people who earn relatively modest wages and who are essential to the rural economy will be the first to be put at risk by those proposals.
We will fight them.
Mr. Geraint Howells
Can the Minister explain why 10,000 full-time farmers left the land last year?
There is no point in blaming MacSharry, because that happened last year.
Mr. Curry
It has been happening all the time and, with respect to the hon. Gentleman, it has been happening constantly.
Even in the best years for agriculture, people have been leaving the land because the trend is towards larger units, maximising productivity and getting the best out of the work force.
I cannot stand here and guarantee that we can halt that long-term consolidation of holdings in agriculture.
No Minister in the European Community could do that.
We will do our best to ensure that we maintain a sensible, profitable structure for agriculture in the United Kingdom in the interests of all those employed by it and involved in it.
Sir Hector Monro
Does my hon. Friend accept that with falling net incomes, particularly in the hills, and diminishing employment prospects, everyone on the Conservative Benches wishes him well for the negotiations in Europe?
We cannot possibly accept the MacSharry proposals as they stand because they discriminate against British farming more than anything else.
Mr. Curry
My right hon. Friend and I have spelt that that out categorically in meeting after meeting.
We shall continue to do that until Mr. MacSharry understands it.
Dr. David Clark
Does the Minister appreciate that, today, 25 farm workers will lose their jobs and 14 farmers will be forced off the land?
Does he appreciate that for every single day that he and his right hon. Friend have been in office in Whitehall place, we have similarly lost 25 farm workers and 14 farmers?
Have they no conscience about that?
Do they not feel any personal responsibility?
It is simply not good enough to blame MacSharry, because his proposals, bad as they are, have not yet affected British agriculture.
Mr. Curry
The hon. Gentleman would know if he had addressed as many farmers' organisations as I have that the first question farmers ask is how we can deal with the uncertainty of the MacSharry proposals, which now confront us.
We know that there are other uncertainties, such as GATT, which represents an equally difficult problem.
What happens eventually in eastern Europe will also present just as much difficulty for our farmers.
Our first task is to remove the uncertainties with which we can deal, and the first of those are the proposals of Mr. MacSharry.
Until we have dealt with that, there will not be the certainty in the industry which will give people the confidence they need to invest.
Otherwise we shall see a continuing decline over and above that which increased productivity would normally dictate.
Environmentally Sensitive Areas
Mr. Boscawen
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a further statement on the planned expansion of environmentally sensitive areas.
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Mr. John Selwyn Gummer)
In my statement to the House of 15 January, I explained th steps that I had taken to improve the first five environmentally sensitive areas designated in 1987, my plans for reviewing this year those ESAs designated in 1988, including any boundary adjustments, and my timetable for designating a further 12 areas this year and in 1993.
Mr. Boscawen
Will my right hon. Friend accept that the new, enhanced payments for those who take up ESAs and the improvements in the scheme are widely welcomed by the farmers concerned?
Does he agree that the scheme must remain voluntary if it is to retain its value?
Will he, if it remains voluntary, reassure farmers who would like to take up the scheme that the payments will not be reduced during the period for which they take it up — that is, for five or even 10 years?
Does he appreciate that the great advantage of the scheme in the Somerset Levels, which I represent and where I live, is that all parties interested in the conservation of the wildlife and landscape of the area are sitting down and talking together?
That represents a great advance and we believe that, in the long term, something valuable will come of that.
Mr. Gummer
My hon. Friend has put his finger on a major advantage of the situation, which is that conservationists and farmers in environmentally sensitive areas are learning to work together.
I hope that the changes in the Somerset Levels will do a great deal to ensure that the area is much improved for wading birds.
We are watching the situation carefully to make sure that that is the effect.
Mr. Dalyell
How much money will be put into the 12 new areas by the Treasury?
Mr. Gummer
As I have announced, total spending will be about £65 million a year.
A large amount of new money will go into the new areas.
When we have completed the prescriptions, we shall be able to give a detailed account of how much will be spent in each ESA, so that details of the total amount will be in the public domain.
English Lamb (Hijacking)
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food how many times English lamb has been hijacked in France: and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Gummer
Since June 1990, there have been 16 such incidents in France involving British lamb exports.
Mr. Evans
I thank my right hon. Friend for that reply.
I congratulate him on his robust stance in defence of British farmers, particularly those producing lamb, in stark contrast to the attitude of Labour Members, who wobble on everything.
Indeed, had they been defending British farmers, particularly, those producing lamb, they would have achieved only a load of jelly — and red at that.
Mr. Gummer
My hon. Friend has a characteristically robust way of demanding our continued support for British lamb producers.
I am sure that he was as pleased as I was that the Parliamentary Secretary, my hon. Friend the Member for Skipton and Ripon (Mr. Curry), spent some time last week promoting British lamb in the middle of France.
I hope that, as a result, the French will eat a great deal more of our lamb, which is the best in the world.
Mr. John P. Smith
I remind the Minister that we also have some excellent Welsh lamb, much of which comes from my constituency in the Vale of Glamorgan.
Is he aware that had the Government encouraged investment in slaughtering facilities, we would not be exporting the jobs that are now being lost?
Mr. Gummer
This is one issue on which the hon. Gentleman might have commenced his supplementary question by saying that most people in Wales are pleased with the way in which the Government have fought for the British lamb industry as a whole and that Welsh consignments have been fought for, too.
The hon. Gentleman has been singularly silent in the battle.
Mr. Conway
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that we in Britain import more agricultural produce from France than we export to France?
Does he agree that it is good that the British farming community is not as violent as appears to be the case on the continent?
Does he further agree that that speaks volumes for the decency of the British farming community, which does not react in kind to French imports?
Mr. Gummer
I congratulate the British farming industry on keeping its temper at times when it could easily have boiled over and reciprocated.
That has brought a great deal of success, because the French Government are now taking the tough measures that we have been pressing on them for 10 years.
That major success is a result of the British farming industry's behaviour.
Meat Labelling
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what proposals he has to oblige food companies to label meat according to the method of production.
Mr. Maclean
All food labelling is controlled by the European Commission.
Britain cannot unilaterally compel meat companies to show the method of production on the label unless the majority of member states agree.
Mr. Mullin
No, but we can make an effort, can we not, to persuade our European colleagues to join us in that.
What effort has the Minister made so far?
If he is really concerned about consumer choice and the gross excesses of the factory farming industry, proper labelling is an effective and cheap way to deal with them.
Mr. Maclean
I assure the hon. Gentleman that the Government are committed to a policy of informative labelling.
That is why we are following the advice of our independent Food Advisory Committee to explore a voluntary, standardised, humane labelling system.
We are actively pursuing that now.
Mr. Hill
Would not the simplest advice to the British public be that they should always buy British beef, pork and veal?
There will then be no chance of contamination.
Mr. Maclean
For a whole host of reasons, yes Sir.
Mr. Ron Davies
Why is there such a gulf between the Minister's actions and his words?
Are not consumers still being denied freedom of choice, resulting in delays in the introduction of more humane systems of husbandry?
Will the Minister confirm that he has no intention of taking meaningful action, but that he is afraid to say so because an election is coming up?
Mr. Maclean
It really is not good enough for a spokesman for the official Opposition to come here in spite, without reading the official report by the independent advisory committee.
That report says:’ We do not recommend a requirement to indicate animal rearing methods on foods labels we therefore recommend that the possibility of drawing up a standard system, which clearly defines terms to indicate welfare-orientated rearing methods, should be considered’.
That is what we are actively pursuing.
Meat Inspection
Mr. Gill
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what progress is being made in determining the future provision of meat inspection services; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Maclean
The Government are currently considering the findings of the recent review of meat hygiene enforcement and will announce their decision as soon as possible.
Mr. Gill
Does my hon. Friend accept the need to harmonise not only the standards but the costs of meat inspection?
Why is Great Britain the only country in the Community to impose full economic cost recovery?
So long as that situation continues, the British meat and livestock industry will be placed at a severe competitive disadvantage.
Mr. Maclean
Because of the EC directive on the harmonisation of charges, which Britain, as usual, has implemented fairly and expeditiously, the meat inspection regime is not properly harmonised.
That is one of the reasons why British inspection costs impose a higher burden on our producers.
We must consider that when we look at an alternative structure for the present arrangements for meat hygiene inspection.
Mr. Haynes
Is the Minister aware that, before I came to this place, I served for many years on a local authority as chairman of the environmental health committee, which had a wonderful section for meat inspection?
Because the Government and Conservative Members supported the poll tax, local authority meat inspection is in difficulty.
Conservative Members should stop appearing before the cameras attacking the Labour party's policies and, instead, start to do their jobs properly, enabling local authorities to provide proper meat inspection facilities in the interests of the community.
They should get off their backsides and let us see what they intend to do about it.
Mr. Maclean
As usual, the hon. Gentleman has made an interesting point.
However, there is one wee flaw that I shall draw to his attention — all local authorities have full cost recovery on their meat inspection systems.
The Government have taken no action to limit the authorities' scope for charging.
That is the problem of which my hon. Friend the Member for Ludlow (Mr. Gill) spoke; many Labour-controlled local authorities charge way over the oddds.
Mrs. Ann Winterton
Is my hon. Friend aware that my hon. Friend the Member for Ludlow has raised an urgent and important issue?
We have been struggling for years with an inadequate meat hygiene inspection system and we need, as soon as possible, to replace it with a centralised system that will guarantee high standards and uniform costs.
I hope that my hon. Friend will give the House a commitment on the timing of that replacement.
That change would be in the best interests of the meat industry, the consumer and animal welfare.
Mr. Maclean
My hon. Friend has made a good point.
I would defend the system by saying that it is not inadequate in that it certainly guarantees quality and safety in this country, but it leaves much to be desired in that it is diverse and scattered throughout hundreds of different local authorities.
The changing EC directives have placed responsibilities on the Government.
We are currently considering all viewpoints, and I can assure my hon. Friend that when we are in a position to announce our final decision, we shall do so as speedily as possible.
Poultry Industry
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when he next expects to meet representatives of the poultry industry to discuss the state of the sector.
Mr. Curry
We have regular meetings with representatives of the poultry industry.
Mr. Wareing
When the Minister next meets representatives of the industry, what will his answer be if they tell him that our poultry meat inspection charges are not subsidised, unlike those of our European Community competitors?
That means an extra 4p a pound on poultry meat to British farmers, with the result that 18 per cent.
of poultry meat is imported into this country.
The disadvantages placed on the industry mean that it costs our farmers 5p a dozen more to produce eggs.
Are the Government trying to ruin our industry at a time when 18 per cent.
of poultry meat is imported and we have a food trade deficit of more than £6 billion — the worst deficit of any industry in this country?
Mr. Curry
I think that the hon. Gentleman has not quite got his figures right on imports.
We are 98 per cent.
self-sufficient in poultry meat, although there has been an increase in imports of whole frozen chickens, which have penetrated the market.
That happened in 1990, not last year, when the figures were relatively stable.
It is true that the industry has to bear some costs.
The House will have heard what my hon. Friend the Member for Penrith and The Border (Mr. Maclean) said about the poultry meat inspection charges.
We have to impose charges when dealing with salmonella.
It would be irresponsible not to guarantee to the consumer that British products are absolutely safe to eat.
I have no doubt that those same consumers, when exercising their choice about what to buy, will want to be absolutely sure that products imported to the United Kingdom have had to undergo precisely the same levels of checks and monitoring as products exported from the United Kingdom.
Mr. Hind
My hon. Friend will be aware of concern in the poultry industry about meat inspection.
There is a difference in price of 4p a pound in poultry meat due to inspection charges.
Will my hon. Friend press the Treasury to sort out the issue of the cost of meat inspection to ensure that the thousands of jobs presently at risk in the poultry industry will be made secure?
Mr. Curry
The complaint about meat inspections in the United Kingdom is that the charges levied by different local authorities vary widely.
Some of the overall costs are due to meat inspections, but not all of them.
It is important to recognise, too, that there are certain structural problems in the industry; but, above all, we must tackle the problem of the failure of the French to observe the rules effectively and their failure to employ enough inspectors.
We have opened discussions with Mr. MacSharry on that, we are pushing the Community for urgency on the zoonoses regulations, and the Commission has before it a proposal to overhaul the meat inspection and meat hygiene directive.
We shall push on all those matters in the interests of the United Kingdom poultry industry.
Mr. Salmond
If the Minister holds meetings on the poultry industry, why does not his hon. Friend the Member for Penrith and The Border (Mr. Maclean), the Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, agree to meet me to discuss the case of my constituent Mr. Johnston, a duck producer from Sharnidubs, who has been shabbily treated by the Ministry?
Does the Minister understand that the arrogance and insensitivity of his hon. Friend, who has not agreed to a meeting for about four months now, has been noted not just by Mr. Johnston but by every farmer in the north-east of Scotland?
Mr. Curry
The hon. Member's limited range of adjectives will have been noted by everyone in the House.
My hon. Friend the Parliamentary Secretary has said that he will always defend the Department's policies in this House; he will do so whenever challenged to.
’ Our Farming Future’
Mr. Marland
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what response he has had to his recent policy document’ Our Farming Future’.
Mr. Gummer
’ Our Farming Future’has been widely acknowledged as a realistic and helpful statement of the Government's approach to the challenges facing the farming industry in the 1990s.
Mr. Marland
Is my right hon. Friend aware of how useful, helpful and informative many farmers have found the document’ Our Farming Future’?
That is because it demonstrates how poorly British farmers co-operate to sell their products — I hope that my right hon. Friend's marketing grants will assist with that problem — and spells out in words of one syllable that the British farmer will not be discriminated against in Europe.
May I take this opportunity of wishing my right hon. Friend the very best of luck at the Agriculture Council meeting next week, when the future of agricultural policy and the appalling proposals of Mr. MacSharry will be discussed?
Mr. Gummer
I thank my hon. Friend.
I think that he will agree that’ Our Farming Future’could cover only the factors over which we have real control.
The decisions that will be made on the common agricultural policy and on the GATT talks will be those which most affect farmers in the future.
I want to get those decisions as quickly as possible, but they must be the right decisions because unless they are, the future of British farming will be under a cloud.
Mr. Skinner
Is the Minister aware that there are at least three farmers in the Bolsover area whose future is bleak?
Since June of last year two of them have not been allowed to sell their milk because it is contaminated with dioxins.
The Minister has promised on several occasions to ensure that the matter is cleared up.
He has received a letter from one of the farmers which I sent him a few days ago.
It is time he responded and paid compensation to those farmers, and allowed them to get on with earning their livelihood, instead of telling them that there is nothing for them from the Ministry of Agriculture.
Mr. Gummer
No one would have guessed from that question that every one of the farmers affected has been paid regularly while we carry out the necessary tests to discover what has caused the problem.
I have never known a Member of Parliament so unwilling to accept the work that has been done by the Ministry on behalf of his constituents.
Sir Geoffrey Johnson Smith
Does my right hon. Friend agree that there will not be much of a farming future unless British farmers improve their marketing arrangements so that they can compete with foreign imports?
Mr. Gummer
I am sure that that is right.
Many farmers are taking that message seriously.
I compliment the National Farmers Union on bringing out an adventurous scheme to complement what the Government are doing and what farmers are doing.
The whole industry is determined to make these changes, and the recent announced by the Milk Marketing Board of its determination to change its own structure is yet another example of an entirely new and welcome move in the industry.
Dr. David Clark
In view of the exhortation by the hon. Member for Southampton, Test (Mr. Hill) a few minutes ago that we should buy British when we buy food, I wonder whether the Minister can tell the House what representations he has received from the Ministry of Defence on his consultation document?
Can he further explain to the House how the Ministry of Defence justifies importing thousands of tonnes of beef from South America to feed our forces when we have almost 1 million tonnes in intervention in Europe?
Mr. Gummer
I find it a little difficult to take that kind of question from an hon. Gentleman who said that we ought to eat New Zealand apples and refuse to eat British sausages.
That aspect of the hon. Gentleman's role is very difficult to take.
I also find it difficult to take from somebody who has said that farmers have not done too badly.
Farmers have been rather lucky, he said in a broadcast today.
The hon. Gentleman has ceased to have any credibility in the farming industry.
I am happy to tell him that my right hon. Friend is now looking to see whether there are better ways of sourcing Ministry of Defence needs among British and other European farmers.
Common Agricultural Policy
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement on the progress made so far in reforming the European Community's common agricultural policy.
Mr. Gummer
Discussions on CAP reform in the Agriculture Council are continuing.
The next meeting of the Council is on Monday.
Mrs. Gorman
What does my right hon. Friend think that people would say when they got their weekend grocery shopping if there was a little item on the end of the bill which read,’ This bill includes £18 hidden subsidy, the result of the CAP’?
Will he be having any talks with the Cairns group of countries, which involves major food producers such as Australia and New Zealand and is dedicated to getting rid of all subsidies, tariffs and quotas which put extra costs on food, and getting good-quality, cheap food back on the shelves — policies from which our farmers have absolutely nothing to fear?
Mr. Gummer
If such an item were included on the bill, the customer could take the salesperson to the courts for misuse of trade descriptions.
Such a bill would be entirely fallacious.
It is entirely based upon the fraudulent suggestion that, if we did not support agriculture, the prices now obtaining in the world at large would be our prices.
Of course they would not; they are dumped prices as a result of support, and they would not obtain.
Therefore, any housewife who receives such a bill should complain to the courts.
Mr. John D. Taylor
Does the Minister agree that, if the general agreement on tariffs and trade talks are concluded successfully and there is subsequent reform of the common agricultural policy, there is a great chance for an increase in production in the intensive sector in the pig and poultry industry once we gain access to cheap grain from the United States?
Mr. Gummer
All kinds of suggestions could be made as to what would be the effect of the major changes which GATT and the CAP reform would bring about.
I am not sure that what the right hon. Gentleman says is true.
The way to deal with the international support system at the moment is to reduce it right across the board — for all support systems to be reduced at a speed which farmers can bear and which bears on different types of farmers equally, both within the Community and as between the Community and our competitors in the United States.
What worries me at the moment about the proposals is that there is discrimination not only against the United Kingdom but against Europe in the way in which the Commission is carrying out the negotiations with the United States.
Sir Donald Thompson
Farmers in Calder valley need continuity, as do farmers all over Europe.
Will my right hon. Friend and his Department therefore spend a great deal of time in the next six months talking to our friends the Portuguese through the Portuguese presidency, so that they may adopt a sensible policy which we can then follow?
Mr. Gummer
As Britain will assume the presidency next, we are carefully discussing with the Portuguese how we should proceed with common agricultural policy reform.
We cannot bring that about successfully until we know what is to happen with the GATT agreement.
It must come first, and then we can implement it through a sensible reform policy that encourages farmers to get closer to the market, helps them with environmentally friendly farming, does not discriminate against the United Kingdom, helps those in the less-favoured areas and gives early retirement to those who are prepared to restructure their farms.
Hedgerows
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food how many miles of hedgerow he expects to be planted in the United Kingdom over each of the next three years.
Mr. Curry
I cannot forecast future plantings, but between 1984 and 1990, some 16,000 miles of hedgerow were planted in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Bennett
That is a disappointing answer.
Does the Minister accept that the Government have continually prevaricated about encouraging the planting of new hedgerows?
Is it not time that they devised a positive policy, to ensure that the many thousands of miles of hedgerows that were grubbed up or allowed to go to waste over the years are replaced?
Hedgerows are an important source of protection for flora and fauna, and it is sad that the Government have not dealt with that situation in a positive and effective way.
Mr. Curry
I am somewhat doubtful about a concrete policy for hedgerows.
Apart from that, the hon. Gentleman should acknowledge that the Government have for a number of years, under the farm and conservation grants scheme, provided a 40 per cent.
rate of aid for new hedgerows.
We are committed to legislating as soon as possible on a new scheme to protect hedgerows and to notify the intention to grub up.
Meanwhile, the Countryside Commission is to introduce a national hedgerow management scheme this year.
Add to that the various set-aside programmes, and the hon. Gentleman will find that agriculture's mood has changed towards amenity, and that, over the coming years, he will have greater cause for satisfaction.
Mr. Nelson
I welcome the Government's measure to protect hedgerows and their management, but among the worst offenders in grubbing up hedgerows are local highway authorities.
What advice does my hon. Friend the Minister have for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment and local authorities, to ensure that, wherever possible, hedgerows are protected, since they can endure at least as long as roads?
Mr. Curry
I will draw the suggestions that have been made to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment.
Our advice is that, where hedgerows are to be replaced, they should not be substituted just with a row of quickthorn between two strands of barbed wire, but with a mixed, proper, traditional hedge — which would be much better for the environment and habitat.
Mr. Morley
The action taken through the farm and conservation grants scheme is most welcome, in terms of hedgerow planting.
However, is it not the case that, under the present Government, thousands of miles of hedgerows have been lost over the years?
Although the Government promise action to preserve hedgerows, they have not produced proposals for a hedgerow protection Bill.
Is it not the case that when it comes to positive action and real decisions, the Government are always in the pocket of the landowners?
Mr. Curry
This Government have done more than any of their predecessors to put the environment at the top of the agricultural agenda.
Ours is the only Government who have as a priority in our negotiations in Brussels the provision that all subsidies should be subject to some form of environmental assessment.
I am at one with the hon. Gentleman in believing that it is important that we develop such a policy — but neither he nor I, nor anyone else, can say that any particular state of agriculture is frozen.
We must ensure that farmers realise that it is in their interests to restore the habitat and hedges.
Everyone benefits from profitable and efficient agriculture, and from an amenity that we can all enjoy.
Environmentally Sound Agriculture
Mr. Steen
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what specific grants are available to farmers to encourage the adoption of environmentally sound practices on agriculture.
Mr. Gummer
My Department offers a number of grants to farmers that encourage the adoption of environmentally sound practices.
Those and all other grants available from other statutory organisations are listed in our booklet’ Conservation and Diversification Grants for Farmers’.
Mr. Steen
Does my right hon. Friend agree that farmers are caught in a pincer movement between the National Rivers Authority, which threatens prosecution of farmers who use more fertiliser on their land to increase productivity, and the banks, which are increasing their interest rates on loans to farmers, because they are considered a bad risk?
Will my right hon. Friend, in his role as David against the EC Goliath, do his best to increase the grants available to farmers, so that, if they practise green policies, they will get their rewards?
Mr. Gummer
A clearly stated aim of our debates in the European Community is the placing of environmentally sensitive farming at the centre of the reform of the common agricultural policy.
We want to see the environment as a central theme, not as an’ add-on extra’— a complementary series of measures, as proposed by Mr. MacSharry.
That is one of the major changes in the MacSharry proposals that we intend to secure.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Sir Anthony Grant
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 6 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Sir Anthony Grant
Does my right hon. Friend recall that, when he was eight and I was a little older, Her Majesty the Queen acceded to the throne?
Will he join me in expressing our deep respect, our loyal affection and our good wishes to Her Majesty on the 40th anniversary of her accession?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Queen has set a shining example of steadfast service over four decades of momentous political and social change, and will he wish her many more years of a great and glorious reign?
The Prime Minister
I am happy to accept my hon. Friend's invitation.
The Cabinet discussed the matter this morning, and the whole House may care to listen to the message that the Cabinet agreed to send Her Majesty:’ At the Cabinet meeting today, Your Majesty's Ministers agreed that I should convey to Your Majesty our warmest good wishes on the occasion of the 40th anniversary of Your Accession to the Throne.
This was in recognition of the incomparable contribution Your Majesty has made to the life of our nation throughout your Reign.’
I am sure that those are sentiments that the whole House would wish to endorse.
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Kinnock
May I join the Prime Minister — and, I am sure, the whole House — in sending good wishes to Her Majesty, and in expressing the admiration that I know is felt throughout our country, the Commonwealth and, indeed, the wider world for the wisdom, strength and dedication that Her Majesty has invariably shown throughout the four decades in which she has been our sovereign?
The Prime Minister
I believe that the right hon. Gentleman speaks for all our millions of fellow citizens.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Kinnock.
Mr. Kinnock
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
When the Prime Minister told us on Tuesday that, like the British economy, Japan's economy was, as he put it, in recession, had he overlooked the fact that last year, while our economy shrank by 2.5 per cent., Japan's economy grew by 4.5 per cent. ?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, a number of countries around the world are in recession, are heading towards recession or are coming out of recession.
According to the latest figures, Australia, New Zealand and Sweden are at the moment in recession.
In the United States, Canada and the United Kingdom, the worst of the recession is over; in West Germany and Japan, growth has slowed and is slowing.
I noted this morning that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) now at last admits that there is a world situation which is on a downturn.
I hope that the Leader of the Opposition will also have the courage to admit that.
Mr. Kinnock
There are economies that are slowing; ours is in reverse because of the Prime Minister's policies.
On Tuesday, the Prime Minister said that Japan was in recession.
It is worth reminding him of the fact that Japan's economy grew by 4.5 per cent., and ours shrank by 2.5 per cent .
Japan's unemployment is at 2 per cent., while ours is at 9 per cent .
Is it not now obvious that, because of his policies, the Prime Minister is reduced to imagining recovery at home while inventing recessions abroad?
The Prime Minister
Every one of the right hon. Gentleman's policies would lead to a continuing recession, and that is well known.
The right hon. Gentleman ignores the fact that I head a Government who have cut interest rates seven times in the past 12 months, halved inflation in a year and built up the best industrial relations in half a century.
The reality, I fear, is that the right hon. Gentleman does not understand the economy or how it works.
The right conditions for economic growth are low taxes, the right hon. Gentleman wants high taxes; low inflation, the right hon. Gentleman would engender high inflation; and good labour relations, the right hon. Gentleman would reintroduce the old, bad trade union practices.
Everything that the right hon. Gentleman proposes would lead to the perpetual recession of which I spoke on Tuesday.
Sir Bernard Braine
May I revert to the question of my hon. Friend the Member for Cambridgeshire, South-West (Sir A. Grant)?
I speak as Father of the House.
Is it not a matter of great rejoicing, wherever we may sit in the House, that throughout the past 40 years, which have seen such momentous changes as the peaceful transition from empire to Commonwealth, the ending of the cold war and the coming together of former enemies in the European Community, Her Majesty has presided over this nation unfailingly, with a dignity and devotion to duty for which we are all greatly thankful?
The Prime Minister
My right hon. Friend is right and speaks with the authority of many years' membership of the House.
One of the most striking facts of the Commonwealth, as I saw clearly at the Commonwealth conference in Harare, is the immense affection and admiration that exists for Her Majesty the Queen among all Commonwealth leaders and countries.
Mr. Ashdown
May I associate myself, my right hon. and hon. Friends and our party with the sentiments expressed by the Prime Minister on the 40th anniversary of Her Majesty's accession to the throne?
On the more unhappy subject of Northern Ireland, in the light of the appalling horrors which last night added to the seemingly endless litany of tragedy in that unhappy Province, does the Prime Minister agree that the first condition for defeating terrorism in Northern Ireland is to ensure that the politicians there get together and work together?
The Prime Minister
I believe that the whole House will share the right hon. Gentleman's view on both the matters that he raised.
The recent activities — the shooting of five men and the wounding of others the other evening — were another terrible and unnecessary scar on the history of Northern Ireland.
It would greatly assist the activities in Northern Ireland and the search for peace if the clearest possible lead was given by all politicians in this country and Northern Ireland.
Sir Alan Glyn
I thank my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister for his message from the Cabinet and Government.
Is he aware of early day motion 580, already signed by 165 hon. Members, which expresses the views of Back Benchers and their loyalty and congratulations to Her Majesty?
It does not include members of the Cabinet or Government, or of the shadow Cabinet, and, unfortunately, is not even allowed to include Parliamentary Private Secretaries.
Will my right hon. Friend please convey that message to Her Majesty?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend expresses sentiments that are shared by the whole House.
Mr. Molyneaux
May I associate my right hon. and hon. Friends with the tribute paid by the Prime Minister to Her Majesty the Queen, and may I join in the other congratulations already expressed?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman, and I shall ensure that Her Majesty is aware of what has been said.
Rev. Ian Paisley (Antrim, North)
May I associate myself with the Prime Minister's remarks about Queen Elizabeth II?
Does the right hon. Gentleman really believe that if politicians in Northern Ireland had been sitting at a table, the awful atrocities that we have witnessed in the past few days would not have taken place?
If he and this House believe that, there is no hope for Northern Irleland.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's words about Her Majesty the Queen.
The point that I was seeking to make a moment ago — I reiterate it now — is that I think that it is to the advantage of everyone in Northern Ireland for the politicians of Northern Ireland, of all shades of opinion, to come together, to talk and to express their mutual wish for peace in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Eastham
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 6 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Eastham
The latest year for which figures are available on the number of new houses built in the United Kingdom is 1990.
A comparison with 1980 shows that 38,000 fewer houses were built in 1990.
Why is it the policy of the Government to build fewer houses?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman might more accurately have asked which local authorities had the highest number of vacant dwellings.
I shall tell him: numbers of vacant dwellings are highest in Liverpool, then in Manchester, then in Salford, then in Burnley, then in Brent, then in Hackney, then in Tower Hamlets, then in Knowsley, then in Newcastle and then in Wolverhampton.
The characteristic of all those areas is that for a long time they have been Labour controlled, although Conservatives have been in control in Brent for the past year and the Liberal Democrats have recently been in control in Tower Hamlets.
There is no doubt which party fails people on housing.
Sir Fergus Montgomery
Has my right hon. Friend noticed the remarks of Sir Brian Corby, the president of the CBI, who said that to sign the social charter would be an act of remarkable lunacy?
Does he agree that, if we signed the social chapter, employers' costs would rise and jobs and foreign investment would disappear, all of which would be bad for this country?
The Prime Minister
I most certainly agree with that view, which is why I declined to sign the social chapter.
I believe that it would cost jobs and cost prosperity in this country.
It is noticeable that a number of other politicians abroad have made it perfectly clear that this country becomes a more attractive place for investment — and therefore for jobs and prosperity — because we are not committed to the costs of the social chapter.
Mr. Win Griffiths
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 6 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Griffiths
Why have pensions dropped from 20 per cent.
of average earnings to 16 per cent.
under the Tories?
Does the Prime Minister believe that pensioners were paid too much in 1979, or will he express regret at that meanness and raise pensions in line with Labour's plans?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman should look at history.
If he talks about pensioners, he should let the facts speak for themselves: under the previous Labour Government, the real average income of pensioners rose by only 3 per cent.
and their income from savings fell by 16 per cent.
The Labour party had no place for pensioners in the past and no promises that it can properly meet for the future.
Sir Ian Lloyd
The Prime Minister will no doubt have noticed the interesting exception that President Bush made in his state of the union message to Congress, when he said that his Government were too big and spent too much.
The exception was that he proposed to maintain research expenditure at the record level of $77 billion and to make permanent the fiscal allowances for research and development.
If my right hon. Friend should be considering with his right hon. Friend the Chancellor any largesse over the next two or three weeks, will he ensure that a few crumbs from the Treasury table fall in that direction?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend will know that there was a real-terms increase in the science and technology budget this year, a point that has been readily acknowledged by scientists up and down the country.
As for potential largesse, there is no lack of applications for any that there might be.
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 6 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Banks
May I thank the Prime Minister for allowing his Ministers to vote as they wish on the Wild Mammals (Protection) Bill on Friday 14 February, St. Valentine's day?
If the Bill is passed, it will stop the massacre of harmless creatures like deer, hares and foxes.
No one expects the Prime Minister to be here to vote on Friday 14 February, but will he tell the House and the country whether he supports the abolition of fox hunting, deer hunting and hare coursing?
I hope that his answer is yes.
The Prime Minister
It is a matter for the individual conscience of every hon. Member, which is precisely why I am allowing a free vote by my Ministers on the Bill.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, the Bill in question goes a good deal wider than just the matters that he has been addressing.
Because it goes a good deal wider, I will not myself be supporting it.
Mr. Colvin
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 6 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Colvin
Will my right hon. Friend send a message today to the leaders of the National Association of Local Government Officers who are spending some £2 million on a shoddy and inaccurate advertising campaign, telling them that their policies of abandoning competitive tendering, abolishing the Audit Commission and introducing a minimum wage would be acceptable only to a party which has already sold its soul to the trade union bosses?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes a very sound point.
It is clear that the advertisements appearing today show that now, as in the past, the Labour party remains in hock to the trade unions.
House of Commons
Monday 10 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock Prayers — Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
TRANSPORT
Marine Safety
Mr. Harris
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what proposals he has to improve marine safety, particularly so far as fishing boat losses are concerned.
The Minister for Shipping (Mr. Patrick McLoughlin)
The United Kingdom has developed domestic legislation and regularly consults the fishing industry safety group about possible improvements.
I expect shortly to receive reports from the marine accident investigation branch of a number of recent fishing vessel accidents.
They will be studied carefully and I can assure the House that any necessary measures that are brought to our attention will be given very careful consideration.
Mr. Harris
I welcome that assurance, but does my hon. Friend accept that there is already a tremendous amount of evidence about some of the things that are clearly wrong with maritime safety?
Is he aware that I have been carrying out my own investigations, including a trip through the channel?
I have received a number of letters on the subject, and most people who are knowledgeable about the subject tell me — and I am sure that they are right — that the root cause is bad watchkeeping, mainly by merchant vessels but also occasionally by fishermen.
Will my hon. Friend try to bring both sides together nationally — as is happening locally in Devon and Cornwall — to try to make some progress on this central issue, as well as pursuing the matter internationally?
Mr. McLoughlin
I am grateful for the constructive way in which my hon. Friend is addressing the problem.
He rightly draws attention to the fact that it is not necessarily always one side that sometimes breaches the watchkeeping agreements and regulations.
House of Commons
Tuesday 11 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
EMPLOYMENT
Training and Enterprise Councils
Mr. Gerald Bowden
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many training and enterprise councils were operational in (a) March 1990 and (b) January 1992.
The Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Michael Howard)
There were no training and enterprise councils operational in March 1990.
The full network of 82 training and enterprise councils has been operational since last October.
That has been achieved as the direct result of the enthusiasm and support of key business and community leaders throughout the country.
Mr. Bowden
I thank my right hon. and learned Friend for that reply.
Will he join me in congratulating the TECs on the part that they are playing in promoting the local economy?
Having in mind my own South Thames TEC in south London, does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the acceptance, success and street credibility of the TECs have been greatly enhanced by the emphasis that they put on the enterprise element of their make-up?
Mr. Howard
I am delighted to respond to my hon. Friend's invitation and I entirely agree with his remarks.
The success of the TEC movement is the result of an unprecedented partnership between business leaders and the Government across the country — I note that sedentary observation of the hon. Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis), which no doubt represents the Labour party's true attitude to training and enterprise councils.
Interruption
Mr. Ray Powell
What financial controls and supervision do the Government exercise over TECs?
Will the right hon. and learned Gentleman make a statement on that matter?
Mr. Howard
Money is made available to training and enterprise councils in return for their performance in pursuance of a contract that they make with me.
The way in which and the extent to which they perform and adhere to the terms of the contract are carefully monitored.
Indeed, complaints are frequently made that too many monitoring requirements are made of TECs.
Mr. Devlin
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that unit costs and the availability of placements will not be the same for employers in different parts of the country?
I know that he recently considered this matter at a meeting with the northern TECs, but will he further consider the plight of some regions where costs are slightly higher than in, say, the south-east?
Mr. Howard
I agree with my hon. Friend that unit costs are not always the same in all parts of the country.
I hope that he agrees that that does not mean that differences that are difficult to justify should be perpetuated indefinitely.
We have a duty to obtain the best value for money for the taxpayer.
That frequently means that some of our negotiations are tough.
Mr. Blair
Is not the real problem facing many TECs the fact that their funds are being cut at a time of recession and rapidly rising unemployment?
Will the Secretary of State now answer for the record the question that he has consistently refused to answer?
How many employment training and youth training places have been cut in the past two years?
How many fewer places are there today than there were two years ago?
Mr. Howard
The point that was made by my hon. Friend the Member for Stockton, South (Mr. Devlin) related to unit costs.
The allegations that have been made by the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) go further and further into the realms of fantasy.
We are continuing to deliver the youth training guarantee.
We are making sure that employment training is making its full contribution to the aim and guarantee groups for the long-term unemployed.
Such comments come a bit rich from the Opposition, when they have opposed each and every training initiative that we have introduced during the past 12 years and when we are spending two and a half times as much in real terms as the Labour Government did.
Unemployment (Leicester)
Mr. Janner
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is the current level of unemployment in the city of Leicester; and by what numbers and what percentage it changed in 1990.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Robert Jackson)
In December 1991, unemployment in the Leicester local authority district was 16,421 on the unadjusted basis.
During the year to December 1990 — the year about which the hon. and learned Gentleman asked — unemployment regrettably increased by 1,941, or 20 per cent.
Mr. Janner
Does the Minister recognise the terrible burden that increasing unemployment in the city of Leicester and elsewhere places on the people involved and their families?
Some of the unemployed are young, some are old and many have never been unemployed in their life.
Does the Minister accept the definition that recession is when someone else is out of work, depression is when one is out of work oneself, and the only hope of recovery will be when the Government are out of work?
Mr. Jackson
Of course we understand the difficult position in which unemployment places many people.
The hon. and learned Gentleman made an epigram out of it.
He picked up the word’ depression’.
One of the psychological problems associated with unemployment is depression, and the range of measures that we have put in place to assist unemployed people can help with it.
One example is job clubs.
I visited one yesterday.
They are successful and helpful devices to help people out of the isolation of unemployment.
The fact is that 25 per cent.
of people who sign on at our jobcentres leave the register within a month, 50 per cent.
leave the register within three months and two thirds leave the register within six months; so there is a flow through the unemployment register.
Industrial Disputes
Mr. Knox
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many days were lost in industrial disputes in the most recent 12-month period for which figures are available.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Eric Forth)
There were 765,000 working days lost in the 12 months to November 1991.
This is the lowest total for the same period for more than 70 years.
Mr. Knox
Does my hon. Friend agree that that figure is a vindication of the Government's step-by-step approach to the reform of industrial relations?
Does he further agree that the time has come for a period of consolidation?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend is correct.
Those dramatic figures reflect several things, not least the steady and progressive reform that the Government have undertaken in industrial relations.
That reform has also given us one of the most successful inward investment records of any country, certainly in the European Community and arguably in the world.
Who can dispute the fact that, if the figures were not as I have just announced and if industrial relations had not improved, we could not have attracted our record level of inward investment from across the world?
That investment has created many well-paid and well-founded jobs for our people.
Mr. Lewis
Should not those figures be considered alongside the 352 million lost days which have been engineered by the Government since 1979?
Mr. Forth
I do not know what the hon. Gentleman means, but I regret that, as ever — and typically of Labour Members — the hon. Gentleman seems to glory in gloom and despondency in identifying the more negative aspects of things, rather than looking at the positive.
As a country, how can we expect to attract inward investment and have the confidence of overseas investors if we hear such remarks from Labour Members?
Mr. Dickens
Do not the figures also herald the demise of the flying pickets, rent-a-mobs, people with crowbars, people who fire ball bearings at horses and place cheesewire across the throats of horses and people who drop concrete slabs off bridges, all of which would stop inward investment into the United Kingdom?
Those days have gone, thanks to our measures.
Mr. Forth
Those days have gone only so long as a Government are in power who are determined to continue a regime of common sense and reasonable and balanced industrial relations.
If there were ever a Government who had a different view of industrial relations and a different relationship with the trade unions, who knows whether events such as my hon. Friend mentioned might not occur again?
Mr. Beggs
Does the Minister agree that, as Northern Ireland has the fewest days lost through stoppages or industrial action and is governed by the same industrial relations legislation as Great Britain, it should be in a special position to attract inward investment?
Mr. Forth
Yes.
I welcome the fact that the hon. Gentleman has brought to the attention of the House and of the world outside the fact that Northern Ireland has so much to offer as an area for investment, both from the rest of the United Kingdom and from beyond.
That, together with the strenuous efforts made by everyone in Northern Ireland at local and provincial levels, means that we can look to the future with some confidence, and I am delighted to endorse what the hon. Gentleman said.
Holloway Employment Office
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is the latest available figure for registered unemployed and recorded vacancies at the Holloway employment office and jobcentre; and what was the equivalent figure for January 1987.
Mr. Jackson
There were 11,978 unemployed claimants and 32 jobcentre vacancies remaining unfilled in the Holloway area in December 1991, on the unadjusted basis.
That compares with 13,221 unemployed claimants and 241 unfilled vacancies in January 1987.
The hon. Gentleman will be delighted to know that unemployment in the Holloway area has fallen since 1987.
Mr. Corbyn
Unemployment may well have fallen since 1987, but it has increased a great deal in the past year.
Will the Minister explain what he is going to say to the people of the Holloway area who find themselves in the unenviable position of having the jobcentre with the largest gap between the number of vacancies and the number of registered unemployed?
There are just 32 vacancies.
Will he assure the people of that area that there will be an increase in employment opportunities and an end to the public spending cuts in the area, and will he guarantee the continuation of the job club, which is threatened with closure?
Mr. Jackson
I shall certainly look into the position of the job club.
Jobcentres are not the only places where vacancies are available.
The fact is that last month the increase in the total number of vacancies notified to jobcentres throughout the country was the highest on record.
Mr. Leighton
The Minister will know that the Holloway area includes a prison and that the admirable Apex Trust works in that area.
Is he aware that the chief inspector of prisons, Judge Tumim, has deplored any possible demise of the Apex Trust, that the Archbishop of Canterbury is raising private funds for the trust and that the Secretary of State received an all-party delegation to ask for a rescue package for it?
What assurances can the Minister give the House that the valuable experience of the Apex Trust over 27 years is not to be destroyed?
Mr. Jackson
I know from my personal experience of the valuable work that Apex has been doing.
The administrator looking into the affairs of the Apex Trust will come forward with proposals, and when we see them we shall consider them.
At this stage, we are not in a position to say anything about them.
Strikes
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many days were lost in strikes in the 10 years prior to 1979 and the 10 years since.
Mr. Forth
There were 72 million working days lost in the 1980s, nearly one third of which — 22.3 million — were lost in the 1984 miners' strike alone.
The total for the 1970s was 129 million, nearly twice that for the 1980s.
Mr. Evans
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply and for those sensational figures.
Does he agree that that improvement has occurred because we — the Government — have given the unions back to their members?
Does he further agree that the Labour party wants to sign up to the social chapter only in order to regain its power by having beer and sandwiches at No. 10?
Is that what the past is all about — the 156
Members sponsored by unions who are turned on by that prospect?
Mr. Forth
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for pointing out what is blindingly obvious to Conservative Members but escapes Opposition Members — our reforms have been to do with giving power to individual trade union members and restoring accountability and responsibility to trade unions and their leaders.
Much though my hon. Friend may dream about the days of beer and sandwiches, I should have thought that the Opposition were so besotted with Europe that it would have to be cafe and croissants, if that change ever came about.
Mr. Speaker
I call Mr. Dennis Skinner.
Happy Birthday!
Several Hon. Members
Happy Birthday.
Mr. Skinner
For the first 10 years of the Government, the cry that used to come from the Dispatch Box was that the economy was in a mess because of strikes by workers.
Who is causing the slump now?
Mr. Forth
I do not recall any such incidents, but the economic difficulties that we inherited between 1979 and 1980 were indisputably due to the winter of discontent, which was a direct result of the relationship between the then Labour Government and the then trade unions.
We now have a different trade union movement and a different Government, with the result that the figures show an all-time record of peace in industrial relations.
That is the difference.
Citizens Charter
Mr. Riddick
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will make a statement on how the citizens charter will affect matters relating to his Department.
Mr. Forth
The Department is meeting all the commitments that we made in the citizens charter White Paper.
The Employment Service has published the jobseekers charter setting out clearly the high standards of service which the public can expect in all its offices.
Charter principles are being applied to all areas of the Department's work.
Mr. Riddick
Is not the jobseekers charter further evidence of the Government's clear commitment to improve public services?
I notice that the Minister is wearing his name badge.
Of course, he is well known to everyone in the House and to many people outside.
Will he assure me that my unemployed constituents will no longer be dealt with by faceless bureaucrats but will be dealt with by individuals who are clearly identifiable and that my unemployed constituents will be treated as individuals?
Mr. Forth
I am delighted to confirm that we will do as my hon. Friend has asked.
He shows his usual great concern about the level of service given by the Huddersfield jobcentre to his constituents.
I assure him that those constituents who seek help from our staff in the Huddersfield jobcentre, and in other jobcentres throughout the country, will find that the charter means that they can identify the people with whom they are dealing because they are wearing name identification badges.
There will be targets for waiting times, for answering calls and for the promptness and accuracy of benefit payments and customer satisfaction surveys will be carried out.
The charter will give people who use public services the opportunity to judge the quality of the service and to seek redress, if that quality of service is not offered.
That is a major advance in the concept of public service of which the Government are rightly proud.
Mr. Harry Ewing
Whatever the citizens charter is or is not meant to do, will the Minister assure us that it is certainly not meant to replace his Department's statutory obligations in relation to the tragic accidents with which the Health and Safety Executive should deal?
I am grateful to the Minister and to his Department for the speed with which they dispatched members of the Health and Safety Executive to the scene of the tragedy in my constituency at BP
Grangemouth yesterday.
Sadly, one of my constituents lost his life in that tragic explosion.
Will the Minister ensure that his Department keeps me advised of all developments relating to that sad event?
Mr. Forth
I join the hon. Gentleman in expressing our sorrow at that tragic loss.
Regrettably, too many people lose their lives in the construction industry which, as is well known, is one of the most hazardous industries.
Together with the HSE, we are constantly working to improve safety levels.
I gladly give the undertaking for which the hon. Gentleman asks and we will keep him well informed of the findings that emerge from this most recent accident.
On that basis, we have asked the Health and Safety Executive and the Health and Safety Commission to consider what contribution they can make to the overall citizens charter initiative to ensure that companies or individuals — whichever are concerned — have the same rights with regard to those organisations as they have with regard to other government and quasi-governmental bodies.
That is something that we are keen to see, and I am confident of getting a positive response from the executive and the commission shortly.
YTS (Eccles)
Miss Lestor
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will state the number of youth training scheme places available in Eccles.
Mr. Jackson
Management of youth training in Eccles is the responsibility of the Manchester training and enterprise council.
In the current year, the training and enterprise council has a youth training budget of £16.1 million, and about 7,430 young people are currently in training.
Miss Lestor
Will the Minister cast his mind back to the letter that he wrote to me last October — a soothing reply to the representations that I had made to him — pointing out that the Salford careers service, which covers my constituency, had forecast a shortfall of between 400 and 450 YTS places?
As I say, his reply was most soothing.
May I inform him, as he has not answered my question, that the same careers service says that nothing has changed and that the same number of young people will not get YTS places, that many of them are fed up with turning up, only to be told that nothing is available and that the continued recession and closures mean that hundreds of them will have nothing to do?
Mr. Jackson
We followed up the representations that were made by the hon. Lady and by others on that point, and the regional offices of the Department of Employment have been in negotiation with TECs to try to establish the extent to which they need additional resources to meet the YT guarantee.
That has taken place throughout the country and has led to substantial additional resources being provided.
I shall be happy to reconsider the position in Manchester and Eccles, although I know that it is being carefully considered.
There is an issue, which the hon. Lady must recognise, involving the careers service figures.
There has been a great national exercise, co-ordinated by the careers service nationally and by my Department, to establish the true position.
It is accepted by the careers service that the figures are rather crude, that they consist of people who register an interest in YT and that there are various problems about counting those people as actual demands for YT places.
Employment Action (Basildon)
Mr. Amess
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he has any plans to visit employment action training services in Basildon to discuss the quality of provision.
Mr. Jackson
Although we are carrying out an extensive programme of regional visits, neither my right hon. and learned Friend nor myself, alas, plan to visit Basildon in the immediate future.
I know that employment action is operating well in Essex.
The Essex training and enterprise council is to be congratulated on its efforts to get the employment action initiative off the ground so quickly.
Mr. Amess
Is my hon. Friend aware that I opened J. and J.
Training Services in my constituency last week and that its programme is already providing an environmental study centre at Basildon zoo, a garden for St. Luke's hospice at Basildon hospital and recreational facilities for the Charitable Printers Trust and that it is restoring old churches in my constituency?
Does my hon. Friend agree that such a programme not only provides high-quality training but helps to enhance life in our local communities?
Mr. Jackson
I agree with all those points, and the Essex TEC is to be congratulated on its success in getting those programmes off the ground.
Particularly important is the contribution that EA will make to ensure that unemployed people are given an opportunity to keep their work skills and work records up to date.
Labour Statistics
Mr. McAllion
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what has been the increase in United Kingdom unemployment during the past 12 months.
Mr. Howard
United Kingdom seasonally adjusted unemployment rose by 703,700 in the year to December 1991.
Mr. McAllion
Is the Secretary of State aware that the management of the Albacom factory in Dundee are taking advantage of the circumstances of mass unemployment by sacking more than 100 members of the work force for the crime of taking industrial action, within the terms of the Government's employment laws?
Will he join me and civic and religious leaders in the Dundee area in condemning such management action as an affront to natural justice?
Will he also explain why we have one of the few remaining Governments who still refuse to give legal protection to workers when they take legitimate and justified industrial action?
Mr. Howard
I am not aware of the circumstances of the particular case to which the hon. Gentleman refers.
If he will write to me about it, I will look into it.
It has always been the law in this country — including under the previous Labour Government, even when the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot) held my office — that if people broke their contract of employment and went on strike, it was legitimate for them to be dismissed.
That has always been the position, but I shall look into the case to which the hon. Gentleman refers.
Sir Michael Neubert
Does my right hon. and learned Friend share my concern about the disproportionate impact of unemployment on the construction industry, which it is estimated will have lost 250,000 building operatives, some perhaps never to return?
Will he do all he can, through the Construction Industry Training Board, to ensure that an adequate supply of skill is available to meet the demands of recovery in the longer term?
Mr. Howard
Yes, I certainly share my hon. Friend's concern.
The Construction Industry Training Board is doing an excellent job in difficult circumstances.
It is doing all that it can to ensure that skilled people will be available to meet the demands that will undoubtedly be made on the construction industry as the economy recovers from recession.
Mr. O'Hara
Can the Secretary of State offer any advice to the daughter of a constituent of mine who has recently become an unemployment statistic?
She is a highly qualified research scientist whose contract, funded by the pharmaceutical industry, has come to an end.
Having signed on and said that she was looking for a job as a research scientist, she was advised that she should think again.
When she asked what she should think again about, she was advised to train for office work.
What advice would the Secretary of State offer that young lady, apart from consulting the job seekers charter?
Mr. Howard
A wider range of help is available for unemployed people now than ever before.
Those who work extremely hard in our jobcentres give the best advice available to individuals who come in.
Unemployed people now have individual interviews and help in preparing a back-to-work plan.
Those who advised the hon. Gentleman's constituent no doubt knew the circumstances of that locality far better than I do.
Mrs. Currie
Does the Secretary of State agree that, to obtain a balanced view, we must consider not only unemployment but employment and self-employment, which grew steadily during the 1980s under the Government and is set to grow further in the 1990s under the same Government?
Is he aware that, when I asked about the growth in employment in south Derbyshire recently, I was told that figures were available only until 1989, that they are collected only once every six years and that figures for self-employment are collected only once every 10 years?
Surely that is not good enough.
Mr. Howard
I rather agree with my hon. Friend.
We hope to make those figures available, on a localised basis, much more regularly and frequently in the future.
However, national and international figures are available and they show that a greater proportion of this country's work force is in work than in any other European Community country except Denmark.
We do not hear much about that from the Opposition.
Mr. McLeish
Will the Secretary of State come clean and say why his Government have the worst jobs record of any post-war Government in Britain?
Why have 2.4 million manufacturing jobs disappeared since 1979?
Why has unemployment risen by 1.45 million since 1979?
Tory polices do not work and the tragedy is that, in Britain every month, 30,000 people join the dole.
When will he do something about that deplorable record?
Mr. Howard
I hope that the hon. Gentleman is aware of the fact that unemployment has been rising in most European Community countries and that it is higher than it was a year ago in every EFTA and G7 country.
If he was really concerned about unemployment, he would persuade the Labour party to abandon its minimum wage and jobs tax proposals and its embracing of the European Community social charter, all of which would add hundreds of thousands of people to the dole queues.
Mr. Bill Walker
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that some of the unemployment has been brought about by the so-called peace dividend?
Would he care to contemplate what unemployment in Scotland would be if the bases at Leuchars, Lossiemouth, Kinloss, Rosyth and Coulport were to close and if Rolls-Royce, Yarrow, British Aerospace and other defence manufacturers did not receive work because Scotland was a separatist country?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend makes an extremely important point.
I am sure that it will be fully appreciated by the people of Scotland when they assess the parties' policies at the election, including the policies of those who advocate a lesser or greater degree of Scotland's separation from the rest of the United Kingdom.
Those policies and their effects will weigh heavily in the balance.
10
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is his estimate of the number of people in the United Kingdom who are economically active, unemployed and not receiving unemployment benefit.
Mr. Howard
In spring 1990, there were 870,000 people in the United Kingdom unemployed on the internationally recognised International Labour Organisation definition, but not included in the monthly claimant count statistics.
That compares with 540,000 people in the claimant count who were not unemployed by the ILO definition.
Mr. Evans
Will the Secretary of State acknowledge that that incredible figure does not tell the entire story?
Will he confim that if unemployment figures were counted today on the same basis as they were in 1979 employment Ministers would be forced to stand at the Dispatch Box and admit that the number of economically active people who are unemployed in Great Britain today is 3.75 million?
Mr. Howard
No.
I certainly do not accept that.
I do not see any basis for the figure that the hon. Gentleman advances.
It certainly has no basis in the figures that I have just given him in answer to his question.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, whenever we make comparisons the figures that we quote are adjusted backwards to ensure that we quote them on a truly comparable basis in all instances.
Mr. Alexander
Since the Opposition, clearly, try to make the worst of the current figures, would it not give a truer picture if we looked at the figures of only five years back?
Is it not the case that in the east midlands, my area, for example, unemployment is 30,000 fewer than five years ago?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is entirely right and I agree with him.
Not only do the Opposition always seek to make the worst of the figures, but they would make the figures very much worse if they ever had the opportunity to put their disastrous policies into effect.
11
Mrs. Fyfe
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many persons are currently unemployed and claiming benefit.
Mr. Howard
On the seasonally adjusted basis there were 2,546,000 unemployed claimants in December 1991.
Mrs. Fyfe
Does the Secretary of State realise that the British people have rumbled him and his colleagues?
They know the true level of unemployment.
They know about the misery of people who are unemployed, but are not even counted in the unemployment figures because of the way in which the Government have fiddled those figures.
Before the Secretary of State rattles on yet again about European figures, our minimum wage policy and our alleged doom and gloom, and as he has proved himself completely unable to say anything constructive, will he today at least ask the Prime Minister to chuck it in now, call an election and let us get on with the job?
Mr. Howard
If the hon. Lady knew what was available to those of her constituents who are unemployed, she would know that we offer a wider range of help to unemployed people than has ever been available in this country before.
About half of those who are unfortunate enough to lose their jobs leave unemployment within three months.
We are doing everything we can to keep that period of time to a minimum.
Instead of dwelling on portraying the figures in the worst possible light, she should work with us to reduce that time.
Mr. John Greenway
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that unemployment across the whole of the European Community is higher than any of us would like?
Does he accept that the way to solve the problem is for workers to provide goods and services that are competitively priced?
Does he welcome today's news that factory output prices are the lowest for many years?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend has correctly identified that it is only by constantly improving the competitiveness of British industry that jobs will be created.
We have in place a framework that will ensure that this country is uniquely advantaged to make the most of the opportunities that will become available in the 1990s.
As we emerge from the recession that will become increasingly apparent.
Training Programmes
Mr. McCartney
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what representations he has received from the chairmen of the north-west training and enterprise councils concerning the level of funding of training programmes.
Mr. Jackson
My right hon. and learned Friend and I have frequent meetings with TEC chairmen from all parts of the country, in which we discuss a range of issues, including questions of funding.
Mr. McCartney
When the Under-Secretary met the TEC chairman did he apologise for the 97 per cent.
increase in unemployment in the north-west since the Government took over?
Furthermore, did he give a commitment to replace the 8 per cent.
cut in the youth training budget for this year, which is in addition to the 12 per cent.
cut last year?
Does he accept that, as the TEC chairmen advised him, if that money is not replaced, some TECs will not be able to meet the guarantee of a youth training place in some places in Greater Manchester in Lancashire?
Is it not an indictment of this Government that, with the high levels of unemployment, young people cannot get a grant-aided training course?
Mr. Jackson
TECs throughout the country are currently deep in negotiations with the regional offices of my Department.
I do not think that it would be appropriate for Ministers to get involved in those local negotiations, least of all from this Dispatch Box.
Since the hon. Gentleman mentioned YT in particular, I may say that we are investing £842 million in YT in 1991-92 and the figure for the year starting in April is £851 million.
We are committed to the YT guarantee and we are providing the funds to honour it.
Mr. Dickens
Does my hon. Friend agree that many leaders of local industry are giving their time and experience to ensure the great success of TECs all over the United Kingdom and that it is imperative that we, the Government, ensure that they are properly funded?
Mr. Jackson
I note what my hon. Friend says and I share his appreciation of the immense efforts being made by TEC board members from business and from other sectors of the community throughout the country.
What he had to say about funding is duly noted.
We are currently in discussion with the TECs about their budget and I do not think that it would be appropriate for me to comment on the particular circumstances of my hon. Friend's local TEC.
Mr. Wareing
If the Government are so committed to training, how does the hon. Gentleman explain the letter from the Merseyside TEC to Hexagon Community Ltd. in my constituency, telling it that output-related funding is to be cut by 25 per cent.
next year?
I received a telephone call just before Question Time telling me that that enterprise will have to close.
This is in an area of very high unemployment.
When the Government mouth words like’ people’,’jobs’and’training’, they should try to convince us that it is more than hypocrisy.
Mr. Jackson
I have had a letter this morning from Hexagon training and I shall be answering it in due course.
The relationship between particular providers and particular TECs must be a matter of negotiation between them.
Neither of us is in a position to make a judgment about that situation.
But I shall certainly be looking into the circumstances of the provider who has written to me.
Courts (Sequestration Power)
Mr. Janman
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what proposals he has to alter the power of the courts to sequestrate the assets of trade unions.
Mr. Forth
None.
Sequestration is a penalty which courts may impose where an organisation or individual commits contempt of court.
It is an essential ingredient in the range of measures which may be needed to discourage such contempt.
Mr. Janman
Does my hon. Friend agree that the ability of employers to take out injunctions to prevent unofficial strike action and the ability of the courts to sequester the funds of unions that ignore such injunctions can act as a very firm and much-needed last line of defence against industrial anarchy?
Does he agree that it would be an act of the most amazing folly to tamper with the provisions that currently apply, and yet that is exactly what the Opposition are committed to doing if they win the general election?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend has made a very important point, which I suspect will become more important as we approach the coming election.
It is quite clear that this power available to the courts is essential to deal with contempt of court when it emerges as a result of abuse of trade union power or trade union positions.
For any political party that makes any pretence of seeking the government of this country to want to remove from the courts the sanction that my hon. Friend has described as so essential is utterly irresponsible.
It gives the lie to the real relationship that exists between the Labour party and the trade unions, and that will not go unnoticed.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask hon. Members to give a fair hearing to the last few questions.
Skill Training
Mr. Roy Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will make a statement on the skill training programme.
Mr. Jackson
There is no central Government programme under the label’ skills training’, but we are, of course, committed to ensuring that high-quality skills training is provided for the 380,000 people who are currently participating in Government-funded training programmes throughout England and Wales.
Mr. Hughes
Is the Minister aware that Japanese employers in Wales recently expressed concern about the level of skills of possible recruits?
Is he also aware that human skills are the major determinant of success or failure?
Is not it a sad reflection on the Government that after 12 years they have failed to provide the necessary skills training for our work force to make our industries competitive in world markets?
Mr. Jackson
That charge, coming from an Opposition Member, is quite unacceptable.
More than 3.1 million young people have taken part in youth training since 1983.
In 1979, when we came to office, only 6,000 young people were on training programmes sponsored by the then Labour Government.
Mr. Ian Bruce
Does my hon. Friend agree that employers and the TECs should be congratulated on the fact that, despite difficult economic circumstances, they are continuing to train people for the period, which will shortly come, when under a Conservative Government we shall be re-expanding the economy and employment?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend is right.
The regular CBI surveys and the regular Department of Employment labour force survey show that over the 1980s — this is the answer to the hon. Member for Newport, East (Mr. Hughes)— there has been a consistent increase in employers' commitment to training, even in this current recession.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Andrew MacKay
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. MacKay
In the light of yesterday's public sector pay settlements, which were particularly welcomed by teachers, will my right hon. Friend give the House some broad indication of just how many teachers will now be earning more than £20,280 a year?
Will he also use this opportunity to give a categorical pledge that under no circumstances will he lift the ceiling on national insurance contributions, because that would, in effect, claw back the extra pay that teachers gained yesterday?
The Prime Minister
I can tell my hon. Friend that well over 120,000 teachers exceeded £20,000 a year even before yesterday's pay increases.
We anticipate that something over an extra 50,000 will now do so.
I can confirm to my hon. Friend that we will not remove the limit and impose an extra 9 per cent.
national insurance on those teachers.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister join me in reaffirming that no group either using or supporting violence will be allowed by any Government to bomb its way to the conference table?
Does he agree that when terrorists inflict danger and disruption on ordinary people anywhere — in Britain, Northern Ireland or anywhere else — they are not so much demonstrating their support for any cause as demonstrating their hatred and opposition to every community?
The Prime Minister
Yes, Sir.
I am happy to agree without reservation with the points put to the House by the right hon. Gentleman.
If terrorists believe that incidents like this morning's will deflect our policy on Northern Ireland, they are mistaken.
They have not been successful in the past, and they will not be successful in the future.
Mr. Andy Stewart
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Stewart
When I last had the opportunity to question my right hon. Friend, he confirmed that under the Conservatives, miners and other earners in my constituency would not pay a higher rate of income tax.
Can he confirm that he will not extend national insurance contributions to savings, because a large number of my constituents took early retirement from the coal industry and use their savings to supplement their income?
The Prime Minister
I can give my hon. Friend that guarantee.
Conservative Governments have reduced the taxation on savings.
We have abolished the investment income surcharge, and have cut the standard rate of income tax to 25p in the pound.
We have introduced savings schemes such as TESSAs, and we believe that excess taxation is iniquitous when we seek to encourage people both to save and to invest in our economy.
Mr. Lewis
Does the Prime Minister recall that in 1986 he announced the closure of DHSS resettlement centres and gave a firm promise that they would not close until alternative accommodation was available?
Is he now aware that four centres, including the Walkden centre in my constituency, will close next month and that alternative provision is not yet available and will not be available?
Is the right hon. Gentleman, therefore, going to allow the Resettlement Agency to rat upon his pledge or is he not?
The Prime Minister
I set out at the time the details of the areas where we would see new and better facilities reopening, and those better facilities have reopened.
In addition, the hon. Gentleman may be aware that the Government are also spending very nearly £100 million over three years to provide accommodation for people who are homeless in London.
So far nearly 2,000 extra bed spaces have been provided, and the number of people who are out on the streets is substantially lower than 12 months ago.
The hon. Gentleman would do well to acknowledge those facts.
Southampton
Mr. Hill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will visit the city and port of Southampton.
The Prime Minister
Tomorrow.
Mr. Hill
When my right hon. Friend visits the port of Southampton he will realise that two Conservative policies have changed the position of the port from stagnation to prosperity.
The first policy was privatisation and the second the abolition of the national dock labour scheme.
All the hospitals in Southampton have been rebuilt over the past few years.
There is only one fly in the ointment —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let the hon. Gentleman ask his question — but briefly please.
Mr. Hill
My right hon. Friend will know that there is a Labour-controlled council.
Not only are its policies extremely wasteful, but one of the companies that it set up is just collapsing, insolvent, and this is costing £8 a head to every community charge payer in the area.
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend puts his point with great clarity and in some detail.
Southampton is already part of a highly successful privatised group of ports.
In some of the privatised ports, ending restrictive practices has led to an improvement in productivity of 50 to 100 per cent.
Engagements
Mr. Jack Thompson
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Thompson
Is the Prime Minister aware that, after a little local difficulty in the House, there was a meeting this morning between the Engineering Employers Federation and the northern group of Labour Members, at which one of the representatives of the federation said that the Department of Trade and Industry suffered from inertia?
Will the Prime Minister consider removing this inertia from the DTI by sacking his Secretary of State?
The Prime Minister
No.
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Taylor
Does the Prime Minister agree that there is an increasing role for responsibility and involvement of individuals in improving their career prospects, whether through training credits for young people or through performance-related pay?
Are these not better ways of improving the skills of British industry than the rigid structures favoured by the feudal barons of the trade union movement?
The Prime Minister
I agree with the point made by my hon. Friend.
I entirely agree with the training credit principle which puts buying power in the hands of the people who seek training.
If my hon. Friend will be patient, I think that my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Employment will shortly have some comments which will please him.
Mr. Robert Sheldon
Has the Prime Minister seen today's Financial Times?
If he has, has he noted the three pages of advertisements by receivers and administrators of companies that have failed?
The exercise is repeated in the columns of the Financial Times three times a week.
Is it not clear that, in the light of all these industrial failures, it is the failure of the Government which really needs to be brought to account, and that it is the Government's task to put things right?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, the essential basics to make sure that things are right are to keep inflation down, to keep interest rates down, to have the right tax structure and to continue with the improved industrial relations that we have had in recent years.
With his experience, the right hon. Gentleman will also be interested in the views of the CBI.
If he is, he will know that the CBI opposes absolutely the reintroduction of the labour laws that the Opposition propose, the tax changes that the Opposition propose and the minimum wage that the Opposition have in mind.
Each of those policies would be deadly to the future of British industry, British jobs and British companies.
Sir Anthony Grant
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Sir Anthony Grant
Will my right hon. Friend warn other world leaders, especially in the United States, of the dangers of a wave of trade protectionism and the catastrophic effect that it can have on the world economy in a recession?
Will he emphasise to the Americans in particular the need to reach sensible agreements within GATT?
The Prime Minister
I have had the opportunity of discussing that with President Bush on a number of occasions, and he is as committed to a speedy conclusion of the Uruguay round as we are.
I believe that that is vital.
The paper set out by Mr. Dunkel provides a basis round which the United States, the Cairns group and the European Community could rally to provide a satisfactory settlement.
That settlement is as vital for the future of the international trading organisation as any other matter under consideration.
Mr. Martlew
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Martlew
In a response to my hon. Friend the Member for Newham, North-West (Mr. Banks) on Thursday, the Prime Minister made it clear that he would not be supporting the Wild Mammals (Protection) Bill, which will come before the House on Friday, but did not clarify whether he is in favour of a ban on fox hunting.
Will he take this opportunity to tell the House and the country whether he favours such a ban?
The Prime Minister
We always examine legislation before the House with great care.
The Bill before the House is not adequate.
Dame Jill Knight
In connection with an incident that my right hon. Friend has mentioned already, is he aware that hon. Members and staff were unable to work in their offices at 1 Parliament street between 9.30 and 12.30 because of three IRA bombs placed in Whitehall?
Is he further aware that immediately the road was made safe, but before any traffic was allowed to pass, there was a demonstration by IRA supporters, well equipped with banners and placards?
Does he not feel that, as they were so ready to move and so well equipped, they knew all about the IRA bombs and probably the timing as well?
Will he ensure that the police are given the photographs of that demonstration, taken close up by the media?
The Prime Minister
I was not aware — I have not yet received reports — of that demonstration, but I believe that it is ironic that the IRA and its supporters should at the same time be enjoying the privileges of democracy and using the methods of terrorism.
I can assure them that they will have no progress until they renounce violence and terrorism.
I believe that that is the united view of all the parties in the House.
Mr. Grocott
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Grocott
Does the Prime Minister recall that it is now more than 12 months since he first started dithering about the election date, since when 750,000 peole have lost their jobs?
Is it not about time that he said to the 44 million voters who are sick and tired of the phoney election campaign that the general election will be on 9 April?
When will he have the courage to say that?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman will know that in the last year we have also cut interest rates seven times and halved inflation.
I have no doubt that when we come to the election the electorate will have spotted that as well.
Mr. Marland
Is my right hon. Friend aware that he is the first Prime Minister in history to attend the annual general meeting of the National Farmers Union?
Is he aware that the warmth of his reception was genuine, as the farmers very much appreciate his understanding of their difficulties with the planners and with marketing?
Is he aware that they welcome his determination to do all he can to improve their lot, both at home and abroad?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
I certainly enjoyed my attendance at the National Farmers Union meeting this morning.
I was able to talk to the farmers about the difficulties that their industry faces at the moment, the need for reform of that industry and the importance that farming will undoubtedly have in the future of our country.
Mrs. Irene Adams
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 11 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave some months ago.
Mrs. Adams
Does the right hon. Gentleman recall that I, along with my hon. Friend the Member for Paisley, South (Mr. McMaster), recently wrote to him pointing out that the Paisley post code area lost 76 per cent.
of its manufacturing jobs between 1979 and 1989 and a further 3,600 jobs since then?
Does he recall that he replied that he did not consider those circumstances grim enough to undertake an economic initiative for Paisley?
Will he now change his mind or shall we have to wait for the people to do that for him?
The Prime Minister
I think the hon. Lady ought to be clear about what she means by assistance.
When the Labour party speaks of incentives it means subsidies.
Perhaps the hon. Lady will remember the success rate of the National Enterprise Board.
It invested in 102 firms, of which one third went bankrupt or went into receivership.
Less than one third of those firms returned the taxpayers' investment.
The right way to help manufacturing industry is to produce the right level of inflation and the right economy for people to make their own decisions.
House of Commons
Wednesday 12 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
TRADE AND INDUSTRY
Manufacturing Output
Mrs. Irene Adams
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what plans he has to boost manufacturing output.
The Secretary of State for Trade, Industry and President of the Board of Trade (Mr. Peter Lilley)
The reduction of inflation is th precondition of renewed sustainable growth.
Mrs. Adams
Given that the second Tory recession is set to cost 550,000 manufacturing jobs and 100,000 companies and is set to put the United Kingdom at the bottom of the European Community league table on under-investment and employment in 1992, will the right hon. Gentleman now admit that urgent action is needed to boost employment in Britain to take us out of this situation?
Will he also introduce training schemes to put the United Kingdom back where it was before we had a Tory Government and to take it out of this recession?
Mr. Lilley
The key to renewed growth is lower inflation, which in turn makes lower interest rates possible.
The interest rates in this country are now down to their lowest differential with those on the continent that we have seen for many years.
We certainly do not need higher taxes, a minimum wage and the restoration of trade union power, which would prolong the recession and abort a recovery.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
I thank my right hon. Friend for responding so promptly to my request that either his good self or my hon. Friend the Minister for Corporate Affairs should visit Nottingham.
I understand that the Minister is planning to visit Raleigh Industries within the next 10 days.
That company is the most famous cycle manufacturer in the world, but it is subject to the most unfair dumping of bicycles from China.
I hope that the Minister will do all that he can to protect that most famous name in the industry.
Mr. Lilley
I recognise the powerful representations that my hon. Friend has made for industries in his constituency, and particularly the bicycle industry.
My hon. Friend the Minister for Trade will meet representatives of that industry when he visits Nottingham and will discuss the problems with them.
Anything that we can do within the context of European Community trade policy, we will do.
Mr. Gordon Brown
On top of the 2,300 jobs tragically lost at British Aerospace today, the textile and motor trade federations are now predicting 40,000 more job losses this year, the Building Trades Federation predicts that 50,000 more jobs will be lost this year, the Engineering Employers Federation predicts that 70,000 more jobs will be lost, and the Confederation of British Industry has said that 200,000 jobs will be lost in total unless Ministers take action.
Has not the Government's last remaining friend, the Governor of the Bank of England, now extinguished the Government's last remaining claims to a pre-election recovery, and is it not the case that, having lost his support, the Government have now nothing left to lose but the election?
Mr. Lilley
I naturally regret the loss of jobs by British Aerospace and other companies, not least those in my constituency.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that the press release from British Aerospace today began:’ The aviation market continues to suffer from the world-wide recession’.
The hon. Gentleman, however, continues to deny the existence of that recession, which makes a mockery of those who have lost their jobs as a result of it.
British Aerospace has to reach world standards of productivity and efficiency, as it made clear in its press release.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman would care to tell the House of the additional job losses that would follow if Labour's reckless defence cuts were superimposed on the problems already faced by the industry.
The Governor of the Bank of England said that there are firm indications of an upturn coming and that the basis of sustainable growth remains a credible commitment to the goal of price stability.
The Labour party could never credibly offer that.
2
Mr. Cran
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what was the increase in manufacturing output between 1985 and 1990.
Mr. Lilley
Manufacturing output rose by nearly one fifth between 1985 and 1990.
Mr. Cran
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the United Kingdom is fortunate to have a large proportion of world-beating, world-class companies?
That is illustrated by Rolls-Royce, which has quadrupled its share of the jet engine market since 1987 and, even today, by the news of the British Aerospace section, which has a £13 billion per annum order book and in size is second only to that in the United States.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that there would not be nearly so many such companies if they had to put up with the economic and industrial policies of the Labour party?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is right to mention the strengths of those companies, even when they face difficulties in world markets, and to emphasise the difficulties that they would face at home if a Labour Government were adding to those problems.
There has been a tremendous growth in exports in the aerospace industry, as in other industries.
We welcome that and will do all we can to sustain and build on it in the future.
Mr. Alex Carlile
Will the Secretary of State confirm that bankruptcies and liquidations, affecting manufacturing as well as other industries, are at record levels not only in the south-east but particularly in Wales and Scotland?
Will he also confirm that the fact that those bankruptcies and liquidations are occurring now in high-tech industries is a particularly worrying aspect?
Does he agree that there is plenty of venture capital about, but that the venture capitalists do not have the confidence to know where to invest it?
How will he instil confidence in the market so that investment in manufacturing industry can really start again?
Mr. Lilley
Confidence will not be instilled by harping solely on the negatives.
Naturally we regret any rise in bankruptcies, but let us remember the strengths of British industry, which has increased exports in the past 10 years by more than France, Germany, the United States or Japan — The hon. and learned Gentleman does not like that answer because he wants to talk Britain down.
Interruption
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the motor manufacturing industry is one of the greatest providers of employment in this country?
Will he encourage his right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer to understand that the company car is not a tax-avoidance weapon but an essential tool of British industry and that, if we are to have a strong home-based industry, we do not need taxes so high that Jaguar and Rolls-Royce lose money?
If those companies cannot sell their products at home, and if the Government do not encourage them at home, people abroad will not be encouraged to buy them either.
Mr. Lilley
I have always shared with my hon. Friend a belief in the importance of manufacturing industry, particularly the motor car industry.
Therefore, like him, I rejoice in the fact that in the last three months of last year the motor car industry earned a surplus on the balance of payments, and exports of motor cars rose by 55 per cent.
I shall convey his point to my right hon. Friend the Chancellor, who also recognises the great importance of a strong and recovering motor car industry.
Dr. Moonie
I notice that the main question carefully ended with the date’ 1990’.
Why has manufacturing output fallen faster and further in Britain's economy than in those of any of our competitors in western Europe?
Does the Minister not yet realise that the country needs action, not words?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman should remember that manufacturing output fell under the last Labour Government and that it is up under this Government.
Compared with 10 years ago, at the same point in the economic cycle, output is up by nearly a quarter, investment is up by a third, manufacturing productivity is up by more than a half and manufacturing exports are up by nearly three quarters.
That is a record to be proud of and to build on in the future.
Telecommunications
Mr. Mans
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what assessment he has made of the attractiveness of the United Kingdom as a location for telecommunications headquarters of internationally mobile companies.
The Minister for Corporate Affairs (Mr. John Redwood)
The United Kingdom is extremely attractive as a location for inward investment in the telecommunications industry.
Recently, US West and IBM have announced that they are to move their business headquarters to the United Kingdom.
One of the important characteristics of those moves was the support that it represented for British liberalisation policies.
Many more companies will follow as investors.
Mr. Mans
I thank my hon. Friend for that answer.
Will he confirm that the Government will continue their policy of liberalisation in the telecommunications industry and continue to welcome foreign companies to compete on an equal basis in this country — provided that, in return, our companies can compete in those countries?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is quite right.
That is exactly what the Government intend to do.
We welcome all sorts of investors here on fair terms.
Another feature that we welcome is that manufacturers are now investing here in the manufacture of equipment to supply the telecommunications industry because of the strength of the underlying service provision in this country.
How much I welcome NEC, Motorola and the other companies, which make large numbers of mobile phones in this country in response to the strength of the cellular mobile phone market.
Mr. Alan Williams
Is it not strange that, while foreign companies invest in this country, British companies which are aware of the position here have invested £40 billion more overseas than the foreigners have invested here?
Mr. Redwood
Investment both ways is welcome because free trade and free investment flows increase world prosperity.
I am delighted that enough large companies in this country have the profits to invest both here and abroad to bring more dividends and income into this country.
It is a great testimony to this country that far more of the large, successful companies in Europe are based in Britain than in France or Germany.
Mr. Gerald Howarth
Does my hon. Friend agree that the stunning improvement in telecommunications in this country in the past 12 years has been led by British Telecom?
Will he confirm that not only has British Telecom invested — this is what the Opposition keep talking about — £20,000 million in new technology, but it has contributed no less than £1,000 million in corporation tax to the Exchequer?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is right.
Much of the major investment in this country's telecommunications infrastructure in recent years has been from BT, which has made a much bigger contribution to the Exchequer than it did in the 1970s, as it is more efficient, more productive, sells more services, makes more money and pays more tax.
That is true not just of BT — a large number of other investors are coming on to the market.
Some £5 billion is pledged from the cable companies alone, which now have 20,000 telephone service customers.
That is just the beginning.
Many thousands more will follow.
We offer choice, competition and more investment — how different from Opposition policies which would smash profits and investment, and return to a monopoly.
Steel Production
Mr. Strang
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will give the figures for steel production in the United Kingdom for the last two years for which figures are available.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Industry and Consumer Affairs (Mr. Edward Leigh)
United Kingdom production of crude steel totalled 17.8 million tonnes in 1990 and 16.5 million tonnes in 1991.
Mr. Strang
Is the Minister aware that in Scotland we have gained the impression that while the Secretary of State for Scotland is prepared to have meetings about the industry such as the one that he had yesterday with the shadow Secretary of State for Industry — the man with the real power in relation to the steel industry, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, is not prepared to lift a finger to help secure a future for steel production in Scotland?
Will the Minister answer one straight question?
Is the Department of Trade and Industry prepared to do anything to help the efforts of my hon. Friend the Member for Motherwell, South (Dr. Bray) to try to secure thin slab steel production in Scotland — or are we to be left entirely to the mercy of that virtual private monopoly, the British Steel Corporation?
Mr. Leigh
We would be happy to consider the prospects for thin slab steel production, but unfortunately there has been absolutely no commercial interest in such production.
Those are the economic facts of life.
As for the Government's position, we are investing £120 million to help the people and economy of north Lanarkshire, including £40 million from this Department.
The hon. Gentleman asks what we intend to do.
One could well direct that question to the Labour party.
Will the Labour party nationalise, subsidise and force British Steel to keep the plant open?
The Labour party should put up or shut up.
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
Is my hon. Friend aware that British Steel's productivity woud be fatally crippled by Labour's absurd proposal to ban coal imports?
Is he aware that 50 per cent.
of imported coal goes directly to British Steel and that that coal is not currently available in the United Kingdom?
Should not the Labour party occasionally pause and think before announcing ridiculous objectives which would cost so many British jobs?
Mr. Leigh
We are extremely worried about that proposal, which was no doubt drawn up on the back of an envelope.
British Steel tells us that there is no viable United Kingdom source of metallurgical — grade coal — coking coal.
It has to import 100 per cent.
of that grade of coal and take advantage of world markets to buy from the cheapest source.
The Labour party wants to stop British Steel importing that coal.
British Steel has trebled productivity since 1979.
Does the Labour party want to return to the days when British Steel cost the taxpayer £8 billion or £16 billion in today's money.
The Opposition must withdrawn their policy, and do so today, or everyone will know what their policies mean for British Steel.
Mr. Salmond
Is the Minister aware that the case for expanded production and investment at the Dalzell plate mill in Lanarkshire is now backed by the Glasgow university study, the Scottish Office, the Scottish Trade Union Congress, the Scottish National party and Motherwell district council, all of whom believe that it is an outstanding plant, given the requisite investment, with a ready market for its enlarged product?
Would the Minister be prepared to back such investment and expanded production, provided that the local Member of Parliament, the hon. Member for Motherwell, North (Dr.
Reid) is prepared to stop rubbishing the plant and its work force?
Mr. Leigh
There is every provision for market investment in this area.
If the market wants to back such a scheme the market will back it.
Mr. Oppenheim
Will my hon. Friend remind Opposition Members that in the heady days of politician-directed industrial strategy in the 1970s Britain had a deficit on our steel trade of £1 billion per year and British Steel lost £16 billion during that decade, whereas now British Steel is the most efficient steel maker in Europe and we have a surplus on our steel trade of £1 billion per year?
If Labour Members are so keen on Ravenscraig staying open, why does the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) not have the guts — or perhaps the influence in the shadow Cabinet — to give an unequivocal commitment that if the Labour party came to power it would keep Ravenscraig open?
Mr. Leigh
I see that the hon. Member for Motherwell, South (Dr.
Bray) is seeking to intervene.
The whole House is waiting to hear what the Opposition's policy is.
Will they subsidise?
Will they nationalise?
We want to know now.
Dr. Bray
Is the Minister aware that the proposals for the expansion and development of the Dalzell works have been pursued for many years more consistently and vigorously by the Labour party than by any other party?
Is he also aware that British Steel cannot go ahead with its plans for building a new plate mill on Teesside because of the depth of the recession into which the Government have plunged the country?
Is he further aware that he is out of date about the commercial interest in thin slab production at Ravenscraig, which has been communicated to the Secretary of State for Scotland but not, apparently, to the Department of Trade and Industry?
Is the Minister aware that substantially lower steel production costs are being achieved by NUCOR with thin slab production in the United States?
Will he confirm, in line with undertakings given at the time of privatisation, that he expects British Steel to consider offers for the sale of Ravenscraig on a commercial basis at opportunity cost — at a price which British Steel could expect to get for the plant on world markets?
Mr. Leigh
That was a very interesting academic lecture, but it was absolutely meaningless because I have already said that if there was a market for thin slab production we would welcome that.
Once again, despite the smoke-screen, the hon. Gentleman has failed to answer the question to which everyone in Scotland wants an answer.
Will Labour subsidise Ravenscraig?
Will it nationalise it?
Will it force British Steel to keep it open?
The Opposition refused to answer that in the recent debate, and they have refused to answer it again today.
Their only guiding light is ambition for office, and they refuse to tell the people of Scotland what their policy is.
That is disgraceful.
Hosiery and Knitwear
Sir John Farr
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what action he has taken in the last six months to protect hosiery and knitwear manufacturers from dumped third-world imports.
Mr. Redwood
The United Kingdom Government will pursue vigorously with the EC authorities any dumping cases brought to our attention.
In this industry, none has been brought in the past six months.
Last year, under different provisions, a temporary ban was imposed on Chinese underwear imports to stop a temporary surge.
Sir John Farr
Is my hon. Friend aware that up to 500,000 jobs in Britain depend on having a sensible, controlled market, and that discipline and control of third world dumped imports can be brought about only if we have a sensible GATT regime?
Will my hon. Friend please encourage my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister to press to ensure that we have the protection of a new GATT structure as soon as possible?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend has my full assurance.
My right hon. Friends the Secretary of State, the Prime Minister and the Minister for Trade are dedicated to pursuing sensible GATT solutions to these problems.
The Government fully recognise the importance of the industry that my hon. Friend the Member for Harborough,(Sir J. Farr) so ably represents, and we want proper GATT disciplines for fair trading in this as in other sectors.
I hope that our partners in the world economy and the European Community will assist our efforts to achieve speedy resolution of the GATT discussions.
Mr. Cryer
How is it that at the British yarn show held recently in Leicester the chairman of Benson Turner, a firm of spinners in my constituency and an efficient and well-organised company, complained that the Department of Trade and Industry shows inertia and indifference when the industry submits complaints about illegal subsidies and dumping?
The chairman called on the Department to take action about those complaints because if it did not do so there would be little industry left to take action about.
Mr. Redwood
I can promise that the Department will take vigorous action where there are good cases.
I am advised that no cases came to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Minister for Trade in the past six months.
The hon. Gentleman should represent his constituents by writing a letter with specific complaints.
We shall then take action to follow it through with the EC authorities.
Mr. Andy Stewart
My hon. Friend will be aware that many of my constituents work in the knitwear industry and are grateful for the steps already taken by the Government.
Does he agree that they are at greater risk not from imports but from the minimum wage, which would devastate the knitwear industry?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is right.
The proposals of the Labour party, and some of the proposals in the Maastricht social protocol, would be deeply damaging to the industry.
We do not want to see those jobs destroyed.
The hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) might like to remember that in the polyester yarn sector, which is not covered by the question, there are anti-dumping suits going on, so we are pursuing the cases of which we are aware.
Mr. Kirkwood
Is the Minister aware that it is not true that there have been no notifications of dumping in the past six months?
Is he aware of the work that the Scottish Knitwear Council has been doing with departmental officials showing that in 1990 a total of 123,000 knitted garments in cashmere coming from China were dumped over the quota agreed?
What action is the Department taking to seek compensation and redress so that the overshipments in 1991 and this year are stopped forthwith?
Mr. Redwood
The question from my hon. Friend the Member for Harborough (Sir J. Farr) was specific.
It asked about six months in a limited industry, and I gave an accurate answer on that.
There have been cases in cashmere relating to an earlier period and we are pursuing those actively with the EC authorities.
We have to ask whether there was some failure in the mechanism of the quota arrangements, and whether they can be adjusted or whether there needs to be some compensation.
My right hon. Friend the Minister for Trade is actively pursuing that.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We are making slow progress.
In fairness to those whose questions come further down the Order Paper, I propose now to speed up a bit.
Post Office
Mr. Hain
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement about the Post Office's negative external financing limit for the year 1992-93.
Mr. Leigh
A negative external financing limit of £66 million has been set for the Post Office for the year 1992-93.
Mr. Hain
Since 1979, the Post Office has contributed more than £1 billion in negative external financing limit payments, at 1991 prices, cutting back on investment and milking the customer.
Would it not be far better for the Government to end these punitive and ridiculous double tax payments — the Post Office already pays corporation tax — thus allowing it to concentrate on improving the quality of service to customers rather than pursuing abolition of the second delivery in towns and putting restrictions on rural services such as insisting that people have letter boxes at the bottom of their gardens or, in some cases, making people go to village centres for their letters?
Should not the priority be investment to improve the quality of services?
Mr. Leigh
Let us put the matter into perspective.
I am sorry, I am only trying to answer the question.
Interruption
We are talking about an organisation which has a turnover of £4 billion.
It is not unreasonable that, from that, it should give its only shareholder — the Government — a dividend of £65 million per year.
If we did not require that dividend, which is spent on hospitals, schools and much else, we would be able to cut only about 1p off the 24p cost of a first-class stamp.
This year, the Post Office has a £340 million capital investment programme.
The first and second-class delivery services have shown a marked improvement over the past two or three years.
The Post Office is a successful and profitable organisation, and I hope that the Opposition wish it to remain so.
Mr. Bellingham
Is my hon. Friend aware that the rural sub-post office is at the heart of the rural community and that it plays an essential role in west Norfolk?
Will he do what he can to ensure that as many Government services as possible are available at post offices?
For example, why cannot every rural sub-post office have a vehicle relicensing facility?
Mr. Leigh
We are anxious to protect the rural post office network and one of the main purposes of the citizens charter is, through the process of competition, to improve quality and choice within the constraints of an affordable uniform tariff.
Therefore, I can assure my hon. Friend, who represents a rural constituency, that we have very much in mind the needs of rural post offices and we shall look with interest at any requests that they make to us for extending their liability to sell other services.
Mr. Wigley
Does the Minister accept that it is feared in rural areas that a move towards privatisation would lead to services that require subsidies being axed, which would be a body blow to those rural areas and their opportunities for economic development?
Can he give any assurance about the future of such services in rural areas?
Mr. Leigh
I have already given such an assurance.
I have said that the Government are committed to the maintenance of the uniform tariff structure, about which people in rural areas are concerned.
That is the commitment that we have given and by which we stand.
Mucking Flats
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he has any plans to visit Mucking Flats in south-east Essex, to discuss industrial growth in the area.
Mr. Lilley
I shall read this answer with particular care.
I have no plans at present to visit Mucking Flats.
Mrs. Gorman
Is my right hon. Friend aware that, thanks to the Government's progressive policies in privatising the electricity industry, that area of south-east Essex deserves a visit because methane produced by all the muck that comes out of London is being dumped at Mucking Flats, converted into electricity and sold to the national grid, thanks to the enterprise of Cory's, which is in my constituency?
Is he further aware that, just up the road from Mucking Flats at Shell Haven, Shell and Mobil are planning to turn their spare gas into electricity?
Does not that show that when we introduce private enterprise we turn muck into brass?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend offers me an enticing invitation which I shall consider taking up.
This is an interesting plan and I am delighted that my Department has been able to offer a grant to help it.
We want to see the environmentally friendly development of electricity.
I understand that this scheme will be able to light up a town of about 30,000 people, just as my hon. Friend can today, almost single-handedly, light up her constituency.
Recession
Mr. Orme
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received from businesses in the north-west concerning the effects of the recession in industry.
Mr. Redwood
My right hon. Friend receives considerable correspondence about the state of north-western business.
Mr. Orme
Will the Minister confirm that since 1979 there has been a 37 per cent.
reduction in manufacturing industry in the north-west — a larger proportion than in any other region in the United Kingdom — that last year 16,800 jobs in the manufacturing and engineering industries were lost and that, unfortunately, we foresee more jobs being lost as a result of the statement made by British Aerospace today?
Faced with those facts, what action will the Government take?
Why do they stand aside as British manufacturing industry is reduced, whereas our main competitors in other countries support their industries?
Mr. Redwood
My right hon. Friend set out the Government's policies some time ago in a clear document that was fully backed by the CBI, which believes that we have the right policies to improve our competitiveness and to take advantage of lower inflation and of business conditions around the world as they improve.
In the 1980s, north-western output expanded, as it did nationwide.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State said earlier that manufacturing output was up by more than one fifth, and productivity, investment, and exports by much more impressive figures.
The CBI stated recently that matters will improve and the Bank of England says that the leading indicator measures point firmly to an upturn in output in 1992.
Sir Peter Blaker
As to British Aerospace, will my hon. Friend give a firm assurance that the Government will continue vigorously to support exports of military aircraft — something which is strongly opposed by many Opposition Members?
What is the Government's attitude to Labour's proposal for a defence diversification agency, bearing in mind that if it were so easy to create jobs through a Government agency, it is surprising that Labour has always left behind more unemployed than when it took office.
Mr. Redwood
My right hon. Friend is right.
The Government will offer all assistance under our policies and programmes to help British Aerospace to export its products.
After all, it is orders that businesses need to provide jobs and to guarantee employment.
The large defence cuts that Labour proposes would be ruinous to job prospects, and its ham-fisted intervention plans would not work.
It would not be easy to effect the transition that Labour suggests by Government sleight of hand.
What is required is careful business planning by the managers and directors of the companies concerned.
Mr. Hoyle
Yes, but if the Minister will come into the real world, he will find that redundancies are still occurring.
Many of the redundancies at British Aerospace involve white-collar workers, including professional engineers — many of whom are graduates.
What future will they have in the recession that continues under the present Government?
Mr. Redwood
The worldwide recession will lift.
It is doing so in many parts of the world, and that provides export and job opportunities.
Skilled people always have opportunities ahead of them, and I am sure that they will continue to do so under this Government, who have the right economic policies.
Those opportunities would be wrecked by the Opposition's policies for commerce and industry.
Deregulation Unit
Mr. Hague
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the work of his Department's deregulation unit.
Mr. Redwood
The Government have a strong programme of deregulatory work.
I will announce shortly the work programme for the coming year.
Removing or reducing burdens on business is vital to successful enterprise policies.
Mr. Hague
I congratulate my hon. Friend on his work so far.
Does he agree that minimising the regulatory burden on business is a worthy objective for any Government?
Would not it be a disaster for business throughout the country suddenly to be confronted by a long list of new regulations and constraints?
I refer to social audits, contract compliance agencies, work force monitoring, compulsory disclosure of information, minimum wages, equality tribunals and many other Opposition ideas.
Mr. Redwood
That is a forbidding and worrying list for all business people.
One of this country's great strengths is that the burdens imposed by the Government on employing people are much lighter than in France and Germany.
That is why we enjoy higher inward investment compared with those two countries.
Labour Front-Bench spokesmen think that that is amusing.
They do not understand the importance of keeping costs under control, and of making sure that the Government do not impede enterprise.
Mr. Flynn
As an apostle of deregulation, will the Minister investigate why British Transport Advertising has banned British Medical Association advertising that seeks to discourage smoking by young people when, at the same time, the tobacco industry spends £300 million on advertising —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I do not think that we need visual aids.
Mr. Redwood
I do not see how I can answer the question as I could not see properly the document that the hon. Member was waving.
Mr. Speaker
We proceed here by speech, not by visual aids.
Mr. David Shaw
Can my hon. Friend confirm that when he announces new proposals for deregulation he will ensure that he and his officials have consulted the Minister for small businesses to see that every effort is made to take into account the needs of small businesses and that deregulation, wherever possible, is increased, so that small businesses can get special exemptions where possible from what can be very complicated regulations and procedures that the Government introduce?
Mr. Redwood
I give my hon. Friend that assurance.
Much practice in the past year or two has reflected just that process, after a good deal of consultation with small businesses.
They have been exempted from certain reporting requirements by my Department under the companies legislation, and my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer put a lot of measures in last year's Budget to improve the position of small businesses, because tax is revealed to be one of their most noticeable problems when they reply to our consultations.
Ms. Mowlam
When the Minister reviews the business regulations will he consider extending that review to the regulation of financial institutions, in view of the problems with the collapse of Guinness III and the potential collapse of Guinness II, and in view of the serious difficulty with fraud regulation at present, particularly now that only three people will be going to gaol for a shorter time than the whole of the Guinness trial was taken, with one of them, Mr. Ernest Saunders, whose sentence was reduced because of ill health, on the national media this morning in blooming health and protesting his innocence?
Mr. Redwood
I do not intend to comment on individual cases before the courts.
The general principle of the Government's policy is clear: we will ensure that people who commit fraud and swindles are brought to book through the courts.
My right hon. and noble Friend the Lord Chancellor has recently made statements, and was on the radio this morning, about the review that he is conducting of how court procedures can be improved.
The House can rest assured that the Government will take every action possible to bring villains to book.
We will not tolerate them.
Recession
Mr. Clelland
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the long-term effects of the recession in industry.
Mr. Lilley
British industry is well placed to grow as we recover from the recession.
Mr. Clelland
Does the Secretary of State recall that in the last recession under this Government the collapse of manufacturing industry was said to be making it leaner and fitter to face the future?
Ten years on, and having lost more than 150,000 manufacturing jobs in the northern region alone, manufacturing is faced with yet another recession, only this time, far from leanness and fitness, it is faced with malnutrition and is dangerously near the point of no return.
With 6,000 manufacturing jobs being lost every week and 1,000 businesses a week going under, what action does he intend to take before more of our industrial capacity is lost altogether?
Mr. Lilley
We are used to the Labour party believing that it can talk up its support by talking the country down.
The hon. Member believes that he should talk down his own region and constituency.
I notice that the Newcastle Journal has the headline’ North-East bucks the trend with firms taking on more workers’, and I am sure that the hon. Member will be delighted that Vickers in his constituency, making the new tank, has excellent opportunities at home and export prospects abroad.
They would be helped by, and I am sure that they would welcome, a positive, upbeat statement from the hon. Member about the revived and renewed prospects for the north-east, which has been transformed not least by inward investment which is threatened by the Front Bench of the Labour party.
Mr. Sumberg
Is my right hon. Friend aware that when the shadow Chancellor recently visited the James Halstead group in my constituency — it employs more than 400 people and is successful in making good profits — he expressed satisfaction to the local media that most of the technology that he saw was British-made and that most of it had been made 20 miles from Bury?
Would it not be a good idea if the Opposition actually trumpeted these successes in the British manufacturing industry instead of moaning and complaining and doing British industry down?
Mr. Lilley
Absolutely.
I noticed that this did not feature in their party political broadcast, wrongly entitled’ Made in Britain’and alleging that virtually nothing was made in Britain, when we not only have the successes mentioned by my hon. Friend the Member for Bury, South (Mr. Sumberg) in his constituency but export far more television sets than we import and make the best hi-fi in the world, and when one in ten personal computers sold in the world are made in this country — in Scotland.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
Will the Secretary of State confirm that, since the beginning of 1990, manufacturing investment has fallen by 35 per cent?
Will he tell the House why he has rejected the CBI's call for investment incentives and investment strategies?
Mr. Lilley
The CBI urges people not to take a short-term view, as the hon. Gentleman does in considering only a 12-month period.
If we take a 10-year view, we see that manufacturing investment is up by a third in comparison with a similar part of the same cycle.
I believe that, as we come out of the recession, we shall find that British industry is much stronger than it was during the same period at the beginning of the 1980s, and that it will prosper mightily during the remainder of the 1990s.
’ 199?’
Hotline
Mr. Amess
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry how many inquiries the’ 199?’hotline has received from small businesses in Essex.
Mr. Leigh
Nationally, calls for January this year have been over 50 per cent.
higher than the corresponding period last year, and nearly 120 per cent.
higher than in December 1991.
Calls to the single market hotline are not necessarily recorded on a geographical basis.
Mr. Amess
Is my hon. Friend aware that, next month, my hon. Friend the Member for Hyndburn (Mr. Hargreaves) and I shall be visiting the European Commission and Parliament — not only to tell Mr. Delors that he cannot have all the money that he is asking from the British people, but to create business opportunities for our constituents?
Does my hon. Friend agree that Basildon, the finest town in the country, is strategically placed to take full advantage of the single market?
Of course, my hon. Friend's hotline is available to help my constituents with their inquiries.
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend always speaks out powerfully for Basildon: he has done so for the past eight years, and I have no doubt that he will do so for the next eight.
Basildon is indeed well placed to take advantage of the single market, but it is important for companies to be well prepared.
It is therefore extremely encouraging that, only this morning, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State took the 250,000th call on the single market hotline — and he could give the answer to the caller's question.
Telephone Repairs
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will indicate the nature and range of discussions he has had with OFTEL on the length of time customers have had to wait to have their telephones repaired; what changes in waiting time there have been in the last seven years; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Redwood
The Government and the Director General of Telecommunications frequently discuss telecommunications policy issues.
Ninety-nine per cent.
of faults are now repaired in two working days, compared with 87 per cent.
in 1985.
My hon. Friend may remember that, in 1980, a quarter of a million people had been waiting for more than two months for telephones to be connected.
Seven days — a week — is a long time to wait for a telephone service nowadays.
Mr. Dunn
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that reply.
Will he confirm that our policy of privatisation and the liberalisation of the telecommunications industry has led to lower prices and a better quality of service for the consumer?
In the light of that, and of the answer that he has just given, would he care to contrast our policy with that of the Labour party?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is right: our policies have been most successful in achieving higher-quality service and lower-priced telephone calls.
How welcome that is.
Labour's policies, which are partly monopoly and partly over-regulatory, and aim to damage the industry's profits and investments, could only make matters worse.
Quality would deteriorate and people would have less choice and therefore a less good service.
Mr. Dalyell
Given the position of such firms as Motorola at Bathgate do the Government recognise that what such firms really want is infrastructure, and that local authorities should be helped to provide it?
Mr. Redwood
All kinds of infrastructure are being provided, both through the expenditure of public moneys under programmes organised by, for instance, the Department of the Environment and the Department of Transport, and through the provision of large amounts of private-sector capital in the case of such matters as telecommunications infrastructure.
The big surge in investment has been possible only because of the liberalisation policies pursued by the Government.
It is being backed up by road programmes and by railway and other investment.
Companies (Government Intervention)
Mr. Riddick
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received from industrialists urging the Government directly to intervene in the strategic direction and management of companies.
Mr. Lilley
The CBI report’ Competing with the World's Best’rejected the notion that Government could or should’be in the business of picking winers, or of engaging in direct intervention in the strategic direction and management of companies’.
Mr. Riddick
Yet is that not exactly what the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) and his hon. Friends are advocating, through the establishment of a national investment bank and a host of other measures — despite the fact that the hon. Gentleman has never done a day's work in industry in his life?
Clearly, the British people do not want a return to the failed interventionist, socialist policies of the 1960s and 1970s — and that is another reason why Labour will be defeated at the next general election.
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely correct.
It is extraordinary that only last week the Leader of the Opposition confirmed that the Labour party is still wedded to bodies such as the national enterprise board, despite the fact that, of the 102 companies in which that body invested, about 35 went bust, 38 were sold at a loss and only the remainder managed even to return taxpayers' money.
Mr. Graham
Will the Secretary of State have some regard for companies like Lawtex, a firm in my constituency that went into liquidation, resulting in the loss of 120 jobs?
Six months later, those people are still waiting for their redundancy payments.
Why are the Government sitting on their backsides and failing to see that they are paid now?
Mr. Lilley
With regard to the example that the hon. Gentleman has given, if there is any question of the law of the land not being obeyed I shall ask my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Employment to look into it.
Development and Assisted Area Status (Devon)
Mr. Speller
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he will reconsider the boundaries for development and assisted-area status in Devon.
Mr. Leigh
The Government intend to conduct a full review of the assisted areas — for all of Great Britain — early in the next Parliament.
Mr. Speller
After the general election, will my hon. Friend give priority to consideration of rather more remote areas, like Ilfracombe, Barnstaple or South Molton that have rural or coastal connections?
Should not the Government be considering places where rail and air communications are poor and where the reduction in the defence programme is causing employment problems?
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend is a very effective constituency Member.
I know that he lobbies hard on behalf of his constituents.
Indeed, he has already brought two delegations to see me.
I am aware of his constituency's problems, and I promise that as soon as this review is held we shall urgently consider them.
He spoke generally of the problems of rural areas and less-favoured areas.
It is interesting that since I have been the Minister responsible for regional policy, regional spending has increased from £506 million in 1990 to £534 million in 1991-92.
That shows an elementary fact of political science: that when one becomes a Minister one does the opposite of what one previously promised.
Environmental Technology Innovation Scheme
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will increase the level of expenditure on the environmental technology innovation scheme.
Mr. Lilley
Although there has been a good response so far to the environmental technology innovation scheme, there are no plans to increase the current allocation of £12 million.
Mr. Banks
Given the nature of the tasks facing industry, that seems a rather small amount of money.
Is any of it used to find alternatives to CFCs in the manufacture of refrigerators, foam, and so on?
I assume that the Minister is aware that 750,000 tonnes of CFCs are used in the world every year and that that has resulted in an ozone layer hole as large as Alaska.
What are the Government doing to further alternative technologies?
Mr. Lilley
We believe that this scheme will attract considerable sums of private money for the development of such technologies.
We believe that small and medium-sized companies, which tend to be the most innovative, will be persuaded to develop new technologies and that that investment will result in considerable leverage.
About 280 applications have already been received.
I am not sure whether any of them cover the technology that the hon. Gentleman has mentioned, but, like him, I recognise the importance of solving the problem and hope that, by this scheme or otherwise, solutions will be found.
Mr. Brazier
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating staff at the university of Kent and the two commercial pharmaceutical companies with whom the university is combining in a venture called’ Viridian’, which is a programme of environmental biotechnology based entirely on bacteria that are naturally available?
Under that programme, they have been able to demonstrate ways of breaking up many dangerous industrial wastes.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that that shows that there is scope, through a range of Government and quasi-government bodies, to encourage action beyond what can be done with direct Government money?
Mr. Lilley
I certainly join my hon. Friend in congratulating those who are involved in this research.
I recently had the privilege of opening the display on biotechnology in George street.
This is a subject in which Britain has a lead over the rest of Europe and much of the world.
We want to strengthen that lead, as we believe that it is in the interests of British industry, British science and the world environment.
Overseas Investment
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what proportion of overseas investment in the European Community is made in Britain.
Mr. Leigh
According to the latest information published in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development economic outlook, December 1990, in 1988-89 the United Kingdom had a nearly 40 per cent.
share of the total inward foreign direct investment in the EC.
Mr. Arnold
Is not the significance of that reply that in a Community of Twelve, investment in this country is as much as that in the other Eleven put together?
Is not that the most telling argument as to the comparative economic strength of this country?
Mr. Leigh
Yes, of course it is.
The fact that this country is the No. 1 location for inward investment in Europe shows that the international business community has confidence in our policies.
What the House wants to know is whether the international business community has confidence in the policies of the Labour party.
We keep asking questions about the Opposition's investment plans: how much they intend to give to the British Technology Group, regional development agencies and investment trusts.
There was a Department of Trade and Industry Question Time last month and a debate last week, but the Opposition did not answer those questions.
Seven Labour Members are sitting on the Opposition Front Bench.
I hope that one of them will stand up now and give the answers, because the whole House wants to know.
Mr. Harry Ewing
Does not the Minister understand that the simple reason for inward investment in Britain has nothing to do with the Government's activities?
The Governments of countries such as Germany and France invest in their own industries.
The difference is that, far from investing in our own industry, the Government of this country is slaughtering it.
Then they have to send Ministers like that youngster around the world with a begging bowl to get other industries to come in to repair the damage that they have done.
Mr. Leigh
Now at last we see the true face of the Labour party on inward investment.
The Trades Union Congress has called this alien.
I want an answer from one of the hon. Members on the Opposition Front Bench about their views on inward investment.
We now have companies such as Fujitsu in the north-east of England, Nissan in the north-east of England and Toyota in Derbyshire bringing wealth into this country and improving our manufacturing competitiveness.
What is the attitude of the Labour party towards inward investment?
Do the Opposition favour it or reject it?
Manufacturing Output
Mr. McMaster
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has recently received about manufacturing output.
Mr. Lilley
I have received the recent excellent report by the CBI's manufacturing advisory group which showed that there has been a transformation in manufacturing performance during the 1980s.
Mr. McMaster
With output in the construction industry falling to its lowest level for six years and the industry predicting a further 50,000 job losses this year, when will the Secretary of State stop his policy paralysis and start listening to people in industry who know what they are talking about?
Will he now start an emergency investment programme?
When will the Secretary of State stop attacking good advice and start attacking the recession?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman surely realises that the key to success in that industry is lower interest rates and that the key to lower interest rates is lower inflation.
All the policies that the hon. Gentleman and his party advocate would move us in exactly the opposite direction.
Mr. Batiste
Is my right hon. Friend aware that constituencies such as mine in Leeds have been very considerable beneficiaries of investment in a wide range of different industries?
For example, this year alone we shall see the commissioning of chemical and textile plants.
We are beneficiaries to the extent of a 20 per cent.
reduction in unemployment since the time of the last general election.
What those industries fear more than anything else is interference by the Government and the European Commission, interference in the choice of products that they can make, interference in the work patterns that they can enjoy and interference in their wage rates.
The more successful my right hon. Friend is in resisting that interference, the greater will be the level of investment in this country.
Mr. Lilley
Everything that my hon. Friend says is echoed by the business men I meet.
They know that the greatest damage would be done to this economy by raising taxes, by imposing a minimum wage and by restoring artificial trade union powers.
They do not want it.
They reject it.
They are determined that we continue with the strategy which, as the Confederation of British Industry says, has restored the health of manufacturing industry and revived the strength of the British economy during the 1980s.
Industrial Policy
Mr. Redmond
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next plans to meet representatives of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce to discuss industrial policy.
Mr. Lilley
I next plan to meet representatives of the northern region CBI later this month to discuss a range of business matters.
Mr. Redmond
Does the Secretary of State —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We are progressing speedily but the Minister has answered Question 21.
We are on Question 20.
Mr. Lilley
I meet representatives of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce from time to time to discuss a range of policies.
Mr. Redmond
Does the Secretary of State accept that people living in the real world question the Government's industrial policy?
In fact, the Government have had no industrial policy since being elected in 1979.
The people are sick and tired of seeing on the television, hearing on the radio and seeing in the press the fairy stories that the Secretary of State keeps preaching from the Dispatch Box.
Does the Secretary of State accept that we should have an industrial policy that is beneficial to Britain so that we can meet the challenge of the 21st century?
Mr. Lilley
I read earlier the CBI's rejection of any policy in which the Government tried to pick winners, determine strategic investments and interfere in the decisions of business.
That is the sort of industrial policy that industry does not want.
Industry wants low inflation, a consequent reduction in interest rates, competition, open markets, a successful GATT round and completion of the European single market at the end of this year.
We will provide that.
House of Commons
Thursday 13 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NATIONAL FINANCE
Child Care
Mr. Maclennan
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what representations he has received on the subject of taxation of child care; and if he will make a statement.
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. Francis Maude)
We have received a number of representations on that subject.
Mr. Maclennan
Does the Minister recall that we on these Benches have advocated provision for tax vouchers for child care in the past three Finance Bills?
Does he recognise that provision is required for local authorities, voluntary groups and the private sector to provide places in creches and nursery schools?
Will he take steps to ensure that that is possible following the Budget?
Mr. Maude
I am aware that the hon. Gentleman and his colleagues have promoted all sorts of proposals in recent years, and many of them have been contradictory.
At this stage in the period preceding the Budget, he will not expect me or any of my right hon. Friends to say anything about specific tax matters.
Mr. Thurnham
Is my hon. Friend aware that private nursery provision has increased by 50 per cent.
in recent years and that efficient councils such as Wandsworth have been able to provide nursery education fully to all the children in their areas?
Mr. Maude
My hon. Friend makes an important point.
Employment Prospects
Mr. Hinchliffe
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will list those measures which he has taken since November 1990 to improve employment prospects.
The Chief Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. David Mellor)
Since November 1990, the Government have reduced interest rates by 3.5 per cent.
and retail price inflation has fallen by more than half.
Underlying earnings growth has fallen to its lowest level for almost 25 years and economy-wide productivity has increased, helping push non-oil exports to record levels.
The foundations have been laid for sustainable growth in both output and employment.
Mr. Hinchliffe
Has the Minister any understanding of the individual human tragedy of unemployment?
Is he aware that today's increase is the 22nd consecutive monthly increase in unemployment?
Does he know that since the Chancellor and the Prime Minister came to office, some 30,000 jobs, on average, have been lost every working day?
Is not the Government's complacency on the matter scandalous and disgraceful?
Mr. Mellor
No, there is no complacency.
Unemployment is a tragedy for the unemployed in Britain, just as it is for the greater number of unemployed in France and the United States.
We have created a climate for recovery.
The key question is not the one that the hon. Gentleman asked, but, rather, whose policies will be best able to put people back to work?
The Labour party will have to deal with that issue.
Sir William Clark
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that far more people are in employment today than in 1979?
Does he also agree that a minimum wage and higher taxation would lead to even greater unemployment?
Mr. Mellor
That is undoubtedly so.
There are nearly 600,000 more jobs in the United Kingdom today than there were in 1979.
My right hon. Friend will be aware that the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development said that between 1984 and 1990 the United Kingdom had by far the best job creation record of the larger European Community countries.
Mr. Beith
Why does not the Chief Secretary recognise that a period of high unemployment and recession is the best time to spend additional resources on investment in the fabric of our schools, homes and transport?
That would put people back to work and give long-term benefits to the economy.
Mr. Mellor
The hon. Gentleman knows only too well that in his autumn statement my right hon. Friend the Chancellor was able to announce a £1.4 billion boost to the railways and London Transport and an increase of more than 10 per cent.
in real terms for capital works on schools.
In addition, for good measure, a substantial increase in the Government's commitment to hospital building was announced.
Therefore, I am not sure that the hon. Gentleman has as good a point as he thought.
Sir Ian Stewart
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that the best way to provide improved employment prospects is to get inflation and interest rates down, as the Government have done so commendably in the past 18 months?
The worst thing to do would be to impose swingeing increases in personal taxation of the sort advocated by the Labour party, because that would undermine the incentive and enterprise on which jobs depend.
Mr. Mellor
My right hon. Friend is quite right.
As the Bank of England's recent quarterly bulletin made clear, the right environment for recovery is one of stable prices.
For the Labour party, inflation is the word that dare not speak its name.
Mr. John Smith
Are not the truly appalling unemployment figures announced today — an increase of more than 53,000, taking the unemployment total to more than 2,600,000, even leaving out the thousands of job losses announced during the present month — ample proof that the Government's incompetent economic policies are certainly not working, but are causing severe hurt?
Do the Chancellor and the Chief Secretary consider that the mounting job losses, with all the human tragedy that they bring, are a’ price well worth paying’?
Mr. Mellor
It is quite clear that we have a climate for recovery in this country, with falling unit labour costs, inflation below the European Community average and interest rates fully competitive with those of our competitors.
Once we get beyond the cheap debating point, has the right hon. and learned Gentleman thought about what the minimum wage will do to unemployment?
Does he appreciate the nonsense of the proposal to increase taxation at this time of economic difficulty?
The key question is: what impact would Labour policies have on unemployment and the economic well-being of the country?
That is the question which the right hon. and learned Gentleman fails to address.
Value Added Tax
Mr. Enright
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will give the rates of VAT since the beginning of 1979; and the dates of each change.
The Economic Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. John Maples)
Until 18 June 1979, 8 per cent.
and 12 per cent; from 18 June 1979 to 1 April 1991, 15 per cent ; and since 1 April 1991, 17 per cent .
Mr. Enright
I am grateful to the Economic Secretary for his diligent research in producing those figures.
Will the hon. Gentleman tell the constituent of mine who is over 21 and earns £50 for a 40-hour week why he has taken a greater percentage of the young man's earnings than he has from his right hon. and hon. Friends who go to the City and, for part-time work, earn hundreds of thousands of pounds?
Is not it a fact that the Government are robbing the poor to pay the rich?
Mr. Maples
The only way to reverse what the hon. Gentleman alleges would be to go back to the sort of tax rates that we had under the last Labour Government — 83 and 98 per cent.
I am sure that it will be interesting to the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) to know that Labour Members advocate such tax increases.
What the hon. Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) said is not true for the vast majority of the population.
A married man on average earnings, with two children, has found that his tax burden from central Government has risen from 32.2 to 32.7 per cent.
The great increase has come from domestic rates and the community charge, and we know who is responsible for that — high-spending Labour councils.
Mrs. Peacock
Will my hon. Friend confirm that it was the last Labour Government who introduced a value added tax of 25 per cent.
on certain luxury items?
Mr. Maples
My hon. Friend does well to remind the House of what happens under a Labour Government.
They had a value added tax rate of 25 per cent.
My hon. Friend may have noticed that the Opposition have been floating a similar idea among themselves and discussing again in an internal memorandum the possibility of a luxuries rate of VAT.
We have no problem in this regard; we do not need to raise taxes
Hon. Members
You have.
Mr. Maples
We have set out our tax and spending plans for the next three years.
The Labour party has set out only its spending plans, including plans to spend £35 billion.
Apparently, it does not need to finance that from raising more tax.
Mrs. Beckett
Is the Minister aware that he has just admitted that under this Government there has been a trade-off between income tax cuts and increases in VAT?
If we take the Prime Minister's words at face value — that the Conserservative party will not raise the rate of VAT — does the hon. Gentleman recall an interview given recently by the Chief Secretary, when he was asked about extending coverage of VAT to transport fares?
He said:’ nobody knows what is waiting round the corner.’
The Chief Secretary then sought to imply that the Government might in some way be forced by the EC to extend the coverage of VAT.
Is the Minister aware that last week in Brussels Madame Scrivener, the relevant Commissioner, assured me that there was no question of our being forced by the European Community to extend the coverage of VAT, and that we cannot be forced so to do?
Does he think that his right hon. and learned Friend the Chief Secretary was hinting that the Government might choose to extend VAT?
Mr. Maples
This is quite extraordinary.
No one could have fought harder than this Government to maintain the zero rates that we have.
We have secured the right to do that.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has made it clear that we have no intention of raising the rate of VAT either before or after the election.
As I told my hon. Friend the Member for Batley and Spen (Mrs. Peacock), we do not need to raise taxes; the Labour party does.
How do the Opposition think they are going to finance £35 billion of extra spending without raising taxes on ordinary people?
They cannot do it.
Mr. Squire
My hon. Friend reminds the House of the 25 per cent.
rate under the last Labour Government and mentions that it was a tax on luxuries.
Will he confirm that those luxuries included televisions; and does he agree that if there is not to be an income tax rate of 35p to support those massive spending plans, they can be supported only by a large increase in VAT?
Mr. Maples
My hon. Friend is, of course, right.
There has to be a substantial increase either in income tax or in VAT to pay for the Labour party's spending plans.
My hon. Friend does well to remind us that when the Labour party was last in office its idea of luxuries included petrol as well as televisions and caravans.
Environmental Policies
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what representations he has received in favour of taxation policies to benefit the environment; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Maude
We have received a number of representations on this subject also.
Mr. Hughes
Given that investment in cavity wall insulation, in energy-efficient boilers and in heating controls has dropped by 50 per cent.
since 1987, given that even double-glazing salesmen appear to have gone quiet in this recession and given that energy-efficiency investment not only helps the environment but protects the vulnerable and the old and creates hundreds of thousands of jobs, will the Government consider extending the exemption from stamp duty for all energy-efficient homes beyond August and perhaps indefinitely?
Mr. Maude
I shall certainly listen carefully to what is said on that matter and give it full consideration.
The hon. Gentleman seems to leave out of account the fact that investment in energy efficiency is desirable for its own sake.
Saving energy saves on cost, so there is already a built-in incentive for people to make prudent investments in energy-efficiency measures.
Mr. Nicholls
Will my hon. Friend confirm that one of the representations that he must have received was that from the Liberal Democrats advocating their policy of imposing an extra 50p a gallon on petrol?
Does my hon. Friend agree that those who live in rural areas ought to know that that is what the Liberal Democrats have in mind?
Does he agree that that policy would have a devastating impact on people who live in the country areas of Teignbridge?
Mr. Maude
My hon. Friend does a sterling service in drawing attention to that Liberal Democrat policy.
I wonder, with him, whether the Liberal Democrats will be quite as keen on promoting that policy in rural areas in the coming general election.
Value Added Tax
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will state the amounts of Exchequer revenue raised from value added tax in each of the years 1978-79, 1986-87 and 1990-91; and indicate what percentage of total Exchequer revenue raised in each of these years these figures constituted.
Mr. Maples
In 1978-79, £5.2 billion and 9 per cent.
; in 1986-87, £22.2 billion and 15.1 per cent.
; and in 1990-91, £32.5 billion and 15.8 per cent.
Mr. Wareing
I thank the Minister for that answer and the confirmation that during the Government's tenure the burden has been placed firmly on the shoulders of those who are least able to bear it.
Will the hon. Gentleman give a categorical assurance that if, unfortunately, the Conservatives are returned to power in a general election, value added tax will not be extended to any of the goods or services upon which it is not already levied?
May I have a simple answer, yes or no, and no shenanigans?
Mr. Maples
It simply is not true that the burden of taxation has been increased on the poorer members of society.
That was the subject of the first part of the hon. Gentleman's question.
Living standards at all income levels improved over that period.
The hon. Gentleman asked about three questions and I shall choose which one to answer.
I think that most people are interested in the fact that living standards under this Government have risen dramatically.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has made it perfectly clear that we have no intention of increasing VAT.
We have made our plans on spending and tax perfectly clear.
We do not need to raise VAT and in the European Community we have fought harder than anyone could have done to maintain our zero rate.
We do not need any clarification about that.
We need clarification from the Opposition about what their tax burden will be.
Mr. Charles Wardle
Has my hon. Friend heard the call from the many people who run village halls about the burden that VAT imposes on their activities?
Mr. Maples
I hear my hon. Friend's Budget representation and will take it into account.
Mr. John D. Taylor
How can the Government give an assurance that there will be no change in VAT rates when, under the Single European Act, the Government have already committed themselves to a policy of convergence of VAT rates throughout the European Community?
Mr. Maples
Any change in fiscal measures has to be agreed by unanimous vote in the Council of Ministers.
Mr. Ian Taylor
Will my hon. Friend make it clear that, according to the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee, VAT is progressive in its impact, given that the more people spend, the more tax they pay?
May we therefore put the Government's tax policy into context: although we do not wish to raise VAT above its present level, what we have done reflects further taxation on those who can afford to spend more?
Mr. Maples
Of course, my hon. Friend is quite right.
The more one spends, the more one pays in VAT.
It must amaze my hon. Friend, as it amazes me, that we have to explain that to the Opposition.
Dr. Marek
Does the Minister agree that his initial answer, taken with the huge increases that his Administration have brought about in national insurance contributions, the poll tax and the burden of rates that business men and business women have to pay, makes it clear that his party is the tax, tax and tax again party?
Will he confirm that the proportion of national income taken in tax rose from 34.75 per cent.
in 1978-79 to 37 per cent.
in 1991-92?
Has the Minister any plans to lower the total burden of taxation on the people of this country, which reached its highest levels in the 1980s after the very much lower levels that we experienced under Labour in the 1970s?
Mr. Maples
It is extraordinary that the hon. Gentleman wants to discuss this part of his party's history.
The tax burden under this Government rose during our first two and a half years because we inherited at the top of the business cycle a borrowing requirement of 5.5 per cent.
of gross domestic product.
For every year since 1981, the tax burden has fallen.
It will continue to fall this year and next year and I think that it is well known to everybody that this Government's policy is to lower taxes, in contrast with the plans of the hon. Gentleman's party.
We know that it plans to spend £35 billion.
We should like to know how Labour plans to raise that.
Mr. Wareing
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of the unsatisfactory nature of the Minister's answer to the question on the extension of VAT, I intend to raise the matter on the Adjournment.
Income Tax
Mr. Haselhurst
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what assessment he has made of the impact on total tax revenues of the changes in the higher rate of income tax since 1979. 10
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what assessment he has made of the impact on total tax revenues of changes in the higher rate of income tax.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Norman Lamont)
The top 5 per cent.
of taxpayers pay 32 per cent.
of the total yield of income tax, compared with 24 per cent.
in 1978-79.
Mr. Haselhurst
Does my right hon. Friend agree that those figures strikingly demonstrate that lower, rather than higher, tax rates are at once a fairer and more effective way to maximise revenue to sustain improvement in important public services?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
We inherited a situation in which there were penal rates of taxation, which we reduced.
The effect was to increase revenue.
The Opposition seem anxious to repeat the mistakes that they made before.
They want to increase tax rates again.
The whole country would like to know at what level of income they intend to increase the higher rate of tax.
The right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) says that it will be at £36,000, but the right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) will not tell us and says that he does not think that it is necessary to say so.
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
Does my right hon. Friend agree that any proposal to raise the higher rate of income tax, as advocated by the Opposition, would be damaging for morale and prosperity, because such a move would not only destroy the will to work but drive some of our best brains out of the country?
We Conservatives do not want that.
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that we shall always be the party of lower taxes and the Opposition that of higher taxes?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
In addition to her arguments, I believe that the low rate of top rate tax is also an incentive to bring inward investment into the country.
It is very much appreciated and gives us a competitive advantage.
Mr. Madden
Does the Chancellor of the Exchequer realise that ability to pay must be the underlying and fundamental principle of any fair taxation policy?
Mr. Lamont
I do indeed, and we have a progressive system.
What the hon. Gentleman does not seem to understand is that one can have a progressive system with two rates.
Mr. Rooney
Does the Chancellor of the Exchequer recognise that 2, 700,000 people out there would welcome the opportunity to pay any income tax?
Mr. Lamont
What the hon. Gentleman does not answer is this question: by putting up —
Mr. Rooney
Answer the question.
Mr. Lamont
The point that the hon. Gentleman will not face up to is this —
Mr. Rooney
Answer the question.
Mr. Lamont
The point implicit in the hon. Gentleman's question is: what is the point of putting up the top rate of tax if one raises less revenue?
What good does that do the poor of this country? 7
Mr. Quentin Davies
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer how much income tax was paid by an average family with two children in 1979 and 1991, at constant prices.
Mr. Norman Lamont
Income tax has been reduced from 14.5 per cent.
of such a family's gross income in 1978-79 to 13 per cent.
in 1991-92.
Mr. Davies
Does my right hon. Friend agree —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is no longer funny.
Mr. Davies
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the reductions in personal taxation have played a major role in the revival of enterprise and the increase in risk taking, productivity and output that we have achieved in the past decade?
Does he agree that reductions in personal taxation are a highly efficacious means of stimulating simultaneously the demand and the supply sides of the economy?
Mr. Lamont
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
The benefits of income tax cuts have been widely appreciated.
The last thing that the country needs at this moment are the sort of enormous tax increases being advocated covertly by the Opposition — the tax increases implied by their sky-scraping public spending plans.
Mr. Ron Brown
Has not national taxation increased with higher levels of VAT and the introduction of poll tax?
Is not it disgraceful that the Government are destroying living standards, yet they claim to believe in human values?
Is not it also true that the Prime Minister claimed that he was concerned about third-world debt?
As this country is also a third-world country, suffering a Tory Government, what is he going to do about that?
Mr. Lamont
I have long thought that the hon. Gentleman imagined that we were living in Ethiopia, having listened to some of his speeches about the economy.
Equally fanciful is his assertion that we are destroying living standards.
How he can use that phrase when living standards for a married man on average earnings with two children have risen by about 35 per cent.
after increases in VAT and increases in the cost of living, I do not know.
The answer lies in the real increase in take-home pay.
Taxes (Abolition)
Mr. Cran
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer how many taxes have been abolished since 1979; and if he will list them.
Mr. Mellor
We have abolished six taxes — investment income surcharge, national insurance surcharge, development land tax, the tax on lifetime gifts, capital duty and composite rate tax.
We plan to abolish a seventh — stamp duty on shares.
Mr. Cran
Has not my right hon. and learned Friend conclusively convinced the House that only a Conservative Government have the courage to reduce taxation on the one hand and to get rid of taxes on the other, in contradistinction to nearly all other Governments before them, and especially the one between 1974 and 1979 who found endless ways of leaching money out of other people's pockets?
How many new taxes would the Opposition introduce if they were in government?
Mr. Mellor
We know that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) proposes a number of additions to existing taxation and a number of new taxes, including the reappearance of investment income surcharge.
I return to the question that we shall level continually at the Labour party: what is the basis for thinking that there is any answer to the country's problems through increasing the burden of taxation?
Mr. Ashton
How many welfare benefits have been cut and how many freezes have been imposed to pay for taxation cuts?
Mr. Mellor
On the contrary, the level of benefits paid has never been higher.
It has risen sharply in real terms, as the hon. Gentleman knows only too well.
Mr. Allason
I congratulate my right hon. and learned Friend on the abolition of composite rate tax.
Is he aware that the 0800 free number is of enormous benefit, especially to pensioners who have had tax deducted from their gross income from their investments in banks and building societies?
Has he any plans to extend the free 0800 number to other taxes which could be reclaimed by pensioners and others?
Mr. Mellor
I have no announcement to make on that matter at this stage, but I shall bear in mind the representation that my hon. Friend has made.
Mr. Skinner
If all those taxes have been abolished since 1979, why is it that the average family, starting out in 1979 with a debt of 45 per cent.
of income after tax and insurance, reached the end of 1991 with a debt of 102 per cent?
The abolition of those taxes has not done the average family any good, has it, or those at Lloyd's?
Mr. Mellor
During the lifetime of this Government the average family the hon. Gentleman talks about has had increases in disposable income of unprecedented levels, in excess of £50 per week, while the hon. Gentleman well knows that from 1974 to 1979 their standard of living bumped along without showing any significant increase.
Family Income
Mr. Tredinnick
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what was the average family income in (a) 1979 and (b) 1991 in real terms.
Mr. Norman Lamont
The real net income of a married couple on average male earnings with two children has increased from £194 in 1978-79 to £262 in 1991-92 — a rise of 35 per cent.
Mr. Tredinnick
Does my right hon. Friend agree that that huge increase in real income clearly demonstrates the overall success of Conservative policies and would not have come about without the tax cuts that all families have experienced?
Would it not be a disaster if families in my constituency in Leicestershire and throughout the country faced the huge tax increases proposed by Labour and the Liberals?
Mr. Lamont
It remains the situation that if we had not altered the income tax regime that we inherited when we came to office, and if we had merely indexed the rates and allowances, the average family would be paying £1,200 more in income tax.
That is what it would be paying under the previous regime of the last Labour Government.
Mr. John Smith
What about value added tax?
Mr. Lamont
I may inform the right hon. and learned Gentleman that a single man on average earnings in 1978-79 was paying 42 per cent.
of his income away in income tax, national insurance contributions, and VAT.
Today the proportion is 40 per cent.
Mr. Cohen
Will the Chancellor comment on the recently published’ Social Trends’, which shows that the income of the richest one fifth increased by more than 50 per cent.
as an overall proportion, whereas the bottom 60 per cent.
saw their proportion of income fall relative to that top one fifth?
As most average families are in the bottom 60 per cent., does not that show that the Government have given money to the rich at the expense of ordinary families?
Mr. Lamont
A person on half average male earnings — a married man with two children — has seen his after-tax, post-inflation income rise some 28 per cent.
That is the increase in real take-home pay for someone on half average earnings.
The hon. Gentleman does a valuable service by reminding us that Labour is committed to a policy of heavy redistributive taxation.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
My right hon. Friend informed us that the previous tax rates would have cost each family an extra £1,200.
Perhaps I may turn briefly to the higher rates, which may be in the minds of some, and ask whether it would be possible to picket Park lane, to ask those attending this evening's £500 per head dinner whether they are paying more tax this year at the lower rate, or whether they paid more tax in 1979 at Labour's higher rates?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend makes an excellent point.
It is utterly baffling why Labour wants to pursue a policy that is likely to raise less revenue and do less good for everybody.
North Sea Oil
Mr. Eadie
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what the cumulative total of all taxes from North sea oil has been since 1979 in 1991-92 prices.
Mr. Maples
Around £109 billion.
Mr. Eadie
Is the Minister aware that the Government have just announced that they have achieved a financial bonanza that no previous Government in history have enjoyed?
Bearing in mind the millions of pounds that the Government raised from privatisations — the selling of the family silver — and all the money that has been raked into the Treasury, should not the Economic Secretary stand at the Dispatch Box and apologise for the economic mess in which the Government have landed this country?
Mr. Maples
The revenues from North sea oil and privatisations helped this Government to restore public finances to the kind of good shape that those of few other countries are in.
Ours is one of the few countries in the European Community that would meet those aspects of the stage 3 European monetary union standards.
Under the last Government, debt rose to unprecedented levels, which was essentially postponed taxation on future generations.
We reduced those debt levels.
They have gone in reducing overseas debt inherited from the —
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Where has the money gone?
Mr. Maples
I am telling you — listen.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The Minister ought to rephrase that remark.
Mr. Maples
Through you, Mr. Speaker, I am telling the hon. Member for Workington (Mr. Campbell-Savours) where the money has gone.
It has gone in repaying the overseas debt that we inherited from the last Labour Government.
It has gone on reducing the fantastic levels of public sector borrowing requirement that were reached under the last Government.
It has gone on reducing income tax from the levels of 83 and 98 per cent.
that were reached under the last Government.
We think that that was a good investment.
Mr. Bill Walker
Welcome though North sea oil taxation revenues are, does my hon. Friend agree that they are not a large proportion of the taxes paid in the United Kingdom?
Also, can he confirm that a separatist, socialist, nationalist Scotland could not expect to enjoy all those oil revenues?
Mr. Maples
My hon. Friend is right about the revenues from North sea oil taxation.
This financial year, they are expected to be just over £1 billion — about one half of 1 per cent.
of total tax revenues.
Manufacturing Output
Mr. Knox
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer what is the most recent monthly figure for output in the manufacturing industry; and what is the comparable figure for the same month 18 years ago.
Mr. Mellor
The idex of manufacturing output was 111.2 in November 1991, the same level as 18 years earlier.
Mr. Knox
Does my right hon. and learned Friend think that this situation represents satisfactory progress over the last 18 years?
Mr. Mellor
The real test of what has happened has been the overall growth in gross domestic product, which has been very substantial.
In so far as one concentrates on manufacturing output, the fall was in the earlier part of this period.
Between the first half of 1974 and the first half of 1979, there was a fall in manufacturing output of 2 per cent.
; whereas from the end of the first half of 1979 to the third quarter of 1991, there has been an increase of nearly 6 per cent.
Ms. Armstrong
The complacency that the Chief Secretary has just demonstrated is way beyond anything that my constituents will understand.
They have seen manufacturing industry absolutely devastated during the period of this Government.
What do the Government intend to do not just to offer help to individuals but to give areas such as mine the opportunity to be again a fully participating part of this nation?
Mr. Mellor
With the greatest respect to the hon. Lady, perhaps she should read the Confederation of British Industry's recent publication,’ Modern Manufacturing Strength’.
It is a fair assumption that the CBI knows at least as much about manufacturing as the hon. Lady does, and she will see a commendation of the Government's policy in the 1980s and a firm recommendation that it should continue.
Mr. Devlin
Is not the constituency of the hon. Member for Durham, North-West (Ms. Armstrong) in the middle of the area of the United Kingdom which gets the largest level of outside investment into this country and, indeed, into the European Community?
Is not that new manufacturing capacity brought here by the Government's successes in promoting Britain and the north of England as a location for manufacturing?
Mr. Mellor
My hon. Friend has made an invaluable point.
The fact that this country has recently received 50 per cent.
of total inward investment by the United States and Japan in the European Community has made possible a diversified economic base, particularly in manufacturing in the north.
This has enabled the north to weather this recession far better than any previous recessions and in a way that bears the best comparison with the south.
Mr. John Smith
As the Chief Secretary has no doubt noticed, the Government's figures today indicate yet a further fall in investment in the manufacturing sector.
Given the horrendous job losses that have been announced this month in the manufacturing sector, are these signs of the success of the Government's economic policy?
Mr. Mellor
What those figures certainly reveal is that the real gains in investment in British business since 1979 have been sustained, so that even at the depth of this present recession investment is 40 per cent.
higher in real terms than it was in 1979.
That was the position last year and it is a sign of the real improvements in investment that have followed the policies of this Government.
Charter Mark
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a statement on how the charter mark will operate.
Mr. Maude
Charter marks will be awarded each year to those organisations that have delivered service to the public to the highest standard at present available.
They must be able to show measurable improvements in the quality of their services over the past two years, and customer satisfaction, and they must have in hand or plan to introduce at least one innovative enhancement to their services which entails no additional cost to the taxpayer or consumer.
Mr. Mitchell
Since the charter mark is designed to improve public services, does my hon. Friend agree that the attack launched today on the citizens charter by the National and Local Government Officers Association in a lavish newspaper advertising campaign is typical of that union's contempt for the consumer and lack of interest in improving public services?
Mr. Maude
What is depressing about that campaign is its spineless acceptance that nothing can be done to improve public services without throwing huge amounts of money at them.
It would be interesting to hear whether the Labour party agrees with the view of that huge public sector trade union.
Or does it accept that the only way to make things better is to lavish ever-greater sums of public money on the public services?
Gross Domestic Product
Mr. Morgan
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer when he expects to have available (a) information on the United Kingdom gross domestic product per head in 1991 and (b) comparable information for the other member states of the European Community.
Mr. Maples
October, when 1991 population figures for the United Kingdom and other EC countries will be available.
Mr. Morgan
May I draw the Economic Secretary's attention to a study that I have just received from the House of Commons Library's statistical section?
According to the author's best estimates, the average gross domestic product per head in this country in 1991 was five percentage points behind that of Italy.
Can the hon. Gentleman confirm that that means that the average family in this country would be approximately £2,000 better off if it lived in Italy?
Is this yet another case of’ Excuse the mess, we have got the Conservatives in’?
Mr. Maples
I told the hon. Gentleman that I could not give him the information for which he asked until October, when the 1991 population figures would become available.
I can tell him, however, that over the 1980s GDP per head in this country rose at an average rate of nearly 2 per cent.
a year — faster than in Germany, France or Italy.
In 1974, Germany's GDP per head was 15 per cent.
ahead of that of the United Kingdom; by 1979, after five years of Labour government, in was 19 per cent.
ahead.
In 1990, after 11 years of Conservative government, the gap had been closed to 16 per cent.
If the hon. Gentleman examines measures of GDP per head and compares this country with France, Germany or Italy, he will find that the gap widened under the last Labour Government and has closed under the present Government.
Savings
Mr. Oppenheim
To ask the Chancellor of the Exchequer if he will make a statement of his policy on the level of savings.
Mr. Norman Lamont
The Government aim to secure an appropriate climate in which people can plan sensibly for the future, making their own decisions about what to save and what to spend.
Mr. Oppenheim
Would not a policy of clobbering savers with an investment surcharge reduce savings and so reduce the pool of available investment capital for manufacturing industry?
Do not such policies illustrate the fact that no amount of tacky red plastic roses, sharp suits or slick public relations can disguise how little Labour has really changed?
Mr. Lamont
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Labour Members talk all the time about the need for investment.
Investment is financed out of saving and the last way in which the level of savings can possibly be increased is by the imposition of extra taxes on it.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Ronnie Campbell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 13 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Campbell
What advice has the Prime Minister for one of my constituents, Mrs. Logan, who lives in Camlinton new town and is in great pain with an arthritic hip?
She has to climb the stairs with the aid of her husband and has to lie in bed in agony most nights.
She has been told by the local hospital that she cannot have an appointment until June 1993.
Is that the Prime Minister's way of keeping waiting lists low?
The Prime Minister
If the hon. Gentleman will give me details of the particular case that he has mentioned, I will certainly have it examined.
What he should acknowledge, however, is that spending is up by more than 50 per cent.
in real terms, 25 per cent.
more patients are treated, there are far more doctors and nurses, and they are far better paid, and treatments that were rare in 1979 are now commonplace.
I wish that the hon. Gentleman and his colleagues would stop running down the improvements that have been made in the national health service.
Mr. Aitken
On a constitutional point, does my right hon. Friend agree that if an assembly were set up in Scotland with responsibility for health, trade and industry, and taxation north of the border —
Hon. Members
Reading.
Mr. Aitken
In such circumstances, would not it be impossible thereafter for Members of Parliament with Scottish constituencies to sit in Departments as Ministers, administering those Departments —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Get it out, please.
Mr. Aitken
I know that this is painful.
Would not it be impossible for Ministers to be in charge of Government Departments administering those matters for England and Wales?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it would be right to set up a retraining scheme for soon-to-be-redundant members of the shadow Cabinet?
Mr. Speaker
I think that that is enough.
The Prime Minister
I should be happy to add that training scheme to the many other excellent training schemes we have at present.
The point that my hon. Friend has made was graphically illustrated by the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook), who is reported as having said that if Labour were to introduce its devolution plans he could not act as Secretary of State for Health for England and Wales.
Presumably the same principle would apply to the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) and the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown).
I look forward to their confirming that.
If the Labour party were then to show some affection for devolution in Wales, perhaps the same principle would apply to an even more eminent right hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Kinnock rose —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The Leader of the Opposition must have a chance to answer.
Mr. Kinnock
Not until we have a Question Time for the Leader of the Opposition, but within a couple of months I shall be answering from the Government side of the House.
Is the Prime Minister aware that in the 15 months since he got his job 840,000 people have lost their jobs?
In this 22nd consecutive month of rising unemployment does he still cling to the pretence that the recovery has already started?
The Prime Minister
I accept that the unemployment figures this month are disappointing — no one can deny that — but what we are seeking to do is to put people back into permanent jobs, and not temporary jobs.
That can be done only by putting in place the right conditions to create long-term, permanent jobs, long-term growth and secure jobs.
That is why we have been working to reduce inflation — with success; to bring down interest rates — with success; and to cut direct tax rates — with success.
Of those people who have lost their jobs, more than 250,000 are this year in well worth while and excellent training schemes.
That is the right way to help people, it is the right way to achieve long-term prosperity for this country and it is the way in which we have been developing our policies.
Mr. Kinnock
For 2.6 million of our fellow citizens the unemployment figures are not disappointing — they are absolutely devastating.
Why does the Prime Minister ignore the evidence of employers, who tell us that unless policies change 50,000 more jobs will go from construction, 40,000 from motor vehicles and textiles, with a further 70,000 manufacturing jobs going?
Why does the Prime Minister ignore all that evidence?
Why does he just sit there and do absolutely nothing to combat the recession that his policies have caused?
After 22 months, does he not yet understand that sitting there crossing his fingers and closing his eyes will not bring recovery?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman talks of ignoring evidence.
There is evidence, too, which he is ignoring.
He has not acknowledged that more people are now moving out of unemployment than a year ago.
Every month 300,000 people are leaving unemployment.
The right hon. Gentleman quotes job losses, but he fails to mention Tesco's plans for 5,000 new jobs over the next year, Safeway's plans for 2,000 jobs, Nissan's plans for 600 new jobs in the north-east, and the fact that Toyota is providing another 3,000 jobs in Derbyshire.
He also chooses to ignore the fact that this country has a higher proportion of its population in work than any other Community country except Denmark.
Mr. Kinnock
Under the Prime Minister's leadership, in the last 12 months alone more than 800,000 jobs have gone and during that period the number of people in employment in Britain has gone down by 800,000.
The number of vacancies has fallen.
Even the Chancellor confesses that the Government caused the recession.
And they have continued it, and have let it get out of control.
The Government are guilty on all counts.
The Prime Minister
My right hon. Friend said no such thing, as the right hon. Gentleman knows.
If the right hon. Gentleman wants to talk about taking action, perhaps he will consider the action that he proposes to take in his policies: a minimum wage that will cost jobs, a payroll tax that will cost jobs, and a strikers charter that will create jobs — not here but in France, in Germany, in Belgium, in Italy, in the United States and elsewhere.
Can the right hon. Gentleman explain how the costs of extending national insurance or raising taxation will help employment?
None of that will help employment.
The right hon. Gentleman's plans would spell disaster for this economy, disaster for companies and permanent unemployment for millions of people.
Mrs. Ann Winterton
Does the Prime Minister accept that one of the great achievements of the Olympic movement is to bring nations together in sporting endeavour and excellence and that similarly, despite the forthcoming general election, all political parties are brought together to support this country's bid to host the Olympic games in the year 2000?
Will my right hon. Friend agree to support fully the Manchester Olympic bid which will benefit not only the north-west of England, where most of the events will be staged, but our capital city and the rest of the country — in fact, the whole nation?
The Prime Minister
I met the Manchester Olympic bid committee some weeks ago when we discussed the proposed bid that Manchester wishes to make.
I asked on that occasion for considerably more information.
That is being provided and I look forward to meeting the bid committee again towards the end of this month.
Mr. Ashdown
The Prime Minister is right — the Government are not wholly to blame for this recession, but they are chiefly to blame.
Does he realise that what the country now needs from him is hope, but all that it gets is complacency; that what the country needs from him is leadership, but all that it gets from him is excuses; that what the country now needs is a Government who will act, but what it has is a Government paralysed by the election who dodge the issues, duck the realities and do nothing?
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman for reprising his party political broadcast of last evening.
It is a good sound bite, but it is not any better for hearing it the second time.
What the right hon. Gentleman should bear in mind, if he cares about real prosperity for this country, is making sure that we get the economic basics of inflation and the exchange rate correct so that we can get sustainable investment for the long term, not the short-term gimmicks that the right hon. Gentleman embraces.
Sir Peter Hordern
Will my right hon. Friend tell Mr. Delors that the proposed increase in the United Kingdom contribution to the European budget is wholly unacceptable?
Will he also tell him that the first priority must be to reform the common agricultural policy, to remove the losses from fraud which occur within that policy and, especially, to bring about a successful conclusion to the GATT negotiations?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend on each of the points that he makes.
There is no justification whatever for an increase in the budget on anything like the scale that the Commissioner proposed.
There is already scope for significantly increased expenditure within the existing own resources ceiling.
Mr. Martlew
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 13 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Martlew
The Prime Minister will be aware that there is great anger and despair in the country at the announcement today that unemployment has moved up again.
That is reflected in my constituency, where there are an extra 400 people unemployed in the Carlisle area, bringing the total to a staggering 4,000 unemployed.
Bearing that in mind, will the Prime Minister take the opportunity today to condemn one of his Ministers who said yesterday that people who were losing their jobs were being’ liberated’?
Will he dissociate himself from that comment and will he take action today to see that the hon. Gentleman concerned is’ liberated’from his ministerial duties?
In other words, will he sack him?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman neglected to mention that unemployment in his constituency has fallen by nearly 20 per cent.
since the last general election.
My hon. Friend has made clear his regret at the job losses at British Aerospace.
The hon. Gentleman simply trivialises the issue with his remarks.
Sir William Clark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that of the known policies of the Labour party —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Sir William Clark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that if there were a minimum wage and also higher taxation both on individuals and on companies, that would kill inward investment and cause even more unemployment?
The Prime Minister
I entirely agree with my right hon. Friend about that.
It is also the case that most independent commentators — Goldman Sachs, Credit Lyonnais, BZW, Phillips and Drew, Nomura, the CBI — agree that Labour would cause a rise in inflation, with all the impact that that would have on living standards, jobs and future prosperity.
Mr. O'Brien
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 13 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. O'Brien
In a radio programme, the Prime Minister told Sue Lawley, in response to a question on housing, that repossessions had stopped before Christmas.
Will the Prime Minister now tell us whether he accepts that, in addition to the massive number of homes repossessed last year, a further 80,000 families are to lose their homes in the current year?
The Prime Minister
What I confirmed in answer to the question to which the hon. Gentleman has referred was that we had put in place measures to deal with the problems arising from repossession.
Lenders have confirmed that they do not seek possession where the borrower has suffered a severe reduction in income support but is still making a regular and routine payment, nor will they repossess — which is the point that I was making — where income support is paid direct to them.
I reiterate that point today.
Mr. Dykes
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 13 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Dykes
Further to the European Community budget proposals, which were proposed unanimously by all the Commissioners, including the two British Commissioners, will my right hon. Friend also agree that extra resources long term will be needed for redundant farmers —— in east European countries, and for the cohesion fund, that there is no need for us to have the United Kingdom budget contribution undermined in any way by these proposals and that they are less in percentage terms annually than the last 10 years' increase in the EC budget?
Interruption
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend points to the fact that there is scope for significantly increased expenditure, perhaps for eastern Europe and the cohesion fund, as he says, but without the existing own resources ceiling, which is still underspent.
There is at this stage no justification for the proposed increase suggested earlier this week.
House of Commons
Tuesday 18 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HEALTH
General Practitioner Fund Holders
Mr. Andrew Mitchell
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how the system of general practitioner fund-holding is progressing.
14
Mr. Andy Stewart
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the operation of the general practitioner fund-holding initiative.
The Secretary of State for Health (Mr. William Waldegrave)
It is clear that the first year of the scheme has brought a wide range of benefits to patients, and that has been confirmed by independent evaluation by Professor Glennerster at the London school of economics.
Mr. Mitchell
Has my right hon. Friend had a chance to reflect on the excellent report produced by Professor Glennerster and published by the King's Fund, which shows that fund-holding practices are more effective and efficient in delivering health care to patients, and that they use their resources much better?
Could not he have arranged for that report to be leaked to the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook), because that might have prevented the hon. Gentleman from making the foolish pledge that Labour will abolish the excellent reforms?
Mr. Waldegrave
I do not know whether the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) likes to read things published in the normal way.
If he had read the report, he would have found in it powerful evidence that his partisan ideological commitment to abolish the scheme is foolish.
Professor Glennerster says that his research shows that none of the alleged scares about the scheme could be found to be true.
He quotes Professor Maynard, who makes the basic point that decisions made closer to the consumer are more likely to reflect consumer information and preferences than an overall average view taken in a district planner's office.
That is the strength of the GP fund-holding scheme.
Mr. Andy Stewart
Has my right hon. Friend noticed the success of GP fund holding in Nottinghamshire and the benefits that has brought to patients and the national health service alike?
Does he agree that there is pressure to extend the excellent scheme and not — as suggested by the would-be Secretary of State for Health for Scotland — to abolish it?
Mr. Waldegrave
I believe that there are four excellent fund holding practices in my hon. Friend's neighbourhood, and they have been adding to the region's total health care provision and are bringing new services to patients.
I am under pressure from a wide range of general practitioners to bring the list size criterion down and to extend the range of care that can be purchased by GP fund holders.
I am considering both points.
Mrs. Dunwoody
Is not the Secretary of State being slightly selective in the parts of the report that he uses?
Is it not clear that it is an untried system, which is clearly producing a two-tier system for many patients, who are not receiving the very best care because their GP practices are treated as inferior to those that hold contracts?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Lady selects the wrong argument on which to call Professor Glennerster as witness, because he says that that argument is muddled.
He shows clearly that he did not find evidence of the so-called two-tier phenomenon to which the hon. Lady refers, but that the total of care provided was increased.
That benefits all patients because it takes the pressure off out-patient departments.
Mr. Hinchliffe
Is it not true that patients are refused access to services on financial grounds by GPs who are fund holders?
May I draw to the attention of the Secretary of State the case of a Wakefield man who was refused expensive injections for infertility by a fund-holding GP and told to apply for that treatment to a non fund-holding practice in Wakefield?
May I also draw the right hon. Gentleman's attention to the personal circumstances of a friend whose wife is suffering from serious cancer?
She was advised that she could not receive homoeopathic treatment because the fund-holding practice had no appropriate contract.
Has not the experiment proved a disaster for vast numbers of national health service patients?
Mr. Waldegrave
As always with selective, individual cases, there is more to them than meets the eye.
I know a great deal about the difficulty of getting homoeopathic treatments referred by general practitioners because there is a homoeopathic hospital in my constituency.
It is not a matter of fund holders versus non fund holders.
There are a number of general practitioners who do not approve of such treatment.
Professor Glennerster considered carefully the argument that expensive treatments might be refused by fund holders and found no evidence of that yet.
We fund the budgets on the basis of past practice so there is no reason for that to be so.
I suspect that when we inquire into the matter, we shall find that the general practitioner had doubts about the treatment's clinical appropriateness.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
Although my hon. Friend is right to say that budget-holding practices have been outstandingly successful and are now very popular with most doctors —
Hon. Members
Sit down.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I think that the whole House wants to hear.
Mr. Winterton
Does my right hon. Friend, who is undoubtedly committed to improving health care, agree that the reforms make planning and the provision of supra-regional specialties very much more difficult?
Will he ensure — and give me an assurance — that there will be careful monitoring?
Mr. Waldegrave
I warmly endorse — of course— the first two parts of my hon. Friend's question, but I do not accept that his criticisms are well founded.
Planning is based on good information and the internal market provides better information about GP, district and patient preferences.
They can then be planned for.
Those working at a supra-regional and regional level believe that once the services that they can make available are known more widely, money will follow the patients to them.
Mr. Robin Cook
I remind the Secretary of State that last month he claimed that the majority of GPs supported him on fund holding.
Is he aware that the very next week, a poll of GPs showed that they believe, by a massive majority of 65 per cent.
to 15 per cent., that his reforms are damaging the NHS?
Is that what he calls majority support?
Is the Secretary of State aware that last week in North Tyneside, 53 operations were cancelled, whereas operations on four other patients from fund holders went ahead?
Is he aware that in Bath, all cataract operations have been cancelled except for those involving the patients of fund holders and that in Norwich, the patients of fund holders are jumping the waiting list and entering private wards?
I call that a two-tier service.
Most GPs call it a two-tier service.
It has no place in the NHS and the next Labour Government will end it.
Mr. Waldegrave
I notice from a recent survey that Labour has achieved 13 per cent.
support among GPs, so it has some way to go in winning the argument.
When the hon. Gentleman finally gave me a straight commitment across the Dispatch Box to abolish GP fund holding, I told him that he delivered the support of the majority of GPs by doing so.
I believe that GPs, whether fund holders or not, recognise, like everyone else in the NHS, that Labour's plans to turn all the reforms upside down and to throw away all the gains that have been made in the past three years are the last thing that the service needs.
The hon. Gentleman can commit no more money.
All he can commit himself to is undoing everything that has been achieved in the past three years.
London Health Services
Mr. Jim Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what assessment he has made of the adequacy of the internal market as the mechanism to determine the future pattern of health services in London.
Mr. Waldegrave
Information derived from the national health service internal market on general practitioner and patient preferences and on comparative costs will help the service to plan sensibly for the future, in London as elsewhere.
Mr. Marshall
Is the Secretary of State prepared to recognise that the Government's reforms have added to the difficulties of health care provision in the capital?
Will he confirm or deny that the Tomlinson inquiry is likely to show that two directly managed units and one trust are in serious trouble?
May I beg him to stop making political capital out of the health of the citizens of the capital and concentrate on the real issues?
Mr. Waldegrave
Putting around scares such as that, which have no foundation in fact, is the worst kind of playing politics with health.
The Government were the first to undertake the far too long postponed replanning of services in London.
That was why I appointed Sir Bernard Tomlinson.
I should have thought that the hon. Gentleman, who cares about these things, would welcome that.
It goes as far back as to when Lord Ennals was Secretary of State.
All those years ago he knew things and said that services should be replanned in London, but did nothing whatever about it.
Mr. Michael Morris
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the need for a review in London goes back much further than Lord Ennals?
My right hon. Friend's agreement to such a review and initiative is greatly to be welcomed.
Will he ensure that in the review by Sir Bernard Tomlinson, the key point about London — its specialist abilities serving constituencies such as mine in Northampton — remains a focal point?
I visited the neurology department at the Middlesex hospital this morning.
Such services, which are available to my constituents and others elsewhere in the country, are vital for the future of our health service.
Mr. Waldegrave
I agree with my hon. Friend.
Many people within those marvellous specialist services in London believe that attracting patients from around the country, and the money that will come with them as the reforms develop, will strengthen those outstanding services.
For example, many people at the Royal Brompton and National Heart hospital tell me that some of the special health authorities should be allowed to win new patients and the money that comes with them by being allowed to work in the internal market.
There is no contradiction between paying tribute to those specialist services in London and pressing ahead with the reforms.
Ms. Harman
The Secretary of State said that the internal market was sensible.
Does he regard as sensible the position revealed by Graham Jackson, the cardiologist at Guy's opted-out hospital, where local people are unable to be treated because the local district health authority's contract has run out?
Local people are left waiting while less urgent cases from outside the district are treated because they bring money in with them.
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that six local people have had to go private to avoid waiting and 40 remain on the waiting list with no prospect of being considered until the next financial year?
One person has already died.
Is not this a case of your money or your life in the internal market?
Mr. Waldegrave
I am glad that the Labour party second-rate advertising agency is now writing the hon. Lady's interventions in the House.
The old system to which the hon. Lady and the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) wish to return us was far more unsatisfactory, as she well knows.
Under that system budgets were given to hospitals.
They ran out two thirds of the way through the year.
As the hon. Member for Livingston can promise his hon. Friends nothing about money, he could not prevent that from happening if he returned to the old system.
We are moving to a system in which patients are accompanied by the money to finance their treatment.
That is far more sensible.
Organ Donor Cards
Mr. Wallace
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what steps his Department has taken over the last 12 months to promote the carrying of organ transplant donor cards; and if he will make a statement.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
The Department maintains a continuous campaign to promote the carrying of donor cards.
Mr. Wallace
Is the availability of donor organs more of a limitation on the transplant programme than the availability of resources?
Will there come a time when that might become so acute that the Minister would be prepared to consider an opt-out as opposed to an opt-in donor system?
How much money has been spent in the past year on promoting the donor card, compared with that spent on the more partisan promotional material which the Government have put out on their other health policies?
Mr. Dorrell
We distributed more than 10 million donor cards in the past 12 months.
For a long time we have made it clear that the largest restriction on the growth of the transplant programme is the availability of donated organs, although it is not a restriction which has stopped the programme in its tracks.
I remind the House that 33 kidney transplants per week are now completed, compared with 16 per week in 1979, and that there are now six heart transplants and seven liver transplants every week — a total transplant programme of 46 operations every week of the year.
The programme is going well, but needs to go better.
The best way to further enhance it is for every citizen to carry a donor card and to ensure that their families are aware of their view that their organs should be available for transplantation after their death.
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson
Does my hon. Friend agree that only about 60 per cent.of potential donors have organs retrieved from them?
Does he agree that that is partly due to the failure of some consultants to seek organs on every possible occasion and also to the reluctance of some next of kin of potential organ donors to give their consent?
In those circumstances does he think that there is a place for a new organ donor card, which has to be countersigned by next of kin?
Will he consider a much stronger publicity campaign for organ donation?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is known to the House to be a great expert on this issue.
He is right to say that a significant number of organs, which could be used for transplantation, are not used.
We are conducting some research to establish the full range of reasons why that is so.
We are specifically considering the proposal that the donor card should be countersigned.
I am much more sympathetic to that proposal than I am to the opt-out proposal advanced by the hon. Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace).
National Health Service Provider Units
Mr. Eadie
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on the financial position of provider units in the NHS.
Mr. Waldegrave
At the end of the third quarter, provider units remained on course to achieve a financial balance this year, as we had reported earlier at the end of the second quarter.
Mr. Eadie
Does the right hon. Gentleman deny that there was an attempt to cover up the fact that many of those units are in serious financial difficulties?
Since the matter is in the public domain, as a consequence of information from his Department reaching the public which was not intended to reach them, how does he propose to deal with the matter?
What proposals has he to put before the House this afternoon?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman is heading towards a vulnerable area for the Opposition.
I advise him not to embarrass his hon. Friend the Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) in that way.
The national health service is greatly improved, in that for many years — including those years when the Labour party was running, or reported to be running the country — the financial balance of the service was poor.
This year we have treated many more patients than previously and the service is in financial balance.
The leaked document showed only the most commonsense action by the NHS management executive to monitor those hospitals where there are problems.
If the hon. Gentleman thinks that that is odd it merely shows that, in common with the hon. Member for Livingston, he has had no experience of such matters.
Mr. Hayes
Has my right hon. Friend had the opportunity to read the scandalously deceitful national health service trust ballot which was put through my constituents' letter boxes by Labour-controlled Harlow council — at an expense to the charge payers of £25,000?
Is my right hon. Friend at all surprised that the local health authority wants nothing to do with that document because it is pure Labour party propaganda and a cynical manipulation of the elderly and the frail?
Will Labour stop at nothing to grab a few cheap jokes?
Mr. Waldegrave
I had the opportunity to study the document because my hon. Friend drew it to my attention as we came into the Chamber.
It is a classic example of the waste of local taxpayers' money by a foolish council which would do much better to spend the money on the services for which it is statutorily responsible.
Mr. Robin Cook
How does the Secretary of State square his answer to my hon. Friend the Member for Midlothian (Mr. Eadie) that provider units are in balance with the evidence from the document, which he knows well, that 86 hospitals are in deficit?
Many of them face major cuts to balance at the end of the year and one of them has dangerously low nursing levels.
How many hospitals, such as Watford, have big deficits?
How many health authorities, such as Tunbridge Wells, cannot pay for routine operations and how many district health authorities, such as South Birmingham, cannot pay any more bills until April?
Is the reason that the Secretary of State objects to the leak that the document tells the truth about those hospitals and exposes his cover-up?
Mr. Waldegrave
The hon. Gentleman is a bit confused.
If 86 hospitals have some problems, it means that another 500 do not.
Some of those 500 are in surplus and, as the health service is a unified service, those surpluses can be transferred to deal with the problems.
There is nothing astonishing about that.
Eye Tests
Mr. Alexander
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he has monitored the extent to which people over 60 years are having their eyes examined since 1989 compared with previous years; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister for Health (Mrs. Virginia Bottomley)
Surveys carried out by the optical profession show that after an initial drop, 12.43 million sight tests were carried out in the financial year ending 1991.
This exceeds the 12.21 million sight tests in 1987 — the last typical year before the changes to the system were announced.
Mr. Alexander
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for those figures, which I shall study carefully.
In view of the fact that eye testing is important in picking up illness in the elderly and that we are in the business of preventive medicine rather than treating illnesses when they occur, will my hon. Friend keep an open mind?
Should the figures for the number of eye tests show an adverse trend compared with those of the past, will my hon. Friend consider the possibility of reintroducing free eye testing for the over-60s?
Mrs. Bottomley
My hon. Friend is right to emphasise the importance of prevention.
That is why the work of general practitioners is important in terms of the regular checks that they carry out on their patients, in particular those patients aged over 75.
I can tell my hon. Friend that four out of five of those elderly patients have accepted their check-ups and that nine out of 10 found them useful.
For 40 years the policy has been that some contribution should be made towards the cost of sight and dental charges — that was agreed by both parties.
People pay 13p a week towards the cost of a sight test every two years — less than the cost of a second-class stamp.
Mr. Kennedy
Is the Minister's very carefully worded reply an attempt to distract from the fact that the proportion of the elderly in the population is increasing and will continue to do so?
Therefore, the potential demand for eye tests from the over-60s will increase exponentially.
We have received clear evidence from opticians in our constituencies that the imposition of charges runs contrary to the concept of preventive medicine.
That move was further encouraged by the increases in prescription charges last week, which were above average when set against inflation.
Should not the costs of check-up tests and the associated costs be scrapped?
Mrs. Bottomley
The hon. Gentleman, when discussing the increase in prescription charges, did not, of course, mention the above-average increase in optical vouchers — a 9.5 per cent .
increase.
As the population becomes older, it also becomes wealthier and I draw the hon. Gentleman's attention to the fact that the average pensioner has increased his or her income by 33 per cent.
That contrasts with the time when Labour was in power when pensioners' incomes increased by a modest 3 per cent.
The importance of prevention has been emphasised time and again.
That is why, only last year, we were involved in the eye awareness campaign with the profession to draw attention to the importance of people ensuring that their eyesight is checked.
Dame Jill Knight
Is my hon. Friend aware that there was a serious fall-off in the number of people presenting themselves for eye tests for a considerable period after the charges were introduced and that the current figures show that we have not yet made up that gap?
If that is not so, why have so many ophthalmologists gone out of business?
Mrs. Bottomley
I regret that I disagree with my hon. Friend, but I assure her that the levels have returned to those of 1987.
That is agreed by the professions, with which I shall be having further discussion shortly.
It is important to note that we have greatly increased the number of professionals providing services on a wide range of fronts.
For example, there are an extra 22 per cent .
ophthalmologists and an extra 22 per cent.
optometrists registered with family health service authorities over and above the 1979 figure.
They are all providing an excellent service.
I am also pleased to inform my hon. Friend that ophthalmology waiting lists have fallen substantially during the past year.
Mr. James Lamond
Is the Minister aware that the number of eye tests in the Oldham area dropped by one third last year?
Is he aware that even when people are examined, are found to have cataracts and wait a long time for the operation, some of them — such as a 91-year-old constituent of mine — are told that Royal Oldham hospital, which has been granted trust status, does not have the money to provide the necessary medicines and has money to help only the elderly?
Mrs. Bottomley
I am extremely surprised to hear what the hon. Gentleman says, for opthalmology waiting lists between March 1990 and March 1991 almost halved for long waiters.
There is in the patients charter a clear commitment that patients should be seen within a maximum of two years.
I shall look into the circumstances that the hon. Gentleman describes.
Free NHS sight tests are available to those on low incomes, children and those especially at risk of eye disease, such as glaucoma sufferers.
About 40 per cent.
of people are entitled to free tests.
General Practioner Targets
Mr. Arbuthnot
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what proportion of general practitioners in Redbridge are reaching the 80 per cent.
target for immunisation and cervical smears; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Dorrell
On 1 April 1991, 65 per cent.
of GPs in Redbridge and Waltham Forest were entitled to receive target payments for childhood immunisation, compared with 52 per cent.
12 months earlier.
On the same date, 75 per cent.
of local GPs were entitled to receive target payments for cytology, compared with 42 per cent.
in the previous year.
Mr. Arbuthnot
Is my hon. Friend aware that the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) and I have something in common?
Although I do not share the hon. Gentleman's rather seedy taste for handling stolen goods, I did believe, as did he, that the 80 per cent.
targets were too heroic and would never be reached.
I was wrong, and they have been a dramatic success.
Will my hon. Friend call on the hon. Member for Livingston to make a similar admission of the error of his ways?
Mr. Dorrell
I congratulate my hon. Friend on accurately quoting the words of the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) on 25 July 1989, when he described the targets as’ so heroic that many doctors will give up trying.’
Far from giving up trying, doctors are meeting the targets.
I have further bad news for the hon. Member for Livingston.
He may remember that at about this time last year we published a series of figures which demonstrated that his predictions were wrong.
He will not have long to wait for another diet of his own words.
Doctors' Contracts
Mr. Adley
To ask the Secretary of State for Health when he next intends to discuss doctors' contracts with the British Medical Association; and if he will make a statement.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
Ministers meet BMA representatives regularly to discuss a range of issues.
Mr. Adley
In view of the evaporation of the objections of the BMA and a large number of doctors to the Government's policy, does my hon. Friend agree that the debate is being drawn up along the following lines, with the Confederation of Health Service Employees, the National Union of Public Employees and the Labour party on one side and the Government, the taxpayers and the patients on the other?
My hon. Friend is aware that junior hospital doctors' hours have been a matter of concern for many years.
Will she do more to publicise the results of the recent negotiations on that issue?
Mrs. Bottomley
My hon. Friend is right to say that the Labour party is increasingly losing credibility with patients, the public and the NHS staff because we are seeing concrete achievements by the NHS as the reforms work out in practice.
We frequently talk with the BMA about junior doctors' hours.
We have agreed to a new deal, with £60 million extra going in to tackle the problems of junior doctors and 500 extra staff.
Moreover, we have agreed in full to the pay review body's recommendations on how to fund the doctors' new contracts.
Shortly, we shall launch a further information campaign because, to achieve the changes in junior doctors' hours, it is important that the NHS task forces in each region can work with the juniors, managers and consultants to find practical solutions at their particular places of work.
We believe that we have seen the end of that problem.
We must complete that process.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
Does the Minister realise that there is great disquiet among doctors about the slow implementation of an improvement in their hours and conditions?
In that context, will she look at the pooling system that applies to GP contracts, because many GPs have improved their work in terms of cervical smears and other tests in preventive medicine, but have ended up worse off as a result?
Mrs. Bottomley
The number of hours a week worked by juniors has come down by about 10 hours since the Labour party was in power.
In the past year, the number of those contracted to be on duty for more than 83 hours has halved, but we must go much further.
Above all, we must move junior doctors on to a shift system so that they do not work more than 60 hours, coming down to 56 hours in the most intensive posts.
We now have an agreement from all those concerned — the colleges, consultants, juniors and the health service — and we must find practical arrangements in each working unit to complete the task.
Princess of Wales Hospital, Ely
Mr. Paice
To ask the Secretary of State for Health if he will make a statement on progress towards obtaining the use for the NHS of the premises of the RAF Princess of Wales hospital, Ely.
Mr. Dorrell
I am pleased to tell the House that Cambridgeshire health authority and the Ministry of Defence have agreed in principle that the health authority should buy the RAF hospital at Ely.
The health authority and the Defence Land Agent hope to conclude negotiations within a month.
Mr. Paice
For my constituents in Ely and the surrounding area, it will be excellent news that, after 52 years as part of the RAF, the hospital has a future as part of the NHS.
Will my hon. Friend join me in paying tribute to the sterling work done by the Action Committee for a Hospital in Ely and Cambridge health authority, which persevered in trying to get the hospital for the NHS?
Can he give the House any information about how it has been possible for the NHS, which is supposedly starved of funds, to find the money to buy that hospital?
Mr. Dorrell
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the fact that the further substantial increase in the NHS's capital budget in the next financial year has made it possible for the health authority and the Ministry of Defence to come to an agreement on that issue.
I am glad to join my hon. Friend in congratulating those local people who have argued the strong case for ensuring that the hospital facilities at that building continue to be provided to the people of Ely.
I welcome the fact that it is part of a continuing development of community hospital and community health facilities within the modern national health service.
NHS Treatment
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Health what remedies are available to NHS patients or their families to use if they are dissatisfied with the treatment given in NHS hospitals.
Mr. Dorrell
Directions issued under the Hospital Complaints Procedures Act 1985 require all NHS hospitals to make formal arrangements for dealing with complaints and for publicising those arrangements.
Under the patients charter, NHS complaints procedures will be extended to all hospitals in which NHS patients receive care.
Mr. Hughes
May we have an urgent inquiry into why, over the past three years, the number of complaints against the health service in Lewisham and North Southwark has gone up by 100 per cent., why there have been 30 complaints already this year and why serious complaints of maladministration and negligence have been made against Guy's, King's College and St.
Thomas's hospitals by my constituents over the past year?
Why, even when complaints are made, are they often inadequately dealt with, why is there no compensation and why do people sometimes hear nothing for far too long?
Mr. Dorrell
The increase in complaints may have something to do with the fact that we believe that it is important that if someone has not received the care to which he thinks he is entitled from the NHS, his right to complain should not be a well-kept secret, as has too often happened in the past.
A patient's attention should be drawn to the fact that he has a right to complain and we have taken steps to do so.
We take each complaint seriously and seek to ensure that every one is properly examined.
I look forward to hearing from the hon. Gentleman how he will deal with the complaints that I expect he will receive from his constituents, when he has to explain to those employed at Guy's hospital why the Labour party's policies would deny that hospital the opportunity to increase staff pay by £6 a week.
Sir John Hannam
Will my hon. Friend accept the thanks of the House for the award of compensation to those patients who contracted HIV as a result of blood transfusions in the NHS?
Will he pass on the thanks of those of us who went to see the Prime Minister two weeks ago to ask for his help in the matter?
Mr. Dorrell
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his comments.
We concluded, after long and careful thought, that it was right to make the change that we announced earlier this week.
Mr. Ashley
Is the Minister aware that medical accidents constitute a major cause of dissatisfaction?
The legal procedure is far too clumsy and hit-and-miss.
Cannot we have a proper system of no-fault payments for medical injuries?
Mr. Dorrell
The House debated the issue about a year ago and reached the conclusion, on a free vote, that that issue was not the highest priority call on the NHS budget.
I agree with that decision and would not commend any proposal to change it.
Waiting Lists
Mr. Franks
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many in-patients are waiting for longer than a year for treatment; and what was the corresponding figure for 1979.
Mr. Waldegrave
At March 1979 the number of in-patients waiting over one year was 185,195.
Provisional figures show that by December 1991 the number had fallen to 108,982, a reduction of 41 per cent.
Mr. Franks
Those figures are welcome, as is the 60 per cent.
reduction in the northern region of those having to wait more than two years.
Is not the essential difference between Government policies and those of the Opposition that the Government's prime concern lies with patients' interests, while Opposition Members' prime concern is to keep happy the unions that pay and sponsor them?
Mr. Waldegrave
I fear that on health, as on other issues, that is all too true.
I think that the House will unite in applauding the fall in long waits.
Our congratulations should go out from the House to the national health service for what it is achieving.
Mrs. Heal
The policies of the Secretary of State have meant that patients who have waited too long find the lists abolished, as happened to the varicose veins list at Whipps Cross hospital.
As South East Staffordshire health authority has drawn attention to the longest waiters —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
I did not hear the intervention, but hon. Members should keep quiet.
Mrs. Heal
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
As South East Staffordshire health authority has said, attention to the longest waiters’ does not equate to attention to clinical priorities.’
Is the Secretary of State more concerned with patients on waiting lists or with headlines on waiting lists?
Mr. Waldegrave
Like the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook), the hon. Lady leads for the Labour party in a weak suit.
It is not just long waits that are falling.
As she probably knows, half of all patients are treated as emergency cases, half come from waiting lists.
When the Labour party was in power, half of the remaining half — the other 25 per cent.
— were admitted in, on average, eight weeks.
We have reduced that period to five weeks, which means that millions of patients now wait for shorter periods than they did under a Labour Government.
We are told by The Observer that the hon. Member for Livingston is now running as part of a comic team with the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, East (Mr. Prescott)— a wonderful pantomime horse — in seeking the job of the Leader of the Opposition.
If the hon. Member for Livingston ever got into power, no doubt we would return to the longer waits that we experienced under the Labour Government.
National Health Service Trusts
Mr. Hind
To ask the Secretary of State for Health how many representations he has received from patients about NHS trusts; and if he will make a statement.
Mrs. Virginia Bottomley
I am delighted to report that a recent patient satisfaction survey showed that, of 901 patients consulted, 96 per cent.
were either very satisfied or quite satisfied with the quality of service that they had received.
The survey showed also that the majority, 92 per cent., felt that the service had improved or stayed the same.
Mr. Hind
Will my hon. Friend take time today to congratulate the doctors and staff at Ormskirk district general hospital who are second in the country in respect of their waiting list register, with 94 per cent.
of patients operated on within three months of their names appearing on the register?
The hospital, driven by the doctors themselves, is seeking trust status; I hope that my hon. Friend will consider its application sympathetically and support the hospital in every way that she can.
Mrs. Bottomley
I give my warmest congratulations to the staff at Ormskirk hospital, which I visited in November 1989 for the turf-cutting for a new £32 million project which was a typical example of the 75 per cent.
increase in capital spending that we have put into the service — unlike the cuts of the Labour party.
The hospital has certainly achieved remarkable developments and was recently congratulated by the Sunday Times on its work in having achieved the second shortest general surgery waiting list.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 18 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Skinner
With only a few more bribing days left before the general election and in view of the fact that the House has been televised for more than two years, will the Prime Minister tell us whether he is prepared to take part in televised debates during the general election campaign with the Leader of the Opposition — yes or no?
The Prime Minister
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we hold televised debates in the House twice a week —
Hon. Members
Frit!
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Robert B. Jones
Has my right hon. Friend had a chance to study the statement by the Bundesbank that Germany is now in recession and that it blames the fall in output in Germany on the world recession?
Does not that nail the lie being put around that these circumstances are due not to world but to British recession?
The Prime Minister
As my hon. Friend points out, the Bundesbank has said that the German economy is now in recession.
That confirms the point that I have been making to the House for some time about the international slow-down and international difficulties.
A number of countries are either in recession or experiencing a slow-down in activity.
Germany, alas, is the latest country to reach a formal recession.
Mr. Kinnock
Would the Prime Minister confirm that today's figures show the biggest rise in long-term unemployment in 10 years, that 1.3 million people in Britain have been without work for more than six months and that 750,000 of those have been without work for more than a year?
Against that background, does the Prime Minister still dare to say to those people and their families that their prolonged misery is a price well worth paying?
The Prime Minister
No one has said that, as the right hon. Gentleman well knows.
This month's increase in the numbers unemployed for a year or more is certainly extremely unwelcome, but the long-term unemployment level is about half what it was five years ago and long-term unemployment among 18 to 24-year-olds is also half that level.
Long-term unemployment among the over-50s has halved over the past four years.
These figures are too high, but the only way to get them down permanently is to have the right structure of development in the economy: low inflation and stable exchange rates.
That is what we are providing; there is no easy way.
Mr. Kinnock
But the Prime Minister and the Chancellor have said that this unemployment and recession are a price well worth paying.
Can the Prime Minister really take any comfort from the fact that, bad as today's figures are, they are slightly less bad than they were in the last Tory slump?
Is he really trying to convince the people of Britain, as they tried to do then, that policies of this kind provide a basis for sustained recovery and sustained growth?
British unemployment is rising faster than unemployment in any country in the rest of the European Community.
We have a huge increase in long-term unemployed, and more job losses are being announced every week.
All this is taking place while the Prime Minister has had his present job and while he was Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Is not it now obvious that Majorism is not working?
The Prime Minister
I repeat to the right hon. Gentleman that I have said no such thing, and neither in context has my right hon. Friend the Chancellor.
As I said a moment ago, there is only one way to create long-term stable employment.
The right hon. Gentleman implies that nothing is being done.
I do not call halving inflation doing nothing.
Last month it fell to just over 4 per cent.
If that is doing nothing, what were the last Labour Government doing when inflation went up to 27 per cent?
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister cannot correct the record to the extent of pretending that both he and the right hon. Member for Kingston upon Thames (Mr. Lamont) have not said that today's conditions, with all their misery, are not a price well worth paying.
That is the first point.
Secondly, the Prime Minister refers to the record over 13 years.
In that 13 years manufacturing output under his Government in Britain has gone up less than 6 per cent.
It has gone up by four, five and 10 times as much among our competitors, and the right hon. Gentleman is still not doing anything to bring Britain out of recession, to give us recovery.
A Tory Government means permanent high unemployment.
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman does not listen and he does not understand.
I repeat: I have said no such thing and I invite him to withdraw.
The House will know that he changed his allegation between his first and third questions.
If he is really concerned about unemployment, why does he want to cripple British industry by bringing back flying pickets, by encouraging mass pickets, by returning trade union immunities, with all the difficulties that we saw in the 1960s and 1970s?
That would not produce growth and jobs.
That would produce permanent slump, no jobs, no prospects, no hope for the future.
Those are the policies that the right hon. Gentleman sets out before this nation.
Mr. John Marshall
Does my right hon. Friend recognise that the decision to compensate those who contracted HIV as a result of treatment through the national health service is widely welcomed?
I thank him for a speedy and compassionate response.
He knows the representation that I made with other colleagues only a fortnight ago.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for what he says.
We made special provision for those with haemophilia and HIV because of the special circumstances that are apparent and because of the widespread representations that have been made to us.
I hope that it will ease the difficulties of people who face such a tragic circumstance.
Mr. Ashdown
Does the Prime Minister realise that there are only two facts that one needs to know to assess the Government's real commitment to recovery?
The first is that unemployment rose by 53,000 last Thursday and the second is that the Government cut their training budget by £171 million last Friday.
How does the Prime Minister justify that?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman is well aware that we have the largest training provision that this country has ever seen.
If the right hon. Gentleman does not know what circumstances are necessary for long-term prosperity and jobs, and that they are basically low inflation and a stable economy, he ought to learn that speedily.
Mr. Gorst
When my right hon. Friend is making arrangements for his business in the second week in April, will he please include a visit to Edgware general hospital, where he will find patients, members of staff and doctors highly satisfied with the changes that have taken place in the national health service?
The Prime Minister
I shall be happy to visit that hospital.
I think that the changes in the health service are increasingly being understood to be welcome and to be providing a better health service for the future.
That is becoming increasingly understood within the health service — if not, alas, on the Opposition Benches.
Mr. Patchett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 18 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Patchett
The Government have increased prescription charges 14 times, and they did so just this week by twice the rate of inflation.
Will the Prime Minister intervene to stop this disgraceful taxation of the sick — yes or no?
The Prime Minister
There are 100 million more free prescriptions this year than there were at the time of the last Labour Government.
The number of people who pay for prescriptions has shrunk and shrunk, as the hon. Gentleman knows.
He should stop trying to misrepresent policies.
Mr. Amess
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 18 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Amess
Will my right hon. Friend agree to visit Basildon ——
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Come on.
Mr. Amess
— the finest and most exciting town in the country?
When my right hon. Friend does so, will he tell my constituents that there has been a record reduction in the number of strikes and that we now have the best figures for decades?
Does he agree that such improvements are a key component in a strong economy and that they have been achieved through the Government's industrial relations laws, which the Opposition parties wish to repeal?
The Prime Minister
I shall be happy to visit my hon. Friend at Basildon either before or after the general election.
He makes a good point.
Indeed, the figures for 1991 are even better than those for 1990.
There were fewer strikes last year than in any year since records began a century ago.
That is essentially because of the change in labour relations and the encouragement that has been given for employers and the work force to work together.
Mr. John Garrett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 18 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Garrett
Has the Prime Minister seen the prospectus from Pathfinders Repossessions plc, which is a company which proposes to buy repossessed homes at auction and then flog them off or rent them at a huge profit?
I understand from the promoters that the project cannot fail because it qualifies for tax reliefs under the business expansion scheme.
Does the Prime Minister find this proposition just plain squalid?
The Prime Minister
The straight answer to the hon. Gentleman is no, I have not seen that prospectus.
If the hon. Gentleman had wanted a detailed comment on it, he would have invited me to look at it before he asked his question.
Interruption
Mr. Oppenheim
Has my right hon. Friend had the chance to study the document entitled’ The Citizen's Charter’, which was written in 1921 by Herbert Morrison, then secretary of the London Labour party?
It states that the best way to improve public services is to increase competition.
Does not that show that no amount of tacky red plastic roses, sharp suits and slick public relations can disguise the fact that, far from progressing, Labour is regressing?
The Prime Minister
I believe that it does show that.
My hon. Friend is entirely right about the merits of competition.
We now have another citizens charter that addresses the direct problems faced by the people of this country.
The Opposition are so rattled about it that NALGO is spending £2 million to advertise against it.
Mrs. Mahon
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 18 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mrs. Mahon
The Prime Minister does not seem to be aware of what is happening with prescription charges.
May I draw to his attention the case of a constituent of mine, a Mr. Russell, who is paid just 6p more than the income support level?
From 1 April, he will have to pay £3.75 a week for a prescription out of an income of £60.31.
If that is not a tax on the sick, will the Prime Minister tell us what it is?
The Prime Minister
One in three people are now entitled to free prescriptions, as opposed to one in six.
There are far more prescriptions than ever before for which people no longer pay, and those who find themselves marginally above income support level have the option of acquiring a season ticket precisely to meet that problem.
Mr. Moate
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 18 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Moate
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act is an essential weapon in the battle against terrorism?
Does he agree that all parties in the House should support its annual renewal, so that we can send the terrorists the clear message that they can never win?
The Prime Minister
Yes, Sir — and I believe that recent events reinforce that point.
Without the renewal of the Act, the IRA would be free to march, recruit and raise funds anywhere in Great Britain.
Its renewal is absolutely essential, not just as a clear message to the terrorists but as a vital part of our ability to safeguard the lives of our citizens.
I hope that, in the light of all that has happened, the Opposition will change their policy on this occasion, and will support the renewal of the Act.
Mr. Speaker
The motion in the name of Mr. John MacGregor.
Not moved.
I call Mr. Andrew F. Bennett.
Several Hon. Members
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Well, we have rather passed points of order.
Mr. Corbett
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
The Prime Minister said in reply to my right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition that neither he nor the Chancellor had made the remark about unemployment being a price well worth paying.
May I tell you and the House, Mr. Speaker —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman's point of order constitutes a clear continuation of Question Time.
I am not responsible for what the Prime Minister has said.
House of Commons
Wednesday 19 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
ENVIRONMENT
Domestic Rates
Mr. Butler
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment how many representations he has had on the subject of domestic rates; and if he will make a statement.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
I receive very few such representations.
The overwhelmin majority of taxpayers have no wish to see the reintroduction of unfair domestic rates.
Mr. Butler
Does my hon. Friend agree that domestic rates were especially unfair to single people, and will he reassure the House that he, at least, has no intention of returning to a system that discriminated against many pensioners?
Mr. Portillo
My hon. Friend is right.
It is extraordinary that the Labour party is planning that widows, for example, should enjoy no discount over households full of wage earners.
It is incredible that the Labour party proposes that there should be no limit on the tax that a widow would pay on the house in which she has lived all her life.
It is incredible also that the Labour party proposes for a widow four different intrusive valuations of her house, and proposes, too, that that same widow should be penalised with higher taxation if she has made improvements to her property.
That is Labour party policy, and I shall have nothing to do with it.
Mr. John Evans
Does the Minister acknowledge that when we had a domestic rating system almost every citizen in the land made sure that he or she registered to vote?
Will he now confirm that one side effect of the appalling poll tax is that more than a million citizens of this country have not registered to vote?
Will he mount a campaign to ensure that every citizen in the land registers for a vote — especially so that those votes can be cast in the general election?
Mr. Portillo
I know that the Labour party thinks that it has lost the election, and is looking for an excuse.
That is what is known as a pre-emptive whinge.
If anybody has given up his right to vote, in the misguided intention of not paying his taxes, he will get no sympathy from the public — and more fool he, for listening to the Labour Members of Parliament who urged people not to pay their community charge.
Sir Rhodes Boyson
Is my hon. Friend aware that in my constituency the majority of people infinitely prefer the council tax to Labour's alternative — the so-called fair rates, which are nothing but a return to the dreaded rating system that we had before, and which was especially hated in the south of England?
Mr. Portillo
My right hon. Friend's constituents were often paying £2,000 on their houses, whether or not they could afford it, and whether or not they were widows or pensioners.
Who could possibly advocate returning to such an unfair system?
Labour is the only party which could advocate that.
Mr. Alton
If fairness is to be the criterion, does the Minister agree that it is fundamentally unjust that people should be expected to pay twice — that people should be surcharged in cities such as Liverpool, where last year the cost was £71 per head, after people had already paid their bills?
Next year it could cost £2 extra a week — £100 per head — to pay for people who have refused to pay their poll tax?
Does the Minister agree that that — and the practice of sending vexatious summonses to people who have paid their bills, and who are being forced to pay £12 a head for the privilege of receiving such a summons — must be altered if people are to have any confidence in the system?
Mr. Portillo
It is terrible that people are being made to pay for the non-payers.
That is why there will be no amnesty, and those people will be pursued until the moment that they pay up.
It is surprising that some people in Liverpool chose not to pay their community charge, when they were urged not to do so by Labour Members of Parliament?
One Member of Parliament there was actually sent to prison for non-payment.
Is it any surprise that some people took that example and ran up horrendous debts?
There will still be no amnesty.
Rents-to-Mortgages
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment when he expects to make an announcement on a national scheme for the conversion of council rents to mortgages.
The Minister for Housing and Planning (Sir George Young)
My right hon. Friend is considering a statutory rents-to-mortgages scheme in the light of the results of the pilot schemes in Basildon and Milton Keynes.
Mrs. Hicks
Is my hon. Friend aware that since 1980, 10,075 council tenants in Wolverhampton have become the proud owners of their council houses?
Does he recognise that many people want to be proud owners, but cannot afford to buy their council homes outright?
They would warmly welcome the opportunity, which they hope that the Government will give them, of being able to convert their rents to mortgages.
I ask my hon. Friend, please, to give us that opportunity as soon as possible.
When he does so, I hope that he will ensure that he legislates to ensure that Labour cannot operate delaying tactics as they have in Wolverhampton.
Labour does not want people to own their own homes.
Sir George Young
My hon. Friend rightly draws attention to her many constituents who are now home owners and thus have the privilege of owning their own homes — a right which would have been denied them if we had listened to the advice of Opposition Members.
If we decide to extend the rents-to-mortgages scheme and to make it nationwide, we shall take steps to ensure that no recalcitrant local authority can deny people rights that have been given to them by the House.
Mr. Winnick
Is the Minister aware that a number of people in the west midlands and elsewhere who took the opportunity of buying their accommodation now find that their homes have been repossessed as a direct result of Government economic policy?
The essential need in housing is to provide far more rented accommodation.
Before the Minister gives us, once again, the sterile old argument about the number of empty council properties, I point out that the number of empty council properties is far fewer than the number of empty properties owned by the Government.
Sir George Young
No one in temporary accommodation who sees empty and unused local authority accommodation thinks that that is a sterile argument.
On the first point, local authority tenants who bought their homes are among those least likely to have been repossessed.
They tend to be people who are used to making regular weekly payments and they have a substantial equity in their homes because of discounts.
They are not a significant element among those who have been repossessed.
We shall continue to put pressure on local authorities with stock that has been empty for more than a year.
We shall persuade them to bring it back into use for the benefit of those in temporary accommodation.
Mr. Hind
My hon. Friend will be aware that I have often urged him to follow the Basildon project with the Skelmersdale project.
Skelmersdale is a new town with many former council houses which would be ideal for conversion from rents to mortgages.
When he considers his share of the Conservative party manifesto, will my hon. Friend give a promise to my Skelmersdale council tenants that they will be able to purchase their houses under such a scheme in the future?
Sir George Young
We are, indeed, reflecting on precisely that proposition.
We believe that the tenants about whom my hon. Friend has spoken are responsible people who are capable of taking a mature decision.
I was appalled to see that the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) referred to the rents-to-mortgage scheme as a’ facile and short-term measure’.
That is a patronising approach which would deny widening choice to many local authority tenants.
Mr. Soley
Is not the reality that the scheme is an enormous flop?
Is not it true that throughout the United Kingdom, only about 100 such cases have been pursued despite the enormous amount which the Government have put into advocating the scheme?
Is not the reality that there is a far greater interest at present in a mortgages-to-rents scheme?
Does the Minister agree with the figure given by the Chancellor of the Exchequer at the Dispatch Box when he told us that there would be 40,000 mortgage rescues this year?
If the Minister does not agree with that figure, will he tell us how long it will take to introduce any rescue schemes?
Are we talking about months or years?
Sir George Young
As to the rents-to-mortgages scheme, 568 people in Milton Keynes and Basildon applied to buy their home under the scheme; and 100 applicants have switched to the right-to-buy scheme.
They would not share the hon. Gentleman's view.
Labour adopts a dogmatic approach to the rents-to-mortgages scheme, as it did to the right to buy and will abandon it in the same way.
Mr. Dunn
Does my hon. Friend accept my view that the Labour party would really like tied workers living in tied cottages?
Will he confirm that tenants who decide to buy under the provisions of the rents-to-mortgages scheme will pay little more than they do in rent?
Sir George Young
My hon. Friend is right.
They would pay exactly the same under the rents-to-mortgages scheme as they currently pay in rent — but they would be acquiring their homes, rather than simply being tenants.
I could do no better than use the graphic terms in which my hon. Friend described Labour's position.
It has a paternalistic approach to local authority tenants.
We seek to enfranchise them.
Environmental Protection Act 1990
Mr. Alan W. Williams
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on the progress being made in implementing the Environmental Protection Act 1990.
The Minister for the Environment and Countryside (Mr. David Trippier)
The Environmental Protection Act 1990 has already led to significant improvements in national pollution control, waste disposal, the control of litter and the reorganisation of bodies responsible for the countryside.
Progress in all areas is continuing on schedule.
Mr. Williams
Will the Minister confirm that Her Majesty's inspectorate of pollution has so far achieved just six prosecutions under integrated pollution control and the 1990 Act?
The Minister will remember that in Committee, he regularly boasted about how powerful a piece of legislation the Bill was — saying that it was the most far-reaching legislation in Europe, and so on.
After 13 years of Conservative government, it is the only environment Act that we have.
It is flimsy legislation.
No money was committed to it, only six prosecutions have been brought and fines imposed to date amount to only £13,000.
Is not that the true measure of the Act and of the Government's lack of commitment to the environment?
Mr. Trippier
When the hon. Gentleman sat on the Standing Committee on the Bill he did not vote on any single occasion against the precise measures to which he now refers.
There is a major difference between the hon. Gentleman and myself as to whether prosecutions are an agency's proof of success.
I maintain that the principal force of the 1990 Act is the deterrents that it introduced.
Prosecutions are the mark of the failure of a policy, not of its success.
The hon. Gentleman has a ghoulish thirst for blood — except, of course, the sight of his own.
Mr. Squire
Is not my hon. Friend a little surprised that the Opposition seek to raise that point, given that the 1990 Act and other measures demonstrate that every major environmental initiative this century has been implemented by a Conservative Government?
Will my hon. Friend emphasise that Labour's only policy on air pollution is to abolish nuclear power and replace it with coal-fired power — the net consequence of which could be only a massive increase in global warming?
Mr. Trippier
My hon. Friend is right.
On his last point, Labour has manifestly failed to square the circle.
While it has a policy such as that to which my hon. Friend referred, it cannot convince the House or anyone else that it is serious about stabilising and reducing carbon dioxide levels.
My hon. Friend's first point is valid.
Conservative Governments have been responsible for all major environmental legislation.
An Opposition spokesman, the hon. Member for Dewsbury (Mrs. Taylor), said at Labour's party conference that Labour introduced the Clean Air Act 1956.
It did not.
That legislation was introduced by a Conservative Government.
Mr. Win Griffiths
Will the Minister explain why, if the Environmental Protection Act 1990 is so wonderful, the Government are being dragged to the European Court for failing to comply with Community legislation on water standards and air pollution control?
Is it not a fact that, for all their fine words, the Government's deeds are desperately poor and that the country is looking forward to a change of Government in a month?
Mr. Trippier
The hon. Gentleman always comes to the House badly briefed.
Nothing in the Environmental Protection Act 1990 relates to the European directives to which his question refers.
Every member state has either received article 169 letters or is, according to the Commission, in breach of European directives.
The case being considered during the next few weeks will be the first alleged breach of an environment directive by this Government in 20 years' membership of the European Community — and I am proud of that.
Empty Council Properties
Mr. David Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what is the latest figure for the number of council properties left empty by the 10 councils with the most such properties.
Sir George Young
In the latest housing investment programme returns, the 10 councils reporting the highest percentage of their council house stock empty on 1 April 1991 were Liverpool
Hon. Members
Labour.
Sir George Young
with 5,733 dwellings; Manchester
Hon. Members
Labour.
Sir George Young
with 6,042; Salford
Hon. Members
Labour.
Sir George Young
with 2,292; Burnley, 372; Brent
Hon. Members
Tory.
Sir George Young
937, but Brent has no overall control; Hackney, 1,998; Tower Hamlets, 1,895; Knowsley, 1,037; Newcastle upon Tyne, 1,886; and Wolverhampton, 1,347.
Mr. Evans
I thank my hon. Friend for those revealing figures, and congratulate him on all his efforts to rehouse the homeless.
Is that not in stark contrast to Labour Members who trade on the squalor and misery of people who are not housed?
Their friends in the town halls keep people out of homes and use them to trade and to get cheap votes.
When will the Opposition tell Labour councils to open those houses, and get the homeless off the streets and into the empty dwellings that those Labour authorities control?
Sir George Young
There is —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Could hon. Members calm down.
Sir George Young
There is no way in which I can match my hon. Friend's colourful eloquence.
He rightly points out that — apart from Brent, which has no overall control, and Tower Hamlets, which is controlled by the Liberal Democrats — the 10 authorities with the highest percentage of empties in their stock are Labour controlled, and about 20,000 properties have been left empty for more than a year.
That is an affront to people in temporary accommodation and in housing stress.
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to that.
We must reflect on whether further measures might be needed to put extra pressure on authorities to bring properties back into use.
Mr. Tony Banks
Instead of trying to score cheap points —— no hon. Member would defend any situation where empty properties are kept unnecessarily empty.
We know the Minister to be a reasonable man.
Why does he not call in the authorities that he mentioned — there are others — to identify the problems that confront them and which lead to properties being left empty when clearly, a large number of people are waiting to be housed?
Interruption
Sir George Young
We are not after cheap points, but cheap accommodation.
The hon. Gentleman knows that many local authorities could use quicker reletting procedures and faster procedures for the repair and maintenance of properties to reduce the gap between one tenant leaving and another moving in.
The Audit Commission has said that if all authorities did as well as the average, significant reductions could be made in the number of families living in temporary accommodation.
Many of the voids are in that category not because of a shortage of resources, but because of weak and poor management.
I hope that Opposition Members will use their influence with Labour-controlled councils to improve their performance and so put many more such properties back into use.
Mrs. Gorman
Is my hon. Friend aware of the disgraceful record of Basildon council, which covers part of my constituency, on reletting properties?
Is he further aware of the bribe that that council is offering to its tenants in the form of a rent freeze to try to dissuade them from opting for new landlords in Commission for New Towns and council house properties?
Will he assure me that he will look into that matter, because Basildon council is simply trying to bribe its tenants before the election?
Sir George Young
I am sure that the residents of Basildon will see straight through any transparent attempt to buy their votes.
Many local authorities, including Basildon, could do better.
As I have already said, we will see whether any further measures are necessary to reduce the number of properties left empty by local authorities.
It is a scandal.
Mr. George Howarth
When will the Minister own up to the fact that the biggest offender in terms of empty property is his Government, who have 31,000 empty properties throughout the country?
Instead of all this fake indignation, when will he own up to the fact that most of the local authorities, including my own of Knowsley, have empty properties because they are being held for improvement under schemes in which the Government are involved after 13 years in which they have neglected to fund local authority and other housing stock?
When will the Minister admit that it is him and his Government who are responsible for all the problems, including the appalling homelessness that is subsequently caused?
Sir George Young
Most Government property is owned by the Ministry of Defence which is bringing back families from Germany and other parts of the world and those properties are needed for them.
There is no way in which one can compare properties built by the MOD for service men with the scandalous performance of a number of local authorities.
Such comparison cannot justify that performance — nothing can justify leaving 20,000 properties empty for more than a year.
There is no advantage to be gained by Opposition Members seeking to defend the indefensible.
Council House Sales
Mr. Ian Bruce
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on the availability of council house sales' receipts to repay debt and to provide additional houses to rent.
The Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Michael Heseltine)
At 1 April 1991, local authorities had unspent housing capital receipts of £700 million.
In addition they held approximately £5.1 billion from all capital receipts and set-aside as provision for debt repayment under the new capital finance system.
Since 1985-86 alone, total capital public expenditure on social housing provision has been £18.3 billion.
Mr. Bruce
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
I wonder whether a new radical approach should be taken to the receipts from council house sales.
Should councils be asked to relieve the public sector borrowing requirement of that burden of long-term debt by transferring it and their balances to housing associations?
In that way housing associations could immediately buy up many of the surplus properties that are currently available on the housing market.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that that would provide low-cost homes, a welcome boost to the housing market and reduce housing benefits?
Mr. Heseltine
My hon. Friend's heart is in the right place, but I do not believe that his precise proposal would have the effect that he has in mind.
Because of the flow of capital receipts we have been able to increase the cash spent on social housing, not least through the agency to which my hon. Friend referred, the Housing Corporation, whose budget is shortly to rise to £2 billion a year.
Mr. Nellist
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that if the principle that the Government applied in cancelling £14.5 billion worth of debt for all nationalised industries before privatisation were applied to local authorities, there would be little debt left to repay?
If he is really concerned to increase the number of homes available to rent, why will he not recognise that of the 700,000 empty properties, 100,000 are in the council sector and 600,000 are privately owned?
Why not deal with the beam instead of for ever going on about the mote?
Mr. Hesletine
The hon. Gentleman raises the important issue of the privately rented sector.
It is probably true to say that his party did more decade after decade to destroy the availability of properties in the private rented sector — to the impoverishment of some of the most needy sectors of society.
Area Cost Adjustment
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will consider the abolition of the area cost adjustment.
Mr. Portillo
It is important that standard spending assessments should recognise that pay and the costs of recruiting and retaining staff are substantially higher in some areas than in others.
That is the purpose of the area cost adjustment.
Mr. Pawsey
My hon. Friend will be aware that there is much disquiet in Warwickshire and elsewhere about the standard spending assessment and the result of the revenue support grant — At least I get support on some occasions from Labour Members.
The area cost adjustment exacerbates that position.
My hon. Friend will also be aware that a number of counties are now calling for the abolition of the area cost adjustment.
Will he give careful consideration to the possibility of abolishing that unneeded and unnecessary measure?
Interruption
Mr. Portillo
I do not think it would be reasonable to pretend that the cost of paying people, recruiting them and retaining them is the same in the south-east as in other parts of the United Kingdom.
It would be unfair to pretend that, but I do not want my hon. Friend to be carried away by the importance of it.
In a county such as Hampshire, recognising the extra costs, we give an extra 5 per cent.
for teachers' pay, so the differential between Hampshire and my hon. Friend's county is only 5 per cent.
Mr. Flynn
A consequence of the area cost adjustment is to elevate finance to be the supreme consideration.
Is the Minister aware that part of the result is that in my constituency today 14 classrooms have been closed in Bassaleg school?
Parents were told last night that their children should not come to school due to the appalling standard of cleanliness resulting from the employment of contract cleaners.
That state of affairs never occurred under the previous system.
What do the Government intend to do about it?
Mr. Portillo
Not only have we enormously increased the standard to which schools and public buildings are cleaned, as a result of compulsory competitive tendering, but we have saved ratepayers and community charge payers huge amounts of money.
It is disgraceful that the Labour party, in hock to the trade unions, is now threatening to sweep away compulsory competitive tendering, irrespective of the cost and the effect on services to the customer.
Noise Pollution
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will bring forward further measures to assist the police, local authorities and individuals in combating noise pollution.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Tony Baldry)
My Department commissioned an independent review of noise control policy in 1990 and has already taken action on more than half the recommendations.
Mr. Bowis
Does my hon. Friend agree that a curse of modern urban living is musical mega-decibels in the night?
Hitherto, police and local authorities thought that they did not have power to deal with it adequately.
Now that it has been shown in Liverpool that there are powers to confiscate offending equipment — as there always have been in Scotland — may I ask my hon. Friend to draw those powers to the attention of local authorities — and, through the Home Office, the police — so that the public may be protected from this menace?
Mr. Baldry
There has been considerable comment in recent months about the need for environmental health officers to have power temporarily to remove equipment.
We have advised environmental health officers that they already have power under the Environmental Protection Act 1990 temporarily to remove equipment such as audio equipment to ensure that a noise abatement notice is complied with.
The courts have recently demonstrated the existence and effectiveness of that power.
Any environmental health officer who is in doubt about the existence of that power should examine schedule 3 to the 1990 Act, where it is clearly set out.
Mr. Haynes
Mr. Speaker, Sir, when we had a Greater London Council, the noise of lorries in London was controlled.
Is the Minister aware that when I lie in my flat at night I cannot sleep for noise?
I need to be fit so that I can stay awake in that Committee upstairs.
Will the Minister do something about it?
Mr. Baldry
The hon. Gentleman is conversant with the problem of noise pollution in every way.
He will be glad to know that we have set up a noise review working party and that one of the issues that it has been considering is traffic noise and how to deal with it more effectively.
Diesel Fuel
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what steps he proposes to take to encourage the use of low-sulphur diesel fuel.
Mr. Baldry
The Government welcome the European Commission's draft directive setting new limits for the sulphur content of diesel fuel and other gasoil.
Those are a necessary complement to last year's directive on emission standards for heavy duty diesel vehicles.
We are working for resolution of outstanding points of technical detail with a view to early adoption by the Council of Ministers.
Mr. King
My hon. Friend will know of the widespread success of his unleaded petrol campaign, which has persuaded motorists to use a more environmentally acceptable fuel.
Is he aware that 10 per cent.
of cars purchased these days run on diesel, and that there is widespread concern that the fuel used has a heavy sulphur content?
The European Commission wants that content to be reduced to a very small amount by 1995-96.
Will my hon. Friend speak to our right hon. Friend the Chancellor about introducing financial incentives similar to those for unleaded fuel so as to encourage speedier acceptance of a lower-sulphur fuel?
Mr. Baldry
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The fiscal incentives for use of unleaded petrol have been a great success.
As my hon. Friend knows, fiscal matters are for our right hon. Friend the Chancellor.
However, my hon. Friend's suggestion envisages simultaneous availability on the market of two different grades of diesel, which would present difficulties in terms of separate pumps, separate distribution systems, and so on.
Moreover, it would soon become redundant when the low sulphur standard becomes mandatory for all diesel.
We are seeking to resolve a similar difficulty with the Commission's proposals.
Mr. Dalyell
In view of the sulphur monoxide consequencies, have the Government taken into account the latest findings from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration in relation to the ozone layer, and the need for urgent measures to be taken into account in view of this desperately dangerous and cancer-giving situation?
Mr. Baldry
The Government have been at the forefront in calling on our European partners to take action to reduce chlorofluorocarbons by 1995.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State will no doubt have something to say about that to European Community colleagues this weekend.
Mr. Paice
Will my hon. Friend look at the work being done in Austria and France to make an eco-friendly diesel fuel from oilseed rape and other oil crops?
Will he particularly look at what the French are doing in terms of tax concessions to encourage the viability of such an environmentally friendly fuel, and will he perhaps have a word with our right hon. Friend the Chancellor on that subject?
Mr. Baldry
In that area, as in so many, enhancing environmental improvements will mean considerable scope for new environmental technology.
The good example that my hon. Friend gives shows that, in pursuit of higher environmental standards, new technology is coming forward.
I shall certainly look with interest at the specific matters to which my hon. Friend has drawn attention.
Mr. Simon Hughes
What is the Government's general policy in relation to fuel and environmental protection?
Given that the chairman of the Conservative party and the Secretary of State for Energy have accepted, on behalf of the Conservative party, that petrol prices will have to rise, do the Government wish to take action before Europe imposes its own regime on us, or will they wait for Europe?
What increases in fuel prices does the Conservative party envisage in the next 10 years?
Mr. Baldry
It is a great pity that not one member of the Liberal Democratic party could be bothered to attend the European Standing Committee this morning, where we debated those matters for nearly two and a half hours.
Had they bothered to look in on that Standing Committee, they would have heard me make it clear that the Government will be working in co-operation with our European Community colleagues to find a way of reducing carbon dioxide emissions effectively.
We have said that we recognise that high energy prices may have to play a part in a strategy for reducing carbon dioxide emissions.
It is important, however, to recognise that this is a global problem which requires a global solution.
Perversely, unilateral action, even by the European Community, could have the effect of increasing carbon dioxide emissions.
Air Quality
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what action is being taken by his Department to monitor air quality in London; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Trippier
My Department already spends more than £4 million annually on monitoring air quality, particularly in London, and making the information available to the general public and the media.
We are extending the range and coverage of our urban air quality monitoring network in the coming years, and an additional monitoring site came into operation in central London last month.
Mr. Corbyn
Is the Minister aware that many people in London are deeply disturbed by the increasing incidence of asthma among children, but that the Minister for Health has been unable to give figures relating to the level of asthma suffering in London as a result of air pollution, which is caused mainly by vehicles?
In December, air quality levels were the worst for 11 years, with carbon monoxide at 13.3 parts per million, and nitrogen dioxide at 243 parts per billion?
Does he agree that the serious deterioration of air quality in London arises mainly from increasing vehicle movements and that the best course would therefore be to improve public transport, reduce the number of cars going through London and ensure cleaner fuels and cleaner burn to preserve the health of our children, who are suffering grievously because of the increasing levels of pollution in central London?
Mr. Trippier
No one has a monopoly of concern about this issue.
Neither is the problem confined to London.
As two members of my family suffer quite badly from asthma — they suffered particularly when we had low-level ozone problems last summer — I am well aware of the situation.
I can give the hon. Gentleman and the House some comfort by saying that over the next two years things will change dramatically.
By the end of this year, the fitting of catalysts to new cars will be mandatory.
Then there are the new European Community standards for heavy diesel vehicles.
The new MOT exhaust emissions test, which was introduced only a few months ago, will also play a significant part in cleaning up the air.
In addition, there are traffic management measures, including red routes, of which the hon. Gentleman is aware.
The Environmental Protection Act 1990, too, has raised the standards of air pollution control.
The combination of those measures will improve the situation dramatically.
Mr. Jessel
Is not aircraft noise the worst form of air pollution in London?
Does the Minister agree that, as the Government have curbed night flights, refused planning permission for a heliport at Cannon Street in the City, stopped the Heathrow-Gatwick helicopter link and refused planning permission for a fifth terminal at Heathrow, they are second to none in protecting people from the blight and the curse of aircraft noise?
Mr. Trippier
I am most grateful to my hon. Friend for raising that matter.
I add only that a consultation paper on aircraft noise, including the noise caused by leisure flying, has been released.
That paper is the responsibility of the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, and I have no doubt that when it has gone out we shall receive positive comments and shall act accordingly.
Rev. Martin Smyth
We welcome the positive steps that the Minister says have been taken, and we are glad to hear of the amount of money being spent on monitoring.
What specific lessons have been learnt which could result in a reduction of air pollution?
I am thinking, for example, of the city of Belfast and other urban areas throughout Northern Ireland which in the past year have suffered more than ever from air pollution.
Mr. Trippier
The most important outcome of the increased use of monitoring equipment is that people who suffer from respiratory diseases can be alerted to the possibility of a problem arising within the following 24 hours.
I have already indicated that, as members of my family suffer from asthma, I am aware that it is absolutely essential to have such information.
The advice provided by the Department of Health is very good.
The Department advises people who suffer from respiratory diseases to take minimum exercise and, preferably, to stay indoors.
That is the purpose of the monitoring equipment.
We have learnt that when there is protracted sunlight during the summer months the low-level ozone problem is activated and aggravated, causing massive difficulty for those who suffer from respiratory diseases.
All the measures that I catalogued earlier will help to reduce vehicle emissions — the principal cause of bad air.
Green Belts
Mr. Dykes
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will consider the need for additional regulations to enhance the ecological protection of the environment for green belt areas of open space in the outer London boroughs.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Tim Yeo)
We will shortly issue a draft planning policy guidance note on nature conservation which will expand and update our existing policies to promote nature conservation in all areas, including the green belts.
Mr. Dykes
I thank my hon. Friend for being part of the Government who have enhanced and protected green belt districts more robustly than any other Government of the post-war period.
I believe that total green belt space has doubled since 1979.
I particularly thank my hon. Friend and his colleagues for recently calling in the Hillside and Brookshill development in my district so as to protect still further the local green belt land.
Is my hon. Friend aware that without fresh primary legislation it is possible to require owners of green belt land to ensure that it is maintained properly and not just left undeveloped?
Mr. Yeo
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for giving me the opportunity to reinforce the Government's commitment to protect green belt districts.
We have been robust in dealing with planning applications in green belt areas, and we are wholly committed to the five objectives of the green belt.
As my hon. Friend said, we have substantially increased the area covered by green belt in this country, and I welcome this chance to make absolutely clear to any planning applicants thinking of trying to develop green belt land that we shall stand by our commitments.
English Heritage
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment when county hall and Battersea power station were last inspected by English Heritage as his advisers on historic buildings matters.
Mr. Yeo
Both buildings were last inspected by English Heritage on Thursday 13 February.
Mr. Banks
How very convenient!
Is it not disgraceful that two of London's most conspicuous and well-known landmarks — county hall and Battersea power station — stand empty, forlorn and in an increasingly derelict state?
Does the Minister recall that a shyster developer was going to turn Battersea power station into a theme park?
The building now stands in grave danger from the weather, derelict and in ruins.
Is it not a fitting monument to 13 years of shyster Tory Government?
Mr. Yeo
The only thing that stands between county hall being put to good use is the Labour-controlled Lambeth borough council, which is squandering charge payers' money on increasingly desperate but unsuccessful attempts to prevent the sale of county hall and its productive use for hotel and residential accommodation.
The consequence of those legal manoeuvres is to deny other London boroughs a massive capital receipt which could have been put to good use on behalf of charge payers.
That attitude exposes the fact that Labour's posture on capital receipts is totally fraudulent.
If the Labour party were in power, there would be no capital receipts.
The hon. Gentleman's question was interesting in that it linked county hall and Battersea power station, making it clear that the Labour party's plans for a reborn Greater London council are not the reassuring slim-line version that Labour spokesmen have been peddling.
The Labour party plans a vast and sprawling bureaucracy which will need not just county hall, but Battersea power station, to house the thousands of officials required to carry out the wishes of Labour's public sector trade union paymasters.
Mr. Bowis
Is my hon. Friend aware that the Member representing Battersea has kept in regular touch with English Heritage, from which he has received confirmation that everything that needs to be done to protect that building has been done?
English Heritage pays tribute to the work of Wandsworth borough council in ensuring that, if the owner of the building has not done the work, the council has done it and billed the owner.
Will my hon. Friend pay tribute to English Heritage and to Wandsworth council for protecting that building?
Mr. Yeo
First, I pay tribute to my hon. Friend the Member for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) for his interest in the matter.
It is true that English Heritage has carried out frequent monitoring.
Both that institution and Wandsworth borough council have demonstrated their concern about the fabric of Battersea power station and have stepped in from time to time to ensure that, while the present owner obtains the refinancing required, essential works are carried out to prevent the building's condition from deteriorating.
The excellent work by Wandsworth borough council and by my hon. Friend will be rewarded, as the key to the increased majority in Parliament that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister will secure later this year lies in the fact that many London Labour-held marginals will fall as a result of the lingering effect of the loony London Labour party.
Mr. Gould
How can the Minister justify the attempt to sell off into the private sector, just a matter of weeks before a general election, what most Londoners rightly regard as the proper seat of London's government?
Is that not merely a last act of spite by a Government who still bear a grudge against London?
Will the Minister tell us whether he agrees with the chairman of the Tory party that a citywide administration is needed for London?
If he does agree, what form should it take?
Mr. Yeo
The verdict of Londoners on whether London wants a Labour-led Greater London council reborn will be seen when we judge the results of the general election in the London constituencies.
I am confident that those results will pass a crystal clear judgment that people are afraid of the Labour party in London.
They can see what it is like in Lambeth, in Southwark, in Hackney and elsewhere.
They will further pass judgment that the Government want to see that enormous capital asset across the river sold for hotel or residential accommodation, and a huge capital receipt — probably more than £100 million — distributed to the old London boroughs for productive use in their areas.
If the Labour party continues to promote the idea that London wants a new Greater London authority, with powers over the police — a policy which strikes terror into the heart of every law-abiding citizen in the capital — it will get its come-uppance when the general election comes.
Housing Associations
Mr. David Nicholson
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment if he will make a statement on progress in developing the role of housing associations.
Sir George Young
Housing associations are now the main providers of new subsidised housing.
Government support for the Housing Corporation's approved development programme is set to increase from £1.6 billion this year to more than £2 billion in 1993-94.
Next year, the corporation will approve more than 50,000 new homes — more than 25 per cent.
more than this year and three times as many as in 1990-91.
Mr. Nicholson
I am grateful for the progress indicated in that reply.
My hon. Friend knows of my great interest in further improving the resources available for housing associations.
Will my hon. Friend — with his hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, with whom I have corresponded on the matter — undertake to consider further how a housing association might help with the difficult and complex problem faced by owner-occupiers in Galmington in Taunton, whose homes were built in a non-traditional manner just after the war and who cannot now sell those homes?
As the owners are aging, they are facing considerable problems.
Sir George Young
I am distressed to hear of the problems facing owner-occupiers in the area referred to by my hon. Friend.
The housing defects legislation was introduced to try to tackle those problems.
I shall see whether further steps can be taken to remove the uncertaintly hanging over my hon. Friend's constituents.
Mr. Trimble
One welcomes the provision that housing associations can make, and I speak as a member of the management committee of a housing association.
Nevertheless, one has one reservation about making housing associations the main vehicle for the provision of social housing: a housing association is not accountable in the same way as a local authority to the people for whom it is making the provision — that is, of course , in those areas where local authorities have a housing function.
Sir George Young
The hon. Gentleman raises a serious matter.
In England, we have been taking steps through the Housing Corporation to increase the accountability of housing associations to their tenants by, for example, promoting tenant membership of management committees, and by requiring management committees to consult much more effectively.
One could develop the argument that a well-run housing association, with tenants on the board and with regular consultation, might be more accountable than a local authority for which there was a vote only every four years and which tended to ignore the views of tenants.
Mr. Wolfson
I support strongly the development of housing associations in view of my experience with my local authority in Sevenoaks, which successfully sold the whole of its housing stock to West Kent housing association.
Nevertheless, is my hon. Friend the Minister not concerned about the growth in size of housing associations, which might make it more difficult to maintain the personal contact with tenants which is an important aspect of good housing management?
Sir George Young
Again, my hon. Friend raises a very valid point.
The housing association movement has a tradition of accountability and good local performance.
If a housing association becomes too big, it loses those inbuilt advantages.
Of course we have this matter under review.
The Housing Corporation is particularly anxious to ensure that the smaller and medium-sized housing associations get an adequate share of the growing resources provided by the Housing Corporation so that the more traditional associations can continue to provide the new homes and local management to which my hon. Friend paid tribute.
Mr. O'Brien
The Minister must be aware of the shortage of affordable housing in villages and towns in rural areas, with the result that young people have to leave those areas to find suitable accommodation.
The Housing Corporation cannot meet the demand in the rural areas.
What is the Minister doing about that?
Will he consider allowing local authorities to build houses in rural areas for the people who live there and who need the houses now?
Sir George Young
The Government have taken a number of steps to promote the provision of affordable homes for exactly the people whom the hon. Gentleman mentions.
We have two sets of rural initiatives — one through the Housing Corporation and one through local authorities.
Increasingly, however, we are using the planning system to generate the affordable homes that are needed.
The hon. Gentleman will have read and re-read circular 7/91 which contains the exceptions policy, allowing homes to be provided on sites not normally designated as residential so long as they are aimed at local people.
He will also be aware that the planning system can now be used to require a developer to make provision for a percentage of homes specifically for young people who cannot afford to buy on the open market.
We are conscious of the issue and we have developed policies which address it head-on.
Community Charge
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment which councils have the lowest level of community charge collection.
Mr. Portillo
For the first year of the community charge, I believe that the authorities with the lowest collection rates are Hackney, Islington, Lambeth, Liverpool, Newham, Southampton, Birmingham, Waltham Forest, Bristol and Greenwich.
We have had no return from Manchester.
Mr. Arnold
Is not the most significant point about that list the fact that all the authorities listed are Labour controlled?
Does my hon. Friend agree that that is not surprising, since so many Labour councillors backed the’ won't pay, can't pay’campaign?
As a result, there are large bills to be paid — bills which are being passed on to ordinary community charge payers.
Is that fair?
Mr. Portillo
Of course it is not fair.
The collection rate in my hon. Friend's area is 94 per cent., which shows that it can be done.
There is a very strong link between the list that I have read out and the authorities whose councillors advocated non-payment — Lambeth, for instance, whose councillors were so bad that even the Labour party had to remove them from office.
If the Labour party did not want us to vote for its councillors, what confidence can we have in the people that it puts up for election?
Another strong link is that the areas of inefficiency and non-collection are the very areas where the Conservatives have been scoring the most remarkable by-election victories in terms of council seats.
Mr. Blunkett
Does the Minister agree that the performance of Labour councils attempting to collect the uncollectable in the face of the unspeakable is responsible for this dilemma?
A total of 172,000 people registered for poll tax payment in Lambeth, where 68,000 summonses and 50,000 liability orders have been issued.
In Islington, 127,000 people registered, and there have been 75,000 summonses and a staggering 70,000 liability orders.
Does the Minister agree that he and his colleagues are responsible, first, for refusing to take action to clear up the fiasco on the issue of computer records being used, secondly for refusing to abolish the 20 per cent.
contribution rule for the poorest in the community and, thirdly, for devising and implementing the wretched tax in the first place?
Mr. Portillo
The hon. Gentleman is being preposterous.
The figures that I read out are for the first year.
The computer evidence problem has only just arisen.
The condemnation of the figures that the hon. Gentleman has read out is that in those boroughs we need never have had so many liability orders or so many people taken to the courts or threatened with prison if they had not been misled by Labour Members of Parliament and councillors into running up enormous debts.
Now that those people have run up those enormous debts, where are the Labour Members of Parliament who led them into that position?
They have fled the field and left their constituents in the lurch.
Derbyshire County Council
Mr. Oppenheim
To ask the Secretary of State for the Environment what are the numbers of people employed by Derbyshire county council; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Key
Staff employed by Derbyshire county council have increased by 22 per cent.
in the past 10 years — from around 38,500 people in 1981 to nearly 47,000 people in 1991.
If spending and the community charge are to be kept at acceptable levels, staff numbers have to be kept under better control than that.
Mr. Oppenheim
Is my hon. Friend aware that while Derbyshire county council's policies have led to the redundancies of hundreds of teachers recently, and while Derbyshire is the only county in England to have fewer policemen than 10 years ago, none the less the county council's job creation priorities have managed to find no fewer than three posts at £40,000 per annum for former Labour councillors and Members of Parliament, the council leader has fitted himself up with a job at an annual equivalent salary of £40,000, the leader of the Derbyshire Labour party — one David Skinner — has been given a job as a minder to Japanese business men despite being kicked out of the council for corruption 15 years ago, and his wife has been given a job at £23,000 per annum in the council's bloated publicity department?
Are those the candy-floss, Mickey Mouse jobs that the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) goes on about so much, or are those people just sponging off the backs of the poll tax payers?
Mr. Key
Anyone who wants to see a Labour government in action should look at Derbyshire.
Talking of phoney jobs, the biggest generator of phoney jobs will be Labour's con trick of creating regional parliaments full of fully salaried Members of Parliament and all their hangers-on without making a ha'porth of difference to the quality of services for local people.
Mr. Skinner
That millionaire mammy's boy —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is not wholly unparliamentary.
Mr. Skinner
That millionaire mammy's boy has some cheek to talk about families.
My brother was sacked by a Tory council many years ago in Derbyshire because he had the guts to take it on, and he has nothing to apologise for.
Neither has Derbyshire county council which, unlike many Tory councils, has kept school meal prices down to the lowest in Britain and refused to sack workers.
In 1985, its Labour majority was bigger than that of the Tories and the people of Derbyshire re-elected it in 1989: they are satisfied with Derbyshire county council's policies, and when we have the general election they will kick out the Under-Secretary of State and the hon. Member for Amber Valley (Mr. Oppenheim), the man with the Pampers on.
Mr. Key
I think that we understand why so many Labour seats in Derbyshire are at risk in the coming election, and I am not surprised.
This is the authority which has not increased school meal prices for 11 years, since 1981; it has been expelled from the Museums Association for selling pictures and using the money for non-museum purposes — and so on, and so on , and so on .
The electorate will judge it.
House of Commons
Thursday 20 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
HOME DEPARTMENT
Police Authorities
Mr. Paice
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department whether he has any plans to introduce direct elections to police authorities.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Kenneth Baker)
We have no plans to change the existing arrangements for the constitution of police authorities, where two thirds of the members are local councillors and one third are local magistrates.
Mr. Paice
Is my right hon. Friend aware that in a recent opinion poll only 8 per cent.
of the respondents supported the idea that police authorities should consist only of elected members?
Is it surprising that the public should resist such an attempt to politicise the police, despite the fact that it is the policy of the Opposition?
Mr. Baker
As far as I can see, it is the only policy that will appear in Labour's manifesto, in that Labour want fully elected police authorities.
There is no popular support for that and there is no evidence that policing is made more effective by tinkering with the membership of the police authority.
In my judgment, magistrates add an important element of non-political independence to any police authority and they help to improve the effectiveness of that authority.
We remain strongly opposed to bringing police forces under total local political control.
Mr. Tony Banks
Is the Secretary of State aware that in London there is a majority in favour of Labour's proposal to set up an elected police authority for the Greater London area?
We already have one elected police authority in London — in the City of London.
Is the Secretary of State further aware that the proposal is welcomed not only by the majority of Londoners, but by all the senior officers of Scotland Yard?
What has he got to say to that?
Mr. Baker
The hon. Gentleman totally misrepresents that opinion of senior police officers of the Metropolitan police.
I know perfectly well that when he was chairman of the Greater London council he wanted an elected police authority, and I think that he wanted to be chairman of it
Mr. Tony Banks
No.
Mr. Baker
I can think of nothing more damaging to law and order in the metropolis than having the hon. Gentleman as chairman of such an authority.
Mr. Tony Banks
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
The Home Secretary has just misled the House.
He is a liar.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman must withdraw that comment, even though I was on my feet.
Mr. Banks
If the Secretary of State withdraws his allegation, I will withdraw my accusation.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
No ifs and buts, please.
Mr. Banks
I called the Home Secretary a liar.
It is true and I regret it.
Mr. Speaker
That compounds the offence.
The hon. Gentleman must not call an hon. Member a liar.
Mr. Banks
I withdraw it, Sir.
Police Expenditure
Mr. Cyril D. Townsend
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the extra police expenditure resulting from the War Crimes Act 1991.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mr. John Patten)
Additional police expenditure associated with the War Crimes Act 1991 is estimated at £930,000 for 1991-92.
Mr. Townsend
On reflection, does my right hon. Friend agree that precious police resources — the figure of £2 million has been mentioned — should not be used on vindictive, Soviet or Israeli-type show trials which are bound to be a travesty of British justice as practised by this country for a long time?
Should not the money be used instead to deal with rapists, murderers and muggers in my constituency and in other parts of Greater London today?
Mr. Patten
There are two points there.
I respect my hon. Friend's strong personal feelings, but I point out to him that Parliament has expressed its view very strongly.
It is now up to those charged with the duty of investigating alleged crimes to do so.
My hon. Friend knows as well as I do that no Government have brought the police force to such a level as this Conservative Government have done.
It is better manned, it has more resources and it is better equipped than any police force in British history.
Mr. Winnick
I totally disagree with what the Minister said about police resources.
We know only too well of the crime wave in this country.
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that last Friday, on a delegation to Kiev, I took the opportunity — as I had always promised myself that I would if ever I were in Kiev — to visit Babi Yar, just outside the city limits, where in two years of Nazi terror and occupation tens of thousands of people were murdered?
There is a monument to those who fell — men, women, children, babes in arms and the aged.
Why should those responsible for such crimes and atrocities against humanity go scot free because they have managed to escape justice for 50 years?
Mr. Patten
I appreciate the effect that the hon. Gentleman's visit, of which I was not aware, must have had on him.
Parliament has already expressed its view that investigations should proceed and, if necessary, prosecutions should be brought.
It is then a matter for due process of law before a trial judge and jury as to whether people are found guilty and punished.
On the hon. Gentleman's first point, if he implies any strictures at all, he should be aware of the amount of help that has been given to the police force since 1979.
He should recall that in the last two years of the last Labour Government, up to 5,000 police men and women were leaving the police force each year and voting with their feet.
Sir John Farr
Is it not time to cease the spiteful vendetta against a group of pathetic old people who really have nothing left to offer?
Mr. Patten
Again, I respect my hon. Friend's strongly held personal views, but Parliament has expressed its views and I cannot add anything to the answer that I gave to the two previous questions.
Drugs
Mr. McFall
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what information on drug shipments and drug seizures from illegal traffic from European countries and from other countries is shared with United Kingdom, European countries and other interested organisations.
Mr. John Patten
Responsibility for combating drug trafficking is shared between Her Majesty's Custom and Excise and the police service.
There are close and developing links with other European countries and elsewhere.
In some of those countries, those links are enhanced by the posting or exchange of drugs liaison officers.
Effective exchange of information is essential, and we devote considerable efforts to that.
The United Kingdom also plays a full role in the work of international organisations — in particular, Interpol and the Customs Co-operation Council.
Mr. McFall
I am sure that the Minister will congratulate Customs and Excise on the record seizures of drugs that it has undertaken.
Nevertheless, heroin is still coming into this country at an increasing rate, and something must be done to control it.
In view of the recent’ Dispatches’television programme, has the Minister conducted an inquiry into how the police, Customs and Excise and the security services work together and how they share information with other countries so as to reduce the hard drugs problem that each and every hon. Member sees weekly in his or her constituency?
Mr. Patten
I agree that it is a serious problem — and not, I hope, one for party political debate.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that co-operation between the services — customs and the police at frontiers and at ports of entry — is very close indeed.
Her Majesty's Government are doing all that they possibly can to cut off overland supplies of heroin, in particular, coming along the so-called Balkan route.
In the next few months, with British taxpayers' money, we shall be setting up a national drugs intelligence unit in Czechoslovakia to try to intercept drugs coming overland.
We hope shortly to do the same in Hungary.
Mr. Soames
Would it not be a good idea if the airlines, when checking in passengers in those countries from which large quantities of drugs come to this country, were to hand each passenger a paper in his or her own language clearly explaining that if they bring drugs into the United Kingdom they are likely to be caught and, if they are caught, they are likely to go away for a very long time indeed?
Mr. Patten
That is an interesting thought from my hon. Friend and I shall pursue it.
The effect on anyone flying into Kuala Lumpur and hearing a Malaysian Airlines hostess saying,’ You are about to land in Kuala Lumpur: if you bring drugs into our country, the penalty is death by hanging’must be very salutary indeed.
We do not have that penalty, but we have life imprisonment — which means between 20 to 30 years in the case of some of those convicted in the most serious cases.
The notice to which my hon. Friend referred is a very good idea indeed.
Mr. Sheerman
The Minister of State
Hon. Members
Where is the shadow Home Secretary?
Mr. Sheerman
My right hon. Friend is presenting awards at an important lunch.
The Minister of State does not want to make this a political issue, but I want to make two important political points.
It is all very well for the Government to pretend to mount a campaign against drugs and drug imports, but at the same time they have allowed another Department, the Treasury — Conservative Members do not want to hear — to cut 400 customs officer jobs.
Customs officers are the front-line troops.
Interruption
They are the people who stop drugs flowing into Britain.
The Government have also allowed the Port of London police to be privatised.
What does that do for the campaign against drug imports?
Mr. Patten
What a rant — the hon. Gentleman gives his well-known imitation of the hon. Member for Kingston upon Hull, East (Mr. Prescott), but without the charm and lightness of touch.
The Government are spending about half a billion pounds per year dealing with the serious international problems caused by drug traffickers trying to bring drugs into Britain.
I would hope for a little bipartisan support for the sort of work done, for example, by our drugs liaison officers abroad, who have brought about such successful seizures of heroin and other drugs in recent months.
Car Crime
Mr. Hague
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what information he has on new initiatives undertaken by car manufacturers as part of his strategy to defeat car crime.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
I am glad to report that in the past few months we have made real progress with the car manufacturers.
I have had three meetings with them and our manufacturers are committed to improving the security of their cars and, in particular, introducing immobilising devices, deadlocks and visible identification numbers.
Much has been done in the past few months, but more needs to be done.
I am meeting the manufacturers again early in March.
Mr. Hague
I welcome the moves made so far by my right hon. Friend to encourage manufacturers to make cars more defensible.
Will he undertake to include the insurance industry in his fight against car crime and encourage it to give financial incentives by way of lower premiums to owners who improve the security of their vehicles?
Mr. Baker
I have had two meetings with the Association of British Insurers.
At the first, there was not much co-operation, but I am glad to say that in October the association announced a scheme similar to that which my hon. Friend suggested — to offer discounts to certain car owners who have security devices fitted when the car is being made in the factory.
It has also introduced excess payments for when goods are stolen from people's cars.
That is a beginning, but I expect the insurance industry to do much more in helping to reduce car crime.
Mr. William Ross
Is the Secretary of State aware that any measures taken to increase car security will be welcome in Northern Ireland, where stolen vehicles are so often used in terrorist murders and other such crimes?
Will he also ask the manufacturers to consider the possibility of installing devices to enable stolen cars to be traced, so that if a terrorist murder is committed the police can get on the track quickly?
Mr. Baker
I acknowledge that in Northern Ireland cars are used extensively for terrorist activities, quite apart from normal criminal activities to support terrorism.
On the hon. Gentleman's last point, I am glad to say that work is being done on such devices so that we can trace cars more effectively.
All those measures must be taken because cars are now involved in 30 per cent.
of all crime.
Unfortunately, that is a record unique to Britain.
We have a uniquely high level of car crime and we must all do something to reduce it.
Mr. Onslow
Can my right hon. Friend say what proportion of that car crime is carried out by juveniles and how many of them come into the category of persistent offenders?
Mr. Baker
A large proportion of car crime is carried out by young males between the ages of 12 and 22.
I must ask my right hon. Friend to wait for an answer to his question about persistent offenders.
I shall be making a statement in the next few days about offending while on bail.
Mr. Darling
It must be six years since the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) first met the manufacturers.
Since then, there have been about half a dozen glitzy launches — featuring among others, the Home Secretary grinning into the television cameras, telling us that something was going to be done some time.
Is it not time that the Government forced the pace and, if necessary, made regulations requiring manufacturers to incorporate safety procedures?
We do that regularly for aviation safety matters.
Why cannot the Government force the pace, make real progress and do something about reducing what the Home Secretary acknowledges is the fastest growing crime?
Mr. Baker
Progress is being made.
Significant changes have been made during the past few months.
As a result of my promptings, car manufacturers are committed to introducing immobilising devices on all new cars by the end of the year.
In addition, I have put the matter on the agenda for the Ministers of the Interior of our partners in Europe, because I want a European standard with tighter security applying to all cars made in Europe and sold in this country.
National Drugs Intelligence Unit
Mr. Steen
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department what is the current annual budget of the national drugs intelligence unit.
Mr. John Patten
The annual budget for 1991-92 is £5.2 million.
Mr. Steen
Does the Minister agree that something must be done to control imports of the drug known as Ecstasy, which is not merely creeping into schools in London but has reached teenagers in my constituency in south Devon?
Is he aware that that drug is not grown on some poppy field in South America but that 98 per cent.
of it is manufactured in Holland, which is one of our EC partners?
The Dutch have been very lax in dealing with that.
What does my right hon. Friend think that we could do to stop the drug being imported into this country, or arranging some reciprocal arrangement whereby we would stop importing Dutch cheese or some such thing?
Mr. Patten
I do not know about that kind of radical suggestion, but the police were very successful last year in closing down four domestic manufacturers of Ecstasy — hence the fact that most of the drug being sold on our streets comes from abroad, some from continental Europe.
That is why it is so important that, as one of the conclusions of the Maastricht settlement, it was agreed that the 12 countries should set up an organisation loosely known as Europol whose first job would be to set up a Europeanwide drugs intelligence unit among the Twelve, which should lead to a greater level of co-operation with our continental partners to stop Ecstasy and other drugs coming into the country.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
How do we know that the drugs enforcement authorities are doing their job when there is no point at which they are democratically accountable to elected people?
Is that not a pertinent question in the context of the millions of pounds worth of drugs on the streets throughout the United Kingdom?
Where is the process of accountability whereby elected people can ask questions such as,’ What are you doing to stop it?’
Mr. Patten
There are thousands of police officers in the 17 drugs wings who are accountable to the police authorities, and my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary and I come to this place to answer questions about them.
Also we have democratic accountability for the customs service, which is deeply involved.
Occasionally it is important to ensure that people are protected, such as the brave police officers, both men and women — I am sorry that the hon. Member for Workington (Mr. Campbell-Savours) has not time to listen — who serve abroad as drugs liaison officers on difficult and dangerous work.
We should support them and not seek to undermine them.
Mr. Gerald Howarth
Is my right hon. Friend aware that I have lost a young constituent to one Ecstasy tablet?
It is a killer drug.
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the charity Release is putting out the leaflet that I have here, which dupes young people into the belief that Ecstasy is somehow not a harmful drug?
Will my right hon. Friend undertake to withdraw all Government funding for that organisation until it sends a clear message to young people about drugs —’ No, no, and no’?
Mr. Patten
I shall read carefully the evidence that my hon. Friend will probably wish to send me about the document to which he referred.
I agree entirely that Ecstasy is a drug which can kill.
The first reported death was in 1989 and there were five deaths last year.
Ecstasy kills because it affects the respiratory system and causes lung failure and hence death.
Also clear evidence is emerging that, unfortunately, long-term psychotic effects may be involved.
That is why we are absolutely determined to make sure that the advice that reaches young people is correct.
My hon. Friend is right to put his finger on advice that he thinks is wrong.
That is why I give a clear undertaking that our answer to pleas to legalise the use of soft drugs will be no, no, and no again.
Miss Lestor
I hope that the right hon. Gentleman will not accuse me of ranting and raving as I am always the sweet face of reason.
I agree with the hon. Member for South Hams (Mr. Steen) about the dangers of Ecstasy.
There is not a parent of teenage children who is not worried out of their life about the use of cocaine, Ecstasy and heroin, especially when our children can obtain them almost without question anywhere in the country, even in the constituency of South Hams.
The Minister has few suggestions on how to combat that problem and the Government have cut the number of customs officers by 400.
I believe that all parents would rather pay increased taxes or not receive tax cuts if that would deal with the problem.
Why has the number of customs officers been cut when only recently an amount of Ecstasy was seized at Sheerness and cocaine is periodically seized in various parts of the country?
Such a cut is a false economy and it is killing our children.
Mr. Patten
I enjoyed the hon. Lady's charmed offensive and I would never in any circumstances dream of comparing her with her hon. Friend the Member for Kingston upon Hull, East.
I have two things to say in response.
First, customs have been extremely successful this year with record seizures of Ecstasy.
Secondly, the hon. Lady does not seem to be aware that 17 drug prevention teams have been established in areas where Ecstasy and other drugs are being consumed in large amounts and sold on the streets.
I visited the drug prevention team in Newham only last week.
I have also seen the excellent work being done on prevention in schools and with young people to get across the message, which must be repeated year after year as children come into the consuming group, about the dangers of drug abuse.
The work of the drug prevention teams deserves the support of the whole House.
Police Clerical Posts
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the civilianisation of police clerical posts.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
In the past eight years, some 5,400 police officers have been freed for operational policing duties by civilianising posts which do not require the powers or skills of a police officer, representing an efficiency gain of around £100 million per year.
Mr. King
I thank my hon. Friend for that excellent reply.
Will he extend his congratulations to the West Midlands police, who have civilianised 413 posts since 1985?
Does not that suggest how we can release police officers to duties within the community at very little cost to the police authority?
Mr. Lloyd
I certainly extend my congratulations to the West Midlands police.
It has done well and civilianised 73 per cent.
of the posts identified, but, even though it has done very well, it has somewhat further to go.
Mr. Alton
In the light of the 86 per cent.
increase in robberies on Merseyside in the past 13 years, does the Minister agree that the freeing of police officers through the civilianisation of posts should give Merseyside police the chance to put more policemen back on to the beat?
Does he further agree that there is a need to reopen neighbourhood police stations and to put more emphasis on community policing?
Mr. Lloyd
The hon. Gentleman is right about the benefits from civilianisation.
That suggests to me that he supports the policy of sector policing that my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary has put his weight behind.
That policy means that the police identify with the local community that they serve.
Sir Peter Emery
In parallel with civilianisation of the police, will my hon. Friend ensure that instructions are given to all chief constables to increase further the designation of special constables and to increase the special constabulary, which would lead to more bobbies on the beat?
Is that not the best discouragement to crime and an encouragement to those elderly people who fear being attacked on the streets?
Mr. Lloyd
Our objective is that the number of special constables should equal about 20 per cent.
of the regular police force.
The campaigns that we have been conducting are moving in that direction because special constables have a particularly valuable part to play.
Mr. Randall
On the question of police numbers, why has the Minister constantly refused to provide chief constables with the number of police officers that they need to reduce crime?
Why do not the Government copy Labour's policy of supporting our police forces by substantially increasing the number of bobbies on the beat in a self-financing fashion?
Mr. Lloyd
It is extraordinary that the hon. Gentleman comes to the Dispatch Box to suggest that the Government follow Labour's policy.
When the Labour Government left office, they left the police force about 7,000 under strength.
Travellers
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he has any plans to increase the penalties for the unlawful occupation of private or public land by traveller families; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
The main criminal penalties for unlawful occupation of land, under the Caravan Sites Act 1968 and the Public Order Act 1986, are fines.
The maximum level of all fines will increase when the Criminal Justice Act 1991 takes effect in October.
Mr. Dunn
Does the Minister realise that traveller families pose an immense law and order problem to local authorities and the police, especially in north-west Kent?
Will he therefore liaise with his colleagues in the Department of the Environment so that a joint effort can be made to give the law the rigour to prohibit the illegal occupation of public and private land by traveller families?
Mr. Lloyd
I well understand, as my county has similar problems involving unlawful occupation of sites by gipsies and other travelling folk.
As my hon. Friend implies, the principal Act belongs to the Department of the Environment — the Caravan Sites Act 1968.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment recognises that there can be difficulties with that Act and is considering whether a review would be helpful.
However, local authorities have had a duty, since 1968, to provide adequate sites for gipsies normally resorting to their area and, where they have done so to the satisfaction of my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment, they have criminal powers to remove illegal campers.
Mr. Trimble
Would it be possible to have another look at the last provision that the Minister mentioned, which imposes on local authorities a duty to provide sites for travellers?
Why should they have to facilitate what is, in all its aspects, an anti-social form of life and thus impose a loss on rate and charge payers, who then have to put up with such sites in their neighbourhood?
Mr. Lloyd
The hon. Gentleman will appreciate the difficulty of moving on people who lead a nomadic lifestyle when there is nowhere to move them to.
As I said, it is a matter for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment.
He is concerned about the issue and I shall draw the remarks that have been made today to his attention.
Sir George Gardiner
Is my hon. Friend aware that section 39 of the Public Order Act 1986 has proved something of a disappointment in protecting those whose homes are near tracts of land that are habitually invaded by travellers?
Does he agree that those peaceful citizens have their rights too, particularly against the disturbance, disorder and disruption that is often brought by those people?
Is not further legislation urgently needed?
Mr. Lloyd
Section 39 is available for the police to use at their discretion.
It was designed to deal with seriously aggravated unlawful occupation, not to undermine the Caravan Sites Act 1968, which is the basic legislation in that area.
We have no plans to change section 39.
It was recently reviewed and guidance was issued, but we shall examine how that guidance has been used.
Mr. Madden
While I recognise that the occupation of unofficial sites can cause a severe nuisance to settled communities, surely the Minister must appreciate that the only proper way of dealing with the matter is to enforce the 1968 legislation.
How can he justify the fact that, so long after that legislation was introduced, local authorities such as Kirklees and Calderdale have made absolutely no permanent provision with proper facilities to provide proper homes for travelling people?
Mr. Lloyd
I have some sympathy with what the hon. Gentleman says.
In not getting themselves designated, county councils cause problems for their local residents, as they are unable to achieve the powers that would enable them to deal with unlawful campers.
West Yorkshire Police Authority
Mr. Riddick
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department when he expects to make a decision relating to West Yorkshire police authority's application for a £3.6 million grant from the urban crime fund.
Mr. Peter Lloyd
We expect to receive details of applications from all those eligible, including West Yorkshire, later this month, and to make decisions by the end of March.
Mr. Riddick
Is my hon. Friend aware that the residents of West Yorkshire will be pleased to know that a decision on the matter is not too far off?
I am sure that every one of them would want that extra money to come to West Yorkshire, as I do.
Is not the extra £3.6 million further evidence of the Government's clear commitment to fighting crime?
Does not that contrast sharply with the complete mess that the Government inherited from the Labour party in 1979, when there was low police morale, low police pay and the police were way under strength?
Mr. Lloyd
My hon. Friend is right.
We expect the authorities to come up with imaginative schemes, designed to tackle specific local crime problems, such as kerb crawling, mugging and burglary.
If they do, they will certainly bring great benefits to the public in their district.
Mr. Lofthouse
I am sure that West Yorkshire will welcome any assistance that the schemes can give, and will also appreciate that its rate support grant has increased by 16 per cent., but that does not mean that it can bring its force up to the required standard.
Has the Minister any plans to assist the West Yorkshire police authority to enable it to bring its police forces up to the required standard?
Mr. Lloyd
Although spending nationally on the police has risen 73 per cent.
during this Government's life, in West Yorkshire the figure is 83 per cent.
Therefore, the spending in that police authority area is higher than elsewhere, so it does have the resources to police to strength and it will receive additional resources under the arrangements.
Sir Donald Thompson
Is my hon. Friend aware of the fact that we welcome the £3.6 million in West Yorkshire?
Will he ensure that the money is spent throughout the county?
Mr. Lloyd
It will be spent throughout the police area, except in those regions that do not come within the urban crime catchment area —
Sir Donald Thompson
That is the wrong answer.
Mr. Lloyd
I am giving my hon. Friend the correct answer; if he has asked the wrong question, that is his problem.
The area does not include Wakefield and Calderdale, but if the police authority has good sense, it will arrange its spending so that the benefit will also be felt outside the immediate area to which the money applies.
Mr. Sheerman
Conservative Central Office does not seem to have got its questions and answers right today.
At a time when crime has doubled in this country and is increasing at a rate of 28 per cent.
per annum in West Yorkshire, how can a Minister stand in the House and say that it will keep West Yorkshire 154 police officers under strength this year and next year?
Mr. Lloyd
If the hon. Gentleman had listened the last time we had Home Office questions he would know perfectly well that the standard spending assessment has been set in West Yorkshire to enable it to employ police officers up to the full establishment.
The problem in West Yorkshire is that it costs more there to put a police man on the beat, and the authority spends more per head of the population.
If its cost effectiveness was equal to that of the average police authority, it would be able to recruit up to full establishment.
Derek Bentley
Mr. Burns
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the case of Derek Bentley.
Mr. Kenneth Baker
The report which I have received from the police is receiving careful consideration.
I shall decide as soon as I can whether any action on my part is appropriate in this case.
Mr. Burns
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
Does he recall that it is now 40 years since that unfortunate and backward youth was hanged?
Does he accept that not only that youth's family but many other people have a total lack of comprehension as to how someone could be hanged in this country when he was in police custody when the gun was fired and the unfortunate police officer was killed by another person?
Although it is 40 years since the incident, I urge my right hon. Friend to give urgent consideration to the case because the suffering of Derek Bentley's family continues day in and day out.
Mr. Baker
I appreciate the importance of the case and the public interest in it.
The Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis has taken new evidence which has been received and is being assessed by my Department.
It will then be submitted to me and I shall review not only that evidence but all the earlier evidence, the reports of the trial and all the voluminous other aspects of the case.
I assure my hon. Friend that I shall do that as soon as I can.
Mr. Corbett
I congratulate the hon. Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns) on raising this issue.
Has the Home Secretary considered exercising his powers of a posthumous pardon in this case?
If he has, will he explain why he decided not to act?
Secondly, I urge him to make the best possible speed in this matter because for many of us it represents the most dreadful stain on our criminal justice system.
Mr. Baker
The material new facts that have emerged involve new evidence from certain officers who were present on the night of the crime and who witnessed certain things.
That evidence has to be assessed, and when that is done I shall, of course, make a decision.
Sunday Trading
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for the Home Department if he will make a statement on the progress of discussions on the future of Sunday trading.
The Minister of State, Home Office (Mrs. Angela Rumbold)
My extensive programme of separate discussions with a wide range of major interest groups on possible ways of reforming the Shops Act 1950 is nearing completion.
For the present, there remain great differences between the groups.
Once the legal position of the Shops Act 1950 in relation to Community law is clear, I hope to be in a position to recommend a way forward to the House.
Mr. Coombs
Is it not by now abundantly obvious to everyone that those organisations that remain implacably opposed to Sunday trading will never agree to any compromise solution to the problem that could be laid before the House and command widespread support?
Has not the time come for the Government to commit themselves unequivocally to legislate in the next Parliament so that those who wish to shop on Sunday and exercise their free choice to do so are enabled to do so by total deregulation of the law?
Mrs. Rumbold
My hon. Friend represents the important views of a number of colleagues.
However, another group of people have equally strongly held views, and for that reason it is not as easy as my hon. Friend would have the House believe to introduce legislation that would command total respect in the House.
Mr. Ray Powell
Does the Minister appreciate that tomorrow there will be an opportunity to ensure that proposals put to the House could be accepted, could go into Committee and could form the basis of discussion for any Government returned on 9 April?
I know that a Labour Government will be returned and I am sure that that Government will not take as long as from 1986 to the present time, as this Government have, to do something constructive about changing the law and bringing in legislation that could be enforced throughout the country.
Mrs. Rumbold
I appreciate the hon. Gentleman's views; I also appreciate the fact that he is presenting a proposal to the House of Commons.
I think that he knows that it is difficult for the Government to accept any proposal before the question of Community law is resolved, and also that his proposals are relatively controversial.
Mr. Malins
Will my right hon. Friend join me in condemning the supermarkets that have recently been opening on Sundays?
Does she accept that very few people are totally opposed to Sunday trading, but millions want some form of compromise that recognises the special nature of Sunday?
Mrs. Rumbold
Many people wish to recognise the special nature of Sunday.
Interestingly, however, each time that the topic is raised in the House of Commons, very diverse views are expressed.
That, I think, clears the stand that the Government have been taking, and their view that the matter cannot be easily resolved.
I share some of my hon. Friend's views, but I do not believe that the House is yet ready to accept a proposal from the Government that will command wide support from a large number of hon. Members.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Salmond
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Salmond
When the Prime Minister visits Scotland this weekend, will he be big enough to acknowledge that, sooner rather than later, he will have to bow to the wish of the Scottish people for self-determination?
Does he not understand that, at a time when even he is forecasting a Europe of up to 30 member states by the end of the century, it is inevitable that the Scottish nation will demand to be a full part of that process of change?
The Prime Minister
No, Sir.
I disagree fundamentally with the hon. Gentleman.
The Union between England and Scotland is greater than the sum of its parts, and always has been.
I understand what activates the hon. Gentleman, but I believe that he is profoundly misleading Scotland and treading a path that is damaging Scotland and the Union.
Mr. Fishburn
At a time of economic difficulty and rising unemployment across the world, does not this nation — as a great trading nation — need, more than anything else, constant tax policy, the lowest possible income tax and competitive rates of corporation tax?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it would be a disaster to adopt a policy that changed almost from hour to hour under Labour, with no constancy or purpose of any sort?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend about the importance of clear-cut and low corporate and personal tax rates.
I note that the Opposition's tax plans have gone back to the drawing board; after five years of careful preparation, they have been ditched in a period of five weeks.
I also note that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith)— who said, when he took on the job that there would be’ no more phoney shadow Cabinet Budgets’— has now promised that there will be a phoney shadow Cabinet Budget.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister confirm that today's official figures show that the British economy is in its longest recession for over 60 years?
As the right hon. Gentleman was Chancellor before it started and has been Prime Minister throughout its course, is it not clear that he is not only the Prime Minister of recession, but the prime cause of recession?
The Prime Minister
Before the right hon. Gentleman goes into overdrive, perhaps he will confirm that, in the past three months, industrial production has fallen faster in Germany, faster in France, faster in the United States and faster in Japan than it has in this country; and that, if we take the last year as a whole, industrial production fell more in Japan, and more in Germany, than in the United Kingdom.
Why does the right hon. Gentleman think that is, if he blames me for everything?
Mr. Kinnock
To put it into perspective, let me point out that since 1988 the German economy has grown by 10 per cent.
The British economy, under the Conservative Government, has not grown at all.
Will the Prime Minister recognise that and stop groping round to try to find excuses for his own failure?
Does he recall that it is exactly a year since he told us in this House,’ Our policies are working’?
Does he recall that in that 12 months the British economy has contracted by 2.5 per cent.
and that unemployment has gone up by 750,000?
Do not today's figures make it clear that it is official — Majorism isn't working?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman is now keen to look at a longer period than just the last year, he will also be interested to know that between 1981 and 1991 the British economy grew faster than the German economy, the French economy, the Italian economy or the economy of any other country in Europe.
Will he now confirm, since he seems to regard all problems as being entirely domestic, that over the second half of the last year industrial production fell in the United States, in Japan and elsewhere and that Germany's gross domestic product has now declined for three quarters in succession and Germany is in recession?
How can this be if, as the right hon. Gentleman claims, it is all a British problem?
Mr. Kinnock
In the last 18 months of recession —
Interruption
British people are not on the dole in Germany; they are on the dole in Britain.
In the last 18 months of recession, unemployment in Britain has gone up by 1 million and the British economy has contracted by nearly 4 per cent.
The figures speak for themselves.
During the course of the time the right hon. Gentleman has been Chancellor and Prime Minister he is convicted by his own record and condemned by his own inaction in the face of the slump that he caused.
The Prime Minister
The House will have noted that the right hon. Gentleman cannot understand the facts and cannot handle the questions.
He may recall that in Germany more than 3 million people are unemployed and he may bear it in mind that a higher proportion of people are in work in this country than in Germany or in any other European country except Denmark.
Let me try again to help the hon. Gentleman.
The fact is that the world is in an economic slow-down, as even the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) has now acknowledged.
That makes domestic politics even more important.
That is why we have cut interest rates seven times in a year and halved inflation in a year, have the lowest number of strikes for half a century and have cut the basic rate of tax.
As a result of our action, real earnings are rising and we have lower interest rates, lower mortgage rates, lower inflation and the right circumstances for recovery.
The people of this country will not let the right hon. Gentleman throw that away.
Mr. Stanbrook
When my right hon. Friend sees the new Irish Prime Minister soon will he tell him that the biggest contribution the Irish Republic can make to peace, stability and reconciliation in Northern Ireland is to renounce its claim to sovereignty over Northern Ireland, as that claim encourages Irish Republican terrorism and gives it legitimacy, as well as being the strongest stumbling block in the way of all-party talks aimed at constitutional progress?
The Prime Minister
I have already spoken to the new Taoiseach and we have agreed to meet shortly.
I think that we must wait and see what his detailed policies will be, but everything that I have seen and heard suggests that he is certainly very understanding of the situation in Northern Ireland.
Amendment of the Irish constitution is, of course, a matter for the Republic, but I am glad that it continues to be an issue that could be tackled in fresh political talks.
The Government remain committed to the Anglo-Irish Agreement unless and until agreement can be reached on new and more broadly satisfactory arrangements.
Mr. Kirkwood
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Kirkwood
Has the Prime Minister had time today to study the Department of Trade and Industry's figures that were released on Tuesday, which showed that over the last five years Chinese quotas for the importation of cashmere garments into the European Community have been exceeded by 500,000 units and that in 1991 the actual importation exceeded the quotas by over 400 per cent?
Is the Prime Minister aware that 500,000 cashmere jerseys are worth £75 million to textile communities such as my own in the central borders in Scotland?
Will he take a personal interest in stopping this scandalous dumping and make sure that the overshoot is clawed back during the next two years, the time remaining to the EC-Chinese trade agreement?
The Prime Minister
I am aware of the matter that the hon. Gentleman raises, not least because he was courteous enough to give me an indication of what he was going to mention this afternoon.
I understand the point that the hon. Gentleman makes.
I have asked my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State to look into the matter and to contact the hon. Gentleman.
Sir Robert McCrindle
To revert to the Scottish question that was raised by the hon. Member for Banff and Buchan (Mr. Salmond), has the Prime Minister noted the statement today by the leaders of the financial services industries north of the border that in the event of a measure of devolution or independence, to which the Opposition parties aspire, the likeliest result would be that many of the financial services companies would move south of the border?
In his forthcoming visit to Scotland, will the Prime Minister underline the fact that these are matters which the Scottish people should also take into account before moving in the direction Opposition Members would like them to go — in favour of devolution or independence?
The Prime Minister
I did notice those remarks, which were widely reported this morning.
We have made it clear for a long period that we believe that devolution or independence would damage very severely the degree of inward investment into Scotland and the degree of self-generating investment within Scotland as well.
The Union has been in the interests of both this country and Scotland for many years, and it remains so.
Mr. Fatchett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Fatchett
May I also raise a matter with the Prime Minister, of which I have given him prior notice?
It concerns the tragic death on 5 February of six-year-old Carley Reavill who died in hospital of meningitis.
That is the reason why I gave the Prime Minister prior notice of the question.
She died not because, as the Department of Health says, she was too ill to be moved, but because, according to her paediatrician, Dr. Alison Schurtz, no intensive care hospital bed was available at St. Mary's hospital or Great Ormond Street hospital.
Is not that a tragic waste of a life?
Does it not provide further evidence for the argument that if money is available it should be spent not on tax cuts but on our health service?
The Prime Minister
I asked for a report on this tragic case this morning.
As the hon. Gentleman has raised it, I reply assuming that he has received the permission of the family for it to be the subject of a public exchange.
I am advised that doctors at the Queen Elizabeth II hospital have confirmed that Carley could not have been transferred when the hospital test results showed that she had meningitis and the test results were available within one hour of Carley's admission.
Carley's decline, I am informed, was sudden and fast.
Medical advice is that paediatric intensive care is unlikely to have arrested this.
The House may wish to know that between 1979 and 1990 the perinatal mortality rate for England and Wales dropped by 45 per cent.
It is now at its lowest ever recorded level.
As for national health service resources, the hon. Gentleman will know of the very large real-terms increases that have been made — in excess, in fact, of the real-terms increases promised by the Opposition at the last general election.
Mr. Brazier
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Brazier
Does my right hon. Friend agree that many of those who live on their income from savings are either widows or those who retired early, very often to look after an elderly dependant?
Does he further agree that it would be a grave injustice indeed to put swingeing extra taxes on the savings of these people as a result of the profligacy of socialism?
The Prime Minister
I believe that such people would find it inexplicable if that were to happen.
We have sought to encourage savings by abolishing the investment income surcharge and by introducing tax-exempt special savings accounts.
It is the Labour party which wants to increase tax by extending national insurance.
Its plans would hit more than 1 million people, three quarters of whom pay tax at the basic rate.
So much for the Opposition's promise that no one earning under £20,000 a year would be hit.
That promise is worthless and that pledge by the Opposition illustrates why the promise is worthless.
Mr. Livingstone
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 20 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Livingstone
Tomorrow is the first anniversary of the stabbing to death of the young black schoolboy Rolan Adams and in the year since then 15 black families — council tenants and owner-occupiers — have been driven out of their homes on the Thamesmead estate.
The campaign, including a fire-bombing, has been orchestrated by the local headquarters of the British National party.
Is there anything that the Government can do to change those events?
Will the Prime Minister support the unanimous decision by Greenwich Conservative councillors to support the demonstration called by the Anti-Racist Alliance for Saturday at noon in Plumstead High street to demand the closure of the British National party headquarters?
The Prime Minister
I have every sympathy for Rolan Adams's family at this sad time and I wholeheartedly condemn racial attacks and those who commit or incite racial hatred.
The hon. Gentleman raised this matter with me in December and my office subsequently corresponded with the mayor of Bexley.
Although the location of the British National party office is a matter for Bexley council, we have drawn the council's attention to the laws available to deal with racial hatred.
The local police searched the BNP premises in January and evidence has been submitted to the Crown prosecution service which is considering a prosecution.
Rolan Adams's murder a year ago led to the speedy identification and prosecution of the attackers and the murderer subse-quently received a life sentence.
I very much hope that in the future that will deter similar attacks which are a blot on our country.
House of Commons
Monday 24 February 1992
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
ENERGY
Electricity Disconnections
Mr. Ground
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy when he last met the chairmen of the regional electricity companies to discuss levels of disconnection for debt.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory)
I am delighted that the number of disconnections for debt has continued to fall.
In 1991, the figure for England and Wales was less than a third of what it was 10 years ago.
Mr. Ground
I thank my hon. Friend for that answer.
Is it right to see in the big reduction in disconnections signs of a different attitude on the part of the electricity companies to their customers and signs of better management since the companies were privatised, and is there scope for further improvement in this respect?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Yes, the sharpest reduction in disconnections for debt has occurred since the companies were put into the private sector.
I believe that they are now closer to their customers and more able to cater for the needs of their customers, including those who fall behind with their payments.
I look forward to further reductions in unnecessary disconnections and I know that that is also the desire of the independent electricity regulator.
Mr. Harry Barnes
The reason why there are fewer disconnections is that the electricity companies have introduced card meters, so that people cut themselves off rather than having to be cut off by the electricity companies.
Moreover, there is an absence of facilities for obtaining cards for the meters, so that many people who have to use them have to spend a considerable amount of money on travelling to get hold of cards.
As the meters are now in operation, will the Minister take action to ensure that dispenser facilities are more widely available?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The installation of pre-payment meters is one reason why the number of disconnections has fallen, but more important is the fact that the regional electricity companies, under the terms of their licence, have to approve a code of conduct with the Office of Electricity Regulation and must offer customers who are in genuine difficulties a payment plan so that debt can be paid off over a period.
If customers agree a payment plan, they will not be disconnected.
That is a very much better arrangement than that which pertained more than 10 years ago, when a state-controlled monopoly was only too ready to disconnect customers without agreeing such arrangements.
Mr. Dobson
What are the prospects of disconnection for industrial customers in the coming year if they cannot afford to pay the exorbitant increases that the electricity companies are seeking from them?
For instance, Fields Packaging of Bradford has been asked to pay 30 per cent .
more, and Ibstock Brick in Leicestershire has been asked to pay between 20 and 30 per cent.
more.
How can the Minister or the companies justify increases of five to seven times the rate of inflation?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
We are anxious that all industrial customers should have access to competitively priced electricity and I am pleased to say that an independent survey showed that in the first year after privatisation three quarters of those customers experienced at least a 10 per cent.
reduction in their bills.
Any subsequent increases should be seen in that context.
Moreover, it should be an embarrassment to the hon. Gentlemen to be reminded that under the last Labour Government prices for domestic customers rose by 22 per cent.
in real terms.
That was a scandalous neglect of the interests of those customers and it will not be repeated under this Government.
Coal Prices
Mr. Alan W. Williams
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will make a statement on the discussions taking place in the European Community about setting an EC-wide reference price for the cost of coal.
The Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. John Wakeham)
No, Sir, because there are no such discussions.
The Commission has made it clear that it has no proposals for guide prices on coal contracts or for Community subsidies for coal production.
Its ideas on’ reference prices’are aimed at reducing the amounts of aid for coal production that member states may give to their industries.
Mr. Williams
Will the Minister confirm that, at about £42 a tonne, the average price of British coal is well below that of west German coal?
Dr. Kim Howells
Which costs two or three times as much.
Mr. Williams
That is right — two or three times as much.
As Europe moves to become a single market, does it make any sense that Britain should be closing coal mines which are producing coal far cheaper than those in west Germany?
Why are the Government so intent on destroying the industry through imports, through the dash for gas, and through their privatisation proposals?
Would it not make more sense to have a moratorium on pit closures in the interests of jobs, the balance of payments and European energy conservation?
Mr. Wakeham
I agree with the hon. Gentleman that British coal is the cheapest in western Europe, but it is certainly not cheaper than coal from the United States or Australia and it is still uncompetitive in world terms.
However, the next coal contracts will be at competitive rates and I believe that they will be satisfactory for British Coal.
Sir John Hannam
Does my right hon. Friend agree that such a proposal about coal imports would be in direct conflict with the objectives of GATT and of free trade and would also result in the removal of the need for competitiveness in British Coal, which would work to the disadvantage of the consumer?
Mr. Wakeham
I agree with my hon. Friend.
I do not believe that those questions have been properly thought through.
There are questions about our international obligations to GATT and to the Community.
There are also implications for the steel industry and, as my hon. Friend pointed out, there are implications for electricity consumers.
It is not in the long-term interests of the British coal industry not to become efficient and competitive.
Mr. Redmond
If the Secretary of State wishes to be believed at the Dispatch Box, he must honour what he says at the Dispatch Box.
During the last Energy Question Time, more than a fortnight ago, he promised to write to me but he has failed to do so.
If he makes statements from the Dispatch Box, he should be a man of honour and honour his promises.
Mr. Wakeham
I have to say that I have no idea what the hon. Gentleman is talking about.
Mr. Gerald Howarth
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the interests of my coal mining constituents would best be served by long-term contracts with the generators, which the British coal industry is well placed to secure and which the generators should welcome, and not by market rigging by Labour politicians posing as experts?
Mr. Wakeham
I agree with my hon. Friend.
British Coal is in a position to sign long-term contracts with the generators, which will be very much in the interests of British Coal and the electricity consumers.
Mr. Barron
If the Secretary of State regards protecting the British coal industry and, therefore, the nation from the fluctuation in world prices as rigging the market, will he explain why he has done exactly that by rigging the market for nuclear electricity in this country?
Mr. Wakeham
The arguments for nuclear electricity were different — Oh, yes.
We argued, rightly, that we believed in a diversity of supply and we wanted to ensure that that diversity of supply was available.
We believe that British Coal can achieve a significant share of the coal market for generation in the new contracts which begin in 1993, and we believe that it will be able to achieve that at competitive prices.
Interruption
Unleaded Petrol
Mr. Hague
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what is his estimate of the current level of unleaded petrol sales in the United Kingdom; and what comparable figures he has for EC member states.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. Colin Moynihan)
Unleaded petrol sales in the United Kingdom currently account for nearly 44 per cent.
of all petrol sales.
The United Kingdom Petroleum Industry Association estimates that in 1990 the market share of unleaded petrol in other European Community countries was as follows: unified Germany 71 per cent., Denmark 58 per cent. , Netherlands 49 per cent. , Luxembourg 32 per cent. , Belgium 27 per cent. , Eire 20 per cent. , France 14 per cent. , Italy 5 per cent. , Greece 3 per cent. , Spain 1 per cent. , Portugal 1 per cent .
The comparable United Kingdom figure for this period was 34 per cent.
Mr. Hague
Does my hon. Friend agree that those figures reflect a sharp improvement in this country over the past few years and scope for some of our Community partners to do more to encourage unleaded petrol sales?
Does my hon. Friend expect that unleaded petrol sales in Scotland would improve if the petroleum engineering directorate were relocated to Aberdeen?
Mr. Moynihan
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State is to announce today that he is appointing Ernst and Young management consultants to undertake an independent study of the case for and against relocating the Department of Energy's petroleum engineering directorate to Aberdeen.
Whatever the findings on relocation, there may well be an impact on the level of unleaded petrol sales in Scotland and thus in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Simon Hughes As the Minister's first answer made it clear that a price differential has been a major cause of the substantial increase in sales of unleaded petrol, and as the Secretary of State is on record as saying that the market has a role to play in cutting the use of petrol across the market in the United Kingdom, by what figures does the Department currently estimate that petrol prices will increase over the next few years?
Mr. Moynihan
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we are not in a position to predict what oil prices or, through oil prices, petrol prices will be over the next few years.
On the hon. Gentleman's first point, there is no doubt that the duty differential in favour of unleaded petrol has been an important catalyst for the increased take-up of unleaded petrol, but the need for further changes to the duty differential is, as the hon. Gentleman knows, a matter for my right hon. Friend the Chancellor.
Mr. Mans
Although those figures are very encouraging, does my hon. Friend agree that an awful lot of older vehicles could be converted to run on unleaded petrol but that people are ignorant of that fact?
Will my hon. Friend therefore consult his colleagues at the Department of Transport to see whether it is possible for notices to be sent with car tax reminders, indicating whether certain vehicles could be easily converted to run on unleaded petrol?
Mr. Moynihan
My hon. Friend makes a very imaginative proposal.
I will certainly pass it on to my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Transport.
My hon. Friend will know that more than 200,000 free information booklets have already been distributed, which answer questions about unleaded fuel and provide contact numbers for the main car manufacturers.
Seven out of 10 cars on the road are capable of using unleaded petrol, but we need to press on and go further.
Mr. Win Griffiths
Having admitted that the lower duty on unleaded petrol has helped to promote its use, has the Minister had any discussions with the Treasury about introducing such a lower level of duty for the cleaner diesel fuels which are now available, especially as BP is one of the pioneers in that respect?
Mr. Moynihan
The answer is no — not least because diesel prices are determined by the market.
I accept that, at present, they are high — only slightly below unleaded petrol prices — but, as the hon. Gentleman knows, that is because the demand for gas oil, which is equivalent to diesel, is high at this time of year as it is used for heating and high demand tends to push up prices.
However, I expect the differential between unleaded and diesel to revert to the norm in the summer months.
Coal Imports
Mr. Hain
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what proportions of coal consumed in Britain was from (a) imports and (b) domestic production in 1979 and 1991; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Wakeham
In 1979, imports accounted for 4 per cent.
and domestic production for 96 per cent.
of United Kingdom coal consumption.
The corresponding figures for 1991 were 17 per cent.
for imports and 83 per cent.
for domestic production.
Mr. Hain
Since 1979, when the Government came to power, coal imports have increased from 4 million tonnes to 19 millions tonnes, an increase of 346 per cent., which has had the effect of wiping out the coal fields of south Wales, damaging our balance of payments, costing the taxpayer £8,500 for every one of the tens of thousands of unemployed miners, and making us dreadfully dependent on foreign supplies.
Does the Secretary of State appreciate that that is economic lunacy of the highest order, or is he just plain thick?
Mr. Wakeham
No.
The answer is that expensive electricity is very bad for British industry.
The reason why coal imports have been increasing has been the failure of British Coal to be competitive enough.
That is not through lack of support by this Government, who have put £17 billion into the coal industry since 1979.
I am pleased to say that there are now signs — after the improvement in recent years and with further improvements — that British Coal will be able to secure good contracts for the future.
Mr. Rost
How is British Coal expected to compete in the privatised electricity market when the duopoly is able to close down coal-fired power stations even though they can produce cheaper electricty than the new gas turbine power stations, because the duopoly is able to pass the extra costs to consumers?
Should not the regulator ensure that the extra costs for higher cost plant are not passed to consumers?
Should not coal-fired power stations, which could be competitive and which the duopoly rejects, be offered for sale so that continuing competition can develop?
Mr. Wakeham
Some of those questions are for the regulator.
I remind my hon. Friend that the regional electricity companies have an obligation to undertake economic purchasing.
If, as my hon. Friend suggests, there is cheaper electricity to be obtained from coal-fired power stations than from gas-fired power stations, I would expect them to use the electricity from coal-fired stations, in accordance with their licence obligations.
Mr. Eadie
Does the Secretary of State realise that his comments have failed to persuade the House that the policy that he and the Government are operating is right?
It is a gross slander on the miners to talk about the cost of coal and about productivity when miners in Britain are achieving record productivity figures.
How can the right hon. Gentleman stand at the Dispatch Box and seek to justify the untrammelled entry of coal imports into Britain, which is flinging thousands of miners out of work and at the same time digging a hole for the economic morass in our balance of payments?
Mr. Wakeham
I cannot accept the hon. Gentleman's analysis.
The threat to coal jobs has been much more from gas than from imported coal.
The only way to deal with that is to make coal a competitive source of fuel and the first choice for the generators.
It is possible for British Coal to achieve those contracts and that is what I look forward to seeing.
Independent Electricity Generation
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will make a statement on the number of new independent electricity generating units since privatisation.
Mr. Wakeham
The Government welcome the strong growth of competition in generation.
The first project to be developed since privatisation, at Roosecote, is already supplying electricity to the grid.
Four other independent generating stations are under construction and the Government are aware of about 30 other potential independent projects.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my right hon. Friend.
I am delighted with the progress that we are making in finding new sources of electricity generation.
Does my right hon. Friend agree that we should welcome the decision by the European Commission to remove its restriction on gas-fired generating stations?
Does he agree that gas is better not only because it is transported through its own pipelines and therefore takes transport off the road, but because it is green-clean and thermally more efficient?
In my constituency it has stimulated the introduction of three new generating plants, two of them based at oil terminals at Shell haven, where the oil industry welcomes the progress of moves towards gas and is not mounting a rearguard action against it, as the coal industry seems to be doing.
Mr. Wakeham
I welcome the introduction of gas as a fuel for power generation, but it must remain competitive with coal: that will produce the best prices for electricity consumers.
Mr. Lofthouse
The Secretary of State will undoubtedly be aware that Mr. Malcolm Edwards told the Select Committee on Energy last week that the cost of gas for generation of electricity would be about 2.7p per kilowatt hour compared with 2.2p for coal.
That was similar to the evidence that the Secretary of State gave some weeks ago.
To enable the House and the country to clear the matter up, will the Secretary of State tell us the correct figure?
Will he consider bringing the regulator's review of purchasing policy forward from 1993?
Mr. Wakeham
I have been in the House long enough to know that it is not appropriate for me to comment on evidence given to a Select Committee until that Committee has reported.
However, I am prepared to confirm that in my evidence to the Select Committee I made it clear that the regional electricity companies were obliged to purchase the most economic electricity on the market.
If that be coal-fired generation, so much the better.
Mr. Hind
My right hon. Friend will be aware of widespread concern in the community that whatever fuel is chosen by the electricity producers, it should be the cleanest fuel of all.
Environmental considerations must play a part.
If coal is to be the choice, does my right hon. Friend agree that scrubbers are essential at coal-fired power stations and the type of coal put into them must be low in sulphur dioxide emissions?
Mr. Wakeham
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Gas is environmentally helpful in achieving the Government's target of stabilising carbon dioxide emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2005.
The Opposition policy of seeking to stabilise emissions at 1990 levels by the year 2000, while keeping the coal industry at its existing size, stopping the use of gas and phasing out nuclear electricity, is the mathematics of Bedlam — it just does not add up.
Mr. Dobson
Will the Secretary of State name to the House any allegedly independent gas-fired generating projects which do not involve investment from regional electricity companies?
For example, is it not true that the Roosecote project has received a substantial amount of capital from NORWEB but that the deal has been kept secret?
No one knows how big the contribution was and the price paid for the electricity is being kept secret.
Should it not be transparent?
Mr. Wakeham
I believe that contracts between generators and regional electricity companies are commercially confidential, and there is no reason why they should not be —
Mr. Barron
The regulator must know the difference in price.
Mr. Wakeham
I agree with the hon. Gentleman.
That information must be available to the regulator, and it is.
Secondly, the licensing obligations of regional electricity companies apply to power that they buy from their affiliates as well as to power that they buy from other people.
Energy Efficiency Office
Mr. Gwilym Jones
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what the budget for the Energy Efficiency Office will be in 1992-93; and what was the comparable figure for 1979-80.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The budget for the Energy Efficiency Office in 1992-93 will be £59 million, an increase of 40 per cent.
on this year's budget.
The comparable figure for expenditure in 1979-80 was £2.4 million.
Mr. Jones
What action is being taken by South Wales Electricity and the other companies on that most important aspect of energy efficiency?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Under the terms of their licences, the newly privatised regional electricity companies must take steps to promote the efficient use of their fuels.
In addition, the regulators of both the electricity and gas industries are examining with the industries scope for further funding of energy efficiency measures, funded in part under the price formula.
Since privatisation there has been a transformation in the attitude and work of those energy companies towards promoting energy efficiency as well as selling their product.
Dr. Kim Howells
Does the Minister agree that no matter what progress is made in energy efficiency — in Wales or in the west country, for example— it could all come to nothing if the Government press ahead and force British Gas to start up a new company for the transportation of gas through its pipelines?
It would mean that British Gas would put a mileage rate on the transportation of gas so that regions such as Wales will suffer from higher gas prices, which will offset anything that we may do to achieve efficiency.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Those are matters for the regulators of the industry concerned, who have an explicit duty to promote competition in the industries and to safeguard the interests of consumers.
Before the industries were privatised, there was no comparable safeguard for the consumer.
It has come about entirely as a result of privatisation.
Energy Prices
Mr. Jessel
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy by how much the level of prices for fuel, light and power has changed in real terms since 1986.
Mr. Moynihan
The cost of fuel, light and power to the domestic sector is estimated to have fallen by 8 per cent.
in real terms between 1986 and 1991.
For the industrial sector, it is estimated that the cost has fallen by more than 25 per cent.
in real terms during the same period.
Mr. Jessel
Is not that a tremendously impressive achievement?
It is no wonder that we receive so few complaining letters about electricity prices these days.
Can my hon. Friend say how far that is due to privatisation?
Mr. Moynihan
I believe that it is due both to privatisation and to the benefits of restructuring, especially in the electricity industry.
It is evident that the emergence of competition in both generation and supply has had a significant impact on prices.
Mr. Tony Banks
Why is it, then, that so many of our constituents are coming to advice surgeries about bills that they cannot afford to pay?
Is not it now time that the Minister decided that the standing charges, which are an unacceptable imposition, particularly on the elderly, should be abolished?
Why have the Government not done something about that?
Mr. Moynihan
The hon. Gentleman will be able to tell his constituents, as I do mine, that domestic users and other small users of electricity are protected for the first time, as a result of the Government's initiative, by price controls against unjustified price increases.
Mr. Rathbone
Can my hon. Friend say what the price increases are likely to be in the forthcoming year?
Mr. Moynihan
The protection offered by electricity price controls against unjustified increases will limit increases up to April 1992 to the level of inflation as measured from October to October, subject to unforeseen circumstances.
It is important that those controls are seen in a three-year context.
Mineworkers (Redundancy Pay)
Mr. Haynes
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy when he last met the chairman of British Coal to discuss redundancy payments for mineworkers.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
We meet the chairman of British Coal on a regular basis to discuss all aspects of the coal industry.
Mr. Haynes
I am not surprised that the Minister has not mentioned redundancy payments for miners when they are closing pits willy-nilly.
You know, Mr. Speaker, they would complain like billy-o on the Treasury Bench if we docked their redundancy payments.
Yet they are using blackmail on miners to vote to close pits earlier than they year that had been decided on so that they can close the pit down and they have cut the redundancy payments for miners.
They should be ashamed of themselves.
What are they going to do about it?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
If I heard the hon. Gentleman correctly, he suggested that redundancy pay for displaced miners was excessively generous.
That is a curious message from the Labour party, although it is true that Opposition this year voted against the Coal Industry Bill, which provides for the continuation of those generous payments to redundant miners.
Miners all over the country will know that the Labour party voted against those terms.
Mr. Haynes
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Due to the unsatisfactory reply from the Minister, I shall apply for an Adjournment debate.
British Coal (Exchequer Subvention)
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what was the total subvention to British Coal from the Exchequer over the past five years.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The total amount of Government grant that has been made available to British Coal over the past five financial years is £8.5 billion.
Mr. Marshall Does not that figure underline the Government's commitment to the coal mining industry?
Would my hon. Friend care to hazard a guess about how many fewer jobs there would be in that industry if that money had not been given?
Does he agree that that money underlines the huge benefits to the taxpayer that will come from the privatisation of the industry, to which the Labour party is opposed?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My hon. Friend is right to point out that, in the past five years and beyond, the taxpayer has not been ungenerous in giving money to the coal industry.
In return, we expect the industry to fight for its share of the electricity market by improved productivity.
I am delighted at the progress that the industry has made with Government assistance.
Mr. Hardy
The Minister has accepted that investment by the state has assisted miners to achieve records of productivity unmatched by the rest of British industry.
However, despite that achievement in the national interest, the Government have sat idly by while the electricity supply industry has disregarded that massive increase in productivity.
Not only have the Government disregarded the electricity supply industry's disdain for that achievement, but they have sat idly by and watched collieries close which, in the past five years, have taken up a large part of that sum of money about which the Minister boasted just a moment ago.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The provision of £8.5 billion of grant aid hardly amounts to standing idly by.
The mining industry knows that its long-term security comes only from selling its product to customers at prices they can afford.
If we insisted on electricity generators buying expensive coal, that would be bad news for domestic electricity customers and it would cause job losses in the rest of British industry.
THORP
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy at current trends, how much plutonium he expects the thermal oxide reprocessing plant to have produced by the year 2000.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
BNFL estimates that, by the year 2000, some 30 tonnes of plutonium should have been recovered during reprocessing in THORP.
Mr. Cohen
Is not THORP about to become the principal producer of plutonium for proliferators in the world?
Will it not produce the equivalent of about a quarter of the nuclear arsenals of both the Soviet Union and the United States at their peak by the year 2000?
Is not THORP capable of destroying the world, and should not the Minister show some courage as well as some sense and phase out plutonium production?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
The reprocessing does not create plutonium but recovers it so that it can be recycled as a source of energy.
The hon. Gentleman may know that a tonne of plutonium is equivalent, in energy terms, to about 3.5 million tonnes of coal.
It therefore makes sense to recover that element for possible future use in civil reactors or, one day, in the fast reactors.
Pit Closures
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what recent meetings he has had with the National Union of Mineworkers to discuss the proposed pit closures; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Wakeham
I have had no recent meetings with the National Union of Mineworkers to discuss pit closures.
Mr. Skinner
Does the Minister agree that 90 million tonnes of imported coal last year is equivalent to about 20 pit closures involving 20,000 men?
Compared with how the German coal industry is subsidised — its coal is produced at no less than £89 a tonne compared with £42 a tonne for deep-mined coal in Britain — how can we say that the industry is on a level playing field in Europe?
What guarantees do we have that some of that imported coal is not part of the German coal laundered in Rotterdam with coal from other countries?
Does that mean that we are helping to subsidise the German coal industry while shutting pits in this country and throwing people out of work?
Those people then receive the dole, which is taxpayers' money.
The whole matter needs to be brought to an end immediately.
Mr. Wakeham
The hon. Gentleman put his finger on the cause of the problem — the excessive subsidies in Germany.
I want those subsidies to be phased down by the Community, and I also want to encourage British coal to be exported to Germany if that is a way to deal with the problem.
Mr. Roger King
Is my right hon. Friend aware of the widespread confusion among Opposition Members — particularly the hon. Member for Holborn and St. Pancras (Mr. Dobson), shown by his attitude towards the importation of coal — and the great conflict within the Labour party about how to handle the matter?
Will my right hon. Friend comment on the Labour party's idea on the possibility of stuffing the generating board with political satraps to bring salvation to its energy policy?
Mr. Wakeham
From time to time I read about the views of the hon. Member for Holborn and St. Pancras,(Mr. Dobson) but I was also interested to read over my cornflakes on Saturday morning the Labour party briefing to the effect that we were not to take the hon. Gentleman too seriously.
Mr. John Evans
Surely the Secretary of State agrees that it is economic madness to switch electricity generation from coal to gas, close scores of collieries and throw thousands of miners on to the dole?
Does not the industry need a long-term agreement to keep collieries like Parkside in my constituency, the very last colliery in north-west England, in existence?
Mr. Wakeham
We need the lowest possible electricity prices for consumers and British Coal has a part to play in that.
I agree with the hon. Gentleman that it would be in Britain's best interests to have long-term coal contracts, but those must be negotiated on commercial terms.
Energy Efficiency Office
Sir John Hannam
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy what the budget for the Energy Efficiency Office will be in 1992-93; and what was the comparable figure for 1979-80.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer I gave earlier today to my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, North (Mr. Jones).
Sir John Hannam
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that this year more than £1 billion is being spent by the public sector on energy efficiency?
Much energy could also be saved by businesses.
Has he any new initiatives in the pipeline for energy efficiency in the business sector?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I can confirm the figure given by my hon. Friend.
The funding of the Energy Efficiency Office in my Department has risen 10 times since the Government took office in 1979.
The energy management assistance scheme, which will come into place on 1 April, will grant-aid energy efficiency projects for smaller businesses — a new initiative to add to the many others that my Department already runs.
Energy Management
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Energy if he will outline what initiatives he is taking to encourage responsible energy management among businesses.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
We are taking forward three major initiatives: the making a corporate commitment campaign, which is designed to secure board level commitment to energy efficiency; best practice, which is the Department's main programme of energy efficiency information transfer; and the energy management assistance scheme, which I have mentioned and which gives grant aid to the energy efficiency projects of smaller businesses.
Mr. Evennett
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply, which makes most welcome news.
What was the budget for 1979-80 and what is the predicted budget for 1992?
Do not the figures show that the Government are committed to the scheme?
Mr Heathcoat-Amory
In real terms, the funding for the Energy Efficiency Office has risen 10 times during the past 11 years.
THE ARTS
Arts Sponsorship
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Minister for the Arts whether he has any plans to visit Barnet to discuss the private sponsorship of the arts.
The Minister for The Arts (Mr. Tim Renton)
I will be visiting Community and Recreational Arts in Barnet in March, where I will have the pleasure of attending the official opening of the Tedder lounge, which has been extended to include a wheelchair accessible art room.
I shall be happy to speak about private sponsorship of the arts if asked.
Mr. Marshall
If asked, would my right hon. Friend be able to confirm that private sponsorship of the arts has generated an additional £46 million on top of the already large amounts of public expenditure?
Would he also be able to confirm that the only threat to the continuation of that expenditure is the election of philistines of the left, who are opposed to the scheme and whose tax policies would pulverise the attempts of those who support the arts?
Mr. Renton
I agree with my hon. Friend.
One of the very satisfying factors is that despite the difficult times that some companies are facing, they are continuing with their sponsorship of the arts, often in partnership with my office, through the business sponsorship incentive scheme award.
It is sad that the Labour party has already shown indifference to that form of arts funding.
If it does not kill off the golden goose, it will certainly let it starve to death through neglect.
Museum Charges
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Minister for the Arts what recent assessment has been made of the effect on attendance figures of the introduction of admission charges to museums.
Mr. Renton
Comparisons are hard to make because of the unreliability of the numbers recorded prior to the introduction of charges.
However, evidence suggests that, after an initial fall-off, admission numbers at those museums which charge have held up well in subsequent years.
Mr. Flynn
Since the catastrophic drop in attendance at the National Museum of Wales — a reduction which has largely been made up by the efforts of the museum staff — there is still bitter resentment among Welsh people that a barrier prevents them from seeing the treasures of Wales that were purchased and the national museum that was established as an expression of Welsh identity.
Those shows of identity were paid for by the pennies of miners and the barrier was imposed by the philistine, alien Government who do not know the difference between a work of art and a tin of baked beans.
When will there be an end to the philistine approach of the Government who apply a cornershop philosophy to the arts?
Mr. Renton
It is extraordinary to describe the Government or Welsh Office as philistine when the Government are currently spending £21 million on the extension and development of the National Museum of Wales in Cardiff.
I had great pleasure in seeing that extension and I would be surprised if the hon. Gentleman had not visited it and was not looking forward to its opening.
The fall in attendance was mentioned in the debate on the Museums and Galleries Bill the other day.
Although a fall in numbers occurred in the first year after charges were introduced, that was largely due to the building works, but the figures have increased and Welsh men are looking forward enormously to the addition to their national museum.
Mr. Soames
Does my right hon. Friend accept that if the major galleries of this country are to go on with their extremely enlightened and successful purchasing programme, it is essential that we bring in charging for entry?
Does he accept that the general public will not mind in the least paying to see these magnificent treasures?
Will he further accept that there is a perfectly satisfactory formula under which all who are exempted from prescription charges are exempted from charges for entry to museums?
Mr. Renton
My hon. Friend will know that the galleries and museums that charge either do not charge or operate substantial concessions for the elderly, for school children and for educational parties.
My hon. Friend puts his finger on a crucial point: the total income of the museums and galleries for which I am responsible, outside their grant in aid, is £48 million — up by £20 million from the figures for three years ago.
If Labour came to power, it would remove all that money and thus deprive the public of the pleasure of the special exhibitions that are staged as a result of the charging policy.
Municipal Theatres
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Minister for the Arts if he will make a statement of the funding of municipal theatres.
Mr. Renton
Municipal theatres, which are an essential part of arts provision in this country, are funded and run by local authorities.
As receiving theatres they do not attract direct Arts Council funding, but they benefit from the Arts Council's support for touring which enables more distinctive and varied programmes to be mounted.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank the Minister for that reply.
Does he agree that it is possible, if arts societies stage productions that the population want to see or hear, for those societies to be self-financing — as the society in Billericay is?
The arts society there produces an excellent range of cinema, theatre and music, professional and amateur, and last year made a profit of £30,000.
By contrast, in nearby Basildon, whose council levies an extortionate community charge, the municipal theatre receives a subsidy of £1.7 million a year and makes a loss of £500,000, which has to be funded out of the pockets of my constituents?
Mr. Renton
I hesitate to enter a dispute about the rival merits of these two different establishments.
I certainly appreciate the good work done by the establishment in my hon. Friend's constituency which she mentioned first; but I would point out that the Towngate theatre in Basildon also puts on some interesting performances — by Opera 80 and the Second Stride dance company, for instance.
I understand that it recently hosted a show by the Chippendales, not a branch of the’ Antiques Roadshow’but an American male strip show which played to an all-female audience.
That at least shows a certain equality of opportunity.
Mr. Fisher
Will the Minister widen his reply to include funding of the national companies, and in particular will he explain the remarks that he made to the Royal Society of Arts last week, when he speculated on the Government funding the national companies directly?
Is that ending of the arm's-length principle Government policy or is it another example of a Minister, who knows that he has only another five weeks in the job, making a remark entirely of his own without consulting his civil servants, the Arts Council or any of the national companies?
Will he make his position clear: are the Government going to end their arm's-length approach?
Mr. Renton
That question is a long way from municipal theatres.
However, if the hon. Gentleman had attended the seminar at which I made my remarks last Monday — I greatly regret that he was not there to hear me talk about delegation to the regional arts boards — he would have known that I made the point that if such delegation is fully successful — if the regional arts boards are progressing well — the question whether the five major national companies should continue to be funded by the Arts Council or be funded directly will arise.
I framed my remarks in a hypothetical context following on from delegation to the regional arts boards, and I am sorry that the hon. Gentleman was not there to listen and to learn.
Touring Companies
Mr. Amos
To ask the Minister for the Arts what steps he is taking to encourage the increase of touring by arts companies.
Mr. Renton
Following the record increase in Government funding of the Arts Council for 1992-93, I am delighted that the council has decided to increase its touring budget for England for next year by over 19 per cent.
to £9.6 million, and to increase substantially the separate Great Britain touring fund.
Mr. Amos
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the quality of cultural life in the north-east is second to none?
Will he join me in congratulating Queen's hall in Hexham on winning so many national awards?
Will he give an assurance that he will sustain the generous funding of Northern Arts that he has managed in the past few years?
Mr. Renton
I am well aware of the good work carried out by the Queen's hall arts centre.
Its public sector funding depends on money from Northern Arts, and I am delighted to confirm that, as a result of the record settlement that I was able to negotiate for overheads, Northern Arts will receive a 13.9 per cent increase for 1992-93 amounting to more than £5 million.
European Arts Festival
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Minister for the Arts what plans he has for the European arts festival; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Renton
To ask the Minister for the Arts, what plans he has for the European arts festival;—
Interruption
The European arts festival, which I announced on 9 December will be a rewarding and imaginative way of celebrating our Presidency of the European Community in the second half of the year.
Some £6 million is being made available to support a full programme of events across the United Kingdom.
Mr. Greenway
I thank my right hon. Friend for that doubly impressive answer.
Will there be something for everybody, for people of all ages, in the European arts festival?
Would not the festival be a good way to allow our citizens to improve their knowledge and understanding of European languages and culture?
Mr. Renton
Yes.
I was so carried away by the wisdom of my hon. Friend's question that I found it necessary to repeat it.
It is hoped that the European arts festival will reach all parts of the community, schoolchildren included, and will bring a tradition of British art in the European context to all parts of the country, including Ealing, North.
CIVIL SERVICE
Executive Agencies
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service when he last met representatives of the civil service unions to discuss the operation of executive agencies.
The Minister of State, Privy Council Office (Mr. Tim Renton)
I meet representatives of the civil service unions from time to time to discuss a range of issues.
Union members have an important part to play in the continued success of’ next steps’.
Mr. Evans
Did the Minister discuss with the unions concerned the maintenance of free collective bargaining and union recognition in the agencies?
Will he take this opportunity to give a categorical assurance that none of the agencies will be allowed or encouraged to derecognise any of the civil service trade unions?
Mr. Renton
Derecognition of the civil service unions is certainly not part of our policy.
In the context of the first part of the hon. Gentleman's question, I must ask him to appreciate that one of the important matters now being examined by the chief executives of the agencies is the issue of greater pay flexibility and performance pay, so that better results can be achieved, both by individuals and in terms of customer service, from a given amount of pay.
That matter was being discussed at the chief executives' conference that I attended in Harrogate on Thursday, and it is a matter of great importance to all those working in the’ next steps’agencies.
Mr. Latham
Is my right hon. Friend aware that, since these bodies remain within the civil service, some of us feel that executive agencies are neither fish nor fowl nor good red herring?
Will he see what can be done to improve parliamentary accountability for the agencies because, in particular since they are responsible to the Public Accounts Committee, Ministers should be prepared to answer questions about them?
Mr. Renton
I disagree with my hon. Friend about the agencies being neither fish nor fowl nor good red herring.
They are an extremely important development for the civil service and for those parts of the civil service that are especially concerned with delivering service to the customer.
If my hon. Friend has a chance to visit any of the executive agencies, as I do, he will be very impressed by the way that they are tackling their tasks.
My hon. Friend asked about answers to parliamentary questions.
My right hon. Friend the Leader of the House has submitted proposals in that connection which I think are being studied by the appropriate House of Commons Committee.
Dr. Marek
The Minister will know that for some years London weighting has been frozen because the Minister's policy is to pay just sufficient to recruit and retain civil servants.
Does he intend that policy to be part of the new executive agencies?
Mr. Renton
The hon. Gentleman is wrong, and I think that he knows it.
Although further London spine points have been introduced and the amount of extra pay given to people working in London has therefore increased, there is more flexibility in the system than there used to be.
Now, the emphasis is on pay agreements that will meet the specific needs of the civil service and of the executive agencies throughout the country, rather than on maintaining an unnecessarily rigid or uniform structure — a structure which did not necessarily produce the best results in the past.
Civil Service College
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service if he will make a progress report on the Civil Service college.
Mr. Renton
The college is contributing to a better-trained and more professional civil service.
It has recently published its prospectus for 1992-93, and I will send my hon. Friend a copy.
Mr. Dunn
I am grateful to my right hon. Friend for that reply.
Does he agree that one of the tasks of the Civil Service college is to inculcate a sense of responsibility, a sense of loyalty and a sense of commitment to the Government of the day?
Will he urge those who run the college to use the example of Mr. Pashley to illustrate the way in which a civil servant ought not to behave?
I refer to trading in stolen documents with the Labour party — a practice that has not, I believe, yet been condemned by that party.
Mr. Renton
I appreciate the sentiment that lies behind my hon. Friend's question.
The work of the civil service is, of course, dedicated more to the training of senior management and training in the key professional skills such as information technology, audit, purchasing and supply.
As for the basic question of loyalty to which my hon. Friend referred, that consideration should be fundamental to the acceptance of a civil service job, and I hope that it will always remain a priority for every civil servant, regardless of which party is in power.
Mr. Winnick
When the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs.
Thatcher) was Prime Minister, Mr. Bernard Ingham and Mr. Charles Powell exercised far more influence on members of the Cabinet, apart from on the Prime Minister herself.
Would it be possible for the Civil Service college to illustrate, by means of that example, what should not happen, and to demonstrate the amount of abuse that took place at that point in our history?
Would not that be useful?
Mr. Renton
The hon. Gentleman does his best to get everything out of context whenever that is possible.
His hon. Friend the Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Banks) is one of those Members of Parliament who have contributed regularly to college courses, and I am delighted that he has done so.
Perhaps he would like to put his hon. Friend right in regard to the question of bias at the college.
Sir John Stokes
I admire the work of the Civil Service college.
Does its principal keep in touch with the colleges in Her Majesty's forces, which maintain such a high standard in every respect, while also ensuring that intelligence is applied to complex problems?
Mr. Renton
I know the principal well.
She is a woman — and I am very pleased that she is one of the women heading the executive agencies.
I am sure that she follows up precisely the kind of matter to which my hon. and loyal Friend has referred, but I shall make certain that that is so, and write to my hon. Friend.
Appointments
Mr. Tony Banks
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service how many senior civil service appointments subject to prime ministerial approval have been made since 1979.
Mr. Renton
There are currently about 170 posts in grades 1 and 2 of the civil service.
All appointments in these top grades have been subject to the consent of the Prime Minister.
Mr. Banks
Does the Prime Minister see some dangers there?
Maintaining the previous Prime Minister's attitude to the selection of senior civil servants —’ Is he one of ours?’— will lead to the politicisation of the civil service at the top level, and I believe that that has happened.
Would it not be better either to move over to a’ spoils’system — which would at least do away with all the hypocrisy, and would be more honest and open — or to appoint civil servants via a Select Committee, or through some other all-party approach?
Mr. Renton
Those comments are unworthy of the hon. Gentleman.
I am glad to say that his thoughts are not shared by Opposition Front Benchers.
I can only assume that it was from his previous experience as chairman of the Greater London council in 1985-86 that he learnt all about’ getting your friends appointed to the key jobs’, and that that is why he assumes that the same is happening in the civil service now.
It is not; the top people are appointed solely on the basis of their merit and intelligence.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is sad to hear the ex-leader of the Greater London council, who appointed people purely on political merit, suggest that senior civil servants are chosen on anything other than ability?
Would it not be a sad day for this country if that attitude of mind took hold?
We are well served by our civil servants.
Although Governments come and go, governance in the civil service sector of this country continues untainted.
Mr. Renton
I agree with my hon. Friend.
The civil service procedures for the most senior appointments are well established.
They have been supported by both sides of the House for many years.
They are based on ability to do the job.
I do not believe that we should cast aside at all lightly the all-party support for these methods.
Staff Development
Mr. Dalyell
To ask the Minister for the Civil Service what opportunities exist for civil servants based in Great Britain to gain experience in duties relating to Northern Ireland as part of staff development programmes.
Mr. Renton
Staff are regularly seconded to the Northern Ireland Office from other Departments and agencies.
In addition, several Departments offer postings to their offices in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Dalyell
May I welcome the presence of the Home Secretary and the shadow Home Secretary when asking a question of which I have given notice, in the hope of a serious reply?
What is the House of Commons to make of the reports of serious on-going disagreements between, on the one hand, Mr. Ian Burns and other most senior officials in the Home Office and the Metropolitan police, as represented by Mr. Bill Taylor, and, on the other side of this subject of how to deal with Ireland-originating situations, Mrs.
Stella Rimington whom the Government, with a fanfare of trumpets, announced as the head of MI5?
Does the Minister agree that answering as he does, in a sense, for the Prime Minister, this is a very serious matter for the House of Commons?
Mr. Renton
I know that the hon. Gentleman tabled an early-day motion on the subject a short time ago.
However, he well realises that these matters of detail are for response by my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary.
If he catches your eye, Mr. Speaker, the hon. Gentleman may have an opportunity to raise the matter in the debate that is to take place later this afternoon.
House of Commons Tuesday 25 February 1992 The House met at half-past Two o'clock PRAYERS Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
EDUCATION AND SCIENCE
Education, Northumberland
Mr. Beith
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what recent representations he has received about education in Northumberland.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Michael Fallon)
We have received a number of representations, and on Tuesday 11 February I met a deputation which included the hon. Member for Berwick-upon-Tweed (Mr. Beith).
Mr. Beith
Has the Minister accepted the argument which was put strongly to him and to which he listened carefully that day, that it makes no sense for Northumberland to be forced by Government spending restrictions to cut £3.5 million from its education budget when it spends less per pupil than most other authorities?
Will the Minister respond urgently to the constructive plea that was put to him for help through which Northumberland could ease those budgetary restrictions this year and, of course, for an eventual change in that system?
Mr. Fallon
I am looking at the specific points that were made by the delegation to me earlier this month.
However, Northumberland's education spending allocation has increased by 24 per cent.
over the past two years, and I see no need for any of the cuts that the hon. Gentleman mentioned.
Mr. Amos
Does not my hon. Friend find it outrageous that Labour-controlled Northumberland county council has refused to accept economies of nearly £1.5 million, as identified by the Conservative and Liberal groups, and has refused to take enough money out of balances to avoid any education cuts, but at the same time it can find thousands of pounds to issue supplements in the Hexham Courant for party political propaganda to promote the leader of the county council, who happens to be a prospective Labour party candidate?
Moreover, Labour councillors do not defend their actions; they put the county treasurer up to do it and then give him a £4,000 salary increase.
Mr. Fallon
Yes.
Northumberland's Labour council leader appears to be trying to use parents and governors to further his prospective parliamentary career in Hexham by frightening people into thinking that those cuts are necessary.
I repeat that there is no need for any school budget in Northumberland to be cut.
The council's overall spending can rise by 5.4 per cent.
in April before Northumberland risks charge capping.
Mr. Ronnie Campbell
Is the Minister aware that due to the cuts that he has imposed on Northumberland county council
Hon. Members
Oh.
Mr. Ronnie Campbell
Yes.
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that 200 teachers are about to lose their jobs, with the result that class sizes in Northumberland will increase and under this Government the education service will take a dip?
Mr. Fallon
I think that it is now obvious to the whole House that Northumberland is playing politics with its education budget.
I repeat that there is no need for any school budget in Northumberland to be cut at a time when its overall expenditure can increase by 5.4 per cent.
before it risks charge capping.
Surplus School Places
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what plans he has to intervene where local education authorities fail to take action to reduce surplus school places.
Mr. Fallon
The Government continue to press local education authorities to remove surplus places, since only they can make proposals for reorganisation.
Our latest survey of school capacity shows that Wolverhampton has nearly 12,000 surplus places.
We estimate that it will cost Wolverhampton more than £2 million a year to keep them empty.
Mrs. Hicks
I thank my hon. Friend for that answer.
Pressing is not enough.
Unfortunately, the Labour-controlled council in Wolverhampton continues to ignore our pressing.
Does my hon. Friend agree that that money should be intended for pupils?
Will he please come to the rescue of Wolverhampton parents and, if need be, intervene to ensure that Wolverhampton council manages education and does not waste money?
Mr. Fallon
I shall consider that point.
Wolverhampton has the fifth highest overheads of any education authority in England.
Its administration consumes more than 5 per cent.
of its schools budget.
Its education bureaucracy appears to cost £100 per pupil, compared with £30 next door in Solihull.
At present Wolverhampton appears to employ more non-teaching staff than teachers under its education budget.
Mr. Straw
Does the Under-Secretary understand that if the Government had not embarked on the wholly cynical and two-faced policy of enticing schools with surplus places to opt out, the children at Stratford school would not now face chaos?
Given that the Secretary of State's own appointed governor, the former chief inspector, Eric Bolton, said that the situation at the school is’ unsatisfactory’and that the general secretary of the National Association of Head Teachers said that pupils and staff at Stratford school are’disturbed’, does the Minister recognise that the Secretary of State's statement last week that Stratford school was’operating satisfactorily’had no basis in fact and could come only from a Secretary of State who sought to evade, rather than take, the responsibility which was plainly his?
Mr. Fallon
Let me give the hon. Gentleman some facts.
Of the 143 grant-maintained schools to which he referred and which have been approved so far, only 23 were named in reorganisation or closure proposals.
As for the hon. Gentleman's suggestion that the grant-maintained school policy might be paralysing the production of reorganisation proposals, let me tell the hon. Gentleman that in the past 12 months 150 proposals for school reorganisations were received and some 93 have so far been approved.
No such proposals have been made by Wolverhampton.
Mr. Budgen
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the state of affairs to which he referred in Wolverhampton has continued for about 10 years now?
Has not the Labour-controlled local authority frequently made proposals for reorganisations, knowing that they would be rejected because they were highly partisan?
Would it not be a good thing if the Government explained to the people of Wolverhampton, perhaps even by taking an advertisement in the Express and Star, that the gross overspending has continued year after year because Wolverhampton council has seen education in terms of employing people in schools, not in terms of providing good education?
Mr. Fallon
I can tell my hon. Friend that 17 of Wolverhampton's 18 secondary schools have surplus places.
It is high time that Wolverhampton got round to proposing some reorganisations.
As for Wolverhampton's budget, there was a serious overrun last year of some £2 million, including on the operation of something called the Jennie Lee centre.
The working party's report said that the overrun on that centre’ generally reflected policy instructions that no additional cost should be involved but in specifics turned out not to be manageable’.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Exceptionally, in terms of balance, I call Mr. Dennis Turner.
Mr. Turner
Thank you for calling me, Mr. Speaker.
All the interventions from the Conservative Front Bench will not save the seat of the hon. Member for Wolverhampton, North-East (Mrs. Hicks).
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Will the hon. Member deal with education in Wolverhampton?
Mr. Turner
Yes, I definitely want to do that.
First, I want to draw the attention of the House — I want to ask the Minister —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Come on.
Mr. Turner
I want to ask the Minister why his two Back-Bench colleagues from Wolverhampton did not nominate the schools which they would wish to see closed or from which they would like to have surplus places taken away.
In addition, I accept that the Minister is new to his Front-Bench position.
Wolverhampton has already submitted two proposals for surplus places and they have been rejected by the Government.
Mrs. Maureen Hicks
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That question was not out of order.
It provided a balance.
Mr. Fallon
It is clear to the House from that sort of defence that Wolverhampton, even by the standards of Labour councils, is a pretty dreadful education authority, with the fifth highest overheads in England.
Parents in Wolverhampton will want to know why the paperwork cost is £100 per pupil there, compared with only £30 per pupil down the road in Solihull.
Mr. Speaker
If the hon. Member for Wolverhampton, North-East (Mrs. Hicks) wants to raise the matter, she could raise it on the Adjournment.
Mrs. Hicks
Yes; thank you, Mr. Speaker.
Science
Mr. Strang
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how much his Department plans to spend on science in 1992-93.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Kenneth Clarke)
In 1992-93 the science budget will total £1,050 million
Mr. Strang
I direct the right hon. and learned Gentleman's attention to the Government's overall spending on research and development.
Will he address himself to the fact that no less than 44 per cent.
of all Government-funded research and development has a military purpose and next year that figure is due to rise to 48 per cent?
How can that be right?
Mr. Clarke
Obviously, military research is the responsibility of my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Defence, but I am sure that he would argue, as I would, that there is considerable civilian spin-off from all the advances made in the development of military equipment, and that includes the consequences for the electronics industry and others.
I have just described the level of the science budget in my Department, which is spent for civil research purposes on environmental, medical, scientific, engineering, economic and social research.
That amount has just passed £1 billion per annum for the first time, representing a real terms increase of 2.5 per cent.
this year, and we have given the research councils a rising profile for expenditure in future years.
We are also expanding our efforts in civil science.
The defence expenditure to which the hon. Gentleman referred has considerable benefits for the scientific world and for British industry.
Mr. Rowe
Does my right hon. and learned Friend accept that, no matter how large the science budget of his Department may be, it will be a great waste of money in the future if there are no young people interested in science?
Does he agree that when Kent County Engineering Society recently held a seminar for primary school heads and local businesses, it turned out that not a single local business had thought of trying to interest primary school children in science and engineering.
Surely, it is at that age that interest has to be aroused because later those subjects will fall on the other side of the divide.
Mr. Clarke
My hon. Friend makes a valid point.
We have to interest more young people in scientific and engineering education and training.
The development of the national curriculum will do a great deal to stimulate more interest in science because more pupils will have to sustain well-judged scientific programmes of study until at least the age of 16.
Although we have now developed good links between business and secondary schools where companies try to interest pupils, we do not yet have enough tie-ups between primary schools and local businesses.
I agree that more businesses should contemplate approaching younger children and at an early stage arousing their interest in what science or engineering may hold for them.
Dr. Bray
Will the Secretary of State keep in this country what James Watson, the discoverer of the DNA basis of the genetic code, has described as the jewel in the crown of British science?
Will he authorise the Medical Research Council to plan on the basis that the funding needed by Dr. John Sulston of the laboratory of molecular biology of Cambridge will be available to keep in this country work on the nematode project, as that work is the foundation of the human genome project which is the foundation of the future of medical research and biotechnology?
Is the right hon. and learned Gentleman aware that the United States has made a bid for that work?
If funding is not available, and it cannot be found within the present budget, the Secretary of State will be guilty of the loss of that work?
Mr. Clarke
With the greatest respect, it would be a pathetic science policy that suggested that the Secretary of State of the day should intervene to give funds to named scientists — whose names, no doubt, the hon. Gentleman picked up from cuttings in the learned journals.
Science nowadays is an international community and British science is pre-eminent in the world.
We are one of the leading science nations and we attract many more talented people to this country than we lose.
It is no good citing one or two cases.
The Medical Research Council will no doubt consider particular claims on scientific merits to counter the fact that Britain has achieved great success in science because of the increasing sums that the Government have made available for that purpose.
Mr. Hill
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that one of the best universities in the United Kingdom for scientific research is Southampton university?
It is second to none and it is grateful that the figures that have been released today show that it will receive 10.2 per cent.
of its budget for research.
I am sure that that money will be used with the utmost effect to promote more and more scientific developments at Southampton university.
Mr. Clarke
My hon. Friend is right to remind us that the Universities Funding Council has considerable funds which it receives from the Government and distributes partially for research-based purposes.
This year, the funds have been allocated very much according to the UFC's grading of the quality of research carried out at each university.
I congratulate Southampton university on its success in obtaining funds way ahead of the rate of inflation in order to sustain and increase the work that it carries out.
Further Education Programmes
Mr. McMaster
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what plans he has to improve access, facilities and learning programmes in the further education service for people with disabilities and/or learning difficulties.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Alan Howarth)
The Further and Higher Education Bill currently before Parliament will ensure that a wide range of educational provision for students with disabilities and learning difficulties is maintained and developed in the new further education sector.
Mr. McMaster
Does the Minister agree that life-long education is a right, not a privilege, and that it should not be any less of a right just because a person happens to be disabled?
Is the Minister aware that many disabled people are concerned that their rights will be reduced if further education colleges are taken out of local authority control?
Does the Minister agree with the almost unanimous view of the disability lobby that the best way to protect the rights of disabled people would be to introduce anti-discrimination legislation now?
Mr. Howarth
I can offer the hon. Gentleman the reassurance that he seeks.
The Bill places clear duties on the further education funding councils to cater for people with learning difficulties and those councils will be required to allocate resources to discharge those duties.
It is for the councils to determine how they distribute funding, but the Bill gives the councils wide powers to be used in support of students with special education needs.
The Government will ensure that no less than the existing level of resources will continue to be available in the new further education structure and that funding will be apportioned between local education authorities and the funding councils in line with their responsibilities for securing the provision of further education.
Binary Divide
Mr. Edwards
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the consequences for research funding of ending the binary divide.
Mr. Alan Howarth
The new framework for higher education will require funding for basic and strategic research in each subject to be allocated selectively to high-quality departments.
All institutions will be free to compete for selective research funding.
Mr. Edwards
I am grateful to the Minister, but is there not a danger that there could be an unfair distribution of funding research between the new universities, which will be formed from polytechnics, and the traditional universities?
Is there not concern that there could be inequity in the distribution of research funding to Welsh and English institutions?
What will the Minister do to ensure that Wales gets a fair deal in research?
Mr. Howarth
The Government's policy remains as set out in the White Paper on higher education.
Funding will be based on an assessment of individual departments.
Some departments in an institution will do well, while others will do less well, according to the assessment of their research quality.
But institutions right across the new unified higher education sector will be free to compete on fair terms, and the same will apply in Wales.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Does my hon. Friend accept that universities with a strong research base need fear nothing from the end of the binary divide?
Does he further accept that the Universities Funding Council has acknowledged the excellence of research at Lancaster university by giving it a 10.9 per cent.
increase in funding for the coming year?
Mr. Howarth
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for those remarks.
The Universities Funding Council is carrying out the policy, in response to the White Paper, of distributing funding according to assessments of research quality department by department.
I share my hon. Friend's pleasure and offer my congratulations to Lancaster university on achieving a 10.9 per cent.
increase in research funding for the forthcoming year.
Mr. Andrew Smith
Does the Minister appreciate that, with the phasing out of the student-related element of university research funding, the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals is actively canvassing the introduction of top-up fees?
I understand that Birmingham university council is due to consider the matter tomorrow.
Will the Government take action to stop the charging of top-up fees, or will they allow universities to go down the road of pay-as-you-learn?
Mr. Howarth
I should have hoped that the hon. Gentleman would respect the principle of academic autonomy.
He cannot have it both ways.
He cannot profess, as he likes to do, his respect for the autonomy of academic institutions and at the same time seek to limit their management discretion.
I emphasise that we believe, as my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State has said, that top-up fees should be unnecessary because we have planned, and continue to plan, to provide sufficient public funding to support the expansion of high-quality teaching in our universities.
Moreover, we regard such fees as undesirable because we are keen that there should be no avoidable barriers to access on the part of people who have not traditionally had the opportunity to go into higher education.
Technical Education
Mr. Stevens
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what progress is being made in the promotion of technical education.
8
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science if he will make a statement on the building and equipment needs for technical education.
The Minister of State, Department of Education and Science (Mr. Tim Eggar)
The Government are promoting technical and vocational education through a wide range of measures.
They include the introduction of technology as a subject for all pupils from the age of five to 16 and of an improved range of vocational qualifications; the establishment of city technology colleges and of a network of technology schools; and new freedom and flexibility for our further education colleges.
Mr. Stevens
I congratulate my hon. Friend on the £25 million technology schools initiative to further technical education in schools.
Does he agree that such initiatives help to give young people a better start and help to provide the type of recruits needed by industry?
Does he further agree that Labour Members' knee-jerk opposition to city technology colleges shows their obsession with standardisation rather than with improving the quality of education in schools?
Mr. Eggar
I agree with my hon. Friend about the widespread support for the technology schools initiative, with 89 local education authorities having submitted bids.
In addition, in a number of LEA areas where it had been decided, mainly for doctrinaire reasons, not to submit bids, we have received individual bids from schools.
Further to my hon. Friend's final remarks, it should come as no surprise to him or to anybody else that Labour Members are opposed to choice.
They are committed to abolishing city technology schools, grammar schools and the assisted places scheme, and they have no time for parental choice.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Does my hon. Friend share with me some anger that 19 Labour authorities still have not even bothered to bid for the funds that are available?
Does he agree that that contrasts with the breath of fresh air that is now flowing through our universities and polytechnics?
The universities have attracted large sums — more than £700 million of additional funding — for the current year, and our polytechnics likewise, now that they are independent of the stifling hand of Labour authorities —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Supplementary questions must be brief.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Will the Minister pledge total support for the Nottingham city technology college for doing just what our young people and the nation need?
Mr. Eggar
I very much agree with my hon. Friend.
I visited the Djanogly college and was impressed with the quality of education offered to so many young people.
It was interesting to note that so many heads of secondary schools, in Nottinghamshire and elsewhere, are coming to see what has been achieved at Djanogly college and to learn the lessons from it.
With regard to bids to become technology schools, my hon. Friend will be heartened by the quality of the bids that we have received from individual schools, including some exceptionally good schools in Labour-controlled areas.
Mr. Cousins
Does the Minister accept that, as there are now 50 different definitions of a professional engineer, it is unrealistic for the Minister's Department to tell Newcastle council, which put in two bids for technology schools, that it should have submitted only one.
Does the Minister agree that, to tackle such antique snobbery, two bids from one city should be allowed?
Mr. Eggar
I shall look into the matter because I recognise that Newcastle is a Labour authority that has put aside its doctrinaire opposition to technology schools.
So far as I am aware, Newcastle local education authority is as free to submit two bids to the Department as any other local education authority.
I assure the hon. Gentleman that those bids, when received, will be evaluated in comparison with other bids.
If he is genuinely concerned that Newcastle has been prevented from putting in more than one bid, I shall look into the matter for him.
Mr. Cryer
Does the Minister not think it unfair to spend £7 million on a city technology college in Bradford, when that amount equals the sum spent on the nearly 300 publicly owned schools in Bradford?
As the Minister should know, those schools are very much in need of large-scale capital expenditure.
Many of them are of a Victorian standard and need considerable investment.
Does he agree that the schools in Bradford provide a perfectly good technical education and that they need to be built on and improved, rather than being attacked by diverting public funds into city technology colleges?
Mr. Eggar
I do not believe that the hon. Gentleman has visited the city technology college in Bradford.
Indeed, he has refused invitations to do so.
That college provides an excellent education to many pupils in Bradford.
Parents are extremely keen to have their children admitted to the college because they want them to take advantage of the excellent education that it offers.
The hon. Gentleman should take more time to encourage schools in Bradford to learn the lessons from the city technology college to improve the quality of technology education in Bradford.
He should also have words with his colleague, Councillor John Ryan, who needs to improve the quality of his submissions to my Department for funding from central Government.
Mrs. Currie rose
Hon. Members
’ Hear, hear!’
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mrs. Currie
Is my hon. Friend aware that some of the finest technical education in Europe is given to the 7,000 students of the Derbyshire college of higher education?
Its bid to become a polytechnic has been supported for many years by Conservative Members from Derbyshire.
Is my hon. Friend aware that, as polytechnics are to disappear, we now support its bid to become a university?
Will he ensure that everything possible is done so that Derbyshire can have its first opportunity to have a university, in contrast with Nottingham which will have two, Leicester which will have three, and Loughborough which will have one?
At present, Derbyshire has none.
Mr. Eggar
I am aware of the strong support from my hon. Friend and other Derbyshire Members for that development.
The position has been clearly explained to the college in Derby and I am sure that it will pursue the opportunities.
Primary Education
Mr. Bidwell
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what proposals he has arising out of the report on primary education by Alexander, Rose and Woodhead.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
I commissioned the report to stimulate debate within the teaching profession and in primary schools about how best to deliver the national curriculum and to raise standards.
The effective introduction of the national curriculum will require changes in practice in many schools and the report will assist the teachers concerned in planning the necessary changes.
Mr. Bidwell
I welcome the right and learned Gentleman to the Dispatch Box — I did not think that he was going to answer this question as he looked a bit tired sitting on the Bench there.
I am glad that he did answer it, as I wanted to ask him this: has he learnt any lessons from the report, particularly those related to ability streaming?
He is known to have favoured that, but it is rejected by the report as a’ a crude device which cannot do justice to the different abilities a pupil may show in different subjects and contexts’.
Mr. Clarke
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman has read the report.
If he were to read it with a less selective eye, he would benefit considerably.
He would discover that the report advocates the grouping of pupils according to ability in many circumstances, in order to place the pupil in a specific ability group for a particular purpose as that is a more flexible device for teaching older children in a number of subjects.
I hope that he and other members of the Labour party will eventually be talked out of their past commitment to mixed ability teaching at all levels, for, as the three wise men have confirmed, that is not suitable for delivering the broad and balanced curriculum at which the Government are aiming.
Mr. Pawsey
Does my right hon. and learned Friend accept that Conservative Members welcome the report of the three wise men?
Does he further agree that the report condemns the trendy, discredited methods put forward by Labour and calls for a return to traditional teaching?
What plans does my right hon. and learned Friend have to implement the report, and what is the time scale likely to be?
Mr. Clarke
My hon. Friend is right.
The report stated that the progress of primary pupils had been hampered by the influence of highly questionable dogmas, which had led to excessively complex classroom practices and devalued the place of subjects in the curriculum.
My hon. Friend is right to say that the Labour party has been closely associated with the development of those dogmas over many years.
We are circulating the report to all primary schools so that primary school teachers can benefit from its advice.
The National Curriculum Council will take account of the report in monitoring and reviewing the manageability of the national curriculum.
The Council for the Accreditation of Teacher Education is to advise me on the implications of the report for primary initial teacher training in future.
I intend to use the report to review the present arrangements for the induction of newly qualified teachers and in-service training.
Considerable changes are required in classroom practice in many of our primary schools if we are to raise standards to the levels demanded by today's society and parents.
The Government are determined to raise those standards, and the report will be a valuable instrument to enable us to do so.
Ms. Armstrong
Does the Secretary of State accept that there is now evidence that standards in the basics, which the report identified as the key skills on which other learning depends, have fallen?
Does he further accept that the report identifies that there has been serious disturbance in primary schools in recent years?
Will he abandon his ideological dictation from the centre and work with teachers to bring in the changes in the curriculum for which the report calls?
Mr. Clarke
First, I personally do not accept that there is any evidence such as the hon. Lady describes.
I find it odd that the position has so changed compared with 15 months ago when I became Secretary of State, when some Conservative Members were alleging that standards had declined and Opposition Members were denying those allegations.
The recent report of the National Foundation for Educational Research did not attribute any decline to the national curriculum; the interpretation placed on it by the hon. Lady and her hon. Friend the Member for Ealing, Southall (Mr. Bidwell) is based on a deliberate misreading of the report.
Mr. Matthew Taylor
Will the Secretary of State explain how he was able to commission a review of teaching methods in a matter of a few weeks, although his minimum standards — first laid down in 1981 — were not met in the 10 years that the Government allowed themselves, and the current review will not now report until the autumn?
Is it fair to assume that, in this general election year, the right hon. and learned Gentleman expects the review to lead to a cut in the Government's minimum standards for education facilities, designed to meet the requirements of the national curriculum?
Mr. Clarke
Most of the minimum standards have been met.
As the hon. Gentleman has said, the review will go ahead in the autumn.
The reason why the’ three wise men’report was produced so quickly is that the three people whom I invited to deliver it — Mr. Alexander, Mr. Rose and Mr. Woodhead — had behind them a lifetime of experience and close involvement with primary schools, and they were able to distil that lifetime's knowledge very rapidly.
As far as I am aware, no one has criticised my choice of those three experts, or challenged their conclusions.
It is slightly absurd for people to pretend that the’ three wise men’report is anything other than a valuable contribution to the raising of standards in our schools.
City Technology Colleges
Mr. Gerald Bowden
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science how many pupils attend city technology colleges.
Mr. Eggar
Currently, we estimate that there are some 8,000 pupils benefiting from a CTC education.
Mr. Bowden
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
Does he agree that city technology colleges provide a real alternative education for children in the inner city?
Is he aware that in south-east London — and serving my Dulwich constituency — is Haberdashers' Aske's city technology college, which has received more than 800 applications for 180 places?
Is that not proof positive that CTCs are popular both with parents and with pupils?
Mr. Eggar
I agree.
The popularity of all the CTCs is beyond challenge.
Despite deep and unremitting opposition from, in particular, the Labour-controlled councils of Lewisham and Southwark, Haberdashers' Aske's CTC has succeeded in attracting an overwhelming amount of interest from parents.
My only regret is that the college is not able to take more of my hon. Friend's constituents.
Mr. Flannery
Surely the Minister — and all the other Ministers and other Tory Members — know that the CTCs are really private schools, siphoning off millions of pounds of public money.
Is it not true — as my hon. Friend the Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) pointed out — that as much public money goes to one CTC, to which parents who have not gone through the normal process will have access, as to all the other schools in the area, and that it goes there at the same rate?
The other schools have to share little or nothing while the city technology college gets the lot — and it is public money.
Mr. Eggar
I imagine that this may well be the hon. Gentleman's last contribution to Education Question Time.
I note that his question was as full of ideological claptrap as all the others that he has asked during his career in the House.
Further Education
Mr. Amess
To ask the Secretary of State for Education and Science what progress is being made with plans to give further education and sixth-form colleges more independence.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
Excellent progress is being made with our plans, which are the subject of the Further and Higher Education Bill currently before Parliament, to give colleges independence from local authority control.
Mr. Amess
Following the visit of our hon. Friend the Member for Enfield, North (Mr. Eggar) to Basildon last Friday, will my right hon. and learned Friend endorse our hon. Friend's statement that the independence that we are offering colleges of further education and sixth-form colleges such as Basildon's will enable them to be more effective, efficient and flexible than they can be at present?
Will my right hon. and learned Friend agree to visit Basildon this year to observe the excellent education standards enjoyed by my constituents?
Mr. Clarke
My hon. Friend the Minister of State was very impressed by his visit to Basildon, and I should certainly be interested in visiting it myself if and when my diary allowed it.
I have visited sixth-form colleges in Thurrock and Boston this year, and I recently addressed the annual meeting of the Association of Colleges for Further and Higher Education.
I agree that the colleges are looking forward to their independence and to expanding the opportunities for further education available to our young people.
I find that they bitterly regret the Labour party's dogmatic commitment to repeal, contrary to the wishes of the college principals, the Bill going through the House precisely because the Opposition Front Bench are acting at the behest of a few backwoodsmen Labour county councillors throughout the country.
Mr. Fatchett
The Secretary of State will be aware that further education colleges charge their students for certain activities related to the curriculum — not tuition fees, but other activities.
When the Bill goes through, if it does, sixth-form colleges will have the same freedom.
Will the Secretary of State now give a guarantee that no sixth-form college student will be charged for activities in relation to the school curriculum, or is this to be yet another example of pay-as-you-learn under the Conservative Government?
Mr. Clarke
I know of no realistic reason for expecting any sixth-form college to introduce charges of the kind described.
Sixth-form colleges will be funded on the basis that they carry on with their present practice.
I have not met a college principal who intends to change that practice.
The hon. Gentleman is merely trying to raise obscure scares about our proposals when he knows from his own visit to the association that the policy is extremely popular with all the principals and that his statement — that the colleges would be given back to his friends in Labour councils — was greeted with widespread dismay there.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Kilfoyle
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 25 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Kilfoyle
The Prime Minister recently told the House that the British economy had grown faster than any other in Europe, when it has not; he said that the Japanese economy was in recession, when it is not; and he said that German unemployment was over 3 million, when it is not.
Given that series of gaffes, will he now compound his confusion and tell us that he bears no personal responsibility for the appalling slump that is devastating Britain today?
The Prime Minister
As the hon. Gentleman knows, there is a recession in a number of countries.
I quote from what Sir Allen Sheppard of Grand Met said yesterday:’ One thing which no one could predict a year ago was exactly how long the recession would last This recession has not been an exclusively British phenomenon — as some people would have us believe.
It is a worldwide problem; only last week we heard the news that Europe's strongest economy, Germany, had slowed down.’
Those are not my words, but those of Sir Allen Sheppard of Grand Met.
Sir Peter Blaker
Will my right hon. Friend consult his right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster about the attempt being made to steal the emblem of the duchy?
Is he aware that on a previous occasion when such an attempt was made, the miscreant — an imposter named Lambert Simnel, who attempted to steal the red rose from King Henry VII — was not only defeated but sentenced to serve as a scullion in the royal kitchens?
What does my right hon. Friend think would be the appropriate sentence now?
The Prime Minister
It is difficult to find anything entirely appropriate.
Perhaps continuous service as Leader of the Opposition would do.
Mr. Kinnock
Does the Prime Minister recall saying a short time ago in his personal statement — in this document from the Conservative party — that’ if’Government’borrowing takes the strain, taxes have to go up’
Does he still take that view?
The Prime Minister
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, I was Chief Secretary for two years and Chancellor for one year.
Because of the repayments that were made of borrowing during that period, in the midst of a recession we are now in a better position to borrow prudently — than we have been at any stage in the past: to borrow prudently and to maintain our commitment to a balanced budget in the medium term.
Before the right hon. Gentleman reflects further, he may recall that the borrowing requirement was 9 per cent.
of GDP under the last Labour Government — the equivalent to borrowing today £55 billion.
Interruption
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister is now borrowing billions to try to finance a pre-election tax cut, so will he tell us exactly which other taxes he would raise to pay for the bribe?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman knows very well that I cannot prejudge my right hon. Friend's Budget, and I have no intention of doing so.
He should also realise that tax is levied on people's own money: it does not belong to the Government; it is their money that the Government compulsorily take away from them in taxation.
Taxation levels determine how much.
We know that the right hon. Gentleman would add to taxation, for he needs to in order to sustain his promises.
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister said a very short time ago that’ If’Government’borrowing takes the strain, taxes — not just our taxes’—
Hon. Members
We have heard this before.
Mr. Kinnock
And you are going to hear it again:’ If’Government’borrowing takes the strain, taxes — not just our taxes but the next generation's too — have to go up.’
Does not the Prime Minister think that he owes it to the country to say exactly which other taxes he would put up to pay for his bribe?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman should have done a little more research.
If he had done a little more research and had seen the evidence that I gave to the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee in 1987, he would have seen then — when we had a fiscal surplus of many billions — that I indicated that it would be right, in a downturn, to borrow money in a recession.
Would the right hon. Gentleman prefer to do what Labour last did — cut the hospital building programme and cut the other programmes?
That is what it did before.
Mr. William Powell
I thank my right hon. Friend for coming to Corby last Friday to open the magnificent Brooke city technology college.
Does he agree that this type of secondary school has a substantial part to play in the future education of our children in the secondary sector, and will he encourage the development of further city technology colleges in our country?
The Prime Minister
I certainly enjoyed my visit to the Brooke city technology college last week.
It is an excellent establishment and has attracted a good deal of support and resources from the private sector.
I think that that is the sort of choice that parents want for their children, and it widens the opportunities in education.
It is inexplicable to me that the Labour party would wish to stop this continuing and successful experiment.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tueday 25 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mrs. Ewing
As the Prime Minister has now had time to appreciate the significance that Scots attach to the phrase’ taking stock’, will he elaborate on what that means in the Scottish constitutional set-up?
Is it an affirmation of what his junior energy Minister says: that it will be acceptable for the Scottish Office to be staffed by Members from constituencies south of the border, or of what his Foreign Secretary and Secretary of State for Scotland have said in the past 24 hours: that nothing will happen, or is he considering the possibility of affording the Scottish people the right to determine their own future in a democratic fashion?
Will there be a referendum or any other mechanism to establish a Scottish Parliament?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Lady's party seeks isolation for Scotland.
I do not believe that that prescription is in the interests of Scotland or of the rest of the United Kingdom.
I said that we would be taking stock, and I meant precisely that — taking stock on the basis of an increased vote in Scotland, on the basis of more Members of Parliament for Scotland and on ways of seeking to increase the strength of the Union.
That is what I mean by taking stock.
Mr. Dover
Is the Prime Minister aware that millions of people are fed up with having to pay extra community charge to cover those who do not pay?
Will he encourage all local authorities to ensure that people pay their bills promptly and will he ensure that future charges are reduced when that money comes into council coffers?
The Prime Minister
I certainly agree with my hon. Friend that we need to pursue those who do not pay the community charge and, in particular, we should pursue those Members of the House who do not pay the community charge and set a bad example to everyone else.
Mr. Chris Smith
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 25 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Smith
Does the Prime Minister agree with the proposition that it is entirely sensible for a Government to borrow prudently in order to fund capital investment to build economic recovery but that it is sheer folly for a Government to borrow in order to buy votes for an election?
Would that not be fiscal philandering of the worst kind?
The Prime Minister
Without in any way prejudging what my right hon. Friend the Chancellor will do in the Budget, I seem to recall that the last Labour Government — on the back of a huge borrowing requirement — cut taxes just in advance of the 1979 election.
But if the hon. Gentleman wants to know about investment, let me give him some information about investment.
We now have the largest investment programme of capital investment in the national health service that we have ever had.
Next year hospital spending in capital terms will be 75 per cent.
up on the last year of the Labour Government.
Those are the fruits of an improved economy over the last 10 years.
Mr. Tracey
Will my right hon. Friend restate his commitment to the assisted places scheme in our schools, which is an extremely cost-effective way of sending children of high ability to good schools?
Is it not short-sighted for both Opposition parties to be pledged to the abolition of this scheme?
The Prime Minister
It is an extremely popular scheme, as my hon. Friend knows.
We will sustain that scheme in the next Parliament.
The Opposition parties would abolish it, given the chance.
Mr. Alan W. Williams
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 25 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Williams
Having been Chief Secretary to the Treasury before becoming Chancellor, and Chancellor before becoming Prime Minister, is the Prime Minister really trying to tell us that he bears no responsibility whatever for the recession?
Why is the Prime Minister continually trying to blame everyone else when it is his own errors of judgment, mistakes and economic incompetence that have produced the current recession?
The Prime Minister
I think that the hon. Gentleman builds too much on too little.
I made it clear on a number of occasions over recent years that there was, in retrospect, one change that I wish we had not made at the time, but it was one that was urged on us by right hon. Gentlemen opposite.
That was the reduction of interest rates immediately on the back of the stock exchange crash, but, as the hon. Gentleman knows, we were urged to cut them even more by the Leader of the Opposition and the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith).
What responsibility will they accept for that?
Mr. Butcher
Can my right hon. Friend give a guarantee that he will never propose the introduction of unnecessary and expensive regional assemblies in England and Wales?
Does he agree that when Opposition parties advocate such bodies they do so with the entirely cynical objective of maintaining the over-representation of Scotland in this House in the aftermath of the dog's breakfast called devolution?
The Prime Minister
Such assemblies are neither wanted nor needed, and we will not propose them.
Mr. Jack Thompson
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 25 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Thompson
Is the Prime Minister aware that since 1979 the crime figures in England and Wales have gone up by 102 per cent., that in the north of England they have gone up by 123 per cent .
and that in the Northumbria police force area — my area — robberies have gone up by 240 per cent.
and criminal damage by 238 per cent?
The Home Office is advising the police to increase the number of officers while at the same time the Department of the Environment is capping local authorities' spending.
How does the Prime Minister square that circle?
The Prime Minister
If the hon. Gentleman is so concerned about law and order, perhaps he could explain to me why his party refuses to support the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act, which was introduced initially by a Labour Government and is now opposed by a Labour Opposition.
He might also have mentioned in his remarks that spending on law and order is up by 80 per cent.
in real terms and that there are 15,500 more police officers, whereas Labour left the police force under establishment by 7,000 when it left office.
Labour has opposed our measures which have led to stiffer sentences, it would shackle the police with political controls and its answer to rising crime is to blame everyone except the criminal.
House of Commons Wednesday 26 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
SCOTLAND
Mr. Speaker
Before we start Scottish questions, I remind Members from Scottish constituencies that, as is my practice, I shall seek to call those who were not called last time and give them some preference.
Home Rule
Mrs. Irene Adams
To ask the Secretary of State for Scotland if he will meet representatives of the Scottish Constitutional Convention to discuss home rule for Scotland.
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
I have no plans to meet representatives of the convention.
I have already initiated public and parliamentary debate of its proposals which were discussed in considerable detail in the Scottish Grand Committee on 24 February.
Mrs. Adams
As this is likely to be the last Scottish Question Time before the general election, will the Secretary of State indulge in a deathbed conversion and recognise the frustrations and hopes of the Scottish people about the present constitutional set-up?
Will he discontinue his pre-election pact with the Scottish National party in its all-or-nothing bid?
Does he agree that a meeting with the convention may not be enough to save his seat but may just save his face?
Mr. Lang
I look forward to answering Scottish questions from this Dispatch Box at the first Scottish Question Time after the general election.
Then, as now, I shall do my best to ensure the protection of Scotland's best interests by maintaining its place as a full, equal partner in this United Kingdom Parliament.
Mr. Marlow
As a unionist with very good reason for having the warmest of feelings towards Scotland, may I ask my right hon. Friend to make it absolutely clear to anyone who wishes to establish an institution in Scotland with legislative powers over certain areas of policy that, regrettably, it would be totally unacceptable for any Scottish Member of the House to have any say, vote or control over areas of policy in the rest of the United Kingdom?
Mr. Lang
I entirely understand my hon. Friend's anxiety on that point.
It is an anxiety shared by several Labour Members, most notably the hon. Member for Linlithgow (Mr. Dalyell) and, more recently, the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook).
My hon. Friend puts his finger on one of the central dilemmas faced by those who would advocate setting up a separate Parliament with separate powers entrenched in Edinburgh in rivalry to the Westminster Parliament.
That is incompatible with the integrity of the United Kingdom Parliament.
It would not be sustainable or stable in the long term.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce
Will the Secretary of State acknowledge that, given that after five years his Government have completely failed to establish a Select Committee on Scottish Affairs, he has no credibility in the constitutional debate in Scotland because he has no proposals to make?
Is not that aggravated by the fact that the Prime Minister does not know what he believes about the future of Scotland?
The consequence is that the only way to secure reform is to secure the defeat of every Conservative candidate in Scotland at the general election.
Mr. Lang
We know what the leader of the Liberal Democrats thinks.
He thinks that a proportional representation voting system is more important than the constitutional future of Scotland.
When asked whether he would support a constitutional change in Scotland if he did not have proportional representation, he said no; so he makes it clear that he gives higher priority to the self-interest of the Liberal Democrats and a voting system that would help them than to the issue of principle on Scotland's constitutional future.
House of Commons Thursday 27 February 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
NORTHERN IRELAND
Banbridge Hospital
Mr. Trimble
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what guidance the management executive of the Department of Health and Social Services has recently given to the Southern health and social services board concerning the future of Banbridge hospital.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Jeremy Hanley)
None, Sir.
The hon. Gentleman might be referring to the fact that on receipt of the Southern board's investment appraisal for the refurbishment of Banbridge hospital it became clear that there were a number of deficiencies in the document, as certain issues had not been properly addressed.
The board has simply been asked to provide that information before I can make a decision.
Mr. Trimble
The Minister knows of the concern about the future of Banbridge hospital and knows that, for many years, the Southern board promised its refurbishment.
That project was finally put into the proposals for this financial year, only to be clobbered by the moratorium on capital expenditure.
As the Minister said, his Department wrote to the board in January to tell it that it should reconsider’ the issue of Banbridge’.
It also supplied to the board a momorandum which has not been made available to other people.
Is not the implication obvious?
The hon. Gentleman is asking the board either to run down or to close the hospital.
Is not that a consequence of the need to provide up to £15 million to cure the concrete cancer problem at Craigavon?
What other hospitals will be affected?
Why cannot that exceptional expense be met with exceptional funding?
Mr. Hanley
I am doing no such thing.
The hon. Gentleman will know that any project in excess of £1 million must come to me for a decision.
An investment appraisal comes with the project.
The investment appraisal published by the Southern board was deficient in many respects.
The board has a commitment to Banbridge hospital and to continuing health care and social services in its area.
I merely want the information upon which I can decide whether refurbishment can go ahead.
Therefore, there is no lack of commitment by the board or by me.
Security
Sir Patrick Duffy
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the security situation in Northern Ireland.
4
Mr. Hunter
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a further statement on the security situation in Northern Ireland.
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Peter Brooke)
My last statement to the House followed the deaths of nine people on 4 and 5 February.
Since then there have been five deaths as a result of the security situation, including four men shot by the security forces near Coalisland on 16 February.
The Government and security forces will continue to meet their responsibility to bring terrorism to an end within the rule of law by pursuing a firm and resolute security policy and by working for progress in the political, economic and social fields.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Does the Secretary of State accept that the security forces must not only act within the law but always be clearly seen to act within it if they are to deprive the terrorist group of the environment in which it thrives?
Will he therefore ensure that after any incident involving the use of lethal force there is a prompt, thorough and impartial investigation so that the facts are plain to see?
Mr. Brooke
I am most grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his statement and endorsement of the policy under which the security arrangements are conducted within the Province and for his reference to the rule of law.
I assure him that after each such incident the Royal Ulster Constabulary investigates the circumstances.
Mr. Hunter
Will my right hon. Friend give serious consideration to the introduction of short-term selective internment?
At a time of heightened terrorist activity, would not that undermine the operational effectiveness of the terrorists and play havoc with their planned acts of violence?
Mr. Brooke
My hon. Friend is right to point out that the powers of executive detention are on the statute book and are available for use.
We do not comment further on them, beyond the fact that they are available for use.
Mr. Maginnis
Was not the Secretary of State a little disappointed at the reaction of some Church leaders to the successful contact by the security forces at Coalisland?
Is not it important that the Northern Ireland Office should ensure that full information is available to the public on the extent of the deadly arsenal that the terrorists had with them on that occasion, which included AK47 assault rifles and Dsh heavy machine-guns?
Will the Secretary of State ensure that the public are aware that 12 dedicated terrorists were involved in that attack and, although no one glories in anyone's death, make it clear again that only four were shot?
Does not that show that the security forces acted with remarkable restraint and that there is no dedicated shoot-to-kill policy?
Mr. Brooke
I support the hon. Gentleman's observations on the need for the circumstances of such cases to be made known.
I do not think that there were any doubts in Northern Ireland about the circumstances of that case.
The four men who were killed were sent on a murder mission.
It is easy to assess their potential for action and their intent from their fire power, to which the hon. Gentleman referred.
Mr. Peter Robinson
Does the Secretary of State recall a speech that he made several months ago in which he encouraged the business community to take on racketeers?
Does he recall that he said that if the business community took the first step he and the police would give it whatever support and back-up it needed?
Is he aware that one business man did as he suggested and, as a result of his coming forward, three people were convicted of racketeering?
However, that business man was forced to close his business, change his name and go into hiding with his wife and two children, and he has received no financial support from the Northern Ireland Office.
Despite the sympathy expressed by the judge in court, there is no way in which that business man can legally make a claim against the Northern Ireland Office.
Will the Secretary of State ensure that his Department backs up his promises to the business community and ensure that such disincentives to the business community coming forward are not allowed to continue?
Mr. Brooke
I know that the hon. Gentleman supports our drive to deprive the paramilitaries on both sides of the sources of finance that sustain their campaigns.
I recall the speech to which the hon. Gentleman referred and I know that he has referred before to a case similar to that which he described today.
I confess that I thought that that case had arisen a little before that speech.
If the hon. Gentleman wishes to write to me about the details of the case to which he referred I shall be happy to respond.
Mr. Mallon
When a Government have a serious problem that has lasted 22 years, cost billions of pounds in security and military provisions and caused immeasurable suffering to some people, it is reasonable to assume that they have a long-term policy for creating lasting peace and ending the waste.
As we come to the end of this Parliament, will the Secretary of State take this opportunity to give us some insight into the Government's long-term policy which has been formulated during the past 13 years?
I am not referring to ad hoc arrangements or short-term palliatives.
Will the Secretary of State give an unambiguous statement of the Government's long-term policy for creating peace in Northern Ireland?
Mr. Brooke
As the hon. Gentleman implied by his question, the Government's central purpose must be to bring terrorism to an end.
Terrorism will come to an end when the terrorist no longer believes that he has any chance of securing his objective by the means that he is using.
That calls for a robust security policy to enable the people of Northern Ireland to live normal lives conducted within the rule of law.
But it also implies, as my answer to the hon. Member for Sheffield, Attercliffe (Sir P. Duffy) stated, Government policy in political, economic and social matters that deprives the terrorist of the support which he might otherwise have enjoyed.
Political Talks
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland whether he will make a statement about his recent efforts to have talks with representatives of political parties in Northern Ireland.
10
Mr. John Greenway
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a further statement on the efforts he is making to reconvene all-party talks on the future government of Northern Ireland.
Mr. Brooke
The Prime Minister, the Minister of State and I met the leaders of the four main constitutional parties in Northern Ireland on 11 February.
As a result of that meeting, the leaders agreed to meet together to discuss the obstacles in the way of further political dialogue in the hope that new talks might be able to begin at an early date.
I shall meet them again shortly.
Mr. Canavan
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that if the killing is to be stopped and a just and peaceful solution is to be found, all politicians, whatever their views, have a responsibility to speak to each other?
Does he further agree that, sooner or later, the talks will have to develop into meaningful discussions about constitutional change on an all-Ireland basis because the status quo is untenable and is a recipe for continuing conflict?
Mr. Brooke
I endorse what the hon. Gentleman says about the responsibility that politicians of all constitutional parties have, and a willingness so to talk has been very much present in recent years.
As for his comments about all-Ireland talks, the talks on which we have been engaged, and to which we hope to return, contain more than one strand.
The second strand involves the Government of the Republic and it has been a pleasure to all concerned that everybody involved in those talks has supported and sustained them.
Mr. Greenway
I take this opportunity to pay tribute to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for all the work that he has done in the past two and a half years to improve the future and administration of Northern Ireland.
Does he agree that the future economic prosperity of the area depends primarily on the defeat of terrorism and that terrorism will not be defeated until all political parties in the Province renounce violence — not just those represented in the House today but Sinn Fein?
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his comments about the policies that we have been pursuing and economic prosperity in the Province, where we have seen advances in recent years.
Our immediate agenda must be the talks on which we embarked last year.
Everybody concerned has expressed an interest in returning to them.
Mr. Molyneaux
Does the Secretary of State agree that the progress made thus far is more likely to be maintained through calm deliberation than high wire circus acts?
Will he convey to the Prime Minister what I know to be the view of the three party leaders who represent Northern Ireland in the House — that we are endeavouring diligently to meet the wishes that he expressed at the Downing street meeting on 11 February?
Mr. Brooke
I endorse what the right hon. Gentleman said about the progress that has been made so far.
All of us, during the time that we have been directly engaged in these matters, have found it easier to make progress when the media have not been looking over our shoulders and breathing on the backs of our necks.
I mean no disrespect to the media, but some matters are carried forward more easily with the calm deliberation that the right hon. Gentleman described.
Mr. Kilfedder
I draw the attention of the Secretary of State to a damaging allegation made last week by the chairman of the Northern Ireland Conservative party and its prospective parliamentary candidate for North Down that the Secretary of State, by initiating talks between unionists and nationalists, provided the greatest possible encouragement for the murderous IRA campaign.
Will the right hon. Gentleman bluntly refute the despicable accusation that those taking part in the talks are responsible for the deaths of innocent people at the hands of the IRA?
Mr. Brooke
The hon. Gentleman knows well his opponent, the Conservative prospective parliamentary candidate.
I enjoy my conversations with that gentleman as much as I do those that I have with right hon. and hon. Members.
Mr. Rees
As to strand 2 — the north-south strand — of the talks to which the Secretary of State referred, the new Taoiseach announced that articles 2 and 3 would be on the table, and we all understand that.
He said also that the Government of Ireland Act 1920 would be on the table.
I studied it carefully this monring, better to understand what is involved.
What has the Taoiseach said about that aspect that we can consider?
Mr. Brooke
Under the terms of my statement to the House of 26 March 1991, which set in motion the talks that we held, it is open to any party to raise any issues — including constitutional issues — that it considers relevant.
However, the outcome of the talks will depend on securing agreement, and all concerned accept the principle that any change to Northern Ireland's status as part of the United Kingdom would come about only with the consent of a majority of the people who live there.
Rev. Ian Paisley
Is the Secretary of State confirming by that last statement that the union can be negotiated only by the House, the people of Northern Ireland and Her Majesty's Government — and that that matter is no concern of Mr. Reynolds or of the foreign state to the south of Northern Ireland?
Is the right hon. Gentleman confirming that today?
My hon. Friend the Member for Belfast, East (Mr. Robinson) and I understood that the basis of the talks was to try to secure a replacement for the Anglo-Irish Agreement and to make arrangements to safeguard the administration of Northern Ireland within the United Kingdom.
Mr. Brooke
At last night's meeting, the Taoiseach confirmed his Government's continuing commitment to the Anglo-Irish Agreement, article 1 of which contains a clear statement of Northern Ireland's constitutional status.
Mr. McNamara
Is the Secretary of State aware that the Opposition welcome the statements made by the Prime Minister and the Taoiseach at last night's meeting, on the future progress of talks between the two Governments, and that Northern Ireland will be high on their agenda — as it will on the agenda of the Labour Government?
We are pleased that Northern Ireland party leaders agreed to meet to discuss the possibilities of progress.
Does the Secretary of State accept that the Opposition hope very much that, after years of violence and despair, a political settlement will emerge, and that we will do everything in our power to achieve such an outcome, based on the three strands agreement?
Mr. Brooke
The hon. Gentleman and I have had similar exchanges before across the Dispatch Box, when he has advanced that bizarre and extraordinary hypothesis.
I agree that the hon. Gentleman has supported the talks as they are conducted at present.
If the hon. Gentleman's extraordinary and bizarre hypothesis were to come to pass, I would — as I have said before — be supportive of his efforts.
Small Firms
Mr. Bellingham
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what recent representations he has received from the Northern Ireland business community in connection with small firms.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Richard Needham)
Since the beginning of the year, I have continued both to meet and to correspond with a wide cross-section of the Northern Ireland business community.
Among the issues that we have addressed have been a number of particular concern to small firms.
Mr. Bellingham
Further to the point made by my hon. Friend the Member for Ryedale (Mr. Greenway), I pay tribute to the Minister's work in supporting industry and business in the Province.
Does he agree that one of the best ways of breaking down violence and lessening the sectarian divide is to encourage enterprise and initiative?
Am I right in saying that Northern Ireland has weathered the recession better than any other part of the United Kingdom?
If so, is not that due partly to the Government's support for small firms?
Mr. Needham
I thank my hon. Friend for his kind comments.
The fact that Northern Ireland has weathered the recession better than any other region in the United Kingdom is due, to an extent, to the Government's policies; but it is due not least to the resourcefulness, intelligence and dedication of business people in Northern Ireland.
I was interested to learn this week that, whereas National Westminster bank — the parent of Ulster bank — had to make provision for £1.9 billion of bad debts, the figure for Northern Ireland was £6 million and that half the bank's profits came from Ulster bank.
That shows beyond peradventure the current strength of the Northern Ireland economy.
I am sure that, once the recession is over, it will continue to expand, and expand fast.
Mr. A. Cecil Walker
Is the Minister aware that the Department of the Environment has undertaken a surreptitious exercise in an attempt to destroy the private sector taxi service in Belfast?
If so, can he tell us how much money has been allocated to that exercise?
Mr. Needham
I know of no surreptitious exercise being carried out by my Department in regard to private taxi firms in Belfast.
The hon. Gentleman and I have engaged in lengthy discussions about the problems faced by Belfast taxi drivers and I fully appreciate their fears and concerns.
I shall continue to discuss, with the hon. Gentleman and with the taxi drivers, whatever measures need to be taken to ensure their safety and continue their employment.
Mr. McGrady
In 1990-91, only 44 jobs were created in Northern Ireland.
Will the Minister reconsider the wisdom of the policy change introduced a couple of years ago by the Local Enterprise Development Unit to endorse and support market research and development, rather than providing direct grant aid for job creation?
That contradicted the philosophy, which proved correct, that small jobs — one or two-person start-ups — were the way in which to tackle, at least in part, the problem caused by the lack of inward investment.
Will the Minister address himself to LEDU's policy, and consider the reintroduction of direct aid for people starting up in business?
I know that LEDU does a good job through its local enterprise development programmes, but will the hon. Gentleman consider returning to the previous policy?
Mr. Needham
I really do not know where the hon. Gentleman found the’ 44’figure.
Perhaps he is referring to some figures that were leaked a couple of weeks ago from the Industrial Development Board for Northern Ireland — a reference to 44 inward investment jobs.
That figure turned out to be wrong: at least another 350 jobs have already been announced, involving no financial assistance.
I hope that, within the next few weeks, several hundred more jobs will be announced by the board.
That has nothing to do with LEDU.
The key to the success of a small business lies in the skills and professionalism of its management, technicians and staff.
LEDU is trying to ensure that small businesses have the marketing experience, the exporting know-how and the managerial capacity that they need in order to get going.
The Government are not about to hand out dollops of money so that inexperienced people can buy complicated equipment that they then do not know how to use.
Rev. William McCrea
I am sure that the Minister realises that small business is the backbone of industry in my constituency of Mid-Ulster.
Will he tell the House and my constituents what further incentives he can provide to ensure that small businesses are created and the economic blight is removed from my constituency?
Mr. Needham
The hon. Gentleman pays rightful tribute to small business, describing it as the economic backbone of his constituency.
I assure him that the Government's support for LEDU, and the money with which they provide it, continue year on year to match the needs of small business.
I can reassure the hon. Gentleman that that will continue.
I hope to be able to discuss it further with him in the not-too-distant future.
Internment
Mr. Flannery
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what representations he has received calling for the introduction of internment without trial; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Brooke
The Government have received a number of representations calling for the reintroduction of executive detention.
They have also received representations from those opposed to such a step.
The power to introduce executive detention remains on the statute book and is capable of being exercised by the Government.
I shall not comment further, except to say that the consequences of such a step would need to be very carefully weighed.
Mr. Flannery
Does the Secretary of State agree that the re-imposition of internment without trial would deepen and intensify an already terribly difficult situation?
Does he recall that last time this occurred there was an immediate leap forward in terms of killing?
We would face that again.
Those who are asking for that — many voices, including important voices, in Northern Ireland are asking for it — would create a situation for everybody in Northern Ireland that would be far worse than it is now and, God knows, it is bad enough at present.
Mr. Brooke
The fact that the Government retained executive detention on the statute book by a free act last year is an indication that the Government believe it to be important that the instrument should be available.
The hon. Gentleman referred to the last time it occurred.
There are occasions — perhaps the only occasions when I feel a mild sense of despair in dealing with the affairs of Northern Ireland — when I fear that others assume that all events in Irish history will always repeat themselves exactly.
That is not the case — and it is because it is not the case that we are making progress in the way that we are.
Sir John Farr
Will my right hon. Friend assure the House that he will discard no weapon at all in the fight against terrorism — including internment, if necessary?
Should it unfortunately prove necessary, will my right hon. Friend make arrangements for it possibly to be introduced without notice and simultaneously after consultation with the Government of the Republic of Ireland?
Mr. Brooke
By definition, the weapon has not been discarded, as it will remain on the statute book, with the renewal of the order, in terms of the life of the statute.
Clearly and patently, if it were to be introduced, it would be introduced without notice.
There have been commentators who have said that if it were introduced, it would be much more effective if it were introduced throughout the island.
Mr. McNamara
Has the Secretary of State discussed the matter with the Government of the Republic of Ireland?
Does he accept that internment would be the height of folly and would have no support at all from the Labour party?
Will he also point out to those advocating such a foolish policy that they are merely diverting attention from the villainous crimes of the terrorists and, perhaps more importantly, from the enormous successes of the security forces and thus undermining confidence in the rule of law?
The right hon. Gentleman has pointed out in the House that nearly 50 per cent.
of people convicted of terrorist offences had no previous intelligence tracings in terms of involvement with terrorist organisations.
Does he agree that always the best thing to do is to arrest, produce evidence, convict and put terrorists behind bars?
Mr. Brooke
The only matters that I discuss with Irish Ministers in intergovernmental conferences under the Anglo-Irish Agreement are those which can be discussed under the rules of the agreement.
It would be a mistake, however, to think that we do not cover extensively all the ground and territory that is available within those limits.
As to the rest of the hon. Gentleman's question, I said at the beginning that I thought the less said the better.
Castle Court
Mr. Harry Barnes
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what assistance was given by his Department to traders whose businesses were disrupted by the Castle Court development in Belfast.
Mr. Needham
Following representations from local traders about the disruption to their businesses, rates on properties in the surrounding streets were reduced by up to one third.
Belfast city council reduced rents in Smithfield market by a similar proportion.
Mr. Barnes
Glowing remarks were made earlier about small businesses in Northern Ireland.
I know that the Minister has met Mr. Thomas Lennon, whose business was seriously disrupted during the Castle Court development, as were the businesses of other small business men in the area.
A rates reduction for a certain period is inadequate to compensate for the great disruption that was caused to people seeking to make a living in that area — people who do not have the wherewithal or the ability to use the court system against the Minister.
Why does he not face up to his responsibility and see that adequate compensation is given to the people who suffered so badly during that development?
Mr. Needham
Mr. Lennon's rates were reduced by a third.
The best news that Mr. Lennon can have is that the Castle Court complex now employs some 2,500 people.
It has brought into that area of Belfast a vast number of new businesses and has revitalised that area of the town.
The traders who trade around it can do nothing but benefit from the new multi-storey car park with 1,600 spaces.
The best thing that could happen for Mr. Lennon and his friends would be if the military wing of Sinn Fein stopped trying to blow up Belfast.
Mr. John D. Taylor
Despite the major differences between the Conservative party and the Ulster Unionist party following the imposition by the Conservative party of the Anglo-Irish Agreement and partial Dublin rule through Stormont, will the Minister accept on a personal level that there is widespread respect throughout Northern Ireland for the contribution that he has made to the rejuvenation of Royal avenue in our capital city of Belfast?
Does he recognise that it is one of the commercial miracles of Northern Ireland and is now envied by many areas in the United Kingdom?
Should he not be with us in six weeks, will he leave a message for his successor to ensure the continuation of that economic miracle into York street and York road in the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Belfast, North (Mr. Walker)?
Mr. Needham
I am grateful to the right hon. Gentleman for his kind words.
It will not stop at Belfast.
It is spreading to Derry, Newry, Armagh, Carrickfergus and Ballymoney, and throughout the length and breadth of Northern Ireland.
The people, the councillors and the business community of Northern Ireland are coming together to create their own economic future and to undermine the men of violence on either side.
They know that their success will lead to the defeat of the paramilitaries.
The people of Northern Ireland continue to need to be congratulated on their determination and resilience.
Hospital Waiting Lists
Mr. Stevens
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what initiatives are being taken to reduce hospital waiting lists in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Hanley
From 1 April this year, the vast majority of patients will be guaranteed admission to hospital within two years of being placed on a hospital waiting list.
Special task forces have been at work in each board to deal with the longest waiting lists and I have set aside an extra £1 million this year and in each of the next two years to support their work.
Mr. Stevens
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that reply, which I am sure will be welcome to the people of Northern Ireland.
I hope that there will be the same success in cutting waiting lists in Northern Ireland as we have seen in other parts of the United Kingdom.
I know that my hon. Friend is aware that the waiting list for treatment of coronary disease has been a matter of concern in Northern Ireland.
What action has he taken to deal with that specific waiting list?
Mr. Hanley
My hon. Friend is right.
Unfortunately, Northern Ireland suffers from one of the worst rates of coronary heart disease.
Following completion of the £1.5 million extension to the cardiac care recovery unit at the Royal Victoria hospital at the end of last year, a fourth cardiac surgeon has now been appointed there.
The new surgeon, a locum, will take up his post on 1 May this year for an initial period of one year.
That will lead to an increase in the number of operations at the Royal.
In addition, the Eastern and Western boards have already begun to buy in cardiac operations from Great Britain this year and the Northern and Southern boards are expected to do likewise shortly.
I hope that the waiting list for cardiac surgery will reduce greatly over the next year.
Mr. Beggs
Does the Minister accept that patients, irrespective of age group, should not have to undergo prolonged suffering, being fobbed off with medication from time to time when cardiac surgery is necessary?
Will he urgently encourage all boards to purchase coronary artery bypass surgery and other cardiac surgery from Great Britain?
Mr. Hanley
The hon. Gentleman is absolutely right and I agree with every word he says.
Cardiac surgery has the longest waiting list in Northern Ireland, but every effort is being made to reduce it, including the purchase of operations in Britain.
I believe that great progress will be made.
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson
In considering hospital waiting lists, is my hon. Friend satisfied that all those who would benefit from renal replacement therapy are getting it and has he anything to announce about a possible new satellite dialysis unit for the Province?
Mr. Hanley
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that question.
I am afraid that he is right: not everybody is benefiting from kidney replacement, because there is a shortage of kidney donors.
We could probably carry out about 70 more operations a year if there were more donors.
I therefore launched the donor card again last week.
I hope that every hon. Member, and everyone in Northern Ireland, will carry a donor card; it is vital that people do so.
Hospital Trusts
Rev. Martin Smyth
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what assessment has been made of the adverse effect on maintaining and upgrading hospitals of the amount being spent in preparing hospital trusts.
Mr. Hanley
It has always been made clear that the Government's reforms are not to be introduced at the expense of patient and client care.
Additional funds have been made available for the purpose and, accordingly, the reforms — including the establishment of trusts — cause no adverse effects on the hospital maintenance programme.
Rev. Martin Smyth
The Minister's comments may be helpful in the House, but they will not allay the concern that has been expressed throughout Northern Ireland — for example, in Upper Bann — about the amount of money that is needed to deal with the problem of concrete cancer at Craigavon hospital.
Will he acknowledge that even those who are trying to implement hospital trusts are concerned that the dead hand of bureaucracy, which has increased, is hindering their work?
Mr. Hanley
The hon. Gentleman makes a serious point about concrete cancer and money will have to be found to deal with that in due course.
I assure him that the money spent on the health reforms will lead to greater efficiencies and savings — its purpose is to improve patient care and to increase the number of patients treated — and it is extra to the maintenance programme.
I am pleased to say that, as from yesterday, 11 new hospital and social service organisation units applied for hospital trust status in Northern Ireland.
They recognise the advantages that will flow from trust status.
Mr. John Marshall
Will my hon. Friend confirm that NHS trust hospitals are treating many more patients than a year ago?
Is it not perverse, therefore, that some people are suggesting that those hospital trusts should be wound up?
Mr. Hanley
I thoroughly agree that hospital trusts are proving their worth, but the national health service in Northern Ireland is succeeding with trusts even before they have been established.
The establishment of trusts will improve matters.
The total number of in-patients in Northern Ireland, including day cases, increased by 9 per cent.
last year.
The total number of operations increased by 15 per cent.
and the total number of new out-patients by 6 per cent.
With or without trusts, Northern Ireland is succeeding in health care.
Trusts will make that even better.
Roads Maintenance
Mr. Clifford Forsythe
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland what plans he has to increase the funds allocated to roads maintenance in the next financial year.
Mr. Needham
It is planned to increase funding for the operation and maintenance of roads, and associated bridges, in the 1992-93 financial year by £3.2 million to £65.3 million.
Mr. Forsythe
Does the Northern Ireland Office keep a record of unadopted roads not covered by bonds?
What progress has been made in bringing those roads up to condition?
Mr. Needham
I think that the hon. Gentleman's colleague, the hon. Member for Antrim, North (Rev. Ian Paisley) came to see me about one of the cases to which he refers.
All I can say is that the giving up of bonds on unadopted roads is not a matter with which I deal daily, but I shall certainly consider the cases that the hon. Gentleman brings to my attention and see what can be done.
Mr. Hume
Is the Minister aware that when the Unionist party governed Northern Ireland it concentrated heavily on developing the roads only in the eastern part of Northern Ireland?
It did an outstanding job there, but the state of roads in the western part where there are areas of high unemployment such as Derry, Tyrone and Fermanagh — as exemplified by the Derry to Strabane road — are still in need of urgent development.
Will the Department give priority to the development of those roads in future planning?
Mr. Needham
I sympathise with the hon. Gentleman's point.
I assure him that the highest priority will be given to developing those roads, within the budget by which we are currently constrained.
Security
Mr. Molyneaux
To ask the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland if he will make a statement on the security situation.
Mr. Brooke
I refer the right hon. Gentleman to the answer I gave earlier today to the hon. Member for Sheffield, Attercliffe (Sir P.
Duffy).
Mr. Molyneaux
In view of the statement made by the Chief Constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary that terrorist movements can be destroyed very effectively from within, will the Secretary of State consult his right hon. Friend the Prime Minister to ensure that the full weight of the intelligence services is brought to bear on all terrorist movements within the United Kingdom?
Mr. Brooke
In explaining that my hon. Friend the Minister of State is not present to answer questions because he is doing duty in the Province, I give the right hon. Gentleman an absolute assurance of the commitment of the intelligence services and of their relevance in Northern Ireland today.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Loyden
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 27 February.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Loyden
Will the Prime Minister come out of his ivory tower across the road, put his photo calls on hold and face up to his responsibility for the past 13 years of Government mismanagement, which has culminated in the worst economic crisis since the 1930s?
How long must we go on, how many more jobs are to be lost and how many more families are to be dispossessed of their homes?
Will the Prime Minister now put it to the test through the ballot box and let the people decide on his record?
The Prime Minister
It is the hon. Member who is wrong.
We grew throughout the 1980s better than any other major European country except Spain: we received the highest growth in manufacturing productivity of any Group of Seven country and faster growth in business investment than any other G7 country except Japan.
By contrast, the hon. Gentleman might bear it in mind that Labour's plans for an extra £37 billion a year and policies of higher taxation, higher inflation and higher interest rates would drive this country into perpetual slump.
Mr. Devlin
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 27 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Devlin
Does my right hon. Friend agree that higher taxes and minimum wages would put up the costs of British businesses, making them uncompetitive and costing them jobs?
Does he agree that such twin torture is the very last thing that British business needs at the moment?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
Only the Labour party could plan to cripple industry with both a national minimum wage and substantial tax increases when trading conditions are so difficult.
Let me give my hon. Friend a quote:’ If our costs rise more rapidly than others' costs, particularly German costs, then British producers lose markets at home and abroad.’
Those are not my words — they were the words of the Leader of the Opposition.
If that is what he thinks, he should withdraw his tax plans and withdraw his minimum wage plans and do so today.
Mr. Kinnock
Does the Prime Minister recall saying that a’ promise to cut taxes AND increase public expenditure is dishonest and absurd’?
When the right hon. Gentleman wrote that, did he think that he would end up making exactly that’ dishonest and absurd’promise himself?
The Prime Minister
It is quite staggering to everyone who listens to the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) how terrified he and his party are of tax cuts.
He still thinks that tax cuts are immoral.
The Labour party has opposed every tax cut that we have introduced and now it threatens to raise taxes if we cut them.
The right hon. Gentleman wants people to let him spend their money rather than spending it themselves.
Labour opposes tax cuts when the economy is growing and when it is not.
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister heads the Government who have imposed the biggest tax burden in British history.
Perhaps he will now try answering the question.
The Government have promised to increase public expenditure and are promising to cut income taxes.
Is that not, in the Prime Minister's own words, truly a’ dishonest and absurd’promise?
The Prime Minister
If the tax burden is so high, why does the right hon. Gentleman propose to increase it still further?
When it was pointed out to the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) that his taxes would rise, the right hon. and learned Gentleman seemed surprised: what the right hon. and learned Gentleman said, in effect, was that taxes under Labour would’ only’rise higher than those in any other G7 country — lower, perhaps, than taxes in Albania, but higher than those of all our competitors.
Mr. Kinnock
Will the Prime Minister, in the last couple of weeks left to him in that office, try answering the question?
Does he not recall that he has promised to increase public expenditure, to cut taxes and to balance the budget?
His promises do not add up.
He was right —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister has made all those promises.
He was right: those promises are dishonest — I am quoting the Prime Minister, and he will hear this again —
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us have an end to this pointing across the Chamber.
Mr. Kinnock
Even deliberate disruption will not stop the country hearing this.
The Prime Minister has described promises to cut taxes and raise public expenditure as’ dishonest and absurd’.
He was at least right about that — and right about the Government who are making such promises.
The Prime Minister
In the 1980s we did cut taxation and raise public expenditure.
The right hon. Gentleman makes an absurd point.
Under the Labour Government, borrowing averaged more than 6 per cent.
of national product; since 1979, it has averaged not 6 per cent.
but less than 2 per cent.
Before the right hon. Gentleman starts to give lectures on borrowing, he should get his facts right.
In one year under Labour, borrowing reached a crippling 9 per cent.
— the equivalent of £55 billion today.
That was the Labour party's half decade of debt and now they plan another £37 billion worth of expenditure.
Which would it be: £37 billion of extra taxes or £37 billion of extra expenditure?
Mr. Hill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 27 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Hill
On the eve of the first anniversary of the Gulf war, will my right hon. Friend join me in expressing our gratitude to our armed forces, our commitment to the independence of Kuwait and our determination to ensure that Saddam Hussein and his generals comply with all international sanctions or suffer the consequences?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is quite right.
The whole country is proud of the role that our armed forces played in the liberation of Kuwait.
The way in which Saddam Hussein still behaves is unacceptable to us, to the United Nations and to the international community, and we shall continue to keep pressure on him.
Mr. Ashley
Is the Prime Minister aware that something far more valuable than the woolly citizens charter was brought before this House recently — a Bill to improve the rights of disabled people — but was talked out by Conservative Members?
Will he now undertake to rescue the Bill?
Or is this yet another example of the Government and their supporters talking up human rights in theory and knocking them down in practice?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman has done a great deal during his period in the House for disabled people and everyone in the House admires him for what he has done, but he must know that there have been dramatic improvements in recent years in the scope, range and value of benefits and in the number of disabled people who receive them.
No doubt there is still more to do, and it will be done in due course, but the right hon. Gentleman ought not to deny what has been done.
Mr. Bellingham
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 27 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bellingham
Does the Prime Minister recognise that, because of privatisation, the water companies are spending £28 billion on improving water quality, including schemes in west Norfolk to upgrade drinking water and clean up our beaches?
Is he aware that renationalising water would cost the taxpayer £8 billion and that the whole of this investment programme would be put at risk?
Is that really what the Labour party wants?
The Prime Minister
I suspect that it is.
My hon. Friend makes an excellent point.
Yesterday, Labour's spokesman made the point that nationalising water was a priority — yet another priority — which would cost £8 billion.
There was no sign of where the money will come from, and no sign of any advantage from the policy — just sheer blind dogma.
Mr. Ashdown
With British industry burdened by record debt and Britain's trade deficit at its highest for a year, will the Prime Minister explain why tax cuts which will suck in more imports are right while public investment in the kind of things that Britain needs for the future is wrong?
The Prime Minister
There was a time in the history of the Liberal party when it trusted people with their own money and believed that they could make their own decisions.
I note that, yet again, the Liberal party is aligning itself with the Labour party on social and taxation matters.
The whole country will note that, too.
Mr. Kilfedder
I am sure that the Prime Minister will join me in expressing the utmost admiration for the Australian people and the great commonwealth of Australia.
Will he therefore do his best to defuse the present unhappy situation and assure the people of that great continent that, although they may be on the other side of the world, they are close to the hearts of the people of the United Kingdom?
The Prime Minister
I will certainly undertake to do that.
I agree entirely with my hon. Friend on that matter.
Wallsend
Mr. Ted Garrett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will visit Wallsend.
The Prime Minister
I am making plans for a series of visits to all parts of the country and hope to return to the north-east in the midst of those plans.
Mr. Garrett
I would like the Prime Minister to visit Wallsend because he visited the neighbouring Conservative-held constituency and saw the destruction arising from the Meadowell riots as a result of 13 years of Thatcherism.
The Prime Minister would be most welcome to visit the Wallsend part of North Tyneside where he would have an opportunity to visit Swan Hunter and see a dedicated work force, a dedicated management and, above all, the pride of the people in Wallsend in building and refitting ships for the Royal Navy.
He would also learn about a series of problems, the main one of which is the unfair subsidies to ship building companies in the European Community which are handicapping the British ship building industry in terms of merchant shipping orders.
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman makes a fair point and I have considerable sympathy with what he says about that.
The Government's plans for the future naval fleet, including those recently announced for amphibious forces, will provide excellent opportunities for Swan Hunter to bid to obtain more orders.
On the subject of equitability across Europe, our aim is to establish that and competitive conditions for all United Kingdom ship builders as soon as possible at national and international levels.
We shall certainly keep up the pressure to achieve that, in the interests of Swan Hunter and many other fine firms in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
On his way to Wallsend, will my right hon. Friend visit the north-west of the United Kingdom, and the borough of Macclesfield in particular?
If he does, he will find an area ready to respond to the sound foundations of the economy that he and the Government have established.
The Prime Minister
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his very warm support.
I had the opportunity to visit the north-west on Monday, where I found a good deal of buoyancy and confidence in the future of the north-west and of the country as a whole.
Engagements
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 27 February.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Skinner
Does the Prime Minister not have a guilty conscience about his role as an ex-social security Minister?
Does he remember the period after 1985 when he came to the Dispatch Box and abolished the death grant and took away maternity grant and income support for 16 and 17-year-olds, while all the time pensioners were losing £14 a week?
What is all this claptrap about a classless society and a citizens charter?
The pensioners need more than that — and not that load of hypocrisy from the Prime Minister.
The Prime Minister
If the hon. Gentleman wants to know about claptrap, he should listen to what he has just said.
If he examines the record, he will see that for people in need I dramatically increased the amounts available for the death grant.
THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES OFFICIAL REPORT IN THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE FIFTIETH PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND [WHICH OPENED 25 JUNE 1987]FORTY-FIRST YEAR OF THE REIGN OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II
SIXTH SERIES
VOLUME 205
EIGHTH VOLUME OF SESSION 1991-92
House of Commons
Monday 2 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
SOCIAL SECURITY
National Insurance
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security how many non-pensioners with annual gross incomes below £10,000 a year would be affected by the imposition of national insurance contributions on income from savings in excess of £3,000 a year.
The Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Tony Newton)
We estimate that for the United Kingdom, in 1991-92, some 230,000 non-pensioners with gross incomes below £10,000 a year would have to pay national insurance contributions on their income from savings.
Mr. Evennett
I thank my right hon. Friend for that reply.
Does he agree that the use of national insurance contributions as an underhand tax is fundamentally dishonest and that early retirers, widows and those on limited incomes would be hurt by the imposition of a savings tax as proposed by the Labour party?
Mr. Newton
My hon. Friend is certainly right to identify the type of people who are likely to be hit — in all, more than 1 million people.
What is more, they would get absolutely nothing in benefit entitlement for this purported contribution.
Mr. Enright
Will the Secretary of State join me in congratulating my constituent, Archie Heptinstall, on his 80th birthday this week?
Will the right hon. Gentleman further explain to my constituent why people who reach that age end up in the appalling position of having all their age allowances clawed back by the Government?
Mr. Newton
I would wish warmly to join in congratulating the hon. Gentleman's constituent on his 80th birthday, particularly as, next month, the income support premium for the over-80s will be raised in real terms for the second time in three years.
3
Mr. Riddick
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what would be the average cost to a non-pensioner basic rate taxpayer of the imposition of national insurance contributions at 9 per cent.
on savings income in excess of £3,000 a year.
Mr. Newton
We estimate that in the United Kingdom the average cost in 1991-92 to a non-pensioner basic rate taxpayer would be £280.
Mr. Riddick
Does my right hon. Friend agree that imposing an extra 9 per cent.
on savings income would almost certainly deter individuals from saving and that the knock-on effect would be to reduce the resources available for investment in industry?
Does he agree that such a policy — it is, of course, Labour policy — would be sheer lunacy?
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is based on the Labour party's ideological dislike of people who are not wholly dependent on the state?
Mr. Newton
I have great sympathy with every point that my hon. Friend made.
I have the greatest difficulty in finding the remotest sense in the policy of a party which says that it is in favour of investment but which goes out of its way by every possible means to penalise saving.
Mr. Flynn
Will the Secretary of State explain where is the remotest sense in the present system whereby the editor of a national newspaper pays less than 1 per cent.
of his salary in national insurance, someone on the Prime Minister's salary pays 3 per cent.
and a person on average wages pays 9 per cent?
Will the right hon. Gentleman confirm that the Government — without announcing it in any manifesto — have increased national insurance charges by 40 per cent?
Mr. Newton
I do not think that the hon. Gentleman's figures are right.
He has looked at marginal rates in some cases, but not in others.
The basic point about the national insurance system is that it is a contributory one whereby what is paid bears some relationship to what is received.
If the hon. Gentleman wants to tax people more rigorously, he should do so openly and not in the disguised form in which that is proposed.
Self-employed
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security how many self-employed people earn more than £20,280 a year.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security (Mr. Michael Jack)
We estimate that, in 1991-92 about 400,000 self-employed people will earn above the upper profit limit of £20, 280.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Bearing in mind the Opposition's unalloyed joy at the thought of an increase in national insurance contributions for people who earn more than that, is it time that the Opposition came clean on their plans for the self-employed, who are the engine of the power house for this country?
Does my hon. Friend agree that any extra tax on the self-employed without benefits in return would damage the country's chances of growth, and would help it in no way whatsoever?
Mr. Jack
My hon. Friend, in his inimitable style, has smoked out one of the hidden parts of the Opposition's agenda.
I hope that, during this Question Time, the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) will make Labour's policy clear.
The Labour party is committed to removing the upper earnings limit for employed persons, but the hon. Member for Oldham, West has not made his party's policy on the self-employed clear.
We have flushed him out today.
His policy is the start of Labour's hand-in-the-till tax.
Mr. Skinner
One thing that the Opposition are certain about is that those who earn more than £20,000 have every right to be called upon to pay the extra 9 per cent.
Members of Parliament earn between £20,000 and £30,000.
If they cannot find that extra 9 per cent.
— a few hundred quid a year — what right have Tory Members to talk about pensioners who must get by on about £56 a week?
I am prepared to pay my contribution.
It is time that Tory Members understood that they should pay theirs, too.
Mr. Jack
The hon. Gentleman shows the Opposition's fundamental commitment to tax, tax and tax again and then spend, spend and spend again.
He ignores the fact that, as my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State pointed out, our national insurance scheme is founded on a contributory principle that has served the country well for 50 years.
We now know what the Labour party's agenda is on that issue.
National Insurance
Mr. Dykes
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what is his estimate of the time necessary to switch from the current system for collecting national insurance to one based on annual assessment.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Social Security (Miss Ann Widdecombe)
It could take three years or even more, depending on the exact nature of the change and, of course, the priority given to it.
Mr. Dykes
Is my hon. Friend aware that that bizarre proposal, tucked into the back end of a newspaper on25 January by an Opposition spokesman, would cause total chaos and huge problems for companies making such a change, particularly small companies?
It would mean devastating expense in terms of new software and the reprogramming of computers.
Would my hon. Friend care to comment on the chaos proposed by the Labour party?
Miss Widdecombe
The proposal would cause a huge administrative burden not only on business — the necessity to give businesses good notice would take some time — but on the DSS and the Inland Revenue.
It would also mean massive computer reprogramming and possibly the expense of other computer programmes which would have to be introduced.
Mr. Dalyell
In the absence of a member of the Scottish National party in the House, may I ask the Minister to write me a letter setting out, in terms of computer programming and related difficulties, the problems of collecting national insurance in the event of an independent Scottish Parliament?
Miss Widdecombe
Where are the Members of the Scottish National party if they are so concerned about the matter?
As for the unlikely event that the hon. Gentleman sketched, he may wish to test that policy with members of the SNP to find out precisely how such a system would work.
Although I am always prepared to enter discussions with the hon. Gentleman about hypothetical matters, one must also balance the amount of time and expense that it would take to comment on something that is not a reality.
Pension Funds
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security when he last held a meeting with the Occupational Pensions Board to discuss protection of pension funds.
Mr. Newton
I have had a number of informal discussions with the chairman of the Occupational Pensions Board in recent months.
Mr. Corbyn
In those discussions, did the Secretary of State draw to the attention of the Occupational Pensions Board the loss of hundreds of millions of pounds of money owned by Maxwell and Mirror Group pensioners?
Did he also draw attention to the total inadequacy of control over pension fund investments and procedures?
Is he prepared to state clearly now that he will introduce legislation to ensure that the sort of scandal that occurred, which robbed the workers of the Maxwell and Mirror corporations, will not occur again and those workers and others like them will be protected in future?
Mr. Newton
The hon. Gentleman is a member of the Select Committee on Social Security, which is examining those matters, and I see that the Committee's Chairman, the hon. Member for Birkenhead (Mr. Field), is sitting in front of the hon. Gentleman.
We have seen in the press suggestions about what members of the Committee might say, and we shall consider their proposals with interest.
I spent two hours responding to questions put to me by the Select Committee only a fortnight or so ago.
I made it absolutely clear that, when we know precisely what happened in that case and can draw the lessons from it, we shall be willing to learn them and take note of the need for future action, if that is shown to be necessary.
Mr. Hind
In the light of the serious situation which has arisen in relation to the Maxwell case, will my right hon. Friend take a good look at the pension funds of ABG Research, which is about to be wound up?
Hundreds of pensioners in the north and south of England who work for that company are about to lose their pensions, including a 79-year-old widow.
Will my right hon. Friend consider the problem to see whether the Government can help?
Mr. Newton
I am concerned about the position in which some people find themselves as a result of problems with the funds.
That is why, among other matters, I made it clear that, in the appropriate circumstances, we would expect to operate the provisions — through state scheme premiums — to ensure that people at least receive their state earnings-related pension scheme entitlement.
Mr. Kirkwood
Although I fully understand why the Secretary of State needs to be cautious about the Maxwell case, will he be more firm on the need for change?
His earlier answer suggested that there was some doubt in his mind about whether that was necessary.
Is he having any discussions with the Treasury to find ways of getting some compensation for pensioners, who stand to lose millions of pounds?
Mr. Newton
I have made the point about the SERPS buy-back provisions and the guarantee involved, but I cannot go beyond that.
On the wider issue, it has been made clear, not simply from what I have said but through what I have done over many years — in an earlier ministerial capacity and in my present one — that we are more than willing to take action where it is shown to be necessary, once we are sure that such action would be well-judged.
We are some way short of being able to judge precisely what is required, especially as questions have been raised about the regulatory machinery under the Financial Services Act 1986, as well as the arrangements of the Occupational Pensions Board.
Mr. Irvine
My right hon. Friend will know that the Serious Fraud Office is conducting investigations into fraud and dishonesty in this sphere.
However, there is also the related issue of possible negligence and breach of duty on the part of the supervisory authorities.
Will my right hon. Friend give the several hundred Maxwell pensioners in my constituency an assurance that he will scrutinise carefully the role of those supervisory authorities — such as the Occupational Pensions Board — in relation to that subject?
If those authorities were negligent or in any way in breach of duty, it is important that that fact should be uncovered at an early stage.
Mr. Newton
I can certainly give my hon. Friend an assurance that, were the investigations by the Serious Fraud Office to produce evidence of fraud that would have to be considered by those involved in criminal prosecutions of if there were claims that the Occupational Pensions Board had been negligent or in any other way culpable of failure to carry out its duties as imposed by the law, those matters would be considered with great care.
Mr. Frank Field
Does the Secretary of State accept that the answer that he has given on paying the guaranteed minimum pension to the Maxwell pensioners is wholly inadequate?
Does he accept that many of the constituents of his hon. Friend the Member for Ipswich (Mr. Irvine) face losing their houses if they do not receive the full pension?
Once the facts are established, will the Government be prepared to move beyond carrying out what they are, after all, required to do by law?
Mr. Newton
I certainly cannot go beyond what I have said this afternoon and on earlier occasions, including what I have told the hon. Gentleman in the Select Committee, about the guarantee of SERPS rights — to put it in shorthand terms — in respect of the guaranteed minimum pension.
As I told the Select Committee — I make no apologies for reminding the hon. Gentleman of it — anything going beyond that would raise huge implications for all kinds of investments.
Mr. Dickens
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the Robert Maxwell episode has vividly illustrated to the nation the fact that an unscrupulous director can put his hand in the till and get hold of pension fund money?
That being so, many people throughout the nation who are in pension schemes are frightened.
Will my right hon. Friend go as far as to say that we definitely intend in the fulness of time to bring in legislation and, I hope, include in the legislation the provision that there should be at least one employee representative among pension fund trustees?
Mr. Newton
To take the latter point first, if my hon. Friend looks at many, perhaps all, of the Maxwell pension fund trustee bodies, he will find that they were split 50: 50 — there was employee representation.
I do not think that that would necessarily solve the problem.
I cannot go beyond what I have said, except to make it clear once again that if and when it is clear that a further legislative change will materially assist in ensuring that this sort of thing does not happen again, we will be ready to make it.
But there is still a great lack of clarity and we are not prepared to pretend that we know the answer, thereby running the risk of causing at least as much damage as we do good.
Mr. Meacher
Does the right hon. Gentleman recognise that the banks and the Government have treated Mirror Group Newspapers pensioners extremely shabbily?
Will he seek to ensure that the banks hand back the pension fund assets which belong to scheme members and which the banks have no right to keep, given their reckless lending practices?
Is not the right hon. Gentleman culpably negligent in that, 20 months after the Social Security Act 1990 became law, he has still not introduced the regulations that would protect pension funds in the event of bankruptcy?
Although the right hon. Gentleman has said again — several times today — that he will pay MGN pensioners their guaranteed minimum pension, will he accept that it is a mere pittance, and that if Barlow Clowes group shareholders who knowingly took the risk of speculating offshore can be compensated by the Government, the pensioners in MGN and other pension funds are no less deserving?
Mr. Newton
On the latter point, the hon. Gentleman is well aware of what was said at the time of the Barlow Clowes affair, following an investigation by the ombudsman into what was seen to be a unique set of circumstances.
To answer the hon. Gentleman's other points — I hope, not taking too much time over it — the debt-on-wind-up provisions were originally linked, as I think the hon. Gentleman knows, with the wider provisions for limited price indexation.
As they involved a great deal of the same work to bring them into effect — work that would have taken a considerable time — and would have imposed further contingent or actual liabilities on funds at a time when there was already considerable anxiety because of the uncertainty over the Barber judgment —
Mr. Meacher
The Government dropped limited price indexation.
Mr. Newton
We did not.
We made it clear that we would give further consideration to it once the Barber judgment was clear, and that is precisely what we are beginning to do.
On the hon. Gentleman's first question, he will understand that I have no power to order banks to take particular actions.
However, he will have noted what some banks have said in recent days about their attitude to this matter.
National Insurance
Mr. Squire
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security how many more people would be liable for payment of employees' national insurance contributions if the atypical work directive were adopted.
Mr. Jack
We estimate that a further 1,750,000 people would have to pay national insurance contributions if the directive were adopted.
Mr. Squire
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
Will he confirm that the directive, which is strongly supported by the Labour party, would discriminate heavily against part-time workers, especially women who are trying to combine a job with family responsibilities?
Is this yet another instance of the anti-choice nature of the Labour party which, in the guise of new-found moderation, seeks to deny that which is currently available?
Mr. Jack
Again, the Opposition seem to be confused on the issue.
They seem to have signed up to the work directive from which the measure comes.
As my hon. Friend says, the proposal would bring another 1,750,000 people into the position that he describes.
My hon. Friend is right.
Many people take a part-time or lower-paid job because it suits their circumstances and is a good choice for them.
Those people benefit from the fact that they do not have to make national insurance contributions.
Again, the Opposition are recommending a’ take’society.
Mr. Frank Field
Will the Minister confirm that even if the work directive came into force, the Government could still levy national insurance at a zero rating of 1 per cent.
instead of the full rate?
Would not many of those workers prefer that option, with all the benefits that would come from it, rather than the scare stories that the Government are putting over in this pre-election period?
Mr. Jack
I know that the hon. Gentleman is assiduous about detail, and I recommend that he reads article 2 of the directive.
It is not disputed by any member of the European Community that if that part of the directive were to be implemented everybody would have to pay for the associated benefits.
I refer the hon. Gentleman to his hon. Friend the Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) who, if I have understood her words, made it clear that she did not think that it was a very good idea for people below the lower earnings limit to pay small amounts of national insurance.
The hon. Gentleman should look at the detail.
Mr. Ian Taylor
Does my hon. Friend agree that the directive would force employers to pay national insurance for employees who were below the lower earnings limit and that, effectively, that would be a tax on businesses that wish to employ part-time workers?
Given that we wish to give British industry the flexibility to employ part-time workers, is not this another effort by Labour to hit the people who most want to seek jobs?
Mr. Jack
My hon. Friend has put his finger on an interesting point.
The measure, coupled to Labour's proposal for a minimum wage, is a straightforward attack on jobs.
The receipts received by us on the consultation document about the directive show that the Contract Cleaning and Maintenance Association claims that some 40 per cent.
of those employed in its industry would be sacked in the first year.
That is the kind of enlightened policy to which the Opposition are signing up.
State Earnings-Related Pension Scheme
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security if he will revise the state earnings-related pension scheme to make higher pensions available for those people made redundant in their late 50s who are unlikely to obtain another job.
Mr. Newton
We have no plans to do so.
Mr. Bennett
The Minister will recall that during the first Tory recession, Ministers claimed that making many people redundant was a price worth paying to make British industry leaner and fitter.
For many of my constituents who were made redundant, it was not a price worth paying.
They lost their jobs and the chance to get another job and contribute to their pensions.
Now, when they are at pensionable age, their pension is much below that of people who were fortunate enough to keep their jobs.
Is not it time for the Government to compensate the people whom they damaged in their first Tory recession?
Mr. Newton
That is a slightly odd point from a Labour Member in view of the fact that the SERPS entitlement of such people, which is what the original question was about, is precisely as it was left by the Labour Government.
None of the changes made to SERPS affects anybody who is retiring this century.
It is even odder that many of the people about whom the hon. Gentleman expresses concern are precisely those who would suffer from Labour's proposed savings tax.
Mr. Ian Bruce
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that, under the current rules for SERPS, there is a cut-off in the amount which is the same as the cut-off for the earnings limit?
Will he confirm that all the figures published so far by the Labour party, in attempting to collect more money from the national insurance contribution, show that it will not put a penny of that money into increased SERPS for people who retire?
Is that not a clear case of fraud?
Mr. Newton
Even in these relatively heated times, I am not sure that I would wish to use such a word as fraud against the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher).
However, I endorse my hon. Friend's suggestion that the SERPS entitlement accrues on earnings between the lower earnings limit and the upper earnings limit and that the Labour party's proposal to scrap the upper earnings limit for contribution purposes is associated with no increase in benefit for those persons.
Pensioners (Owner-Occupiers)
Mr. Gerald Bowden
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what proportion of pensioners are owner-occupiers and have paid off their mortgage.
Miss Widdecombe
The latest figures available show that in 1988, 50 per cent.
of pensioners were owner-occupiers, of whom 46 per cent.
owned their homes outright.
That compares well with 1979, when only 38 per cent.
owned their homes outright.
Mr. Bowden
With more and more pensioners owing their homes outright, and with eight out of 10 recently retired pensioners having an income from investment and savings, is it not reasonable to recognise a measure of prosperity among pensioners?
If resources are to be used to increase pensions, should they not be used to target those in greatest need, rather than spreading across the board and benefiting both rich and poor?
Does not the idea of giving out a blanket provision look like political bribery in an election year?
Miss Widdecombe
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
It not only looks like political bribery — it probably is.
It is perhaps worth pointing out that in the past three years we have spent some £350 million on the poorer pensioners.
Whereas it is right to make sure that the value of the basic state pension is preserved for all income brackets we believe that any extra resources should be directed to the poorer end.
The Labour party may well find that by the time it has spent billions of pounds on all income levels it will not have the extra money to spend on those who need it most.
That is the price that Labour will have to pay for its policy, in the unlikely event of its ever being able to implement it.
Mr. Bradley
Is the Minister not aware that a significant number of pensioners who own their own homes are among the poorest in the country?
Many have all their capital tied up in their homes and have to use the meagre resources of the basic state retirement pension to repair and restore their homes and to pay their heating bills?
Is not that situation made even worse by the massive Government cuts in renovation grants for elderly people?
Will the Government recognise that the only way that many of those pensioners will have a happy and healthy retirement is through a substantial increase in the basic rate of income of at least £5 for a single person and £8 per couple, which is the commitment of the Labour party and which is supported by pensioner groups throughout the country as was shown by a recent lobby of Parliament by pensioners from the north-west which was supported by many Conservative Members?
Miss Widdecombe
When those same pensioners understand that blanket commitments of that type will erode the extra money available to help the poorer end, they may take rather a different view.
When they also understand that housing costs play a proportionately lower part in pensioners' expenditure in England than in the rest of Europe, they may be grateful for the way in which we have promoted home ownership.
If 50 per cent.
of those retiring now own their own homes, they do so thanks almost solely to the policies pursued and enacted by the Government.
We have made a major contribution to the overall income of pensioners, while all that the Labour party has to offer is inflationary erosion of savings, a failure in home ownership and many other schemes that Labour has offered; although such proposals make it seem that pensioners are better off, because they are offered with other features, in reality it is a small percentage rise.
Labour has nothing new to offer.
We saw the effects of those policies and, in the unlikely event of the Labour party taking power, we shall see them again.
Pension Levels
Mr. Matthew Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security if he will make a statement about pension levels.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
We have maintained the real value of the basic retirement pension since we took office in 1979 and we are pledged to continue this policy.
Mr. Taylor
At my weekend surgery three pensioners came to see me in considerable distress because of the difficulty that they faced in paying their water and electricity bills and other bills from private utilities following the large price increases.
Is it not time that those pensioners, including the one who told me that she was keeping warm during the day by clutching a hot-water bottle because she could not afford heating bills, were given a decent state pension as of right, without the humiliation of a contributory test, which involves means-testing for those who are in greatest need?
Mr. Scott
If the hon. Gentleman examines the incomes of retirement pensioners since the Government took office, he will find that they have increased substantially.
From 1979 to 1988 they increased by about 34 per cent., and there have been further improvements since 1988.
Under this Government, the income of retirement pensioners as a whole has increased more in each year than it did throughout the Labour Government's administration.
Mr. Dunn
Would my right hon. Friend care to speculate as to the impact on pensioner living standards of the suggestion that petrol prices be increased by 50p per gallon, and especially the impact on pensioners who live in the country and who need a motor car for shopping and other aspects of life?
Will my right hon. Friend remind the House that the 50p tax on petrol is a Liberal Democrat idea?
Mr. Scott
I am sure that the House needs no reminding of that.
None the less, I am grateful to my hon. Friend for doing so.
He will realise the concern that I have for disabled people, who would be hit by such an increase in petrol tax.
Mr. Meacher
In the light of the current Conservative’ Newsline’pledge that the Conservative party, if it wins the election, will’target social security’so that it is’not a handout to those who do not need it’, will the Minister confirm that that is a Tory pledge to means test pensions after the election?
Will he also confirm that that is exactly what a previous Tory Chancellor of the Exchequer — the right hon. Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson)— said that he intended to do during a notorious private briefing?
Before the right hon. Gentleman issues a denial, will he confirm that before the previous election the Tories said that they would continue to pay child benefit as before — only to freeze it immediately for three years when they took office?
Does he recall that before 1979 the Tories said that they would maintain the value of the retirement pension in line with rising living standards — a pledge which was promptly broken when they took office?
As a result, a single pensioner has lost £17 a week under the Government while a married couple have lost £28.
Mr. Scott
I can say unequivocally and without a shadow of doubt that the Conservative party has no intention whatever, when it is returned to office, to means test the basic retirement pension.
As I have already said, we have pledged ourselves to maintain the pension's real value.
What we shall do, as we have done over the past three years, is to ensure that poorer pensioners — those who have not benefited from the result of our general policies towards pensioners which have increased pensioners' real living standards by over 34 per cent.
— will be helped.
To that end, as my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State has already said, we have contributed about £350 million since October 1989.
Mr. Speaker
I call Mrs. Alice Mahon.
I call Mr. John Evans.
Hon. Members
—’ Where are they?’
Mr. Speaker
I call Mrs. Teresa Gorman.
Mrs. Gorman
No. 15, Sir.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Sometimes you shout out the names of hon. Members who are caught up in British Rail delays.
It is most unreasonable —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
That is not a matter for me.
Benefits (Recent Settlers)
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Social Security what plans he has to review the eligibility criteria for benefits for individuals recently settled in the United Kingdom.
Mr. Jack
People who have the right of residence in the United Kingdom and who might apply for social security benefits will have their application assessed on the same criteria as British citizens.
Those criteria are kept under review.
Mrs. Gorman
Is my hon. Friend aware that, during the recent debate on the Asylum Bill, our right hon. Friend the Home Secretary pointed out that about 30,000 people are registered as asylum seekers, without their families, and that they are allowed six months' benefit immediately upon registering as asylum seekers?
Will my hon. Friend please comment on the cost of that and on the fact that, 50 years after the Beveridge report, we have moved a long way from the principle of paying into the kitty through insurance before being allowed to draw out of it?
Mr. Jack
First, on a point of detail, people are not automatically entitled to six months' social security.
The longest period for which an order book can be issued to an asylum seeker who makes a successful application for income support is 20 weeks.
Secondly, we are very aware of the seriousness of that development.
Admissions to the United Kingdom are matters for our right hon. Friend the Home Secretary.
On income support applications, I reassure my hon. Friend that the standard acknowledgement letter, a copy of which I have, has been markedly improved by watermarking and the addition of a photograph.
That is a key part in the identification process of an asylum seeker applying for income support.
In the first two months since its advent, that process has reduced by 40 per cent.
the number of people making application for asylum status.
It is important that we maintain our form of help because among asylum seekers there are those who will ultimately be proved to be genuine refugees.
ATTORNEY-GENERAL
Fraud
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Attorney-General if he has any proposals to change the prosecution procedures in cases of fraud.
The Attorney-General (Sir Patrick Mayhew)
No, Sir.
Wherever they have been operating, persons whose dishonesty has infringed the criminal law, on the basis of reliable and admissible evidence, will continue to be prosecuted.
If, on review, any procedural change is shown to be desirable, the Government will consider the steps that need to be taken.
Mr. Flynn
Is the Attorney-General aware that, while the West Bromwich building society and financial advisers have grown fat and rich by selling home income equity bonds, 14,000 pensioners face the prospect of losing their homes, including some of my constituents who were not advised that the bonds were dangerous?
One pensioner, tragically, has taken his life because of them.
Is it not fraud of the most cynical, wicked type that financial advisers are not telling elderly people that those bonds are dangerous and that they are likely to lose their homes within two years?
What does the Attorney-General intend to do about that?
The Attorney-General
I am naturally extremely sorry to hear of the personal circumstances that the hon. Gentleman very properly brings to the attention of the House, but he will not expect me to prejudge any issue of criminality that may arise.
If the hon. Gentleman believes that there is evidence of criminality, he should draw it to the attention of the police, if he has not done so already.
Mr. Tim Smith
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that, since it was established in 1988, the Serious Fraud Office, under the direction of Barbara Mills, has done an outstandingly good job and has brought a number of successful prosecutions for fraud?
Before we make any radical changes such as doing away with jury trials, should we not think very carefully indeed?
The Attorney-General
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
Recent comment has been disfigured by a good deal of misinformation.
The Serious Fraud Office has been in operation for three years and has achieved a striking rate of success in serious and complex frauds.
My hon. Friend is absolutely right in the tribute that he pays.
Mr. John Morris
Does the Attorney-General accept that there is concern about our procedures?
Will the Lord Chancellor consider asking the Lord Chief Justice to establish a committee of judges and practitioners to propose reforms to be approved by a practice direction, and by legislation where necessary?
Does the right hon. and learned Gentleman accept that while juries are unequalled in deciding dishonesty, the burden of lengthy trials is becoming unfair on jurors?
Why are there such a multiplicity of counts, and sometimes of defendants, with long opening speeches and insufficient identification of the issues for the jury until nearly the end of a trial?
The Attorney-General
Obviously, my noble and learned Friend the Lord Chancellor will heed the right hon. and learned Gentleman's remarks.
I am not sure about there being a multiplicity of counts.
In the recently concluded County NatWest and Blue Arrow case, there was only one count — yet comment on it included the assertion that the Serious Fraud Office used a’ scattergun approach’.
In Guinness 2, there were five counts.
I believe that I am right in saying that in the most recent 20 cases, there have been at most 22 counts.
Some of them have to be in the alternative, as the right hon. and learned Gentleman knows.
Every effort is made to bring matters into clear focus.
Incidentally, I was interested to read in the Financial Times and other newspapers today that the foreman in the Guinness 2 trial of Mr. Seelig and Lord Spens said that the prosecution had made a good job of identifying the structure of that case.
Mr. John Marshall
Visitors to Westminster Hall are amazed at Warren Hastings' ability to survive a case which lasted seven years.
Is there not a danger that modern cases go on too long and cover too wide an area?
Is it not sometimes the judges who are overwhelmed by the evidence?
The Attorney-General
I am very sensitive to my hon. Friend's reference to Warren Hastings' because it was Edmund Burke, a kinsman of mine, who prosecuted him over that length of time.
I agree with my hon. Friend that recent cases last far too long, and that a means must be found of securing quicker trials.
In the County NatWest and Blue Arrow case, the time taken before the jury by the prosecution amounted to 27.5 per cent.
of the total.
At present, there is no means by which a judge can sufficiently control the length of time taken by a defendant, particularly — this was not the case with the County NatWest and Blue Arrow trial — one who is defending himself.
We must find a quicker way of securing justice.
That issue is not one on which the Government have made up their mind, and all suggestions will be sensibly considered.
Serious Fraud Office
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Attorney-General what is the current complement for the Serious Fraud Office; what is the number of staff in post; and if he will make a statement.
The Attorney-General
The complement of the Serious Fraud Office is 129 permanent posts.
All those posts are filled and, in addition, a number of temporary staff are employed to meet the varying demands of its case load.
Mr. Skinner
Are there any doctors among that complement?
What is the source of the medical advice given in fraud trials?
Why was Roger Seelig told by someone giving medical advice several months after his trial began that he was on the verge of a mental breakdown, yet last week he was roaring up the M4 in his Porsche to look after his two properties?
Ernest Saunders was told that he should leave gaol after serving 10 months of a five-year sentence because he was a victim of senile dementia, yet now he is running his own business.
I have a suggestion for the Attorney-General.
He ought to swap the doctors that he has at the Serious Fraud Office for those who decide applications for disability allowance and attendance allowance.
If he did that, some of our constituents might receive benefits, and the people involved in crime might get sent down for longer periods.
The Attorney-General
There is no space in the Serious Fraud Office complement for a doctor.
The hon. Gentleman should bear in mind that each of the two cases to which he has referred was decided by the trial judge on the basis of medical evidence, including independent medical evidence.
The hon. Gentleman knows that I am in no position to comment on the decision of any judge.
Let me say this, however.
Mr. Justice Henry is no respecter of persons, and I hope that the hon. Gentleman has not become such a respecter of persons that he supposes that those two people were dealt with out of any consideration for who or what they were.
Law Reform
Mr. Fraser
To ask the Attorney-General when he last met the chairman of the Law Commission to discuss the Commission's programme for law reform.
The Solicitor-General (Sir Nicholas Lyell)
The Lord Chancellor has regular contact with the commission about all aspects of its work.
Mr. Fraser
How does the Lord Chancellor explain to the chairman of the Law Commission the Government's appalling record on matters of law reform?
Since 1984, 22 Bills have not been acted on.
What does that do for the morale of the Law Commission?
Why do the Government not act on the huge injustices currently affecting business people, such as original lessee liability?
Why have they such an appalling record when ready-made Bills are presented to them by the Law Commission?
The Solicitor-General
There are two answers to that question.
First, the hon. Gentleman should not underestimate the immense force of major legislation presented by the Lord Chancellor in the past three or four years — not least the Children Act 1989, which has entirely restructured the law on children and paved the way for the family court, and the Courts and Legal Services Act 1990, one of the most important pieces of legislation in this field to appear for decades.
The House of Commons will need — and the other place will wish — to examine the recommendations of Lord Jellicoe for new procedures to bring such comparatively uncontroversial measures before both Houses more swiftly.
OVERSEAS DEVELOPMENT
CIS (Aid)
Mr. Bowis
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what are the latest figures for aid and other financial support for the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States.
The Minister for Overseas Development (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
Britain has pledged more than £80 million in bilateral aid to the former Soviet Union and is contributing through the EC budget about 18 per cent.
of Community technical assistance and food aid which totals £595 million.
The Community has also agreed a programme of food credits worth £1,225 billion.
Mr. Bowis
With other hon. Members, I recently visited Russia and the Ukraine.
Does my right hon. Friend accept that we returned with an impression of economic chaos — and the impression that, although aid from this country and others is welcomed, it is feared that too much is being siphoned off on to the black market?
Above all, the need is for the west to encourage economic development trade with export credits and, indeed, joint ventures such as the one that we saw with one firm — Tambrands — in Kiev.
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
If the former Soviet Union and all the republics are ever to put the situation right, the most urgent job is to bring about economic reform.
That is why we have ensured, through our know-how funds and all the other means at our disposal, that we are providing economic advice and sound advice for training members of the former republics to get on with the job of economic reform.
I note what the hon. Gentleman said about the siphoning off of food aid.
I have said from the beginning that we and other donors, including the European Community, must have arrangements to guard against misappropriation.
That is why, to date, food has been available through only a limited number of channels.
I have pressed the EC, however, and we have now secured agreement that it will expand the number of outlets in Moscow and St. Petersburg from the 60 shops that were operational in January and February to 150.
Later this week, further missions will be sent from the EC and from this country to ensure that food is getting through.
It is interesting to note that other countries are now copying our know-how funds because they have been of such help to the former Soviet Union and other eastern European countries.
Mr. Winnick
I was on the same delegation to Russia and the Ukraine.
Would it not be very short sighted of the western democracies — not simply Britain — to allow the countries which now make up the Commonwealth of Independent States to drift into such a state of anarchy that a dictatorship could well return?
Given the 74 years of Communist dictatorship and the long period of Tsarist dictatorship before that, is it not essential to provide aid and assistance so that at long last Russia and the countries associated with the former Soviet Union can become stable democracies?
Mrs. Chalker
I agree very much with what the hon. Gentleman says.
That is why Britain was the first country to give £20 million worth of feed grain.
Medical supplies are going in from this country not only to help Moscow and St. Petersburg, but to go as far as Ekaterinburg, Tymen, Novokuznetsk, the Kiev oblast, the Donetsk oblast, and further afield.
We have help going in alongside the United States and German Project Hope airlift, and we have £50 million for the know-how fund.
Everywhere we go, we have been told that the British help is extremely well appreciated.
We are considering what more we can do and it is up to some other donors to do likewise.
Mr. Soames
I warmly congratulate my right hon. Friend on her excellent work in co-ordinating the aid, but does she agree that the words of the hon. Member for Walsall, North (Mr. Winnick) are correct?
We need a kind of Marshall plan which will bring to those poor suffering countries aid such as was brought to continental Europe when it lay prostrate at the end of the second world war.
Is it not time that we tried to co-ordinate an effort on that basis to enable the Soviet Union to pick itself up and start taking a proper role in the world economy?
Mrs. Chalker
The size of the problem is comparable, but I do not believe that the post-war reconstruction programme in Europe is a good model for what is required in the Commonwealth of Independent States.
More than anything else, the CIS needs economic and agricultural reform.
The responsibility for that lies not with the west, but with the CIS itself.
Through our International Monetary Fund membership, we have pushed forward the idea that the CIS countries should come under the IMF.
In Moscow tomorrow we shall discuss with the Russian authorities the way forward on a number of difficult economic questions.
Mrs. Clwyd
I listened to the Minister's words with interest.
Is she aware that when my hon. Friend the Member for Workington (Mr. Campbell-Savours) and I visited Moscow last week and questioned Russian officials about food aid, we found stacked away in a third-floor warehouse what we were told was the whole British contribution of beef to Moscow, which had been there for a month?
We were told that the reason for that outrageous situation was that, unlike the meat from all the other EC countries, our consignment was not colour coded.
The labels were in English and no one could read them.
Downstairs in the warehouse, French pork was being offloaded from vehicles and immediately reloaded for distribution in Moscow shops.
When we asked Russian officials whether the beef was having any impact on meat prices in Russia, we were told that it was not.
As the Minister said, there are too few outlets, which she intends to do something about.
There is also a shortage of EC monitors.
Does the Minister intend to increase the number of monitors?
Are we not faced with the same old story of a badly managed project with inadequate monitoring — in other words, Government incompetence?
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Lady could not be more wrong.
Of course I am aware of what she found in Moscow.
The beef that went to Murmansk was used immediately, and the beef that has gone to St. Petersburg has been used.
Hon. Members
Moscow.
Mrs. Chalker
I know that there has been a problem with beef in Moscow.
I also know that the EC arrangements for labelling were not adequate.
That is why the goods for which we are responsible are being labelled in Russian when they go to the former Soviet Union.
We have asked the Commission for greater consistency in labelling and colour coding for the beef, and we have told Moscow that it is vital that the meat is released on to the market straight .The problem is not the incompetence of this country.
The EC simply had not got matters organised.
The way in which we put our food over there actually got it to the places for which it was intended.
Refugees
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what discussions have taken place with the United Nations High Commission on Refugees over the last month.
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs called on Mrs. Ogata in Geneva on 29 January.
My right hon. and noble Friend the Minister of State also had discussions with Mrs. Ogata on 7 February.
My officials are in regular contact with UNHCR and I shall welcome Mrs.
Ogata to London again in a fortnight's time.
Mr. Wareing
When the discussions took place with the UNHCR, did the problem of the Kurds come up?
On 25 June last year the Prime Minister said:’ We have now met most of the humanitarian needs of the Kurds in Iraq.’
Is the Minister satisfied that those humanitarian needs have been met and are being met, or that they can be met so long as there is a risk to the Kurdish population from the evil dictator in Baghdad?
What do the British Government intend to do to ensure that the Prime Minister's promise of last June is upheld?
Mrs. Chalker
When my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister spoke in June last year, the UNHCR was well on the way to meeting the humanitarian needs of the Kurdish people.
Since then, and particularly in the past three months, the economic blockade of northern Iraq by Saddam Hussein has prevented the UNHCR from doing as much as it would like to do.
We have made sure that we get on with as much as we can get through in our help for Iraq through UNHCR, but there is one man — and one man only — who stands in the dock for the denial of resources to the northern Iraqi people, and that is Saddam Hussein.
Until United Nations Security Council resolutions 706 and 712 are implemented, we cannot relieve the plight of all those people.
Sir Philip Goodhart
As the contribution of Britain to the UNHCR is very much greater than that of France or Germany, will my right hon. Friend encourage our European partners to increase their support for the vital work of refugee relief?
Mrs. Chalker
Indeed, our contribution to the UNHCR this financial year totals some £40 million.
I have asked that the United Nations hold a conference this month to ensure that the UNHCR's vital work continues not only in Iraq but in helping all the people who so desperately need our assistance.
House of Commons
Tuesday 3 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
DEFENCE
Nuclear Weapons
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what new initiatives he plans to curtail nuclear weapons proliferation.
3
Mr. Butler
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on recent progress in multilateral disarmament.
The Secretary of State for Defence (Mr. Tom King)
The greatest immediate risk of proliferation stems from the break-up of the Soviet Union.
I announced last week assistance to Russia in the safe reduction of its surplus nuclear warheads, and we are considering with other interested countries how best to help Russia use the skills of its scientists for peaceful purposes.
We are also considering with partners measures to improve the operation of the International Atomic Energy Agency safeguard regimes.
As regards multilateral disarmament, the Government are fully committed to the greatest progress in the whole range of nuclear conventional, chemical and biological arms control negotiations.
Mr. Flynn
Does the right hon. Gentleman remember that five months before the Gulf war, the Government told me that they had full confidence that Saddam Hussein was not developing nuclear weapons?
If they are being fooled now by many other countries, is it not right that we must seek a strong, new, international non-proliferation treaty containing vigorous verification provisions backed by United Nations sanctions?
Would not the best way to ensure that such a treaty would be accepted worldwide be for us to allow international inspection and verification of the numbers of our warheads?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that we are now engaged with the United Nations in the pursuit of weapons of mass destruction in Iraq.
The world has learnt the lessons from that, of the need for a more effective operation and for more intrusive inspections by the IAEA.
I can certainly confirm on behalf of the Government that we shall take any sensible steps that are necessary, consistent with our security, to play our part in that effort.
Mr. Butler
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it was only by a consistent and credible policy of multilateral disarmament that the collapse of communism was eventually assured?
Mr. King
I agree with my hon. Friend that it is vital at this time, when there is the greatest risk of proliferation that the world has ever known and when the world's greatest nuclear power is in a state of disintegration, that we ensure that while we take every positive and constructive step to try to deal with that very grave situation, we recognise the need to maintain our essential safeguard, our own nuclear deterrent.
Mr. Dalyell
The Secretary of State referred to help being given to Russian scientists.
In precisely what form is that help being given?
Mr. King
The hon. Gentleman will be familiar with the statements made by US Secretary Jim Baker and German Foreign Minister Genscher.
We are in close touch with our allies on this matter to see the ways by which assistance can perhaps be given, and contracts can be placed, for valuable work to be done which would occupy such scientists, in addition to the part that they might also play more directly in some of the work involved in the dismantling and disabling programme of that massive nuclear arsenal.
Mr. John Browne
Will my right hon. Friend tell the House what he feels about the accuracy of the continued Russian accounting for nuclear warheads?
Has he considered whether the western powers should purchase some of those warheads to prevent them from falling into the hands of non-nuclear powers that have no idea how to maintain or destroy them?
Mr. King
It would be fair to say that our impression so far is that the previous Soviet systems were, in many ways, impressive and that the Soviet Union had good controls over its nuclear weapons.
Our concern now is how good those controls remain, given that the situation is moving from union control — the Soviet Union — to control by individual republics.
Four republics now have strategic nuclear weapons, although tactical nuclear weapons have been withdrawn within Russia.
Our worries about the continuing control, however, are real, which is why we are making as positive a contribution as we can to help tackle that problem urgently.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Will the Secretary of State impress on the Prime Minister the need to raise with Mr. Yeltsin the substance of the conversation that my hon. Friend the Member for Cynon Valley (Mrs. Clwyd) and I had last Tuesday with Mr. Bikov of the Russian Academy of Science?
Mr. Bikov said that on those secret sites, nuclear weapons were still being built.
He said that, despite the fact that representatives of the Russian Parliament did not want them to be built and decisions had been taken for them not to be built, they were still being built because of the nature of the command economy that is being phased out.
Was not that an important statement for Mr. Bikov to have made to us?
Will the Secretary of State assure us that the matter will be raised with representatives of the Russian Government?
Mr. King
Allegations of many kinds have been made about that matter and certain aspects of the command economy.
While stocks in the form of raw materials last — I am not talking about nuclear weapons but general armaments — the production will clearly continue.
The successor republics of the Soviet Union regard general armaments such as tanks and artillery as a valuable source of hard currency for their hard-pressed economies.
The information that the hon. Gentleman has, has not been confirmed to me, except in certain minor respects, but it is a serious issue with which we continue to deal.
Royal Auxiliary Air Force
Mr. Wilkinson
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what progress he is making towards restoring a flying role for squadrons of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force.
The Minister of State for the Armed Forces (Mr. Archie Hamilton)
There are no plans to restore a flying role to squadrons of the Royal Auxiliary Air Force.
Mr. Wilkinson
May I point out to my right hon. Friend that the Royal Air Force is the only one of the three western air forces with significant operational experience since world war two — the other two are the Israeli and the United States air forces — not to have combat-ready reserve squadrons?
A flying role for the Royal Auxiliary Air Force would be exceedingly cost effective, particularly as air crews are being made redundant under’ Options for Change’.
It is a marked distinction of the sensible policy of the Territorial Army and the Royal Naval Reserve in that matter.
Mr. Hamilton
We are considering whether a small number of test air crews from industry in the Royal Air Force Voluntary Reserve should be used as front-line reinforcements for fast jet aircraft.
We are talking about costs and, as my hon. Friend will know, the cost of maintaining any aircraft, whether in the Royal Air Force or the reserves, is great, and I do not know how cost effective it would be.
Mr. Rogers
In the early stages of’ Options for Change’the Secretary of State said that he would put more resources and emphasis on the development and re-equipping of the reserve forces.
How many extra resources have been put into the reserve forces since the beginning of’ Options for Change’?
Would he agree to support a review of the Reserve Forces Safeguard of Employment Act 1985 so that we shall not have in the future the rash of litigation that has been needed against employers who have declined to accept reservists back since the Gulf war?
Mr. Hamilton
I am afraid that the hon. Gentleman is anticipating what my right hon. Friend will say on the matter.
My right hon. Friend will shortly make a statement on the regular-reserve mix.
Sir Hector Monro
While declaring an interest and reluctantly accepting what my right hon. Friend says about flying squadrons, may I ask him to confirm that there is a good future for the Royal Auxiliary Air Force in view of its exceptional record and its cost effectiveness as a reserve force?
Mr. Hamilton
Yes, indeed.
As my hon. Friend will know and as hon. Members will hardly need to be reminded, a large number of roles are currently carried out by the Royal Auxiliary Air Force.
Those roles are valuable and we intend to build on them.
Options for Change’
Mr. Loyden
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a further statement on’ Options for Change’.
Mr. Tom King
The’ Options for Change’exercise was completed in July 1990.
Since then, we have been concerned with implementing proposals to create the structure for’ Britain's Defence for the '90s’.
The House is aware of a number of recent announcements, particularly for new equipment, to ensure that our forces, though smaller, will be more flexible, more mobile and better equipped than ever before.
Mr. Loyden
Does the Secretary of State recognise that the Government's inaction on this matter has resulted in’ Options for Change’being a shambles?
There has been no positive action to give hope to those communities and workers involved with the defence industry.
The Government have failed to take the opportunities before them.
Will we have to wait for a Labour Government before positive action is taken?
Interruption
Mr. King
I apologise, Mr. Speaker, I do not usually have by breath taken away.
But for the hon. Member to make such a statement, particularly today when, if I catch your eye, I shall make a statement about equipment procurement for our forces, leaves me breathless.
I have made statements from the Dispatch Box announcing new tanks, new helicopters, new frigates, and new packages for the air force, our amphibious forces and our commandos.
We have made our policies absolutely clear, not just by asserting that we have it in mind to take action, but by stating what we have planned and by making announcements for new equipment and new forces.
I also hope to have something more to say on the reserves, which is an important development.
For the hon. Gentleman to have the nerve to ask such a question when he was undoubtedly one of those who voted successively for large cuts in our defence expenditure, is mind-boggling.
Sir Jim Spicer
I am sure that my right hon. Friend will agree that our infantry is second to none in the world.
Does he also agree that a large part of the excellence stems from the fact that its members have the right training from day one, when they join the armed forces?
Will he make certain that, in no circumstances, will there be an mismatch in terms of that basic training?
Will he ensure that any suggestion of parachute recruits going to Lichfield to train with Royal Army Medical Corps recruits of both genders would be ruled out of court immediately?
Mr. King
My hon. Friend is ever vigilant of the interests of the parachute regiment.
I do not think that anybody seriously believes that we can get much legislation passed in the House without his close observance and approval of it.
We are looking at the training arrangements and are anxious to ensure that our future forces receive the best and most relevant forms of training in the most efficient and cost-effective way.
There may be further announcements shortly.
Rev. Martin Smyth
While welcoming the briefing that is continually taking place, may I press the Secretary of State to bear in mind that the reserve forces are always an important aspect of our national forces?
In an earlier reply he suggested that in Northern Ireland, those who wanted to volunteer for the Territorial Army Volunteer Reserve could volunteer for some other service.
Does he accept that some people prefer to prepare for international emergencies and not necessarily be involved in the local scene?
Will he bear that in mind as he considers further recruitment for the TAVR in Northern Ireland?
Mr. King
I understand the hon. Gentleman's point.
He will recall that when I made the announcement about the TA I made the point that even with the proposed changes the people of Northern Ireland will enjoy some of the best opportunities in the United Kingdom to take part in TA service.
There are changes — the numbers were exceptionally high, as the hon. Gentleman graphically indicated just now — but still no one could claim that Northern Ireland was badly placed in respect of our proposals.
Mr. Cormack
Does my right hon. Friend accept that the anxiety that still persists in Staffordshire about the fate of the Staffordshire regiment is not mere local and parochial concern but is based on a wider concern for the strength of the infantry?
Can he say anything this afternoon that will enable me to reassure my very worried constituents?
Mr. King
I entirely sympathise with the feelings described by my hon. Friend.
I was met by a very respectful group of Gordon Highlanders when I visted Aberdeen recently, when I said that I would have been on the line as well had I been in their position.
We have made our plans; they involve change; they involve striking a balance.
The Army has reached its decisions.
My hon. Friend is concerned about what the strength of the infantry will be in three years' time.
We are steadily working towards the plans that we set out, which we believe are right.
Were the world to change significantly, we would of course have to look at them again.
I do not want to be misunderstood.
We have no plans to change: we believe that these proposals are right.
We believe in smaller but better, which means a choice between the numbers of people and the quality of the equipment that they can enjoy.
My hon. Friend will concede that we have more than lived up to our promise that our Army of the future, as the Select Committee report said, will be outstandingly well equipped.
We intend that to apply to the Navy and to the Air Force as well.
Dr. Reid
The Secretary of State pointed out in his last answer that on 21 February he expressed sympathy with some of the supporters of the regiments, and he said that he would have been standing outside under the same banners.
He did not mention, however, that his answer on the same occasion made it absolutely clear that the proposed regimental cuts would proceed irrespective of the findings of the Defence Select Committee report.
How could the Secretary of State dismiss so lightly and in advance a report which had not even been written at that date?
Is not that a discourtesy to the Select Committee, which is made up mainly of Conservative Back Benchers?
Will it not be regarded by them and by the regiments as an admission that he is unable to justify on security grounds the cuts that he has made?
Mr. King
Is the hon. Gentleman quoting a newspaper report on this matter?
If that is the report to which he is referring, when asked how I would react to a Select Committee report I said that it would depend on what it said.
It is not mandatory on any Government or Minister automatically to accept every Select Committee report.
We will respond constructively; if we believe that the report's criticisms are right and constructive, we will take them into account.
If we disagree with them, we will say so in the most courteous and, I hope, respectful way we can.
Mr. Robert Hicks
Is my right hon. Friend aware of the high degree of dependence of the Plymouth travel-to-work area on defence-related activity?
Does he agree that it is therefore essential that the area be involved meaningfully in future in our nuclear submarine programme and in the Devonport-based surface ships?
Mr. King
Not only am I aware of that dependence; I am aware of the debt that we owe the area and of the real contribution made by the people of Plymouth to the Royal Navy and the Royal Marine Commandos, among other units involved.
They would be the first to show their appreciation.
We have made it absolutely clear that we are determined that Plymouth should have a good future.
I do not want to go into detail now, but that is certain.
How good that future is will depend in part on the performance of the dockyard, which is competing right now.
I hope that the dockyard will be in a position to make a significant contribution to the work in future — our budget provides for that.
Indeed, we are the only party to have made the financial provision to ensure that that happens.
Young People
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence how many young people under the age of 18 years are currently serving in the armed forces.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
As at 1 January 1992, the latest date for which we have information, there were 7,647 personnel under 18 years of age serving in the armed forces.
Mr. Canavan
In view of the growing international concern about the use of children and young people in various conflicts, especially in third-world countries, how on earth can the Minister possibly justify a situation in this country whereby a young lad can join the Army at the age of 16, or in some cases at the age of 15, but if he changes his mind and wants to leave after serving more than six months he cannot do so and is forced to continue in the armed services until the age of 21?
Is not it about time that the Government stopped this practice of recruiting and exploiting young people who are deemed not old enough to cast a vote but in some cases are being forced to continue in the Army and can be put into armed combat, as they were during the Gulf war?
Mr. Hamilton
The issue of people not being able to leave the forces until they are 21 was raised by the Select Committee that examined the Armed Forces Bill, now the Armed Forces Act 1991.
We are looking at the matter and it is currently being considered by the Department.
The hon. Gentleman asked about young people joining the armed forces.
I do not know who the hon. Gentleman thinks he is speaking for, but I remind him that these people are volunteers and join with the approval of their parents.
Is the hon. Gentleman suggesting that a person under the age of 18 should not have joined his unit in the Gulf?
I do not think that that would have been the attitude of the young men who were very keen to fight for their country and to serve with their compatriots.
Mr. Brazier
Does my right hon. Friend agree that his earlier answer emphasised once again how essential and right it was for the Government to stand up against allowing homosexuality in the armed forces?
Many parents of potential boy soldiers, sailors and airmen would have been very reluctant to allow their sons to join the armed forces if homosexuality had been allowed among those who were to train them.
Mr. Hamilton
My hon. Friend is right.
We carefully considered that issue, and I agree that many parents would have been reluctant to allow their children to serve with the armed forces at such a young age if homosexuality had been allowed.
Trident
Mr. David Shaw
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the current position with regard to the Trident nuclear defence programme.
Mr. Tom King
The Trident programme remains on time and within budget.
The first submarine, Vanguard, is set to roll out of the Devonshire dock hall in Barrow tomorrow and, following a series of sea trials, will enter service with the Royal Navy in the mid-1990s.
Mr. Shaw
Can my right hon. Friend confirm that the Government have had a consistent and unwavering policy on nuclear deterrence through the strength and use of Trident?
Will he also confirm that the Government will place the order for the fourth Trident submarine as soon as possible?
Mr. King
The answer to the second part of my hon. Friend's question is yes.
It is our duty to protect our nation against the risk of nuclear attack and nuclear threat.
That cannot be done on an on-off basis.
We must provide the means, the equipment and the training, and that must be maintained year after year.
We cannot take risks.
My great concern about the totally ambivalent position of the Labour party is that it is prepared to take risks by not having enough submarines to provide an effective deterrent.
That applies even to the minority in the Labour party who believe in the nuclear deterrent.
We have heard the ultimate nonsense from the hon. Member for Cynon Valley (Mrs. Clwyd), who has said that if a Labour Government order a fourth boat they will not put any warheads on it.
Mr. Menzies Campbell
Did the Secretary of State derive some comfort from the authoritative letter in The Times of 18 February from the noble Lord Lewin underlining the need for four submarines for the Trident fleet?
Did he also note in the same letter the noble lord expressed the view that it may be possible to adapt Tridents to fill a sub-strategic role?
In view of that, did not the Secretary of State pause to conclude that whatever NATO may require, there is no requirement for the United Kingdom to have its own tactical air-to-surface missile?
Mr. King
I am grateful for the hon. and learned Gentleman's support in respect of the fourth Trident boat.
I give him credit for that, although I cannot give much credit to his policy of favouring a 50 per cent.
cut in defence expenditure, which means that there is not the slightest chance of his being able to pay for the extra boat.
At least he is father to the wish, even if he cannot guarantee its achievement.
As for the hon. and learned Gentleman's other point, I have made the NATO position clear before.
Mr. Churchill
When my right hon. Friend goes to Barrow later in the week, will he congratulate Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd. and its work force there on the excellent job that they have done in constructing the vessels to specification and to schedule?
Is not it clear that a party which, a few years ago, was offering to do a deal with the Soviet leadership that would have involved the sacrifice of 100 per cent.
of Britain's deterrent in return for only 2 per cent.
of the Soviet deterrent cannot be trusted with Britain's defences?
Mr. King
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
I shall ensure that the message that he has asked me to convey is conveyed tomorrow, when I go to Barrow to mark the roll-out of the first Vanguard submarine.
This is a great achievement on the part of all the company's work force, and of not only those who work in Barrow but those employed in the other elements that make up our Trident system.
That system will now come into operation, and will be available for the defence of our country for many years.
Mr. O'Neill
On Thursday, some of the Secretary of State's officials will give evidence about Trident to the Select Committee on Defence.
Can the right hon. Gentleman confirm that on 6 March 1991, in answer to question 40, Rear Admiral Pirnie said that Britain could maintain a continuous patrol with three Trident submarines, and that with one submarine in refit we could still maintain a continuous patrol with only two submarines?
Is that still the opinion of the right hon. Gentleman's advisers?
Mr King
That is a complete misintepretation of the original evidence, which related to the period immediately prior to Vanguard's first refit.
The hon. Gentleman need not think that there is any military support for the idea that in the past the Navy has argued for a three-boat solution, and he will be given a very rough time by the Navy if he makes such a suggestion.
As far as I am aware, no senior officer in the Navy considers it possible to maintain the nuclear deterrent without four submarines — and certainly no senior naval officer would support the suggestion of the Labour candidate for Barrow and Furness that the fourth submarine should be turned into a 17,000 tonne sub-sea supply vessel delivering oil instead of missiles.
Orders
Mr. Hind
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the value of current orders placed by his Department with British Aerospace, Royal Ordnance, VSEL, Ferranti and Leyland Daf.
Mr. King
The current value of outstanding contracts placed by the Ministry of Defence with the companies listed is as follows: British Aerospace, £1,625 million; Royal Ordnance, £315 million; VSEL, £1,070 million; Ferranti, £360 million; and Leyland Daf, £105 million.
Mr. Hind
My right hon. Friend will be aware that the lion's share of the contracts that he has just announced has been placed with defence factories in the north-west of England, including Lancashire.
Will he confirm that, if he were sufficiently unwise — like the Labour party — to cut a further £6 billion from the defence budget, over and above the’ Options for Change’proposals, there would be massive job losses in those factories?
Will he also confirm that he does not intend to do that?
Mr. King
My hon. Friend referred to the north-west of England, and I can give him the figure for Lancashire.
The current orders outstanding are worth £540 million.
As he has asked, I can tell him that, were there to be a cut of £6 billion in the defence budget, the vast majority of those jobs in Lancashire would go and factories would close.
Mr. Boyes
Nevertheless.
If Conservative Members want to play infantile games, I am prepared to stand here.
Nevertheless, does the Minister agree that the number of defence jobs in the north-west has gone down from 23,000 in 1985-86 to only 12,000 in 1989-90, a cut of almost 50 per cent.
in only four years?
That does not take account of the many closures and redundancies announced since the end of 1989-90 which have halved again the number of jobs in the north-west.
Unless the Government are prepared to provide a forum for funds and expertise to assist the defence industry to diversify into other products, the job losses and the decline in Britain's economic performance will continue — but, then, the Secretary of State does not care.
Mr. King
Not only do I care but the Government are meeting their obligations and providing procurement orders to ensure that our forces have the equipment that they need.
The House will have heard the hon. Gentleman in his honest and decent way — the House respects his honesty — accepting with his opening word’ nevertheless’that that is the implication of Labour's defence policy.
I can tell the hon. Gentleman with the full authority of my office and my responsibility for the programme that if one cuts £6 billion from the defence budget no defence job in the country will be safe.
Islander Aircraft
Mr. Barry Field
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a statement on the performance of the Islander aircraft in service with the Army Air Corps.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Defence Procurement
(Mr. Kenneth Carlisle)
The Islander aircraft fully meet the Army's performance requirements.
Mr. Field
Does my hon. Friend agree that the Islander aircraft have established a reputation as the Rolls-Royce of the skies, being virtually indestructible and operating in one of the most hostile environments in the world?
Is not that a tribute to the Islander designers and the engineers who built them?
Will my hon. Friend assure the House that they will remain in service for many years to come, unlike the scenario if the Liberal Democrats were ever to implement their 50 per cent.
cut in our defence forces?
Mr. Carlisle
Yes.
I am glad to pay tribute to the aircraft and to PBN, the company which makes it.
I welcome the support that my hon. Friend has always given to that company.
We have 10 of those aircraft in service.
It is a robust and very useful aircraft which is cheap to run and has great endurance.
It is a valuable piece of equipment, and my hon. Friend may like to know that in the next two or three years we shall proceed with some large modifications to it which we estimate will bring about £4 million worth of work to PBN on the Isle of Wight.
I agree that if the Liberal Democrats came to power, that work would not proceed.
Trident
Mr. Sayeed
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence if he will make a further statement on the ordering of the fourth Trident submarine.
Mr. Tom King
Contract negotiations with Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering Ltd. for the fourth Trident submarine are under way.
We intend to place the order as soon as those negotiations have been satisfactorily concluded.
Meanwhile, construction of steelwork and major engineering items is making good progress under long lead funding arrangements.
Mr. Sayeed
I thank my right hon. Friend for that answer.
The answer that he gave my hon. Friend the Member for Dover (Mr. Shaw) and the answer that he has just given have comprehensively shot a number of foxes, but one is still up and running.
Will he confirm that during its lifetime in service Trident will take about 3 per cent.
of the defence budget and that no other known system could be so cost effective but still provide the same degree of security?
Mr. King
I think that the figure is nearer 2.5 per cent., but that is correct.
Whatever the Labour party's views in the past, it is incredible that any responsible party could be prepared to take risks with our defence budget and could be prepared to take risks with our nuclear deterrent when the world faces the biggest risk of nuclear proliferation that it has ever faced.
Our position is that we shall ensure that we have a nuclear deterrent that is available at all times for the protection of our country.
Mr. Douglas
Will the Secretary of State take a little time to reflect on a previous answer on non-proliferation?
How can he, in logic or in practice, sustain a position whereby he is asking the Soviet Union, as was, to dismantle its nuclear deterrents while he is embarking on a system in which each missile provides the equivalent of 80 Hiroshima bombs?
The Secretary of State talked about cost.
How can he justify a cost per job in the strategic deterrent of £352,000 in a world in which the major powers are building down and renouncing weapons but he is building up?
Mr. King
If the hon. Gentleman seriously does not understand that point, he had better talk to President Yeltsin, who does.
President Yeltsin, as he made clear outside No. 10 Downing street, understands that the position of a super-power which has 30,000 nuclear weapons is different from the position of the United Kingdom which will have as an absolute maximum only 128 warheads per submarine.
There is no comparison, as President Yeltsin recognises.
Indeed, his ambition is to move down now to a minimum deterrent.
His idea of a minimum deterrent is to maintain 2,500 warheads.
Mr. Allason
Will my right hon. Friend once and for all nail the myth of the credible three-boat Trident deterrent?
Will he confirm that all the professional advice that he has received from the Royal Navy is that only four boats absolutely guarantees an effective nuclear deterrent for this country?
Mr. King
That is absolutely right.
The Opposition do not understand that we have to provide for the full life of the Trident system — for 30 years.
Over such a period, as has already been apparent with Polaris, if we had only had three, we should not have been able to maintain that programme.
I should have thought that that lesson was clear.
The true description of Labour's position on that was given by Mr. Hutton, the Labour candidate for Barrow and Furness.
When he heard the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) suggest that Labour could replace a Trident submarine with, for example, a Trafalgar class submarine on the order book, Mr. Hutton described his right hon. Friend as’ ignorant and ill informed’.
Avionic Repair Department
Mr. Martlew
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence what studies have been undertaken with regard to transfer of the avionic repair department from RAF Carlisle to RAF Sealand.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
This matter is currently under consideration by the chief executive of the maintenance group defence support agency.
Mr. Martlew
During last Thursday's visit to Carlisle, my hon. Friend the Member for Rhondda (Mr. Rogers) and I were very impressed by the quality of the work, and by the efficiency and dedication of the work force at the station.
However, there was grave concern about the future of the avionic department there.
It is well known that the appraisal has been carried out and that the information is with the Minister.
The 100 employees and their families will be disappointed to hear today that the Government are putting off their decision until after the election.
The Minister is hiding behind red tape.
If he does not take the decision before the election and if the Conservatives are re-elected, I am afraid that we shall lose another 100 jobs in Carlisle.
Mr. Hamilton
As I have said, that is all up to the chief executive.
We await any proposals to come from him, and we have had no proposals so far.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that we are talking about fewer than 100 jobs out of the 1,000 people who are employed at Carlisle.
Mr. Viggers
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that any study of avionic repair facilities does not affect the Royal Naval aircraft yard at Fleetlands in my constituency?
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that he recognises the outstanding work done at Fleetlands?
Mr. Hamilton
I would, indeed, pay tribute to the work done at Fleetlands, and there is certainly no question of the avionic repairs at Carlisle having any effect on Fleetlands.
Army Sports Control Board
Ms. Hoey
To ask the Secretary of State for Defence when the Army Sports Control Board will next meet to discuss funding.
Mr. Archie Hamilton
The board will meet next on 20 August 1992 to discuss the allocation of non-public fund grants to Army sports.
Ms. Hoey
The Minister is well aware that the armed services sports body does not give a single penny to rugby league.
Will he please explain why, in the list of sports and games that are supported, we find that there are apparently more people who support and provide funding for model aircraft than support and provide funding for rugby league, and why a sport that is universally recognised as a great sport gets not a single penny from the Army Sports Control Board?
Mr. Hamilton
The Army supports the most popular sports.
There are a number of sports that are not supported by public funding and they include angling and archery, which are more popular than rugby league.
Very few people want to play rugby league.
The only time that a rugby league game was started off anywhere was in the Royal Air Force under a corporal at Coningsby who was very keen.
He could raise only one team of 13 players, which left him with no reserves and no team against which to play.
I am afraid that the evidence at the moment is that the game is not sufficiently supported by members of the armed forces.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. John Townend
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Townend
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the disposable income of 10 million mortgage payers is affected by two factors — income tax and interest rates?
Is he aware that the Labour party will put up both — a double whammy?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is quite right.
We have brought down interest rates and we are determined to keep them low.
We believe that the Labour party would do precisely the reverse.
An average of 10 independent City forecasts shows that interest rates would rise by 2 per cent.
immediately if there were to be such a disaster as a Labour Government.
That is Labour's message to home owners — more taxes and higher interest rates.
Mr. Kinnock rose —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us have an end to all this shouting.
Mr. Kinnock
Has the Prime Minister seen the report from Mr. Graham Jackson, consultant cardiologist at Guy's trust hospital, who says:’ You put’— seriously ill heart —’patients on a list to come in but, by the time their turn comes, the contract has run out and the trust administrator says there are no funds till the next financial year’?
Does not the Prime Minister agree that such a system, which puts cash before care, betrays the fundamental principle of the national health service?
The Prime Minister
The right hon. Gentleman knows that there is no system that puts cash before care.
The right hon. Gentleman also knows that we have provided more additional resources in this Parliament than he was even prepared to promise in his last election manifesto.
Mr. Kinnock
But does not Dr. Jackson have a powerful point when he says that the new system — This is a man working in the system.
Does not he have a powerful point when he says:’ The new system is run by accountants who don't have to sit across the table from the patient and say I cannot treat you'’until the new financial year?
Will the Prime Minister recognise now that it is tragically wrong for treatment for seriously ill people to be determined by money rather than medical need?
Interruption
The Prime Minister
The view that the right hon. Gentleman attributes to that surgeon is certainly not shared by, among others, Nye Bevan's nephew.
As the right hon. Gentleman knows, the Government's role in health is twofold: first, to provide the resources and, secondly, to make them work better for patients.
The resources are at a record level, as the right hon. Gentleman must concede, and the new system is making sure that the resources work better for patients.
There is no other way to improve health care and there is no doubt that the new system, across a range of treatment, is improving health care.
Mr. Kinnock
The Prime Minister is going to borrow to fund tax cuts.
Does he understand yet that the priority of the British people is to use all available resources for health and other essential services?
The Prime Minister wants to bribe, they want to build — why does not he listen to them?
The Prime Minister
In the light of what the right hon. Gentleman has just said, perhaps he will tell us two things: how much extra would he provide for health, and where does health come in Labour's order of priorities?
Labour has a long list of priorities: a £3 billion pledge on pensions — presumably health comes after that; health presumably comes after Labour's £1 billion recovery programme and it presumably comes after Labour's £8 billion housing pledge.
What else does it come after?
The right hon. Gentleman's priorities do not add up and he knows it.
The right hon. Gentleman cannot put a cost on his compassion, for it is bogus.
Mr. Lee
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March 1992.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Lee
Since the Government came to power, my Pendle constituency has gained two new enterprise zones which are bursting at the seams, one new motorway and a brand new community hospital.
Currently, 55 per cent.
of employment is in manufacturing — the highest level in the country.
Modesty prevents my asking my right hon. Friend what message he will send to the electorate of Pendle in the coming election.
However, what message will he send to the electorate in the whole of the north-west?
The Prime Minister
I will certainly reiterate fully the message that I delivered when I visited the north-west a few days ago.
The future and prosperity of the north-west are best served by a Government who are determined to keep inflation down, who want to keep taxes down — and will not let interest rates rise as the Opposition would — and who recognise that the level of strikes is at its lowest for more than a century.
In the north-west, we will continue to encourage domestic and inward investment and we will not discriminate against it.
Mr. Ashdown
Now that we know what it means, will the Prime Minister reflect on the’ double whammy’that he received from the other place on the Education (Schools) Bill last night?
When will he accept that the best thing to do with that damaging and foolish Bill is to ditch it?
The Prime Minister
I am surprised that the right hon. Gentleman is so opposed to providing more power for parents in relation to schools.
I note that it is the Liberal Democrats' policy to take power away from parents and governors and to give it to centralised bureaucrats, and that is precisely like the Labour party policy as in so many things.
Mr. Bill Walker
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March 1992.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Walker
Does my right hon. Friend recognise the dangers inherent in introducing unworkable proposals for devolution for Scotland?
Does he accept that if such proposals were implemented, they would lead to a separatist, socialist, nationalist Scotland, enormous loss of jobs and the closure of military bases?
The jobs that currently go to the military in the United Kingdom would be lost from factories in Scotland.
The Prime Minister
I believe that my hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the risks of the devolution proposals which have previously been put before people.
The Act of Union has served Scotland well and it has served England well.
It has provided an essential cement for the whole of the United Kingdom.
The devolution proposals that we have seen thus far would damage that union and separately damage Scotland, England and the whole of the United Kingdom.
I understand the emotional pull that devolution has for people in Scotland, but I hope that every Scot will examine very carefully what it would mean in practice for Scotland and for the rest of the United Kingdom.
Ms. Short
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the answer that I gave some moments ago.
Ms. Short
Has the Prime Minister seen the report on’ World in Action’last night, which showed that one of his Ministers has been involved in smearing a private citizen?
Does not this place give the Prime Minister the chance to show whether he is really against the smears that have been organised against the Labour party, or is he getting others to do his dirty work for him?
Will he sack the Minister concerned?
The Prime Minister
If the hon. Lady were sensible, she would look in the backyard of her own party.
Hon. Members
Withdraw.
Mr. Hill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Hill
Will my right hon. Friend —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to settle down.
Mr. Faulds rose
Mr. Speaker
Sit down.
Mr. Hill
Will my right hon. Friend continue vigorously and robustly to negotiate the British contribution to the European budget and, at the end, submit it at a level which the House of Commons and the country can accept?
The Prime Minister
Yes, Sir.
The Community's budget is already £40 billion a year.
The existing own resources ceiling has plenty of room for further expenditure without increased resources being committed.
It is the Government's view that the Commission should be thinking of ways of saving taxpayers' money, not justifying fresh reasons for expending it.
It cannot justify increased expenditure on the scale that it proposes, and we are not prepared to renegotiate in any way the present rebate to the United Kingdom.
Mr. Tom Clarke
Is the Prime Minister aware that the parents of Carly Reavill and everyone else know that he was misinformed on the circumstances concerning that child's tragic death?
Will he accept that there is indeed an acute shortage of intensive care beds for children?
Will he tell us precisely what action he intends to take so that never again will desperately sick children be turned away from hospitals which do not have the money to provide emergency treatment?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman will know, for he takes a close interest in this matter, that from next year, there is an extra £2.7 billion for the health service in its next budget, in a few day's time — up another 5 per cent., including efficiency gains.
That is the most tangible way to demonstrate our concern for the health service and to continue to improve the service available to everyone in this country.
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bottomley
My right hon. Friend has been successful in building on the work of our right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland in bringing the constitutional parties together.
Will he accept that we are asking the Social Democratic and Labour party and the unionists to work more closely than parties normally do in Great Britain?
Will he send a message to the Provisional IRA and the disloyalists that the mindless, aimless use of bullets and bombs will not be as successful as parliamentary debates and normal political election campaigns?
The Prime Minister
I believe that the whole House will share my hon. Friend's view on the latter matter.
I warmly welcome the decision of the Northern Ireland political leaders to start their talks again.
It gives a clear and very welcome signal to all the people in Northern Ireland of their determination to find a political solution.
That is very much needed.
It also gives a very clear signal to the terrorists that the people of Northern Ireland will not be bullied by guns, by bombs or by any other form of intimidation.
That goes for everyone on the mainland as well.
Sir Patrick Duffy
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Sir Patrick Duffy
As the restructuring of the armed services proceeds, the displaced and redundant service men will continue to be treated with the utmost care and sensitivity, as the Prime Minister is well aware.
But if that policy is not extended to the displaced workers in the defence industries, does the Prime Minister accept that our high-tech base will be damaged, perhaps irreparably?
Certainly, we can ask questions about the future of certain design teams and skilled and professional workers.
The Prime Minister
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we still have substantial orders for defence equipment.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Defence will make a further statement shortly.
Mr. Colvin
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 3 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Colvin
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that if he or my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Employment had a meeting with business leaders to discuss the policy of the minimum wage, they would tell both the House and the country what business leaders had to say about the damaging effect on jobs that such a minimum wage would have?
Does my right hon. Friend think that the shadow spokesman on employment should do likewise?
The Prime Minister
I agree with my hon. Friend.
The minimum wage policy has been condemned by everyone from The Guardian to Goldman Sachs.
The hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) is apparently the only person in the country who does not yet believe that the minimum wage would cost a substantial number of jobs if it were implemented.
The only debate about the national minimum wage is not whether it would put people out of work but how many hundreds of thousands more people would be unemployed, wholly unnecessarily as a result of partisan dogma on the part of the Labour party.
Mr. Faulds
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I will take points of order after the statement.
Mr. Faulds rose
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Gentleman, who is an old parliamentary hand, knows that I do not take points of order until after the statement.
I will hear him then.
House of Commons
Wednesday 4 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
FOREIGN AND COMMONWEALTH AFFAIRS
Soviet Union
Mr. Pawsey
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will give details of the programme of aid and assistance for the former Soviet Union.
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Douglas Hurd)
Britain has pledged more than £80 million in bilateral aid to the former Soviet Union and is contributing through the EC budget about 18 per cent.
of Community technical assistance and food aid, which totals £595 million.
The Community has also agreed a programme of food credits worth £1.225 billion.
Mr. Pawsey
I thank my right hon. Friend for that full reply.
Clearly, the United Kingdom and the Community are doing a great deal to assist the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe generally.
However, what additional measures will be taken, particularly to assist with the distribution of foodstuffs once they reach eastern Europe?
My right hon. Friend will agree that empty bellies make poor counsellors.
What positive action will be taken to assist people in eastern Europe and in the former states of the Soviet Union?
Mr. Hurd
It is important that food should be not only dispatched but distributed to those who need it.
That is why my right hon. Friend the Minister for Overseas Development has ensured that the Crown Agents, for example, are working with the authorities in St.
Petersburg so that our feed aid for animals around St. Petersburg — £20 million worth — reaches its destination.
We are ensuring that the beef that we sent to St. Petersburg and Murmansk has got through, and we are tackling the remaining problems of distribution in Moscow.
Mr. Flannery
Is there not a grave danger of the former Soviet Union lapsing into anarchy?
Did we not recently see riots on the streets of Moscow, with two factions fighting it out?
Therefore, should we not use our strength and influence to try to organise throughout the west a Marshall plan, similar to the one after the second world war, to strengthen the hands of those who are doing their utmost to stave off anything approximating to anarchy?
Mr. Hurd
It is certainly in our interest that the republics of the former Soviet Union should not disintegrate into anarchy and, as my hon. Friend the Member for Rugby and Kenilworth (Mr. Pawsey) said, starvation.
We believe that the next step, in considering large-scale help for the former republics, should be taken through the International Monetary Fund.
That is the orderly and sensible way to proceed, which is why we are pressing and encouraging others to press for the earliest possible membership of the former Soviet republics in the IMF.
Meanwhile, we are pressing for IMF teams already in Moscow and elsewhere to start preparing the ground.
Dr. Michael Clark
Is my right hon. Friend aware that a delegation from the Inter-Parliamentary Union has just returned from Russia and the Ukraine?
Does he agree that western aid should be given to and deployed in the former Soviet Union with care and tact so that those proud people are not humiliated or offended?
Is he also aware that there is apprehension about the possibility of strings being attached to western aid?
Under what conditions is western aid being given to the former Soviet Union?
Mr. Hurd
I know of the visit and am grateful to my hon. Friend and his colleagues for undertaking it.
There is no doubt that such contact now is particularly useful.
My hon. Friend is entirely right about the pride of the Russian people, which must be respected as we seek to help them.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Rugby and Kenilworth (Mr. Pawsey) said, when people are starving, one does not impose conditions.
But the republics know that the help that is increasingly coming in technical assistance and the possible eventual macroeconomic help is tied to the prospect of reform and is dependent on the continued impetus of both political and economic reform.
Mr. Skinner
Is the Foreign Secretary awarere is a case for feeding people who are starving in Russia, as there is for those who are starving in Africa and Latin America countries?
There is also a case to be made for the Government to spend more money on overseas aid.
There is a case to be made for those starving and living in cardboard boxes just around the corner —
Mr. Speaker
Question, please.
Mr. Skinner
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that there is no case to be made for taxpayers' money being used to prop up Boris Yeltsin, who will turn out to be the David Owen of Russia?
Mr. Hurd
I do not know if the hon. Gentleman has got around to reading his Financial Times this morning.
If he has, he will have seen the eloquent article by the Russian Finance Minister.
The case that he makes, which we must listen to, is for help from this country in privatisation, and the creation and stimulation of the free market and the other basics of prosperity.
Africa
Mr. Dickens
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what assessment he has made of the prospects for increased democracy in Africa.
The Minister for Overseas Development (Mrs. Lynda Chalker)
The prospects for democracy in Africa are probably better now than at any time in the post-colonial era.
Although there are some countries where little progress has been made, most African nations now have, or are moving towards, multi-party political systems.
Mr. Dickens
Bearing in mind that encouraging answer, may I ask whether the Minister considers that the worsening drought in southern Africa may have implications for the process of democracy in Africa?
Mrs. Chalker
Yes, indeed I do.
We are deeply concerned about the dreadful effects of the drought in southern Africa.
That is why, as a first step today, I have approved £2.5 million each to Zambia and Zimbabwe in balance of payments aid to ease the difficulties that will be caused by the need to import food.
We have also agreed on a further £3.9 million worth of food aid to Zimbabwe, Zambia, Mozambique and Mozambiquan refugees in Malawi.
Sir David Steel
Following the welcome change in Kenya's constitution towards a multi-party democracy, and in view of the unhappy news from Kenya yesterday of the repression of demonstrations in Nairobi, will the Minister not only advise that country on the international standards of multi-party democracy, which she has ennunciated from the Dispatch Box before, but suggest that, in order to disarm such demonstrations, it is time that the Government start a dialogue with the Opposition on both the timing and ground rules for an election?
Mrs. Chalker
The right hon. Gentleman knows that we shall encourage dialogue wherever it is needed to promote a democratic system.
The incidents in Nairobi are regrettable, but we deplore all use of violence and provocation, whether from protesters, the Opposition or Government forces.
The way to resolve political differences is through debate, dialogue and the ballot box, not on the streets.
That is why we urge all Kenyan political leaders to open up a constructive dialogue on free and fair elections.
Mr. Lord
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the best method for underpinning democracy is through economic stability?
Has she seen the great efforts being made this year to obtain private inward investment into southern Africa in the form of conferences and other initiatives?
Will she give all such initiatives her fullest support?
Mrs. Chalker
My hon. Friend is right: economic stability is the only foundation for the sound development of democracy.
Therefore, it is absolutely critical that open market systems are developed, subsidy is abolished and there is a proper market economy in all parts of southern Africa.
That is one reason why we are putting so much effort as a nation into helping countries in southern Africa to achieve just that.
Mr. Kaufman
On the question of democracy in the republic of South Africa, does the right hon. Lady agree that our objective should be to ensure that the white electorate fully appreciates that South Africa will face unprecedented international isolation should there be a’ No’vote in this month's referendum?
Should not we support the negotiating process now under way through the Conference for a Democratic South Africa, and so secure the maintenance of international pressure for rapid progress towards a new, genuinely democratic constitutional order?
Will those be the objectives of this Government this month, as they will be the objectives of the Labour Government next month?
Mrs. Chalker
Through the whole of their period in office, the Government have supported efforts to do away with apartheid and to ensure that when change came with President de Klerk, there would be a start towards a new constitution and the transitional arrangements that are now being discussed within the Conference for a Democratic South Africa.
We have always sought to maintain contact with all the parties and we have urged them to build on the fundamental principles already agreed.
Through our influence, we shall do all that we can to ensure that there is a’ Yes’vote in the referendum, because that is the only way to achieve a peaceful, prosperous, successful and democratic South Africa.
United Nations
Mr. Loyden
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what initiatives Her Majesty's Government have proposed for reform of the United Nations.
Mr. Hurd
In January, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister convened a meeting of the Security Council at Heads of Government level, which called on the Secretary-General to report on how the peacekeeping role of the United Nations could be strengthened.
We proposed the appointment of a United Nations disaster relief co-ordinator and the introduction of a United Nations arms register, and both proposals have been accepted.
We have also encouraged the new secretary-general to reform the secretariat and we applaud his first achievements in that area.
Mr. Loyden
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that the global position in which the United Nations was established has little relevance to today's world?
Is it not true that, because of the break-up of the Soviet Union, the balance of power has shifted towards the United States?
Does not that make it difficult for the United Nations to carry out a peacekeeping role?
Do not the problems of the third world, which is still suffering economic deprivation, need to be addressed?
Therefore, will not there be a need for radical changes in the United Nations if it is to maintain any confidence and respect throughout the world?
Mr. Hurd
I do not agree with the hon. Gentleman.
The United Nations has found it much easier to undertake a peacekeeping role since the end of the cold war because its efforts are no longer frustrated by the clash between the super-powers.
We are fortunate that the super-power that remains has no instinct or appetite for dominating the world by oppression and force.
Sir Michael Marshall
My right hon. Friend referred to the summit.
Will he take this opportunity to say what progress is being made on the question of preventive diplomacy, for which the secretary-general has set a deadline of 1 July?
Can my right hon. Friend assure the House that he will take fully into account the role of parliamentary diplomacy through the conference on security and co-operation in Europe, the Inter-Parliamentary Union, the North Atlantic Assembly and other relevant organisations?
Mr. Hurd
The secretary-general has been asked to produce his report on a range of subjects by 1 July.
I am sure that he will not neglect the parliamentary context — which my hon. Friend leads in the IPU.
It is an important element in preventing conflicts reaching the stage of war.
International Meetings
Mr. Hague
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will list the most important international non-EC meetings which he expects to attend this year.
Mr. Hurd
There is the North Atlantic Council consultative meeting and the conference on security and co-operation in Europe ministerial meeting this month; the North Atlantic Council meeting in Oslo in June; the economic summit of the Group of Seven in Munich in July and the CSCE summit in Helsinki in July, both of which I shall attend with my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister; the United Nations General Assembly in New York in September; the CSCE council of ministers in Stockholm in early December, and Western European Union ministerial meetings in June and November.
Mr. Hague
Will my right hon. Friend reflect on the fact that when he attends those international meetings and many others in the EC he will discover that Britain's standing, authority and reputation are vastly higher than they were a few years ago?
Is not that a tribute to the work done not only by him but by his recent predecessors?
Would it not be a national tragedy if that were all to be thrown away by any alternative team of Ministers, who were wrong about every international defence issue in the 1980s and who carry no conviction in the 1990s?
Mr. Hurd
That is rather a difficult question to answer.
I hope that we have a reasonable record on piloting Britain's foreign affairs through troubled times.
The right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) and his team are always ingenious in defending whatever the policy of the moment is; it is just that that policy is changed so often that it leaves a little bit of a question mark over whether they have any plan or direction at all.
Mr. Galloway
When the Foreign Secretary visits the Group of Seven summit in the summer, will he bang some heads together to try to bring forward a new deal for the third world?
The announcements made by the Minister for Overseas Development a few minutes ago about the food situation were welcome, but people in Africa are starving and the terms of trade that they receive in their dealings with the developed countries, the problem of their huge indebtedness to the developed countries and the world order over which we now preside are such that hundreds of millions of people live on the edge of catastrophe.
The Group of Seven has a responsibility to the human race to deal with that this summer.
Mr. Hurd
I am delighted that the hon. Gentleman is looking forward to my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and myself going to the G7 summit in mid-July.
He was specific on that point; rather markedly so I thought.
We shall be delighted to seek out his advice just before we go if he is still a Member of the House at the time.
Of course he is right on his serious point about debt and that is why my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has been so energetic in pressing what are called the Trinidad terms to enable the poorest countries of the world to benefit from those terms.
We shall do our best within reason and common sense to ease those burdens as best we can.
Miss Emma Nicholson
In the wake of the impressive list of meetings that the Secretary of State will be attending for the remainder of this year, will he encourage the Security Council to have a special meeting, after Britain's anticipated endorsement of the Van den Stoel resolution on the destruction of human rights within Iraq at least to ensure that human rights monitors are in south Iraq to protect the unfortunate Shias?
Mr. Hurd
We are worried about the extent to which Saddam Hussein is still able to inflict hardship and persecution on the peoples of Iraq, both the Kurds in the north and the Shias in the south.
My right hon. Friend the Minister for Overseas Development is trying to arrange a donors conference to bring further help, but, as my hon. Friend would agree, the best relief of human rights would be if the Iraqis accepted resolutions 706 and 712 and began to sell oil, the proceeds of which could go to the relief of poverty as well as the compensation of those whom they have victimised.
Mr. Foulkes
I advise the Secretary of State to ensure that all his flight bookings are transferable.
However, in the few weeks remaining to him, will he pursue at all relevant meetings the question of the massacre at Santa Cruz in East Timor.
In particular, will he urge that the Indonesians should immediately abandon the trial of the two East Timorese survivors and press for a full United Nations investigation?
Finally, will he make it clear, as my right hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) has done, that British aid and trade depend on Indonesia seeking an agreed solution and ending its illegal occupation of East Timor.
Mr. Hurd
If the hon. Gentleman is suggesting that our trade with Indonesia depends on a resolution to that question, that is a new and rather remarkable policy statement.
The hon. Gentleman must not beg policy in that way.
If he does, his place on even the Opposition Front Bench will be at stake.
He is, however, right about the basic seriousness of the problem, which I discussed with the Indonesian Foreign Minister — as, perhaps, the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) has done.
The report published by the Indonesian Government and the action that they subsequently took — for example, against certain military commanders involved in the incident — show that they are not concerned simply with a cover-up.
I agree that further action needs to be taken.
We are in close touch with the Community and the United Nations about how the issue should be progressed.
Vietnam
Mr. Mullin
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what recent discussions he has had with the United States Government regarding that country's aid and trade embargo against Vietnam and its veto against Vietnam's membership of the IMF and the World bank.
Mrs. Chalker
We regularly discuss those issues in the relevant forums.
Mr. Mullin
Is the Secretary of State aware that the United States still appears to be at war with Vietnam and that it is blocking all aid and trade in the International Monetary Fund and World bank and through misuse of the COCOM regulations?
Only recently vice-president Quayle remarked that most of the refugees in Hong Kong are political — which, as the Secretary of State will be aware, led to a halving of applications for voluntary repatriation.
No quantity of private representations in the relevant forums will make any difference.
It is about time that the Government said something publicly to the psychopaths who run American foreign policy, with a view to achieving change.
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman knows full well that United States Government policy is a matter for the United States.
Now that change is coming, we are trying to ensure that Vietnam will have access to international financial institutions.
We already keep under review financial contributions to the support group, because clearing the arrears to the IFIs is absolutely critical.
Those to the IMF already amount to £108 million, and to the Asian Development bank, $6 million.
There is no United Kingdom trade embargo.
This country is Vietnam's fifth largest investor, at some $143.6 million.
British industry is taking a clear interest in the opportunities that exist in Vietnam, and I hope that others will follow our example.
Sir Peter Blaker
While I cannot associate myself with some of the language used by the hon. Member for Sunderland, South (Mr. Mullin), many people feel that it is high time that the United States modernised its economic relations with Vietnam and started to observe the common action programme agreed between 24 countries in respect of the Vietnamese boat people in Hong Kong.
In view of the events surrounding the Haitian boat people who attempted to enter the United States, does it make any sense for that country to continue opposing the implementation of the common action programme?
Mrs. Chalker
We consistently encourage observance of the common action programme in respect of Vietnamese boat people and in the light of events in other parts of the world, such as that to which my right hon. Friend referred.
We have done well in trying to ensure that we could help Vietnamese migrants — more than 20,000 of whom have returned from all over the region.
The success of our work, with the full support of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, leads us to believe that the American Government would do better to adopt a plan similar to our own.
Middle East
Mr. Janner
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on the current middle east peace talks.
Mr. Hurd
The peace process continued in a fourth round of bilateral negotiations in Washington last week.
A regional settlement remains an important and realistic aim.
It is encouraging that all parties remain determined to continue the process.
I strongly applaud Mr. Baker's continued commitment to pushing for a settlement and we will maintain our full support of that effort.
Mr. Janner
I am sure that the Secretary of State recognises the sensitivities of the middle east peace process.
As he knows that the Syrians spent the money that they received for their support during the Gulf war on sophisticated missiles from North Korea — all of which are pointing towards Israel — can he reassure the House that Britain is not getting involved in that arms process?
Will he confirm the inaccuracy of reports stating that British Aerospace is involved with Egyptian scientists in uprating scud B missiles for use by the Egyptian army?
Surely we must keep out of that arms process, if we are to maintain our nation's influence in the peace process that we all hope will succeed.
Mr. Hurd
The position regarding the supply of arms to Syria remains as it was when Ministers were last questioned about it in the House.
As for Egypt, I do not think that the hon. and learned Gentleman is seriously suggesting that it is about to launch an attack on Israel, or is to be feared in that connection.
Egypt's pioneering efforts in regard to peacemaking are well established and respected, and I do not consider such a line of questioning helpful.
Sir Dennis Walters
Now that the Palestinians have presented serious proposals on autonomy, does my right hon. Friend agree that no progress can be made unless Israel responds by agreeing to freeze the illegal settlements, and by abiding by the Geneva convention?
In that context, is not the continued closure of Bir Zeit university, which was announced the other day, an intolerable provocation, and should not it be condemned?
Mr. Hurd
Clearly, it is good that the Israelis and the Palestinians are sitting around a table in Washington, and that each side is advancing ideas for the future of the occupied territories.
That is a considerable plus.
I have not yet studied the Palestinian proposals, which, I believe, were tabled only yesterday, but I hope that there will now be proper discussion of the proposals that are on the table.
Given that background, my hon. Friend is right in saying that — as we have often commented — the Israelis ought to halt the policy of establishing settlements in the occupied terrorities which is provocative and, in our view, illegal.
I equally deplore the continued closure of Bir Zeit.
8
Ms. Hoey
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs when he next plans to meet the Israeli ambassador to discuss the Government's policy on the occupied territories.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Douglas Hogg)
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has no specific plans to meet the ambassador, but both he and I have met him recently.
We are in regular contact with the Israeli Government at the highest level on this issue.
Ms. Hoey
Will the Minister take time in the next week, as a matter of urgency, to meet the Israeli ambassador and tell him about the feeling in the country generally that the Israeli Government are literally getting away with murder?
I refer to the case of Mustapha Akkawi, who was killed after being tortured in prison just over a week ago.
Just what does Israel have to do — what can it get away with — before the Government are prepared to do something internationally about sanctions and to treat Israel as we treat other countries that break the Geneva convention?
Mr. Hogg
Like the hon. Lady, we believe that the fourth Geneva convention — the protocol — applies to the occupied territories.
When grave breaches of the convention occur, we raise them frequently, and directly, with the Israelis.
The incident mentioned by the hon. Lady is clearly deplorable, as are the deportations that occur from time to time and the closures of universities, about which we have also protested.
The hon. Lady can be sure of this: we do protest to the Israeli Government when there are clear, serious and obvious breaches of international law.
Sir Philip Goodhart
Does my hon. and learned Friend recognise that, in recent years, several hundred Arabs have been murdered by terrorists for co-operating with the Israelis?
Does he accept that those brutal killings, which are still taking place, do not help the peace process?
Mr. Hogg
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the pattern of killing involving those who are described as collaborators.
That is dreadful and we deplore it, as we deplore all violence.
It emphasises the importance of trying to push ahead with the peace process that is now under way.
Horn of Africa
Mr. Michael
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what is his latest view of the prospects for long-term peace (a) in Mogadishu and southern Somalia and (b) in northern Somalia.
Mrs. Chalker
The situation is very grim for the innocent people of Somalia.
We welcome the United Nations initiative on Somalia.
We hope that the factions will honour their commitment to a ceasefire in Mogadishu.
This must be the first step towards national reconciliation.
Reports from northern Somalia suggest that instability is, once again, growing and clan divisions widening.
Mr. Michael
I am grateful for the Minister's reply and I know that she will have been as horrified as the rest of us by the images and the conflict that was reported from Somalia last weekend.
Does she agree that one unfortunate thing about the United Nations effort to seek peace between the factions in the south is the implication that those factions, together, represent a Government?
Does she agree that the factions that are fighting in the south have no claim to represent the north, which has the main link with the Somali community in this country, and that all factions in the regions of Somalia must be involved in reaching a settlement that can be expected to last?
Mrs. Chalker
It is extremely important that all the factions — not just the clans but the sub-clans — in northern, southern and central Somalia come together under the United Nations plan for the ceasefire.
I sent one of our officials to Mogadishu and northern Somalia just over a week ago.
He reports that stores and vehicles belonging to the Save the Children Fund and Me decins sans Frontieres — MSF — have been looted and that individuals have been abused.
If that is starting again, it is as bad as what is going on in Mogadishu.
It requires all people to be involved in a ceasefire and a total cessation of hostilities if the aid that we are willing to send — we have sent £8 million to Somalia since early last year — is to get to the people who desperately need it.
Mrs. Currie
Given that the appalling tragedy in the Horn of Africa will not end until there is peace, and given the changes in the pattern of the United Nations' work in recent years, which our Government have so actively supported, does the Minister think that we are now reaching a stage where British troops could be deployed under a United Nations banner in humanitarian action as a precursor to effective aid?
Mrs. Chalker
In northern Iraq, we have used British troops to help in that situation.
We need a UN relief plan for Somalia as soon as possible.
I cannot foretell what proposals it will contain, but without an effective ceasefire no one can be deployed.
Having talked to James Jonah following his visit and having seen the national reconciliation plan, I am prepared to consider what is necessary.
But we should be very careful not to expect to send troops all over the world.
I believe that there are ways of getting local people to participate in their own ceasefire with some help from outside, but it should not need mass troop movements to do it.
Mr. Anderson
The Minister will be aware of the valuable contribution that is made by members of the Somali community in this country and of the tremendous work that is done on their behalf by my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, South and Penarth (Mr. Michael).
Since only the United Nations can do the job of peacemaking, is the Minister concerned that just over half the value of the assessments on individual countries for last year has been paid, and will she therefore press other members of the international community to ensure that they give the United Nations the resources to do that necessary peacemaking and peacekeeping job?
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman may already have guessed that we have been pressing others to play their part in the important work in which the United Nations is engaged.
I shall add that to the list of discussions that I shall be having shortly with other assisting countries who are aiming to relieve the awful effects of the wars, wherever they may be occurring.
Mr. Bowis
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is a tragedy if law and order is beginning to break down in the north of Somalia, in what is, after all, the old British Somaliland and is now known to local people as Somaliland?
If it is breaking down, it is to some extent because the international community has not recognised the separate nature, if not the independence, of that part of Somalia.
Will she do everything within her power, with our European Community partners, to ensure that all the people of Somaliland are listened to, not just the factions in the south who, after all, have an Italian connection rather than a British one?
Mrs. Chalker
I cannot speak too highly of all the British people who have been in the northern part of Somalia seeking to give help and to assist.
They will go on doing so, but they can be effective only if the fighting which seems to have broken out and the looting that I described cease.
It is not a question whether it is a separate country — it obviously is not.
The relative stability in the months following the purported declaration of independence back in May last year was very welcome and we must do all that we can to re-establish it, but sheer names on pieces of paper will not do so.
We must have a relief plan that the United Nations can implement throughout Somalia if there is to be peace and if the people are to be relieved.
EC Presidency
Mr. Stevens
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what are Her Majesty's Government's principal goals during the United Kingdom presidency of the EC.
Mr. Hurd
Our first job will be to run an efficient presidency.
We aim to complete the single market, prepare for enlargement of the Community, support democracy and reform in the former Soviet Union and eastern Europe, and prepare the ground for carrying out the Maastricht treaty.
Mr. Stevens
Will my right hon. Friend confirm that the Government will remain firm against raising the present European Community budget ceiling and that they will continue to encourage EC financing arrangements based on supply-side economics, not on the massive transfers of money between one country and another through the Commission?
Mr. Hurd
We had a first skirmish on that at the Council on Monday.
I do not believe that the Commissioners justified their proposal to raise the ceiling.
There is headroom within the existing ceiling — for example, we are not in favour of financing an interventionist industrial policy or increased spending on the common agricultural policy.
Mr. Bernie Grant
If the Foreign Secretary is still here — which I doubt — when Britain takes over the presidency of the European Community, will he insist that some race legislation is passed in the European Community to protect black and minority ethnic citizens when they move around Europe?
Mr. Hurd
I do not think that that is a matter within the competence of the Community.
Mr. Onslow
Can my right hon. Friend confirm that our European partners are not losing sight of the need to make the European Commission democratically accountable, any more than they are losing sight of the need to conform to the European Commission directives that we scrupulously honour?
Mr. Hurd
When I talk about implementation of the Maastricht treaty I mean that one of the things that must be done is to set up the arrangements agreed at Maastricht by which member states can be taken to the European Court and punished if they do not carry out obligations that they have assumed.
Mr. Beggs
Does the Secretary of State accept that one of the Government's principal goals during the United Kingdom's presidency of the European Community should be to secure recognition and acceptance of national boundaries by all member states?
Mr. Hurd
I do not think that there is any question in the Community of the boundaries between the member states.
Mr. Soames
Has my right hon. Friend seen the excellent proposals tabled by Sir David Williamson for the reform of the bureaucracy running the European Community?
Does he agree that if — in his admirable phrase — we are to prevent the Commission interfering in the nooks and crannies of everyday life, it would be greatly to the advantage of all European countries if there were a thorough overhaul of the mechanics for the administration of the Commission?
Mr. Hurd
Yes, indeed.
What the Commission has to do now there is a new article in the Maastricht treaty is to ensure that its practice complies with it and that it does not encourage the drafting of legislation or the working out of projects on matters that can perfectly well be dealt with by member states, or even closer to the citizen, and that applies to English and French cheeses.
Mr. Robertson
Of course, this Government will not be responsible for Britain during the presidency — they will be watching from the Opposition Front Bench.
That is fortunate for Britain.
Is the Foreign Secretary aware that the Government's attitude in Maastricht has left a crippling legacy of anger and resentment among our Community partners about the double opt-out, and that it has even led to a denunciation of the Prime Minister and the Government by their own right-wing allies in the European Community?
The new Labour Government who will be elected five weeks tomorrow will immediately sign the social charter and set about getting the social chapter firmly into the treaty itself.
By doing so, and by being at the heart of Europe, that Government will be able to represent Britain properly during the presidency.
Mr. Hurd
There seems, not for the first time, to be a division between the Opposition Front Bench and Back Benches.
Opposition Back-Bench Members have been questioning my right hon. and hon. Friends and myself on the basis that we shall be here for a long time, whereas Front-Bench spokesmen still nurse the occasional illusion.
Let us not shatter that illusion for a week or so.
The hon. Member for Hamilton (Mr. Robertson) is not usually given to fanciful rhetoric, and if he studies the movement of opinion in Europe he must know that since Maastricht more and more people have begun to comment on the future of Europe in the same sort of way as my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and I did before.
There is no doubt about the direction in which the intellectual tide is flowing.
On the whole, that is a good thing.
Another reason that we should be against the Labour party is that we should not put them in a position to buck the trend.
Russia
Mr. Macdonald
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what further assistance he is providing to help political and economic reform in Russia.
13
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he will make a statement on British relations with the Russian Federation.
15
Mr. Quentin Davies
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs how the United Kingdom is assisting the process of political and economic reform in Russia.
Mr. Hurd
Our relations with the Russian Federation are excellent.
My hon. and learned Friend the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office will visit Russia on 9 March.
We have strongly supported Russia's application to join the IMF.
We have pledged more than £80 million in bilateral aid to Russia and other republics of the former Soviet Union.
I have already given the House the details about Community aid in which we participate.
Mr. Macdonald
Will the Foreign Secretary also help to provide a breathing space for the Russian Government, by supporting their call for a suspension of interest payments on the debt?
Would not it be a disaster if Russia ended up having to pay as much in interest rates as it received in aid?
Would not that fatally undermine the radical, bold and much-needed programme that President Yeltsin is now trying to push through?
Mr. Hurd
The crucial factor is that Russia and the other republics should be eligible for macroeconomic aid on an IMF basis.
For that to happen there has to be an arrangement about the former Soviet Union's debts.
An agreement has been reached.
It is important that it should be honoured and that republics such as the Ukraine, which have not yet found a way of doing so, should join in the process.
That is a necessary part of providing the kind of aid for which there is an increasingly strong case.
Mr. Arnold
Is not one of the problems of Russia in its current economic difficulties that the country might turn in on itself and revert to its usual historic xenophobic tendencies?
Is not it our job to keep open the window on the west?
What are we doing in terms of establishing contacts right across the range with Russia, to keep it closely tied in with western Europe?
Mr. Hurd
We are doing more and more, with all kinds of projects.
I shall name just the latest, launched yesterday evening — the British Emergency Action for Russia and the Republics Trust, founded by Lady Braithwaite, the wife of the ambassador — which is trying to bring together in an imaginative way charities and non-governmentalorganisations in this country to make contacts and help to build up that kind of self-help in Russia.
That kind of spontaneous effort, by all kinds of people in this country, will be just as important in the long run as what Governments do.
Dr. Kim Howells
Does the Secretary of State agree that until now, there has been little to encourage the new democracies of central and eastern Europe to change their minds about the EC being a rich man's club?
Will he do all that he can to ensure that within the EC, there is some agreement about how we shall tackle the enormous problems, which will not be tackled by charity, however welcome that is?
If we do not do that, shall not we see hordes of people sweeping from eastern Europe into western Europe simply looking for jobs?
Mr. Hurd
That is right and that is why we have pressed energetically for almost two years for the association agreements, which include trade and political discussions, with Poland, with Hungary and with Czechoslovakia.
That is why we are now pressing for trade and co-operation agreements with the republics further to the east.
Effort on all those fronts, including trade and being willing to open our markets to goods from those republics, is necessary.
We shall continue to press for that and, as I have said, it is one of the priorities of our presidency.
Mr. Anthony Coombs
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is crucial to persuade Russia that its political stability depends on the stability of the region as a whole, especially its neighbours?
To that end, will he encourage Russia to use its good offices to intervene in the appalling situation in Nagorny Karabakh between Armenia and Azerbaijan, if Russia is to win its spurs as a member of the Security Council and ultimately as a member of the conference on security and co-operation in Europe?
Mr. Hurd
I urged especially Mr. Kozyrev, the Russian Foreign Minister, to persevere with his efforts.
Realistically speaking, it will be a little time before there is an answer to the terrifying question between Armenia and Azerbaijan.
My hon. and learned Friend the Minister of State will go to that part of the former Soviet Union next week and I look forward to hearing what he recommends.
Lockerbie Bombing
Mr. Bernie Grant
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs what developments there have been in relation to the attempts by Her Majesty's Government to secure the extradition of the two Libyan nationals accused of bombing flight PA 103 in 1988; and whether he will make a statement.
Mr. Douglas Hogg
The Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 731 on 21 January endorsing certain requests put to Libya on 27 November by the United Kingdom, the United States and France in connection with the bombings of flights Pan Am 103 and UTA 772.
Those included the request that Libya surrender those accused of the bombing of flight Pan Am 103 for trial in Scotland or the United States.
The secretary-general will report formally on the Libyan response to the Security Council later today.
I have, however, seen an advance copy of the report, which makes it clear that Libya has still failed to comply with resolution 731.
Mr. Grant
Will the Minister confirm that under the terms of the 1971 Montreal convention, which was signed both by Libya and by Britain, any dispute can be referred for arbitration to the International Court of Justice?
Now that Libya has referred the matter to the International Court of Justice, will Britain desist from trying to get the United Nations Security Council to impose sanctions or take military action against Libya until the International Court of Justice has ruled on the matter?
Mr. Hogg
Her Majesty's Government have the greatest respect for the International Court of Justice and we look to co-operating with it.
However, as the hon. Gentleman knows, the Libyan Government have been taking steps in parallel — that is, they have made an application to the ICJ and, at the same time, they are making a response to the UN Security Council.
They are working in parallel.
That being so, it is appropriate for us to act in a similar way.
Mr. Allason
Will my hon. and learned Friend confirm that, apart from the political complexities, the matter is straightforward?
Two suspected murderers have had international arrest warrants issued against them and the Government's intention is to pursue those arrest warrants.
Will my right hon. Friend confirm to the House that there will be no secret deal and no secret negotiations, but that the international arrest warrants will be executed as soon as the opportunity arises?
Mr. Hogg
Her Majesty's Government have put the position plainly and it has been endorsed by the Security Council.
There is a prima facie case against two named individuals which is sufficiently strong to justify the issue of warrants.
We are anxious — indeed, we are determined — to ensure that those individuals appear before a competent court as speedily as possible.
We think that the courts of Scotland are well placed to judge them.
Cyprus
Mr. Dunnachie
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs if he intends to have discussions about the Cyprus problem with his European Community colleagues.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Tristan Garel-Jones)
No.
The EC has made clear its continuing full support for the United Nations Secretary-General's mission of good offices, which offers the best hope of progress towards a comprehensive, just and lasting solution to the intercommunal dispute.
We shall continue to give full and active support to the United Nations.
Mr. Dunnachie
I thank the Minister for his reply.
Is it not time that the Government stood up and were counted by telling the Turkish Government to remove their troops from occupied Cyprus and saying that if they do not do so the British Government will veto any attempt by Turkey to join the EC?
Mr. Garel-Jones
I share, and I believe that the whole House shares, the hon. Gentleman's frustration at the tragic situation in Cyprus.
But I am sure that, as a reasonable man, he will agree on reflection that the wisest course of action for the Government is to continue to support the secretary-general's efforts.
That is what we shall do.
Of course, we shall also continue to encourage the other guarantor powers,— Greece and Turkey — to play an equally constructive role.
I am sure that that is the way forward.
Dr. Twinn
I thank my right hon. Friend for his clear statement of the Government's policy on Cyprus.
Does he agree that Cyprus's application to join the EC provides a positive opportunity for other EC states, including Britain, to take a positive attitude to finding a solution to Cyprus?
I hope that our Government will encourage other EC states within the United Nations fully to back up the United Nations and put pressure on Turkey to find an early solution.
Mr. Garel-Jones
I am grateful to my hon. Friend the Member for Edmonton (Dr. Twinn) and, indeed, to the hon. Member for Birmingham, Erdington (Mr. Corbett) and all Members of Parliament for their continued interest in the matter.
The EC application was referred on 30 September 1990 to the Commission for an opinion, in accordance with the treaty.
When that opinion emerges, we shall, of course, examine it with our partners.
But we remain keen, as many partners do, to strengthen relations between the Community and Cyprus.
Mr. Kaufman
Surely the Minister ought to be a great deal more forthright and clear on the subject than that.
Will the United Kingdom advocate the early admission of Cyprus to the European Community?
Will he say that the United Kingdom will not agree to Turkish membership of the EC so long as any Turkish troops are present in Cyprus against the wishes of the present sovereign Government of Cyprus?
Does he agree that Turkey should not be admitted to the European Community until its human rights record is rectified?
Will he give active support to a federal solution for Cyprus which does justice to both communities within the integrity of the sovereignty of the republic of Cyprus?
Mr. Garel-Jones
The right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) has been rushing up and down the country making what I take it he regards as encouraging noises to Cypriots, Kashmiris and others.
British Cypriots are well able to judge what weight to place on his remarks.
The policy of Her Majesty's Government, which is to support the efforts of the Secretary-General of the United Nations is the wisest policy for both the British Government and other Governments in the Community.
No amount of faffing around by the right hon. Gentleman will convince either our allies or Cypriots.
Mr. Alexander
The presence of Turkish troops is clearly a hazard which makes life difficult in seeking a compromise agreement.
Is it not clear that the northern Cypriots are afraid that if the troops go they will simply be overrun?
Is there not a case for the EC to reassure both sides that they can live in peace if the troops go?
I underline that the presence of the troops is causing the problem at present.
Mr. Garel-Jones
I certainly agree with my hon. Friend that a significant reduction in Turkish troops in northern Cyprus would improve the climate for a negotiated settlement.
However, we also have to recognise that the Turks are unlikely to agree to that in advance of a settlement.
My hon. Friend and the House will be aware that our contribution and support for the secretary-general is not merely a matter of words.
We make a substantial troop contribution to the United Nations peace-keeping force in Cyprus, UNFICYP, which we think is a tangible measure of the efforts that we are giving to peace there.
Soviet Union
Mr. Campbell-Savours
To ask the Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs when he next intends to visit the former Soviet Union to discuss matters relating to technology transfer and aid for the republics.
Mrs. Chalker
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State visited Russia, Kazakhstan and Ukraine in January and discussed such question then.
I visited St. Petersburg also in January.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Does the Minister believe that a vitally important stabilisation fund for Russia can be made to work successfully without tackling the problems of food supply in Russian markets, especially when we consider the consequences for money supply and wage inflation?
Mrs. Chalker
The hon. Gentleman will know from our debate this morning that the United Kingdom is fully ready to play its part in providing the financial assistance, on a multilateral basis, which is likely to be necessary to support an IMF programme — such as the stabilisation fund or some other suitable instrument — for the former Soviet Union, and especially for Russia.
I sought to explain to him then and before that we not only need to sort out finance but to get on with distributing the food that they can grow, with the production of the food that they do not grow, and sort out their system of feeding the people.
That is why, through the know-how fund, endless new ideas and help available, which are being paid for by this country to assist with the production and distribution of food.
That work will continue, but so will work on economic reconstruction.
House of Commons
Thursday 5 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
AGRICULTURE, FISHERIES AND FOOD
Animal Welfare
Mr. Burns
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what recent initiatives he has announced concerning animal welfare.
The Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (Mr. John Selwyn Gummer)
I intend to make animal welfare one of my priorities in th United Kingdom presidency, as I made clear when I wrote to hon. Members on 27 February.
The Government are promoting action on animal welfare in the European Community, based on the high standards in this country.
Mr. Burns
I congratulate my right hon. Friend on ensuring that Britain is at the forefront of those countries in Europe that are pressing for improved animal welfare.
I urge my right hon. Friend to ensure that other EC countries emulate our far-reaching rules and regulations to ensure that there is a total ban on veal crates throughout the Community and that the transportation of live animals, particularly horses and ponies, inside the European continent is as stringently controlled as it is in this country under our domestic rules and regulations.
Mr. Gummer
I am sure that, both on veal crates and pig stalls and tethers, the rest of Europe will have to come up to our standards.
I am pleased that we have achieved what most pople thought that we could not — we have stopped and will continue to stop the export of live horses and ponies.
I congratulate all hon. Members on the support that they have given to the Government in fighting that battle.
I do not believe that this is a nationalist issue.
Horses and ponies in the rest of Europe must have the same sort of protection as they do in this country.
I am pleased that the standards on the transport of live animals generally are approaching British standards and are no longer the low standards that once obtained.
Mr. Geraint Howells
I am sure that the Minister is aware that there is great concern about the quarantine restrictions being lifted on 1 April.
Will he clarify the position on pets and dogs?
What are the latest developments on foot and mouth in European countries?
Mr. Gummer
We have managed to get the rest of Europe to come up to our standards, get rid of vaccination and introduce a slaughter policy in relation to foot and mouth disease.
We already allow animals from countries that have the same policy as us, such as Ireland, to be imported into this country.
When the rest of Europe reaches the same standards as us, the same rules will apply.
Quite rightly, once we have won the battle to raise everyone's standards so that we all have the same high levels, we can have a single market.
We have said clearly that we shall not accept changes in the rules on rabies unless we can have at least the same safeguards as we have today.
But we are perfectly prepared to look at scientific evidence — we are not afraid of that.
However, we will not make changes unless they benefit the United Kingdom.
Mr. Harry Greenway
Will my right hon. Friend accept the support and praise of all horse lovers for what the Government achieved when securing the continuation of minimum conditions for the export of live horses for slaughter?
Will he, however, assure us that he will do all that he can to secure proper transport arrangements for live animals being exported, particularly horses?
Will he further assure the House that the same strict safeguards and enforcement of rules on the protection and welfare of horses and other animals that apply in our country will apply in the EC area?
Mr. Gummer
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister ensured at Maastricht that the British proposals on this matter were passed: first, all countries committed themselves to improving animal welfare, which was a major step forward never agreed between those countries before; and, secondly, in future, the European Court of Justice will be in a position to fine countries that fail to keep their obligations under Community rules.
During our presidency we must extend the competence of the Community so that it can ensure that once animal welfare regulations are passed they are enforced — from Spain to Scotland and from Ireland to Greece.
Mr. Ron Davies
Let me assure the Minister that Labour fully intends to use the opportunities presented by Britain's presidency to make sure that animal welfare is high on the agenda.
Why is the Minister so inconsistent in his approach to animal welfare?
On 11 February, he told the National Farmers Union that he had no intention of taking further steps unilaterally, but on 27 February he put out a press release saying that he did reserve the right to act unilaterally.
Can he explain that contradiction, or is he just a politician running scared of the electorate and trying to be all things to all people?
Mr. Gummer
It is always dangerous when the hon. Gentleman reads only the first half of a sentence.
I told the National Farmers Union that I did not believe that unilateral action would help, because if it is taken, the British housewife tends to buy the cheaper product from the rest of Europe and, therefore, we export animal welfare problems to the rest of Europe.
I believe that we should not be nationalistic about animal welfare; we should care for animals in France and Germany as well as for those in Britain.
I said to the NFU and in my press statement that I reserved the right to take emergency action if, for instance, people in this country started to use coloured lenses for chickens, which would be outrageous — I would stop it before it started.
That is a perfectly coherent position.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We are making slow progress today.
Could we please have brief questions and briefer answers?
Food Safety
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement on the implementation of the Food Safety Act 1990.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Maclean)
The Food Safety Act is working very effectively improving the quality of our food and giving consumers confidence in the integrity of the food supply.
Mr. Coombs
Does my hon. Friend agree that the full implementation of the Food Safety Act 1990 will ensure that Britain is in the forefront of Europe in terms of food safety in years to come?
Will he reassure representatives of women's institutes and townswomen's guilds and other voluntary workers that the implementation of the Act is not designed to target their fund-raising activities in the preparation of food in village halls and elsewhere?
Mr. Maclean
I thank my hon. Friend for his earlier remarks, in which he recognised the great step forward that we have taken with the Food Safety Act, but I am concerned about his latter comments.
There is nothing in the Food Safety Act that could justify local authorities specially targeting those organisations.
The advice of the Government and the Audit Commission is to concentrate on the main risks, and if town halls persist in targeting women's institutes, church fetes, village halls or charity teas, the Government will take action.
Potatoes
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement about the level of production of potatoes.
The Parliamentary Secretary to the Ministry of Agriculture,
Fisheries and Food (Mr. David Curry)
Estimated potato production i the United Kingdom in 1991 was 6.3 million tonnes.
Mr. Cohen
Does not a Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food report show that production of early potatoes fell considerably, and that meant an increase in price?
Is not it the case that we do not have widely available anywhere near the diversity of potatoes that is available in other countries, such as the United States?
Is not this subject wholly appropriate for the Minister, because his Government have had their chips?
Mr. Curry
The hon. Gentleman has his facts diametrically wrong.
There are 131 varieties of commercial potatoes in the United Kingdom, which is a great deal more than in any other country.
I know that because I grow at least a dozen of them in my allotment.
Mr. Moss
I know that my hon. Friend the Minister is well aware of the widespread concern among arable farmers in my constituency about the EC Commission's proposals to review potato marketing.
As the Potato Marketing Board has for many years worked successfully for the benefit of processors, consumers and producers, does he agree that any proposals to scrap the PMB should be strongly resisted?
Mr. Curry
The Potato Marketing Board is doing an excellent job, and we fully support it.
Changes introduced a couple of years ago are working well and the aggressive marketing that is now taking place is very much to be desired.
We have to face the European proposals and we shall tackle them as we tackle all other European proposals — in the interests of British farmers and British consumers.
Common Agricultural Policy
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when he next expects to meet his European agricultural colleagues to discuss reforming the common agricultural policy.
Mr. Gummer
At the next Agriculture Council on 30 and 31 March.
Mr. Evans
Does the Minister agree that reform of the common agricultural policy — which costs £25 billion a year, consumes 65 per cent.
of the Community budget and costs the average British family £17 per week — would be assisted by the introduction of an organic farming policy?
Does he recall that more than two years ago he announced that an organic scheme would be introduced in a matter of months?
What on earth has happened to that scheme?
Mr. Gummer
As I have said, the European Community has failed to produce the legislation under which we could do that.
I have made it clear that the reform must include legislation enabling us to do that.
We have led the way in organic farming, both by the introduction of the United Kingdom register of organic food standards and by ensuring that European standards follow British standards.
The hon. Gentleman's figures on the payment per family are not correct.
One issue that is particularly damaging is the decision by the Labour party that if it were in power it would tax British farmers and give the money to the farmers of Spain, Portugal and Greece.
Mr. Marland
It is good to give credit where credit is due.
Is my hon. Friend aware that he has earned the widespread respect of British farmers by standing up for their interests?
Furthermore they know that they can trust him because he will not filch money from the common agricultural policy, as Labour would do, to use it for other purposes.
Will he confirm that he does not stand alone in the European Community but that other countries support his firm stand?
Mr. Gummer
I am pleased to say that more and more European Community countries are coming to the views that we have pioneered on reform.
I am sorry that the Leader of the Opposition has announced that he would take money from British farmers and contribute it to those in southern Europe.
That is the wrong way to use common agricultural policy reforms.
Dr. David Clark
After all these years in office, does not the Minister yet understand that the British consumer simply cannot afford the exorbitant cost of the CAP, which does not exactly help the British farmer either?
Has not he realised that the CAP is the only agricultural support system under which consumers pay a subsidy to farmers and end up paying more for their food than if they had not paid the subsidy in the first place?
Will the right hon. Gentleman, in his swan song at the Dispatch Box, admit that not only has he been the most expensive Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, supporting an increase in CAP spending of 55 per cent., but that, by his failure to get meaningful reform of the CAP, he has been the most unsuccessful one, as well ?
Mr. Gummer
The hon. Gentleman is in no position to make any of those comments.
His party has now signed up to Mr. MacSharry and his basic philosophy.
The Leader of the Opposition has said in the House that CAP reform would mean that he would take money from British farmers and spend it on farmers in southern countries.
That has been contradicted by the Labour spokesman on Treasury matters, who has said that his party would take money from British farmers and divert it to regional policy.
That has been contradicted by the hon. Member for South Shields (Dr. Clark), who has said that he would take money from British farmers with one hand and give part of it back to them with the other.
It is the usual example of the Labour party spending money that it does not have and will not get.
It proposes to do so three times, and those from whom the money would come would not get any benefit.
Mr. Hume
Is the Minister aware that the Commissioner for Agriculture is now the Commissioner for Agriculture and Rural Development?
A major part of the reform of the CAP is focused on rural development, and that is important for less-favoured areas where there are smaller farms.
What steps has the Ministry taken to encourage farmers in those areas to consider alternative land use and to recognise that agriculture policy is no longer about prices only but embraces rural development, rural housing and rural agriculture that is based on their products?
Is there a planned approach by the Government to make maximum use of such a policy to develop employment in the poorer rural areas?
Mr. Gummer
Yes, certainly.
We oppose Mr. MacSharry's proposals because hardly any farmers will be able to gain by his support for rural development.
To Mr. MacSharry, rural development means no help for the farmers of Wales and more help for the farmers of southern Ireland.
It means no help for the farmers of Scotland and more help for the farmers of Portugal and Bavaria.
That is a divisive policy, not a rural development policy, which would affect countries and areas of the European Community.
That is why we oppose it.
Mr. Cash
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the British farmer is the most efficient farmer in Europe?
Does he agree also that the MacSharry proposals will have an extremely damaging effect on the British farmer?
Will he do everything to ensure that the recent announcement by the European Community, which reflects the attitude of the French and those who agree with them in respect of the general agreement on tariffs and trade proposals, will not be immensely damaging to British farming and world trade as a whole?
Will my right hon. Friend do something about that?
Mr. Gummer
It is most important that we have a GATT solution.
Britain, together with most of our partners, made sure that the next step towards that was taken on Monday.
The French and one or two other countries were outvoted on that issue.
It is clear that, increasingly, other countries in the Community are supporting our view on CAP reform.
That is why they refuse to accept the Commission type of document that was presented on Monday and Tuesday and have demanded that we look back once again at the fundamental and basic principle.
The principles that we want are no discrimination, a closer approach to the market, consideration of more environmental matters at the centre of the European Community and a sensible CAP that is designed to support efficient farmers and the proper backing of the rural economy.
MacSharry Proposals
Mr. Kennedy
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a further statement on the implications for United Kingdom agriculture of the MacSharry proposals; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Gummer
The GATT round is regularly discussed at the Agriculture Council and I expect it to be considered again at the Council on 30 and 31 March.
Mr. Kennedy
The Minister obviously recognises that there is continuing concern, not least in Scottish agriculture, including north of Scotland agriculture, about the likely effect of the MacSharry proposals as presently cast.
Does he agree that Scottish agriculture, including north of Scotland agriculture, can hardly have been —
Several Hon. Members
The Minister gave the wrong answer.
Mr. Gummer
I am happy to apologise.
The hon. Member for Ross, Cromarty and Skye (Mr. Kennedy) asked about the MacSharry proposals.
The Commission's proposals for reform of the CAP would discriminate heavily against United Kingdom agriculture.
That is why I continue to seek an outcome to the negotiations which is fair for British farmers and encourages, not discourages, efficiency.
I hope that the GATT solution will help that as well.
Mr. Kennedy
I think that hon. Members on both sides of the House will agree that those two issues are closely connected, but I should like the Minister to say a little more about the specific question that I raised.
Given their less-favoured area status, Scottish and north of Scotland agriculture can hardly be said to have contributed to the problems of CAP overproduction and the related MacSharry implications.
What is the Minister's guess in regard to a possible deadline for a conclusion to the MacSharry discussions — not least in the context of the GATT negotiations that must follow?
Mr. Gummer
It is important to secure the GATT solution first, if we are to have one.
That must be done within a reasonable period.
Until we know what we have signed up to in GATT, it will be difficult to tell how much we must alter the CAP to meet our obligations.
Many alterations will have to be made in any event, and there is no question of CAP reform depending on the GATT solution.
The timetable will, I hope, mean a rapid solution to the CAP problem very soon after the achievement of a GATT solution.
I hope that it will come about under the Portuguese presidency, and I am working towards that end; but it must be an end that does not discriminate against Scottish farmers or British farmers generally.
I shall keep the process going until we achieve a fair solution.
Sir Hector Monro
Will my right hon. Friend continue his robust and effective opposition to the MacSharry proposals?
Will he bring home to Ministers on the continent the fact that the headage basis would prove devastating for hill and upland farmers in the United Kingdom and will he do everything possible to make those Ministers see our point of view?
Mr. Gummer
The Spanish, Dutch, Danish and Belgian Ministers have now committed themselves to the view that such discrimination is unacceptable.
That is a great improvement, and I hope very much that the Commission will soon understand that headage limits do not reduce overproduction but merely discriminate against some of the poorest parts of the United Kingdom.
Some of the farmers concerned — especially those in Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and the backbone of England — suffer particularly from the low prices.
Mr. John P. Smith
Does the Minister realise the damage that the current MacSharry proposals will do to family farms in my constituency, Vale of Glamorgan?
Does he share the concern that I now feel, following my recent meeting with MacSharry, that any MacSharry proposals that include price support will penalise our farmers?
Mr. Gummer
I agree with the hon. Gentleman's comments about the danger of MacSharry's proposals, particularly in areas such as Wales, which are so dependent on farmers who are not big farmers in the general sense of the term but who need the support that they now have.
I hope, however, that the hon. Gentleman will explain to the Leader of the Opposition that Welsh farmers could not afford to have their incomes cuts so that the money could be spent on Spanish, Greek and Portuguese farmers.
That is what the right hon. Gentleman has said that he would do if he were Prime Minister.
GATT
Mr. Rathbone
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when next he expects to have talks with other European Ministers about GATT.
Mr. Gummer
I refer my hon. Friend to the answer that I gave a few moments ago.
Mr. Rathbone
In anticipation of the meeting of the Agriculture Council, will my right hon. Friend re-commit the Government to the search for an equitable basis on which to reduce farm prices within the European Community and worldwide and to reduce trade barriers as well?
Mr. Gummer
I am wholly concerned to fight for the achievement of an equitable GATT solution as rapidly as possible.
It must be a solution that reduces prices across the board, not only equitably throughout Europe but in the United States.
This is a proper negotiation, in which both sides will have to give ground if we are to achieve a solution.
I look to the current discussions, and also to the United States, to give the ground that is needed.
Mr. Edwards
What reassurance can the Minister give the dairy farmers of Monmouthshire that during his discussions on GATT their interests will be protected?
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that those farmers have seen a decline in their incomes and an increase in their costs, and are worried about their capacity to invest in the future?
What reassurance can he give them that they will be able to invest in dairy production in Monmouthshire?
Mr. Gummer
The reassurance is that there will be a Conservative Government to fight for them, and that after the next election they will be represented by a Conservative Member for Monmouth.
Mr. John D. Taylor
Pursuant to the reply that the Minister gave earlier to the hon. Member for Ross, Cromarty and Skye (Mr. Kennedy), and as there has been much speculation that there will be no GATT settlement at all this year, will the Minister confirm that, should there be no GATT settlement, he will oppose the MacSharry proposals for the rest of this year?
Mr. Gummer
If there is no GATT settlement, during our presidency we shall seek to achieve the necessary reform of the common agricultural policy.
That reform will be based not on the discriminatory attitudes of Mr. MacSharry but on a sensible policy of supporting agriculture fairly throughout the Community, bringing agriculture closer to the market and ensuring that the environment is a central concern of the CAP.
It will also ensure that economic farmers are enabled to compete throughout the world.
There will have to be specific help for those in the least favoured areas, and particular help for restructuring in the southern countries of Europe.
Mr. Favell
It is reported on the front page of The Times today that the common agricultural policy — that squalid policy which is costing British families an average of £18.50 a week each — will destroy the world free trade talks, which have been going on for four or five years, and involve just about every country in the world.
Is it not clear, in retrospect, that our right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) was absolutely right when she went to Rome in October 1990 and warned our partners that the talks should be about world free trade, and not about cloud cuckoo land — that is, political and economic union, which was doomed to failure in any event?
Mr. Gummer
The fact is that The Times report is not correct.
The second fact is that there has been a great deal of obfuscation and obstruction from the United States in the negotiations.
It is wholly wrong to suggest that it is the European Community alone which has difficulties with the agriculture dossier.
We must both find a way through this, and I demand that we in this country support the Commission in its negotiations, demanding that the United States come further towards us, so that together we can find a solution for the whole world, instead of throwing batons at each other across the Atlantic.
Dietary Supplements
Mr. Hain
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement on European Community proposals to restrict the availability of dietary supplements.
Mr. Maclean
The Government will support the continuing availability of safe and clearly labelled products in the forthcoming EC negotiations.
Mr. Hain
The Government propose to Brussels that the same upper limits be set on dosages of dietary supplements for ordinary consumers buying off the shelves as for professional practitioners of alternative medicine, even though such practitioners may have good reasons for recommending higher doses to their patients.
Surely the Government should exempt them.
Otherwise, 18 million people who depend on food supplements — including healthy eaters such as yourself, Mr. Speaker — will be discriminated against.
Mr. Maclean
I entirely reject that suggestion.
To suggest, as do other countries in the European Community, and the Commission itself, that there could be maximum daily doses of individual tablets prescribed, is not incompatible with saying that the products will continue to be freely available to all those who wish to use them.
Sir Anthony Grant
Will my hon. Friend confirm that he has no proposals to set up some absurd bureaucratic organisation to tell farmers what bureaucrats think that people ought to eat, as is proposed by the Labour party?
Mr. Maclean
I entirely agree.
The more I read about Opposition policy the more convinced I am that if they were in government there would be no food left to eat in this country.
They would adopt ridiculous food safety measures.
Hill Livestock Compensatory Allowances
Mr. McGrady
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what steps he will take to ensure that early payments are made to farmers in respect of hill livestock compensatory allowances in response to the current economic climate.
Mr. Curry
Payments to farmers under the 1992 hill livestock compensatory allowances scheme have already begun.
That will put nearly £150 million into the rural economy.
Mr. McGrady
I thank the Minister for his reply, but is he aware that there is already considerable delay in these payments?
As the farming community has suffered a substantial reduction in real income in 1991 — to the extent of 17 per cent.
of income in the north of Ireland — and that the hill livestock farmer depends very much on such payments at this time of year, will he ensure that these payments and other headage payments are made in accordance with the rules and regulations and thus assist the distraught financial circumstances especially of the small farmer who has been paid scant regard in the House this afternoon?
Mr. Curry
I can certainly give the hon. Gentleman that assurance.
We have been paying them in England since 21 February and virtually a third of claims have been met.
It is the same in Wales.
Almost a third have been met in Northern Ireland and £17.4 million has already been paid out.
We cannot pay if farmers do not make the claims.
In previous years about 20 per cent.
have not claimed until April.
If the hon. Gentleman will urge his farmers to ensure that claims are on time, we shall deal with them as soon as humanly possible.
Mr. Amos
Does my hon. Friend accept that the good farmers of Hexham are grateful for his sincere effort to look after the interests of farmers in the less-favoured areas?
However, does he also accept that they are worried about two things — first, proposals to put 50p on a gallon of petrol and, secondly, proposals for environment controls which would strangle them to death — proposals made by the Opposition parties?
Mr. Curry
I speak to many farmers — large and small — including some in my hon. Friend's constituency.
They are terrified by Labour party proposals to create a great new machine spitting out red tape all over the countryside.
Labour's planning controls and proposals for access would be directly contrary to the interests of farmers in the United Kingdom.
Citizens Charter
Dr. Kim Howells
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food if he will make a statement about his Ministry's contribution to the citizens charter.
Mr. Maclean
We are developing citizens charter principles in various sectors of the Ministry and, as part of that, I am today announcing a comprehensive food safety and consumer protection programme.
Dr. Howells
It is difficult to understand how the Government can claim to be concerned about looking after the welfare of citizens when there has been a fourfold increase in the incidence of food poisoning in the past 10 years.
Why do the Government continue to extol the virtues of this obnoxious Gummerburger food culture instead of instituting an independent food standards agency as the Labour Government will do in a few weeks' time?
Mr. Maclean
It used to be that Opposition spokesmen quoted figures that were four years out of date, but the hon. Gentleman depends on statistics that go back 10 years.
Let me tell him about the previous 12 months' statistics which show a decrease in salmonella food poisoning and that the Food Safety Act 1990 is working.
For the first time in many years the statistics are going down.
I note that the first thing that the Labour party would do in my Department, if it came to power, would be to change the name of MAFF to FAFF.
Mr. Lord
On food safety, my hon. Friend will be aware of the crippling effect of veterinary inspection charges on chicken-producing companies such as John Rannoch and Sovereign Chicken in my constituency, which are making it impossible for them to compete with their European counterparts.
Will he please take the most urgent steps to correct that, because it is not only deeply damaging to companies in my constituency but harmful to the image of the Community?
Mr. Maclean
We shall do our utmost to ensure that we have a level playing field throughout Europe.
If my hon. Friend has any evidence that other countries might not be implementing the regulations as carefully as we are, we shall certainly take action.
However, at the same time I must say that we have very high welfare and hygiene standards in this country.
That guarantees that the consumer feels safe with our food supply and that is in the best interests of all our chicken producers.
Dr. David Clark
If the Minister claims to be so concerned about the consumer, can he explain why his right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, at the National Farmers Union annual general meeting last month, produced a list of nearly 100 regulations from the Ministry and promised to discuss their relevance and implementation with the farmers?
Why does he refuse to meet any groups other than farmers, as he confirmed to me in the House on 17 February?
Why does he refuse to discuss the regulations on the welfare of animals in transit with the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals?
Why does he refuse to discuss the reduction of salmonella controls with the consumer organisations?
Why does he refuse to talk to the Royal Society for the Protection of Birds about licensing to kill birds?
It is not the citizens charter that the consumers of this country want; they want a Ministry of Food and Farming which the incoming Labour Government will introduce.
Mr. Maclean
That is absolute nonsense and it is nonsense that is years out of date.
Only last week my right hon. Friend concluded yet another of his quarterly meetings with 15 consumer organisations.
Those meetings are held every quarter to discuss issues of food and consumer concern.
We have set up the consumer panel and I meet consumers regularly when I have discussions in the Ministry.
Never before has the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food had so many detailed discussions with consumers and consumer organisations.
They know that; it is a pity that the hon. Gentleman does not.
Mrs. Gorman
Knowing my right hon. Friend's concern for birds and particularly for our very valuable poultry industry, will he keep an eye on the latest scare for our’ bootiful’turkey industry and ensure that that nonsense about which we are hearing — podo dermatitus — does not turn out to be a load of gobbledegook?
Mr. Maclean
I am sure that my hon. Friend will be the first to spot gobbledegook whenever it arises.
I assure her that we are having discussions in Europe on various aspects of animal health and welfare.
However, there is no intention to include turkeys in the EC's zoonoses proposals and that seems to be very sensible.
Set-aside Schemes
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what account he takes of proposals for public access to the areas concerned when considering set-aside schemes and schemes relating to environmentally sensitive areas.
Mr. Gummer
Considerations concerning public access do not feature in either of these schemes.
Separate grants for providing public access to set-aside land are available in certain counties under the Countryside Commission premium scheme, a scheme which, in the reform of the common agricultural policy, we hope will have the powers to extend to the rest of the country.
Mr. Bennett
Is the Minister aware that the Ramblers Association has published a manifesto for access?
Will the Government endorse that manifesto?
Will the Government support the Common Land Forum in its proposals?
If they are re-elected, is there any chance that such proposals will be carried out this time?
Mr. Gummer
The Government are determined to ensure that the kind of access proposals that have been pioneered, particularly by the Countryside Commission, are extended.
However, we recognise that the countryside is also a place for conservation, for bird lovers, for agriculture and for a whole range of people.
Access is not the only requisite in the countryside.
We have to keep a proper balance or we will continue to see destruction in the countryside that we have seen in some areas where there is too much access and where what used to be a path has become as wide as the M1.
Milk Marketing
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food what recent representations he has received regarding the Milk Marketing Board's proposals for changes in the milk marketing scheme,
Mr. Gummer
I have received a number of representations from milk producers and processors, hon. Members and members of the public.
Mr. Taylor
My right hon. Friend is putting forward and considering proposals for reform.
I notice that the Milk Marketing Board has come forward with propositions.
Will my right hon. Friend undertake to ensure that any changes in the milk marketing regulations are introduced in an orderly manner?
There are a very large number of cows munching in the green pastures of my constituency, but there are also a large number of people who are employed by the Milk Marketing Board.
Mr. Gummer
The Milk Marketing Board has produced proposals for reform.
When the Government are re-elected, they will enable the Milk Marketing Board to carry forward those proposals as far as possible through the Commission and through the House.
They will do that because the Milk Marketing Board has put forward those proposals for reform.
I note that the Labour party knows better than the Milk Marketing Board and has said that it would not help the Milk Marketing Board to get the reform that is necessary for British farmers and British consumers.
Recently, British milk producers have received less for their milk than most of the other countries in Europe, and the housewife has paid more for milk on the doorstep than housewives in Europe.
The Milk Marketing Board wants to improve that situation.
The Labour party will make sure that it could not.
National Federation of Fishermen's Organisations
Mr. Austin Mitchell
To ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food when he next intends to meet the National Federation of Fishermen's Organisations to discuss fishing matters.
Mr. Curry
I am constantly meeting fishing organisations.
Mr. Mitchell
When the Minister next meets them, will he tell them why he stood on his head over a decommissioning —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Mitchell
Why he stood on his head over a decommissioning scheme which is too little, too late?
Will the Minister tell them how he proposes to cut the days-at-sea restriction by introducing effective conservation measures, including a one-net rule, square mesh panels and a ban on industrial fishing?
Will he tell them why, if there is to be a days-at-sea restriction, he cannot pay fishermen the same financial support that farmers get when their land goes awry?
Interruption
Mr. Curry
The industry demanded a proper conservation package.
That is what it has.
It has a combination of decommissioning; we are extending the licensing rules; we are attacking the problem of the effort directed against fishing; and we are going to control fishing boats.
In other words, we have delivered precisely what we promised — a measure which would guarantee the long-term future of the fishing industry.
We remain committed to that.
Happily, we will have many years to carry it out.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Austin Mitchell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall be having further meetings later today.
Mr. Mitchell

InterruptionAs the Prime Minister savours one of his last few busy days before the deluge, will he think back to the dinner that he gave at No. 10 Downing street last November on behalf of the Tory party for what The Sun — I must quote it accurately because it is from The Sun —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
No quoting; paraphrase, please.
Mr. Mitchell
In that case, I will paraphrase, Mr. Speaker.
For The Sun told us of members of Britain's Asian community being brought together to win the votes of that community.
Interruption
Will the right hon. Gentleman confirm that nine of his 21 guests were tax exiles in this country who cannot even vote here?
Will he also confirm that he was able to tell them that the loophole in the tax law which enables them to pay virtually no tax in this country will not be closed by his Government?
Finally, will he tell us whether they were asked —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
It is a terribly long question.
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman is quite mistaken, and I will set out the position clearly for him.
I give a number of dinners for industrialists at Downing street, and the dinner for business men was no different.
I am surprised that the hon. Gentleman thinks that I should not have such occasions with business men.
He also shows his usual willingness to exploit every leak that comes to him.
He may care now to listen carefully.
What I said on that occasion was to confirm a policy agreed with the hon. Gentleman's own party.
He has obviously forgotten that the Government decided not to introduce a tax on world income in 1989, following consultation and representations from the Labour party.
Mr. Butterfill
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Butterfill
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the encouragement of savings is important not simply because it gives security to the saver but because it provides funds for investment in the future of our country?
Will he give an assurance that a future Conservative Government will take measures further to encourage savings?
Will he condemn the narrow-minded and vindictive savings tax proposed by the Labour party?
The Prime Minister
I shall happily do both those things.
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
We shall continue to encourage personal savings by keeping income tax rates low, and through special schemes such as the tax-exempt special savings account, which has been a remarkable success.
The savings tax proposed by the Labour party is one of the most poorly thought out and damaging of its proposals.
It would hit widows on ordinary incomes.
It would hit people taking early retirement such as miners, policemen and soldiers.
Now that the Labour party has finally decided to publish its phoney budget, it should think again and drop those damaging and vindictive proposals.
Mr. Kinnock
Is the Prime Minister aware that this morning the University College hospital cancer specialist, Dr. Jeffrey Tobias, said:’ 30 per cent.
of the time I have to say to my patients, Sorry, I had planned to give you chemotherapy today but that is not possible'’ because the beds are not available?
Does not the Prime Minister think that that is a terrible indictment of the health policy of a Government who have been in power so long and could have made things so much better?
The Prime Minister
But as the right hon. Gentleman knows, things have been made much better.
Waiting lists are improving — are falling.
More people are being treated and there are more resources for the national health service.
If the right hon. Gentleman wants to swap quotes, perhaps he will listen to what Dr. David Colin Thorne, a Labour party member who stood for Parliament, said on fundholding.
He said:’ I'm aware that what we're saying may be used but we do believe it is the most energising thing that has happened in my 21 years as a GP It has been good for care, public health and management.’
That is a Labour party former candidate, a doctor, supporting our Conservative party reforms of the health service.
Mr. Kinnock
Why does the Prime Minister never even try to answer the question?
The reality is that cancer specialists are unable to treat patients because of a shortage of beds.
Why do not the Government even now get rid of the tax concessions for private health insurance and put the £60 million saved straight into fighting cancer?
That is what the Labour Government will do.
That is the right thing to do.
The Prime Minister
That would have more credibility if we were not spending more on the health service than the right hon. Gentleman even promised to spend.
It would have even more credibility if the Labour party was not pledged to introduce a minimum wage that would cost the health service £500 million.
It would have even more credibility if the Labour party would claim and set out the funding that it would provide for the national health service, which it has expressly failed to do.
We have repeatedly indicated in public expenditure round after public expenditure round that we are increasing over and above inflation substantial resources for the health service — far more even than the right hon. Gentleman dared to promise.
Mr. Kinnock
Just in recent weeks we have had public reports of a cardiologist who has had to turn seriously ill patients away because of the budget system — I am telling the truth about the health —
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The right hon. Member has a right to put his question.
Mr. Kinnock
We have had other public reports of closed accident and emergency units.
We have had public reports of a mortally ill little girl being unable to gain treatment in a paediatric intensive care unit.
Now we have a physician reporting that he cannot treat 30 per cent.
of his cancer patients because of a lack of beds.
Why does not the Prime Minister address those issues of life and death instead of parading false claims about his Government?
The Prime Minister
We have addressed those issues.
That is why the waiting lists are falling by record amounts at this moment.
Let me tell the right hon. Gentleman what was the test for our new health service reforms set by his hon. Friend the Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook).
The standard test.
The hon. Gentleman invented it.
He asked my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Health whether he was prepared to measure the success by the simple test of whether the trusts did more or less work for the national health service.
They have done more work.
During the first six months of operations English trusts treated 6.5 per cent.
more patients than in the months before they became managed.
They have treated 5 per cent.
more out-patients.
That is the Cook test, not mine.
Why does not the right hon. Gentleman accept it?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to settle down.
Mr. Thorne
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Thorne
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the launching of the first Trident submarine yesterday, and the fact that three more are under construction, is the minimum insurance policy that the country can afford to accept in a dangerous and uncertain world?
Does he further agree that, at this critical time of ordering, building and commissioning that submarine fleet, we should not pay attention to the recommendations of the two main Opposition parties, whose opinion appears to vary, not merely from day to day, but from hour to hour?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right about defence and we have no intention of gambling with this country's defence.
My hon. Friend is also right about the Opposition's position on Trident.
They have said that they would order it, they have said that they would not order it, and they have even suggested that they would order it and send it to sea without any weapons.
Frankly, one has no idea what they will say next on defence.
This morning the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) said that Labour’ have nothing whatsoever to do with CND.
We have no connection with CND.’
What can he have meant?
According to the chairman of CND more than 100 Members still belonged to it late last year.
Have they all resigned?
Have they all let their membership lapse?
Mr. Wareing
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Wareing
The Prime Minister has made much of the citizens charter and the need for openness in Government.
Does he realise that many of our citizens would like to know whether and how much Mr. Vijau Mallya, an Indian millionaire, and Mr. Adam Polemos, a Greek shipping magnate, contributed to the funds of the Conservative party?—
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is very unseemly behaviour.
Mr. Wareing
Will the Prime Minister emulate the Labour party by publishing the accounts of the Conservative party, so that citizens of this country may know the truth before the general election, about who donates to the finances of the Tory party?
The Prime Minister
It is difficult to take that seriously from someone whose party is a wholly owned subsidiary of the trade union movement.
According to Labour's own figures, in 1987 the Transport and General Workers Union gave more money to the Labour party than the whole of industry gave to the Tory party, and it gets votes for it, even on the leadership of the party.
Mr. Moss
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Moss
Has my right hon. Friend had time to study the reaction of the CBI to the proposal for a national minimum wage?
Has he seen its estimates, which suggest that it would increase business costs by an extra £50 million and cut 150,000 jobs?
Does he agree that to propose such a policy at this time is the economics of the mad house and that the Labour party should stop it at once?
The Prime Minister
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend and I have read reports of the CBI's views.
The Labour party claims that it listens to the views of business.
The views of the CBI could scarcely be clearer than they have been on the subject of the minimum wage.
As I said a moment ago, even in the national health service that policy would cost £400 million to £500 million a year.
I wonder what the Labour party would cut elsewhere in the health service to make up for that loss of revenue.
Mr. John P. Smith
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Smith
The crime rate in the United Kingdom is the highest ever, the detection rate is the lowest ever and our prisons are the fullest ever.
Would the Prime Minister explain why he thinks that deplorable situation exists?
The Prime Minister
I shall take lectures from the hon. Gentleman when he and the Labour party support the Prevention of Terrorism (Temporary Provisions) Act 1989.
Mr. John Browne
I offer my sincere thanks to my right hon. Friend for the crucial personal role that he played in securing compensation for the three injured Grenadiers.
Will he now look personally into the cases of some other very obvious cases of severe injuries to service men, in particular those of Mark Booth and Andy Konalyck of the Parachute Regiment and Martin Ketterick of the Royal Marines?
In those obvious cases, they have not been compensated properly because they were not covered due to a lapse of cover in the law.
Surely, it is time that some form of flexibility was introduced into the compensation legislation for armed services personnel who are severely injured in the course of their duties.
The Prime Minister
I am not aware of the particular cases to which my hon. Friend draws attention.
He knows that wide-ranging compensation schemes are available.
I will certainly ask to see the details of the cases that he mentioned.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Thursday 5 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Lady to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mrs. Ewing
Does the Prime Minister accept that, when the people of Scotland vote for independence, Scotland will become an equal partner with England in the European Community?
The Prime Minister
I think that the hon. Lady is unwise to assume that Scotland will react as she proposes, but in any event, were that unlikely event to occur, Scotland would have to reapply for membership of the European Community.
Every member state would have a vote on that application.
The United Kingdom's existing membership of the European Community would continue, but Scotland would have to apply.
House of Commons Monday 9 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Oral answers to questions
TRANSPORT
Roads, Wiltshire
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what is his current estimate of capital expenditure on roads in Wiltshire in the next three years.
The Minister for Roads and Traffic (Mr. Christopher Chope)
Capital expenditure on trunk road schemes in Wiltshire in the next three years will be approximately £50 million.
Mr. Coombs
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that most helpful and encouraging answer.
Can he do anything to speed up the rate at which the link between the M4 at Swindon and the M5 at Gloucester is increased to dual carriageway status throughout its length?
Will my hon. Friend also consider the roads to the south of Swindon through Marlborough and Devizes to Salisbury?
If he saw those for himself, I am sure that he would agree that they are of low quality, given the volume of traffic using them every day.
Mr. Chope
The roads to the south of Swindon are the responsibility of the local authority — Wiltshire county council.
The roads between Swindon and Gloucester, however, are the responsibility of my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State.
I am pleased to say that work on the Latton bypass is due to start next year, at a cost of about £17 million, and there are five other schemes on that road, at a total cost of £100 million.
My hon. Friend's constituents will recognise that it is vital for the future prosperity of Swindon that those schemes be implemented as quickly as possible.
They would be delayed, if not cancelled, were the Labour party to take control.
A13
Mrs. Gorman
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he has any plans to accelerate the proposed work on the A13 between the M25 and outer London.
Mr. Chope
My right hon. and learned Friend has today announced his intention that a major advanced works contract on the A13
Wennington to Mar Dyke scheme should be started in the coming financial year, subject to satisfactory completion of remaining procedures.
Mrs. Gorman
I thank my hon. Friend for that reply.
Will he take my word for it that my constituents are horrified by Labour party proposals to review the trunk road programme?
That would be devastating to my part of the country —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Lady should put a question to the Minister.
Mrs. Gorman
Does my hon. Friend agree that in the meantime we could so something to improve the A13, because it carries major freight from Ford at Dagenham, from Tilbury docks and from Shell Haven, all of which involve developing industries in my part of the country?
Mr. Chope
I agree that the A13 is of fundamental importance for the prosperity of my hon. Friend's constituents and of many others in the east Thames corridor.
Apart from the Wennington to Mar Dyke scheme, I am pleased to say that about £455 million worth of improvements — dualling, flyovers and junction improvements — are planned for that section of the A13.
Mr. Wolfson
On major road improvements on trunk roads and motorways, what progress is my hon. Friend making in achieving lower noise levels through better surfacing?
What consideration is being given to noise barriers of various kinds?
Mr. Chope
There are a number of experiments at the moment to improve the noise environment on our motorways and they include the most modern technology for noise barriers.
We also have studies under way to determine whether it is possible to use a porous asphalt surface on some roads, as that would reduce noise for people living near those roads.
We certainly take into account the effects on local residents of noise from roads and we are doing our best to minimise them.
Road Casualties
Mr. Stevens
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what asssessment he has made of the contribution the road-building programme can make to reducing road casualties.
The Secretary of State for Transport (Mr. Malcolm Rifkind)
It is currently estimated that, for every £100 million invested in trunk road improvements, about 100 road deaths and 4,500 casualties are saved over a 30-year period.
The House will be pleased to know that in 1991 there appear to have been lower fatalities on our roads than in any year since the 1940s, despite a ninefold increase in the amount of traffic.
Mr. Stevens
I am grateful to my right hon. and learned Friend for that reply which shows that the programme for road improvements not only increases traffic flows and reduces congestion but makes a direct and positive contribution to the reduction of road casualties.
I am sure that my right hon. and learned Friend will know that in areas such as mine, which has the A5 running through it, the improvements have been greatly appreciated.
My Conservative county council strongly supports the Government target of reducing accidents by one third by the year 2000.
Has my right hon. and learned Friend any thoughts on the implications of delaying or abandoning the substantial road programme that he has proposed, such as is advocated by the Opposition?
Mr. Rifkind
That would indeed have a serious effect.
For example, this morning we announced the spending of £760 million on road improvement projects in the forthcoming financial year.
That is likely to save 700 lives and more than 30,000 casualties over the next 30 years.
It is important for the Opposition to bear it in mind that their opposition to the roads programme is a recipe not only for increased congestion but for increased fatalities and casualties on our roads.
Mr. Fearn
About 12 months ago, I asked the Secretary of State a question about the safety of the lighting on the M6.
It appears that the lighting has not been improved and that there are black holes all the way along the M6.
Two particular spots with many accidents have been highlighted lately.
Has the right hon. and learned Gentleman any proposal to improve the lighting on the M6 where black holes exist?
Mr. Rifkind
As the hon. Gentleman knows, we have major proposals to widen the M6 and obviously the lighting on part of that road will be improved when the proposals are implemented.
We give serious consideration to safety recommendations and, where lighting would make an important contribution to reducing casualties, it is an important factor.
Mr. Adley
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that the Winchester bypass is one of the most dangerous pieces of road in the country?
The latest figures show that the death and serious injury rate on that road is five times the national motorway average.
There is widespread support for completing that road at the earliest opportunity.
The proposition that it passes through one of the most beautiful parts of England is total nonsense, because it passes through what is virtually surburban Southampton.
Opposition comes mainly from a handful of self-interested people and some foreign thugs.
Will my right hon. and learned Friend do everything that he can to complete that road as soon as possible?
Mr. Rifkind
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the serious congestion in the Winchester area.
We attach importance to environmental considerations and the House will be aware that there have already been, I think, four public inquiries into the project over 20 years.
It is crucial to make progress in completing the Winchester bypass as soon as possible.
We are taking account of environmental considerations.
There are substantial environmental benefits to be had from the proposed project because of the ability to reunite St. Catherine's hill with the town of Winchester.
At the moment the two areas are divorced by a road that will revert to green fields when the project is complete.
Mr. Prescott
The Secretary of State's new £750 million road electoral bribe is something old, something borrowed and something blue.
The programme contains a promise to improve the M25 between junctions 15 and 16.
However, Tory party central office says that the M25 will be widened to four lanes at a cost of £4 billion.
Who are we to believe — the Secretary of State for Transport or Tory party central office in a different statement which was issued this afternoon?
Mr. Rifkind
I am glad to see that the hon. Gentleman is holding a copy of our document headed’ Labour's Threat to Road Projects’.
I trust that he will not only read it but absorb its implications.
If he does, he will recognise the serious warning by the Federation of Civil Engineering Contractors that if a Labour Government imposed a freeze on the roads programme, up to 20,000 jobs could be lost in the construction industry.
I trust that he will take account of the road safety dangers that are inherent in his policy.
Finally, I hope that the hon. Gentleman will remind his colleagues in the shadow Cabinet, including the shadow Chancellor, that they should not advocate major road projects in their constituencies at the same time as the Labour party seeks to impede progress elsewhere in the country.
Channel Tunnel
Mr. John Evans
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport when he next plans to meet the chairman of British Rail to discuss improving the rail links between the channel tunnel and north-west England.
The Minister for Public Transport (Mr. Roger Freeman)
British Rail plans to run channel tunnel freight services from terminals at Trafford Park, Manchester and Seaforth, Merseyside.
British Rail has ordered channel tunnel day-and-night trains which will run on the west coast main line.
Mr. Evans
Is the Minsiter aware that most people in north-west England, including the Railway Industry Association, believe that it is economic madness to open the channel tunnel without first providing a proper linkage between the north-west and the channel tunnel?
What response does the Minister have to the association's recent criticism that neither the Government nor British Rail has a strategy against which manufacturing industry can plan its future?
Mr. Freeman
As regards long-term plans by British Rail for expanding services and re-equipping certain lines, the hon. Gentleman will be aware that Sir Bob Reid, the chairman, published a document in the middle of last year which looked forward 10 years to railway investment.
That level of investment, currently running at £1 billion a year, will be sustained by the Government over the public expenditure planning period which runs for the next three years and, I am quite confident, will run over the next 10 years.
Mr. Mans
Is my hon. Friend aware that people up in the north-west welcome the prospect of the channel tunnel being opened?
Will he ensure that sufficient facilities are made available north of Manchester and Liverpool to allow people and freight to be carried on the trains?
Does he agree that it ill behoves the Labour party to comment on that because Labour was against the channel tunnel at its inception?
Mr. Freeman
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
Freight services will run through the channel tunnel from its opening.
The locomotives and wagons are ordered.
As for passenger services, the new Waterloo terminal is substantially complete.
It will be open by summer next year.
Passengers on trains running from the north-west into Euston will be able to cross London and catch a train at Waterloo and, in addition, some of the trains will run directly to Waterloo.
Mrs. Dunwoody
Does the Minister support British Rail's policy of siting freight depots only where it can find developers to put money into facilities around the depot?
Does he think that that is the way that one should plan the freight movement from the north-west through the channel tunnel?
Mr. Freeman
The hon. Lady is misinformed.
Of the nine terminals that will be opened by the summer of next year, the majority are already owned by British Rail and will be developed for channel tunnel freight services.
Some of them will be developed further with the use of private sector capital — particularly Port Wakefield if, as a result of the public inquiry to be held this month, a decision to go ahead is given.
The majority of the terminals are British Rail terminals.
Mr. Butler
Given that 46 per cent.
of British Rail's freight business originates in the north-west, is not it strange that British Rail has not talked to the majority of its users already about times and tariffs for the channel tunnel?
Mr. Freeman
I am certain that British Rail will shortly publish its scheduled freight services from the nine terminals.
It has already published a preliminary timetable and, as I understand it, preliminary tariffs.
My hon. Friend will know that the Government have proposed a major new initiative in rail freight by encouraging the private sector to run additional services on British Rail track.
Mr. Prescott
Will the Minister confirm that the Government were heavily involved in negotiations with British Rail to produce the passengers charter, which was condemned universally last week?
During the negotiations, was the Minister a party to setting the target of acceptability for the west coast main line at 90 per cent?
He will know that only 85 per cent.
has been achieved and that the 15 per cent.
shortfall is due to track failure and old rolling stock.
Would it be better to confirm the order for the west coast main line instead of negotiating a bonus for the chairman that is worth £53,000?
Mr. Freeman
I would advise the hon. Gentleman not to believe what he reads in the newspapers about the bonus for British Rail's chairman.
There is no truth in those articles.
British Rail has not yet put an investment proposition to the Department for the west coast main line.
It will be for expenditure in the mid-1990s.
It is an extremely important investment project.
The passengers charter has been warmly welcomed by many of my Back-Bench colleagues many of whom are sitting behind me.
The Government had the initiative to work with British Rail to introduce it.
The hon. Gentleman has no proposals whatsoever.
Mr. Jacques Arnold
During the discussions that will range from the channel tunnel to the north-west of England, will my hon. Friend remember that he will have to cross north-west Kent?
Will he take note of the campaign to sink the link, as the channel tunnel rail link passes Gravesend and Northfleet?
We do not see why we should pay the environmental price for manifest improvements for the people of north-west England.
Mr. Freeman
My hon. Friend refers to the proposals for a new high-speed rail link from Folkestone to King's Cross.
I can give him the assurance that both he and the local authority in his constituency will have ample opportunity to express their views on how best to design the line to reduce the environmental impact.
Buses
Dr. Kim Howells
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he will review the regulations covering safety and roadworthiness of buses.
Mr. Freeman
Regulations covering the safety and roadworthiness of buses are kept under continuous review.
However, buses are the safest form of road transport in this country and the Government strongly support the growth of bus services, especially in urban areas.
Dr. Howells
Is the Minister aware that in my constituency people refer to buses these days, following deregulation, as bananas because they tend to arrive in bunches?
One Conservative Member has a sense of humour.
Is the Minister further aware that there has been an enormous erosion of confidence in the reliability and roadworthiness of buses since deregulation, especially in south Wales during a period in which monopolies have been created as stronger firms capture weaker ones and cowboy fleets undercut the operations of firms that are much more conscientious and safety conscious?
Mr. Freeman
The bunching of buses occurs largely because of congestion in urban areas.
The hon. Gentleman will know that we have recently announced a £10 million programme to provide grants to local authorities to enable them to give priority to buses through the construction of bus lanes and by giving priority to buses at traffic lights.
That initiative has been widely welcomed.
There is no statistical evidence to support the contention that deregulation has led to a decline in the quality and roadworthiness of buses.
Passenger casualty rates have fallen by 30 per cent.
in the past five years.
There has been a fall in the proportion of buses that have been taken off the roads because of serious defects found during the vehicle inspectorate's examination.
Mr. Evennett
Will my hon. Friend confirm that safety regulations for buses remain the same whether the services are deregulated or regulated?
Will he confirm also that the regulations are entirely independent of the industry?
Mr. Freeman
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
He has reminded me of what I should have said in my supplementary answer to the hon. Member for Pontypridd (Dr. Howells).
My hon. Friend is absolutely right; there is no difference in the standards applied to the initial test or spot checks on the roadside, whether the buses are in a regulated or deregulated environment.
Ms. Ruddock
Is the Minister aware that one third of the country's bus fleet is now more than 12 years old, which is double the proportion before deregulation?
Does he realise that, given the present replacement rate, the average bus will be on the road for 30 years?
Surely that can only mean the collapse of the bus industry, less safe services and less access for people with disabilities.
Why does not the hon. Gentleman admit that bus deregulation has been a disaster?
Why does not he direct more of his roads bribes money towards the provision of better buses?
Mr. Freeman
As it so happens, on Thursday I had the opportunity to visit Derby, together with the Under-Secretary of State for Transport, my hon. Friend the Member for Derbyshire, West (Mr. McLoughlin), whose constituency is there.
I met the management of Trent Buses, which operates in a very competitive, deregulated environment, and I am glad to say that its investment programme over the past five years has been impressive.
M25 Traffic Flow
Mr. Ian Taylor
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport whether the proposed improvements to traffic flows on the M25 in Surrey will take account of environmental considerations.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Transport (Mr. Patrick McLoughlin)
All motorway and major trunk road schemes are subject to rigorous environmental assessment.
Mr. Taylor
Although I accept the necessity to improve traffic flows and safety on the M25, may I ask my hon. Friend to take into account environmental considerations such as the need to keep noise down to a minimum?
In particular, will he ensure that any widening is within the existing boundaries of the M25 and that the lighting, which is there to help motorists, does not infringe on the villages and the countryside of Surrey?
Mr. McLoughlin
I understand my hon. Friend's concern.
The M25 is being lit in an attempt to reduce the number of accidents, to enhance driver comfort and to increase the security of motorists whose vehicles have broken down.
I assure my hon. Friend that lighting schemes will be designed to minimise visual intrusion into neighbouring property.
Much use will be made of the full-cut-off lanterns, which reduce the minimum spill of light outside the highway boundaries.
I confirm that it is not our intention to widen the M25 outside its present curtilage.
Motorway Service Areas
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what response he has received from organisations concerned with the countryside about his ideas for extra motorway service areas.
Mr. McLoughlin
We issued a consultation document on the provision of motorway services on 10 February.
Copies were sent to a number of organisations with countryside interests.
The Association for the Protection of Rural Scotland has responded.
It was concerned that proposed new arrangements should not lead to undue development in sensitive areas and it favoured a degree of continuing Government control over minimum standards at motorway service areas.
Mr. Bottomley
Will my hon. Friend confirm that there is still time for various groups, whether environmental or road safety, to respond to the Government's proposals?
Does he understand that planning permission was initially gained, with difficulty, for the building of motorways through areas of outstanding natural beauty and great environmental sensitivity, so many people would not be keen to see developers spending hundreds of thousands — if not millions — of pounds fighting in a long succession of inquiries so that they can build not just motorway service areas — possibly excluding the disabled and lorries — but hotels and other facilities that would never have received permission when the original planning consent was granted?
Mr. McLoughlin
I confirm that there is still time for organisations to respond to our proposals and we expect more representations during the consultation period.
My hon. Friend raised matters that we will want to consider carefully.
However, most people would welcome a greater availability of motorway service stations.
A number of people have expressed their concern that there are almost 200 miles of motorway without one.
The proposals in the consultation document will go a long way towards improving the facilities and the standards that drivers expect from motorway service areas.
Ms. Walley
When the Minister consults the countryside organisations about motorway service stations, will he also discuss the wider environmental implications of the Government's transport policy?
Has he seen the report published today by the Council for the Protection of Rural England?
If, over the next decade, there is to be a 50 per cent.
rise in traffic demand, is not it about time that his Department stopped being a Department only for roads and instead sought to introduce a proper, integrated transport system that takes real account of environmental considerations?
Mr. McLoughlin
Well, there we have it.
That sums up the Labour party's attitude, which is against a roads policy.
The Opposition should go to a number of towns where bypasses have been built, which have been warmly welcomed.
I assure my hon. Friends that we will continue to provide those bypasses where schemes are put forward.
They are environmentally friendly and they lead to less congestion.
That helps the environment; it does not damage it.
Mr. Ashby
Will my hon. Friend take into account motorway service areas of the kind found in France — which do not have restaurants, hotels or facilities of that kind, but offer lavatories, running water and parking places, so that the motorist can stretch his legs and rest before continuing his journey?
Such stopping places are cheap and good, and we need them in this country.
Mr. McLoughlin
I hope that the consultation document will prompt a number of proposals of the kind that my hon. Friend makes, and we will certainly consider them.
Second Severn Crossing
Mr. Roy Hughes
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he will visit the site of the second Severn crossing at Caldicot, Gwent.
Mr. Chope
Yes, Sir.
Mr. Hughes
If the Secretary of State were to visit Caldicot, the people there would quickly remind him that Wales is in a state of deep repression — I mean, depression.
They see no sense in imposing tolls on the existing bridge of £2.80 for a motor car, £5.60 for a minibus, and £8.40 for a lorry.
Have not the Government given the French-backed consortium a licence to print money?
Mr. Chope
I am disappointed at the hon. Gentleman's negative attitude to a £300 million-plus investment in a second crossing of the Severn, which will improve enormously communications for the people of Wales.
There is considerable confusion among Labour Members over whether their party supports continued tolling.
We heard only last week from Labour's deputy leader that his party would abandon tolling in Scotland.
If that policy were applied throughout Britain, as was also said by the right hon. Gentleman, it would cost £1.2 billion — an additional cost to the taxpayer which could only mean less investment in roads.
The Opposition's policy is confused — and I do not agree that the people of Wales are repressed.
Mr. Anderson
Is it not clear that the substantial staged increases in respect of the existing bridge are being imposed simply to provide money for the second, privatised bridge?
Did the Welsh Office, because of the enormous blows to the location policy in Wales, bother to make representations against them?
Mr. Chope
The Government are united in their commitment to improving road communications in Wales.
Labour was the first party to introduce the idea of a Severn crossing — and of a tolled crossing, at that.
Labour does not have a clear policy on whether it believes in a second and tolled crossing, or wants just one very congested bridge — which would be very bad news for Wales.
A12 Chelmsford Bypass
Mr. Burns
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport when he expects work to commence on upgrading the A12 Chelmsford bypass from a two-lane to a three-lane road.
Mr. Chope
Consultants are working on possible route options, and we plan to publish them in the summer of next year.
Mr. Burns
Is my hon. Friend aware that prior to the opening of the A12 Chelmsford bypass in 1986, the Army and Navy roundabout in Chelmsford was the most heavily congested traffic blackspot in the country?
After that bypass opened, congestion was greatly reduced — but it is beginning to increase again because of the greater use of the A12 as a route into the hinterland of East Anglia, to the ports of Ipswich, Harwich and Felixstowe.
Will my hon. Friend bear it in mind that the sooner a third lane is constructed to alleviate Chelmsford traffic, the happier will be my constituents?
Mr. Chope
My hon. Friend gives a timely reminder of the benefits of investment in our roads infrastructure.
I am grateful for his congratulations to the Government on the completion of the Chelmsford bypass.
We are committed to improving it further as a result of increased traffic, which is largely a consequence of the success of the east coast ports.
Sir Robert McCrindle
As this might be my last opportunity to draw the attention of my hon. Friend the Minister to the topic of the proposed M12 between Chelmsford and the M25, I seek his assurance that when he receives alternative proposals for that motorway's line of route, he will take into account that such a motorway may not be required.
That is the overwhelming response that I have received, and I suspect that the same is true of my hon. Friend the Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns).
Rather than presume that a motorway is required, will my hon. Friend the Minister acknowledge that there is at least one other option — to leave things as they are?
Mr. Chope
Certainly the Government will take into account all the views expressed during the consultation period.
My hon. Friend's successor will have a hard act to follow: the diligence and commitment that my hon. Friend has given to his constituents have been exemplary.
Roads, West Midlands
Mr. Roger King
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport if he will make a statement on the programme of road building in the west midlands.
Mr. Rifkind
We are pressing ahead with the Birmingham northern relief road and western orbital route.
The A5-A49 Telford-Shrewsbury improvements and two other bypasses are opening this year, and we are also supporting a £446 million local roads programme.
Mr. King
My right hon. and learned Friend will understand that the west midlands conurbation, lying as it does in a landlocked area, is responsible for the bulk of the country's manufacturing industry, and that it depends on adequate and improving road conditions.
Does he accept that there is widespread support from industry and the community generally for the Government's roads programme?
Without it, the whole area would be economically strangulated; but that is not the view of the Opposition, whose transport spokesman — the organ grinder — has now left the Chamber, but who would condemn every aspect of our road building programme.
Mr. Rifkind
My hon. Friend is right to draw attention to the vital contribution that our roads programme will make to the west midlands economy, and to contrast that with the appalling implications of Labour's proposals.
I note that, in addition to the party's moratorium on the roads programme, the shadow Secretary of State for Transport has imposed a moratorium on his own presence in the Chamber.
Mr. Snape
This electioneering is an expensive business, Mr. Speaker.
Will the Secretary of State tell the House what proportion of his Department's projected minimum increase of 80 per cent.
in road traffic will be absorbed by this latest pre-election bribe?
Will he also tell us why he has refused to adopt the alternative package approach, involving a mixture of public transport and road schemes, that has been advocated by local authorities in the west midlands?
Finally, does the Secretary of State accept that, no matter how much money he tries to throw around now, he will not save his hon. Friends' necks?
Mr. Rifkind
We are delighted to hear from the shadow to the shadow Secretary of State.
He must appreciate that we do have a mixed public-transport and roads programme.
In the autumn statement, we announced major increases in rail expenditure in particular.
Labour's proposed attempt to finance improvements in our rail expenditure, at the expense of our roads programme, would result in massive unemployment in the construction industry, along with an increase in the number of casualties on our roads.
It would also bring deep depression to many members of communities who are looking forward to the bypasses that the present Government have promised.
That promise would not be implemented if the Opposition ever came to power.
Motorway Repairs
Mr. Knox
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what recent representations he has received about the speed with which motorway repairs are undertaken.
Mr. Chope
The most recent representation has concerned the removal of the Ingst bridge on the M4.
Mr. Knox
Does my hon. Friend believe that the public are satisfied that motorway repairs are being undertaken in the shortest possible time?
There has been some improvement in recent years, but are not further measures needed to speed up the process?
Mr. Chope
It is because of the concern expressed by my hon. Friend and others that the Government are committed to a further increase in the use of the’ lane rental’method of procurement of motorway repairs.
I am pleased to be able to tell my hon. Friend that, in a recent study on maintenance techniques across the world, the World bank has confirmed that the United Kingdom carries out such work faster than any other country.
Mr. Haynes
I shall wait to see what happens about the speed of motorway repairs.
While the Secretary of State is looking at that, however, will he also take a look at the idiots who race through these roadworks?
They have flipping telephones as well.
It is time that the Secretary of State did something about that.
Mr. Chope
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman does not speed through road works, and I hope that he will set a good example, which others will follow.
Fenchurch Street Line
Mr. Amess
To ask the Secretary of State for Transport what recent representations he has received on the Fenchurch Street line.
Mr. Freeman
I have received a number of representations recently about the Fenchurch Street line.
The Government appreciate that that line does not provide the quality of service which passengers can reasonably expect.
British Rail will, however, shortly be letting a contract to renew the signalling at a total cost of £50 million.
That should help to improve services.
Mr. Amess
Will my hon. Friend join me in paying tribute to Mr. Martyn Rands, chairman of Basildon commuters' club — and to his hard-working committee — who met my hon. Friend this morning and presented him with a petition, signed by 5,000 people in my constituency, complaining about the disgraceful service that they receive on the Fenchurch Street line?
Will my hon. Friend agree to tell the chairman of British Rail that he must do everything that he possibly can to improve the standard of service on that line for my constituents before 1995?
Mr. Freeman
I certainly shall, and I pay tribute to my hon. Friend for his assiduous representations on behalf of his constituents.
Largely because of his representations, it was a pleasure to announce the resignalling of that line recently.
DUCHY OF LANCASTER
Ministerial Visit
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster when he next expects to pay an official visit to Lancashire.
The Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (Mr. Chris Patten)
I have no plans to visit Lancashire in the near future.
Mr. Skinner
I have no doubt that during the general election campaign the chairman of the Tory party will be spreading himself about a little bit, even though he has a tiny majority in Bath.
Is he aware that I shall be following him in Lancashire?
I shall be telling the Lancashire electors about the fact that the Tory party is financing its election campaign with money from Hong Kong, with £2 million from a Greek fascist and £440,000 from Asil Nadir — money which he stole from his company — and will the chairman of the Tory party —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman should bear the sub judice rule in mind.
Some of those cases are before the courts at the moment.
Mr. Skinner
That money has not been declared in the company accounts of Polly Peck.
Will the chairman of the Tory party send that money back to its rightful owners, bearing in mind the fact that the Labour party has agreed to send back Maxwell's money, if it is found to have had any connection with the Mirror group pension fund?
That decision was passed unanimously and if it is good enough for us it should be good enough for the Tories.
Mr. Patten
I do not think that the Labour party could possibly repay the debt that it owes to the late Captain Maxwell.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman and I manage to spend a little time in Lancashire together, and that he will come to Bath.
He will find that in both Bath and Lancashire the electorate has as little faith in Labour's policies as he has.
Mr. Rowe
Can my right hon. Friend spare a moment from Lancashire to come to Maidstone, where he will be able to share our pleasure —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The question is about Lancashire.
Mr. Rowe
My right hon. Friend will be aware, when he next visits Lancashire, that the news that the Liberal council has had to give up office in Maidstone has travelled the length and breadth of the land —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is a bit wide of the subject.
32
Mr. Enright
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster when he next intends to visit the Duchy.
Mr. Chris Patten
I have no plans to visit the Duchy in the near future, nor Maidstone, nor Basildon.
Mr. Enright
Would the Chancellor reconsider that decision because, when he next goes to the Duchy of Lancaster he may go to confession and admit to the untruths that are being told by his party in party-political broadcasts?
He could admit that the 7 million days that allegedly were lost in one year under a Labour Government were lost under this Government, in less than three days because of unemployment.
As a penance, will he restore the £500,000 that he stole from the shareholders of Polly Peck —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Leave it to me, please.
This case is sub judice.
Will the hon. Gentleman please not use the word’ stolen’?
Mr. Enright
That his party has taken from Polly Peck shareholders —
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Gentleman should bear in mind the sub judice rule.
Mr. Enright
If there is a court case, I shall refrain from commenting further, but would the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster urge the Tory party to refrain from wallowing in sleaze, which he calls scholarly?
Mr. Patten
One realises from studying the affairs surrounding the Maxwell Group that the Opposition know everything that there is to know about sleaze.
The confessional is a matter of secrecy, but what is not secret is that, when they were really working at it, the previous Labour Government ensured that far more than 7 million days a year were lost through strikes.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMISSION
National Audit Office (Public Relations)
Mr. Peter Bottomley
To ask the Chairman of the Public Accounts Commission how much the National Audit Office spends on public relations, publicity and parliamentary relations.
Sir Peter Hordern (Chairman of the Public Accounts Commission)
The National Audit Office handles its own public relations, publicity and parliamentary relations work and one member of staff acts as press officer.
Advance copies of reports are provided to the press and other interested parties at a cost of about £6,000 a year.
In addition, the office produces an annual report at a cost of about £8,000 and periodic booklets on its work.
Mr. Bottomley
Will my hon. Friend pass to the National Audit Office the thanks of Parliament for its series of reports and ask whether it would be possible for us to have them at a time when Parliament is likely to be sitting rather than at one minute to midnight for the benefit of the press?
That would be regarded by the House as a sensible courtesy.
Sir Peter Hordern
The National Audit Office normally lays reports before the House five to seven days before publication.
Once a report has been laid and a copy placed in the Library, it is available for any Member of Parliament to read.
The Votes and Proceedings record daily items laid before the House.
I understand, however, from the Comptroller and Auditor General that he would be happy to let any Member have an advance copy of a report if the Member indicates his interest.
A list giving likely publications by the Comptroller and Auditor General in the coming months will now be made available in the Library.
Mr. Tim Smith
Does my hon. Friend think that the excellent work of the NAO is sufficiently well understood and appreciated by hon. Members?
If not, as some changes will be made to its membership after the election, will he consider writing to all Members explaining how the system works — what the Public Accounts Commission, the Public Accounts Committee and the NAO do?
Sir Peter Hordern
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that suggestion.
I should certainly like to consider it.
It is a great pity that hon. Members do not take more notice of the admirable reports that are made by the Comptroller and Auditor General, which are followed up so well by the Public Accounts Committee.
Mr. Campbell-Savours
Is not it true that some documents that the Public Accounts Committee receives are not published, such as the memorandum that the National Audit Office drew up for me on the accountability of United Nations agencies?
Is not it possible to put many of those documents in the public domain and publish them as Public Accounts Committee documents?
Will the hon. Gentleman have a word with the Chairman and members of the Public Accounts Committee about that?
Sir Peter Hordern
I should certainly like to consider that suggestion.
Perhaps I could write to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
Is my hon. Friend aware that there is a Bill to extend the powers of the National Audit Office to consider the Opposition's policies?
Will he consider the staffing levels needed to cost the billions of pounds of wholly uncosted pledges made by the Opposition day after day, week after week?
Would not that be an enormous and unfair burden on the NAO?
Sir Peter Hordern
I think that it would place great strain not only on the Comptroller and Auditor General and his staff but on the budget of the Public Accounts Commission itself if it had to authorise such expenditure.
DUCHY OF LANCASTER
Ministerial Visit
Mr. Dunn
To ask the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster whether he has any plans to visit the Duchy in the near future; and if he will make a statement.
The Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (Mr. Chris Patten)
I refer to the answer that I gave to the hon. Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) some moments ago.
Mr. Dunn
Does the Chancellor of the Duchy realise that a visit to Lancashire — to the Duchy — in the near future —
Mr. Corbyn
He does not even know where it is.
Mr. Dunn
I was born there.
Would not such a visit provide a glorious opportunity to point out that the assisted places scheme — among other major educational advances — would be abolished under a Labour Government, thereby denying many bright children in the Duchy the opportunity of a first-rate education?
Mr. Patten
I share a birthplace with my hon. Friend, and I also share his concern about the future of the assisted places scheme.
There are 295 schools in England benefiting from the scheme, and eight are in Lancashire.
It is astonishing that the Labour party keep putting it on record that it is prepared to defend independent schools but refuses to allow poorer families to send their children to them.
That is astonishing humbug.
Dr. Cunningham
Will the Chancellor of the Duchy reconsider his decision and pay a visit to the north-west, especially so that he can meet the 800 people a week who have lost their job since this time last year as a result of the Government's policies?
When he is there, will he explain to the people of the north-west why he has changed his mind about borrowing?
Does he recall saying in his Disraeli lecture to a Conservative audience that high levels of borrowing were nothing more than deferred taxation?
Why has he changed his mind?
Mr. Patten
In the less demotic phases of my career I have given a number of lectures, most of them described as the Disraeli lectures, some as the Macmillan lecture and some even as the Macleod lecture.
As for the borrowing lecture and the lecture on job creation, I have been able to state on a number of occasions when I have been a little more demotic that all independent forecast suggest that under a Labour Government — heaven forbid — borrowing and unemployment would be higher.
HOUSE OF COMMONS
Select Committee Reports
Mr. Harry Greenway
To ask the Lord President of the Council how many reports have been produced by House of Commons Select Committees during the current Session; and if he will make a statement.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
In Session 1991-92, to 5 March, Selec Committees published 54 reports and nine special reports.
Mr. Greenway
Will my right hon. Friend say how often these reports are considered on the Floor of the House?
When he does, he will accept that it is not often enough.
Will he take particular note of the excellent report on reading by the Select Committee on Education, Science and Arts which established that reading standards have certainly not fallen and that teachers of reading should be congratulated on the excellent job that they do?
If that report were debated, it would surely spread confidence in the teaching of reading which would benefit everyone, including hon. Members.
Mr. McGregor
The reports are debated in the House and we follow the practice of the Select Committee on Procedure which recommended three days for such reports.
When I was Secretary of State for Education and Science I recall being concerned about the implications of some methods of teaching reading if they are followed too acutely — in other words, without a balance of reading methods.
I know that that caused some concern, but, broadly speaking, my hon. Friend is right to say that standards in our schools are very good.
Mr. Cryer
Will the Lord President explain the priorities that he adopts in providing time for debating the reports?
He provided time rapidly for the Select Committee on Sittings of the House which concerned curtailing hon. Members' hours.
Yet for more than three months he has had in his hands the report by the Select Committee on Members' Interests which recommends changes in the registration of commercial lobbying interests.
Is not that because many Tory Members are up to their necks in money received for commercial lobbying of one sort or another?
The right hon. Gentleman did not provide time for such a debate because he did not want to embarrass the Tory party so close to a general election.
Mr. MacGregor
That is absolute nonsense.
It had nothing to do with that.
Hon. Members of all parties who have interests have them declared in the register, as the hon. Gentleman knows.
The reason why we have not been able to debate the report is that we have had a great deal of other business to do.
We have made extremely good progress with the most important business — Government legislation.
However, I thought it right to debate the report of the Select Committee chaired by my right hon. Friend the Member for Westmorland and Lonsdale (Mr. Jopling) because many hon. Members of all parties, which was not the case with the other Select Committee report, asked me to find an early opportunity to enable the House to give its initial response to that splendid and important report.
Palace of Westminster (Security)
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Lord President of the Council what new arrangements he proposes to improve security in the Palace of Westminster.
Mr. MacGregor
It has been the long-standing practice of Leaders of the House not to comment on matters of security within the Palace of Westminster.
I can, however, reassure the hon. Gentleman that we regularly keep security matters under review and take all necessary further steps in the light of such reviews.
Mr. Flynn
Will the Lord President urge the security services to concentrate their search for the alleged theft of information from hon. Members on the organisations that regularly spy on hon. Members, including the organisation that last week published a ludicrous volume full of slanders and innuendos about hon. Members?
Will the right hon. Gentleman stop the self-defeating, ludicrous, sleazy, muck-raking by the Conservative party's thought police?
Mr. MacGregor
If the hon. Gentleman is referring to the document that was recently published by Conservative Central Office —
Mr. Flynn
This one.
Mr. MacGregor
’ Who's Left?’.
There is no need to have any security inquiry into that document because it uses published, freely available sources.
There is no sleaze.
It is a document about the Labour party's policy attitudes and it rightly points out that more than half of Labour Members have either recently belonged to or still belong to the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament.
It is an important contribution to discussion and to policy attitudes on important matters.
Mr. Dykes
As the Lord President has successfully demolished the Opposition's spurious arguments, will he get back to real questions of security and take time to pay tribute to all who look after security in the Palace of Westminster?
It is a nightmarish and difficult job for them all and sometimes we sound a little bit too critical.
Mr. MacGregor
I am grateful to my hon. Friend and I am happy to pay tribute to the security services.
They do a good job in the House, under the Serjeant at Arms.
It is not an easy task and it depends, for example, on thefts being reported.
It does not help when distorted and misleading accusations, often with no foundation, are made by one or two hon. Members.
Question Time
Mr. Skinner
To ask the Lord President of the Council whether he has any further plans to propose changes to the order and method of Question Time; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. MacGregor
I have no plans to do so in the current Parliament.
Mr. Skinner
May I make a suggestion to the Leader of the House?
Mr. Speaker
It should be a question.
Mr. Skinner
It is a question.
Do not panic.
Is the Lord President aware that the Prime Minister has not been doing very cleverly lately in Question Time?
He had to apologise about that young girl Carly because he got it all wrong.
Then he got the public sector borrowing requirement wrong.
Will the right hon. Gentleman take on board the idea of giving the Prime Minister a mentor who could sit by his side for these last two days to help him out?
Perhaps he might use the ex-Prime Minister to give him a chuck on.
May I make the further suggestion that when it is all over on 9 April we get the right hon. Gentleman a new job — a walk-on part in a re-run of’ Crossroads’or as a substitute for Ken Barlow.
Mr. MacGregor
I sometimes think that the hon. Gentleman is so busy thinking up his contorted questions that he does not observe what is going on in the House at other times.
If he had been observing, he would have noticed that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has been scoring heavily at Prime Minister's Question Time — winning hands down.
Whenever the election comes, the hon. Gentleman will find that the electorate has also noticed that.
Sir John Stokes
Is my right hon. Friend aware that very few people in the country will share any of the views of the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner)?
Question Time is unique to this Parliament.
It is very much admired by foreign parliaments and enables the Prime Minister and others to answer questions in front of us all.
My right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has done extremely well and will continue to do so for many years to come.
Mr. MacGregor
As always, my hon. Friend talks great sense, and I agree with everything that he has said.
Mr. Winnick
May we have a change in our procedure for questioning the Leader of the House who last week announced the business for the following week even though he apparently knows that the election is to be called for 9 April and that the business will therefore be changed?
Why should the Leader of the House be in a position to give the wrong information to the House, given that he will almost certainly be making another business statement this week?
As Leader of the House, does not he have a responsibility to the whole House?
Mr. MacGregor
My business statement every week is based on the position as I see it at the time and we have organised matters at the time.
There are occasions — there have been occasions in this Parliament — when I have to make a supplementary business statement.
I always make the statement at the time — as I did last Thursday — based on the information available to me and on the right process for the House for the following week.
Mr. John Marshall
Will my right hon. Friend bear in mind that many of us would like to ask how it is possible to contemplate spending an extra £38 billion without increasing taxes, increasing unemployment and increasing prices?
Will he therefore amend Question Time to allow us to ask questions of the Leader of the Opposition?
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend makes a point which my right hon. and hon. Friends and I will be making on many occasions in the weeks ahead.
The reason why the Opposition do not like Question Time and try to drown my right hon. Friend out is that they know that we are right in everything that we say and that the country will not support them on their policies.
Mr. Rees
If the election were not to be held until May or June, would an announcement be made next time we have business questions?
Mr. MacGregor
Business questions are always about the business for the next week.
House of Commons Tuesday 10 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
EMPLOYMENT
Unemployment, Leicester
Mr. Janner
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment by how much and by what percentage unemployment in the city of Leicester rose between January 1991 and January 1992.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Robert Jackson)
In the Leicester local authority district, unadjusted unemployment increased by 4,877 or 40 per cent.
in the 12 months to January 1992.
Mr. Janner
Is not the increase of 40 per cent.
absolutely disgraceful?
It is due to the inefficiency of the Government which no amount of Budget bribery can possibly erase.
Does the Minister know that while the number of jobs went down and unemployment went up, crime in the county of Leicestershire rose by more than one third over the past 12 months, nearly double the national rate, but the chief constable has said that in the next year the force can spend £1 million less?
From the start of the day to its finish, the Government have got their priorities wrong.
Mr. Jackson
The key question is whether the Government's policy will lead to an increase in unemployment or tend to reduce it.
The hon. and learned Gentleman, who is an authority on this subject and a distinguished member of the Select Committee on Employment, must ask himself in all seriousness about the consequences for the supply of job opportunities of Labour's policies on the minimum wage and increased social charges.
Those policies would have serious consequences for job opportunities.
Mr. Latham
Are not the best chances for employment in the city of Leicester and the county of Leicestershire today's Budget and the re-election of the Conservative Government?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
We must remember that 300,000 people who go into jobcentres find a job within a month.
Value Added Tax
Mr. Page
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many firms were registered for VAT in (a) 1979 and (b) 1991.
The Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Michael Howard)
At the end of 1990, the latest date for which figures are available, the number of businesses registered for VAT in the United Kingdom was 1.7 million, compared with 1.3 million at the end of 1979 — an increase of almost a third.
Mr. Page
Although the figures show a dramatic increase, is not my right hon. and learned Friend being characteristically modest?
Does he forget the increase to £35,000 in the exemption limit for VAT?
Surely, were not many more businesses created last year?
Mr. Howard
I was being characteristically direct in answering my hon. Friend's question.
Of course, the increase in the total number of firms over the period was not one third, but two thirds — to nearly 3 million, or an average increase of almost 500 every working day.
Pay Statements
Mr. McFall
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment if he will introduce legislation to ensure that all employees have a right to an itemised pay statement.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Eric Forth)
Most employees already have the right to receive an itemise pay statement.
We have no plans to extend the current legislative provisions.
Mr. McFall
The Minister is aware that those who work for 16 hours or less do not have the right to itemised pay statements unless they have worked for five years and that those who work less than eight hours have no right to them at all.
Employees are scared to enforce their rights because if they did they would be unfairly dismissed.
Should not every employee have that right and should not the Government therefore scrap the two-year rule, or are the Government determined to keep up their sweat-shop policies, contrary to what is happening in the rest of Europe?
Mr. Forth
I have received no representations on that matter and I am not aware of any disquiet among the groups that the hon. Gentleman described.
As ever, we must balance the temptation to introduce such rights willy-nilly against the unreasonable cost burden that might rest increasingly on employers, especially those with only a few employees.
I believe that we have the balance about right.
If there is any question of unfair dismissal, those concerned always have the right to go to a tribunal, if they are protected in the way that the hon. Gentleman described.
I remain to be convinced that there is a problem and that therefore we should necessarily consider the solution that the hon. Gentleman suggested.
Mr. Tim Smith
Is not this one of several proposals that would add to the costs of employing part-time workers?
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the directive on part-time working would mean that 1.75 million part-time workers, and their employers, would have to pay national insurance contributions?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend is correct.
The Labour party has said that it would sign the directive on part-time working and many others, which would place an intolerable cost burden on British industry.
That suggests that the Labour party does not care about employment.
On the contrary, Labour Members are prepared to place ever more burdens on British business, which would only destroy jobs.
That must be utterly reprehensible.
Child Care
Ms. Armstrong
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what discussions he has had with employers regarding child care.
Mr. Jackson
The Advisory Committee on Women's Employment, which I chair and which includes employer representatives, has discussed child care on a number of occasions.
The tax concession in the 1990 Budget, which allowed tax relief for employees on the benefit of nursery facilities provided by an employer, has been instrumental in promoting child care arrangements.
Ms. Armstrong
I am sure that the Minister is aware that the Midland bank, which has done much to develop child care, has said of the Government recently that they keep calling its representatives to conferences at which they urge the importance of child care, but they do nothing.
Is it about time that the Government took the opportunities of our youngest children seriously, gave their parents the opportunities that they are looking for and made sure that children receive the very best start, which is something that is taken for granted in other European countries?
Mr. Jackson
I have already referred to the tax concession in the 1990 Budget.
That has shown that the Government are concerned.
In the European Community, the United Kingdom has the highest proportion of women in work, with the exception of Denmark.
About 63 per cent.
of women of working age with children are economically active.
That suggests that we are doing quite well by working women.
Miss Emma Nicholson
Does my hon. Friend agree that the United Kingdom has many more women in work than any other European nation and that tax relief on workplace nurseries, which was introduced in the 1990 Budget by the then Chancellor of the Exchequer, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, has greatly assisted many working women?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend is right.
It is too often forgotten — this is another dimension — that in Britain the age at which children start school is comparatively young.
Children in Britain start school at five, whereas the starting ages are six in France, Germany and Italy and seven in Denmark.
Mr. Tony Lloyd
When the Equal Opportunities Commission, in its equality agenda, describes child care facilities as meagre in the extreme compared with the facilities that are available in the rest of Europe, when we know that the women in work to whom the Minister has referred are often forced into part-time work because of inadequate child care arrangements and when we bear in mind his entirely complacent answer, is not it a good thing that a Labour Government are coming who will ensure that child care provision is expanded?
Mr. Jackson
In a recent survey of women who work part time, only 6 per cent.
said that they would prefer to work full time.
Employment Action
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many trade unions are taking part in the employment action programme.
Mr. Howard
So far as I am aware, none.
Mr. Evennett
I thank my right hon. and learned Friend for that reply, which is a great disappointment to all my right and hon. Friends.
Does he agree with me that proposals to pay more to those taking part in the programme will mean inevitably that fewer places will be available?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
It is typical of the Labour party's attitude that it would fritter away additional resources by spending more money not on increasing the number of training places but on paying more to those already in training places.
There would be no net benefit to training.
Mr. Blair
Instead of attacking trade unions, why does not the right hon. and learned Gentleman attack unemployment?
Why does not he admit that since last year's Budget more than 500,000 people have been added to the dole queue?
At the same time, there are 1 million fewer jobs in the economy.
If present policies continue, hundreds of thousands of people will stand in fear for their jobs.
Is not it the truth that the right hon. and learned Gentleman's Government, having created recession and unemployment, do not care about the casualties of their policies?
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman's synthetic protestations about unemployment would carry a little more conviction if he were not so determined to advance policies which, by introducing a national statutory minimum wage, by embracing the European Commission's social action programme and by imposing a jobs tax on employers, would make unemployment far, far higher than it otherwise would be.
Even the proprietor of the aptly named Walworth Castle hotel in the hon. Gentleman's constituency near Darlington has said:’ Labour's plan would be nothing short of disastrous.’
Payroll Levy
Mr. French
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what recent representations he has received on the subject of the introduction of a statutory payroll levy.
Mr. Howard
I have received representations from various sources on the subject of a statutory payroll levy related to employers' training expenditure.
The most recent, from the Institute of Directors, firmly opposed’ any system of levy or tax that discriminates between employers on the basis of assumptions about what a firm spends on training’.
Mr. French
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that, among the many business men who have condemned the payroll tax as likely to cost companies money and, therefore, jobs, is the president of the chamber of trade in Teesside?
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that if the Labour spokesman is unable to convert to Labour policies those business men in his immediate area, he is also unlikely to convince the country?
Mr. Howard
I entirely agree with my hon. Friend.
Increasingly, we find protests from employers in the area represented by the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) about the effect of his policies and those of the Labour party.
The truth is now out — Labour's policies would be disastrous for jobs.
Mr. McLeish
Is the Secretary of State aware that the labour force survey was published today?
Will he take time to explain to the House why, in the past year, 177,000 fewer people were in training in Britain — a reduction of 5.4 per cent?
Whatever happened to all the talk about a world-class skills revolution?
What about the fact that £20 billion is supposed to be spent by industrialists?
Is not it really the case that the Government do not care about training, that we have a disastrous training record and that it is high time that we had a Labour Government to tackle the problems?
Mr. Howard
The same survey showed an increase of more than 100 per cent.
between 1984 and 1991 in the number of people receiving training paid for by their employers and seven times as many people receiving training now as in 1979.
That is the reply to the Opposition's synthetic protestations.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I ask the House to settle down and listen to the questions.
Self-employment
Mrs. Currie
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what has been the rate of growth of self-employment from 1979 to the present time among (a) men and (b) women.
Mr. Forth
The number of male and female self-employed in the United Kingdom grew by 55 and 109 per cent.
respectively between 1979 and 1991.
Mrs. Currie
Is my hon. Friend aware that Britain now has more than 3 million self-employed people, of whom 750,000 are women, many of them in south Derbyshire?
Does he share their view that they work hard for their money, that they pay quite enough tax and national insurance and that they do not want to see what would be the worst disaster for such businesses in future — an increase in income tax and national insurance, as proposed by the Labour party?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend makes an important point.
We are entitled to take great pride in the fact that so many more women have now chosen self-employment to promote their standard of living and that of their families.
It is also true to say that if the Opposition parties were ever in a position to put their policies into effect, that self-employment record would inevitably be gravely harmed and the cause of women in particular would suffer much more.
Dr. Kim Howells
The Minister knows that many self-employed are concentrated in the construction industry.
Does he know that thousands of construction workers in Wales are out of work, yet Shelter Cymru tells us that 63,000 families in the Principality have experienced homelessness in the past year?
Why cannot this incompetent Government get their act together and put those building workers to build houses for those families?
Mr. Forth
That must be a matter for the local authorities.
I am often at a loss to understand the sense of priorities or the lack of priority among Labour-controlled local authorities in particular.
They seem determined to spend their community charge payers' money on the most irrelevant and frivolous projects rather than concentrating on the real problems that the hon. Gentleman described.
British Companies
Mr. Gill
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many British companies have 1,000 employees or more.
Mr. Forth
Recent research by the university of Warwick indicates that there are 3,024 undertakings in the United Kingdom with 1,000 employees or more.
Mr. Gill
Given that the United Kingdom has so many undertakings with more than 1,000 employees, does my hon. Friend agree that we would be disproportionately affected by the draft European directive on works councils?
Will he assure the House that he will vigorously resist that further instance of discrimination against British industry?
Mr. Forth
Indeed.
My hon. Friend has accurately described the position.
The figure of more than 3,000 which I just quoted, when compared with 873 similar undertakings in France and 479 in Italy, shows that the United Kingdom has far and away more undertakings with more than 1,000 employees than either of our major European partners.
That means that the irrelevant suggestions being made by the European Commission for mandatory information for and consultation with employees would bear much more heavily on British business than it would on our major competitors.
That is why British industry is so adamantly opposed to that ridiculous directive.
I give my hon. Friend the absolute assurance that the Government will continue to oppose it root and branch.
Mr. Nigel Griffiths
Why does the Minister have a graph on his tie of the economy in decline under the Conservatives?
Mr. Forth
I have been waiting for some time for hon. Members to refer to my apparel and I am duly flattered.
If it helps the hon. Gentleman, I shall try to wear my tie upside down the next time I am at the Dispatch Box.
Mrs. Peacock
Is my hon. Friend aware that many of the companies that employ more than 1,000 people employ many women part time?
Those women choose to work part time because it fits in with looking after their families.
Please, please, please can we not destroy those part-time jobs?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend illustrates yet again that Conservative Members regard part-time employment as something which is productive and honourable, and not as something which is shameful or sordid.
I believe that the millions of women and men who choose to work part time will understand very well that the Labour party seeks to destroy their jobs whereas the Government are in the business of protecting them.
Mr. Trimble
The Minister will know that we appreciate and share his concern about the handicap that might be placed on British industry by the European social charter.
Before the Minister takes the mote out of Europe's eye, should not he take the beam out of his own?
Are not many British firms unduly handicapped by the harassment they get from regulatory bodies such as the Fair Employment Commission?
Mr. Forth
The hon. Gentleman has made an important point.
I must tell him that I have recently written to all the representative small business organisations in the United Kingdom asking them to give me examples of where excessive regulation is impeding their business.
I am looking forward very much to their responses.
I give the commitment that, when the Government are re-elected, we shall continue to fight to reduce the burden of regulation on British industry in order to make us even more competitive than we are already.
Unemployment, Holloway
Mr. Corbyn
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is the latest unemployment rate for the Holloway travel-to-work area; and what were the comparable figures for June 1987 and May 1979.
Mr. Jackson
Holloway falls within the London travel-to-work area.
In January 1992, the latest available date, the unemployment rate for the London travel-to-work, area was 9.5 per cent., compared with 8.7 per cent .
in June 1987.
There is no rate available for this travel-to-work area for May 1979.
Mr. Corbyn
Is the Minister aware that within the borough of Islington, which includes the Holloway travel-to-work area, fewer than 100 school leavers last year were able to find jobs and that, at the Holloway unemployment office, there is a gap between the 32 registered vacancies and the 11,600 people who are registered as unemployed?
Does the hon. Gentleman recognise the terrible toll that that places on the community and, in particular, on the young people who cannot get work and see the possibilities of career development and a decent standard of living slipping away from them?
When will he do something to bring jobs to inner-city areas?
Mr. Jackson
During the last Employment Question Time, the hon. Gentleman asked me about job clubs in his constituency, and I have written to him about the matter.
He and the House will be pleased to know that, in the 10 months to January, 1,607 people were placed in work as a result of their experience in a job club in his constituency.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
Does my hon. Friend agree that one of the reasons for the unemployment that exists in that part of Islington is the way in which the political friends of the hon. Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn) run Islington council?
They specialise in squalor; they do nothing to help business; they cannot collect their rents; they did not collect the rates; they do not collect the community charge; and they keep homes empty.
Is that the reason why the hon. Member for Islington, North will be swept away by the excellent Tory candidate in his constituency?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend has made a good point.
Over the past 10 months, Holloway jobcentre has placed 2,006 people in jobs.
Disabled People (Unemployment)
Mr. Ashley
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what is the current rate of unemployment for (a) registered disabled people and (b) disabled people generally.
Mr. Jackson
The 1991 labour force survey reported 18.2 per cent.
unemployment among people in the labour market who had a health problem or disability which limited the kind of work that they could do.
I am afraid that we do not have later figures, figures for registered disabled people or figures comparable with the monthly claimant count.
Mr. Ashley
Is the Minister aware that an unemployment rate among disabled people nearly four times as high as that among able-bodied people cannot be justified?
As this is the Government's 13th hour and it is now too late for them to help, will the Minister explain to disabled people why the Secretary of State for Employment spends so much of his time rubbishing trade unions, rather than finding jobs for those people?
Mr. Jackson
I think that, regrettably, there has always been a higher unemployment rate among people with disabilities than among the rest of the population.
We attempt to assist, however, and the total number of people who have been helped through our sheltered employment programme has increased substantially during the past 10 years.
Expenditure has risen substantially, from £88.2 million to £112 million.
The number of people who have been helped through assessment and rehabilitation centres has also risen and expenditure on special assistance schemes has increased substantially.
All those measures were designed to assist people with disabilities.
Mr. Rowe
Will my hon. Friend confirm that many companies find that the loyalty given to them by disabled people more than makes up for any days that they may have to take off work to undergo treatment?
Will he tell the House just how much effort he and his colleagues in the Department have devoted in recent years to bringing that message home to employers?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The best way — indeed, the only way — in which we can make progress in that regard is by affecting attitudes and the culture that exists within companies.
The Government have put a great deal of effort into persuading employers to take seriously the issues involving minorities in employment, including people with disabilities.
Mr. Tom Clarke
Does the Minister agree that discrimination against people with disabilities clearly exists in employment and that it was therefore a great pity that the very modest Bill presented by my right hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Wythenshawe (Mr. Morris) was talked out by supporters of the Government?
Mr. Jackson
I think that the hon. Gentleman is referring to a Bill relating to advertisements —
Mr. Clarke
No.
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Speaker
Order.
If the Minister has not got the message, perhaps he had better be given it.
Mr. Clarke
The Bill presented by my right hon. Friend the Member for Wythenshawe dealt with discrimination against people with disabilities, particularly in regard to employment and jobs.
Mr. Jackson
I do not believe, and the Government do not believe, that such a legislative approach is the right way to deal with the problem.
Since 1944, for example, we have had a quota system which has never been effectively operated under Governments of either party.
Rather than adopting an inappropriate legislative approach, we must persuade people and affect attitudes.
Mr. Couchman
What would be the impact of the imposition of a minimum hourly wage of £3.40 on the disabled, to whom employment is so important in terms of dignity of life?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend makes a very important point.
Many disabled people, often on income support, may earn relatively low wages, and the consequences of a minimum wage would be a withdrawal of job opportunities which would probably affect them in particular.
Rev. Martin Smyth
Does the Minister accept that an example would be a great deal of help to employers in the private sector?
Will he acknowledge that Government Departments have not even come near their own target of 3 per cent.
disabled workers?
Mr. Jackson
We take very seriously our attempts to secure employment for disabled people in the Government.
It is very difficult to meet the 3 per cent.
target, but we are doing well in aiming towards it.
Industrial Action
Mr. Gregory
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many working days were lost through industrial action in North Yorkshire during 1979; what is the most recent comparable figure; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Howard
Information is available only for the Yorkshire and Humberside region, where 55,000 working days were lost during 1991, the lowest for more than 25 years.
The 1991 total is nearly 60 times lower than the 3.1 million working days lost in the same region in 1979.
These figures illustrate the achievements of this Government's step-by-step industrial relations legislation.
The fact that the number of working days lost in the United Kingdom as a whole in 1991 was the lowest since records began 100 years ago is testimony to our success.
Mr. Gregory
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that those dramatic figures are eloquent testimony to the fact that under Labour the number of days lost was so dramatic that it resulted in near anarchy and that, as a result of our legislation, there are now proper secret ballots and democracy in the workplace?
In the unlikely event of our ever having a socialist Government again could not we expect to return to those appalling figures of industrial anarchy?
Mr. Howard
I agree with my hon. Friend.
One of the first things that the Labour party would do would be to change the law to make it easier for trade unions to strike.
They would be aided and abetted in so doing by the Liberal Democrats.
Their recipe for recovery is more strikes, more frequent strikes and more damaging strikes.
That is the way in which they think that they can make the economy grow.
Mr. Barron
Can the Secretary of State say how many working days have been lost through unemployment in the north-east?
Mr. Howard
I can also tell the hon. Gentleman how many days would be lost as a result of the extra unemployment that would be caused by his party's policies.
Unemployment, Sheffield
Sir Patrick Duffy
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what are the latest unemployment figures for the Sheffield travel-to-work area expressed as a percentage.
Mr. Jackson
In January 1992, the unadjusted rate of unemployment for the Sheffield travel-to-work area was 11.4 per cent.
Sir Patrick Duffy
Is the Minister aware that Sheffield is plunging into its deepest recession since the war, that according to new research by the city council's department of employment the true figure for unemployment is 17 per cent.
compared with the Minister's adjusted figure, and that even the Association of Yorkshire and Humberside Chambers of Commerce is now calling on the Government to do something about a sinking economy?
In the words of the regional secretary, sitting there and doing nothing is no longer an option.
Mr. Jackson
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman does not want to talk down his home city.
I cannot give credence to the 17 per cent.
figure.
In spite of the recent very regrettable rises in unemployment, in his constituency and in Sheffield as a whole unemployment remains a quarter lower than it was at the last election and a third below its peak in 1986.
Mr. John Greenway
Does the Minister agree that whether in Sheffield or throughout Yorkshire as a whole the history of a great industry and of a great industrial heritage was based on innovation and entrepreneurism?
Does he also agree that what Yorkshire as a whole needs to restart the economy is low tax, low inflation and another Conservative Government?
Mr. Jackson
My hon. Friend's question speaks for itself, and no doubt we shall hear more about such matters in a few minutes.
Merseyside Training and Enterprise Council
Mr. O'Hara
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment when he next plans to meet the Merseyside TEC to discuss funding.
Mr. Jackson
My right hon. and learned Friend and I meet TEC chairmen on a regular basis to discuss a range of issues, including questions of funding.
Mr. O'Hara
What advice or comfort can the Under-Secretary of State offer to those providers of training on Merseyside who have been driven out of business because insufficient resources have been allocated to the Merseyside TEC to provide contracts to them?
What succour or comfort can he offer to the unemployed in my constituency of Knowsley, South, where 65 jobless now chase every vacancy advertised in the jobcentres?
How can he possibly justify cutting training which is so desperately needed by a work force without jobs such as that in Knowsley, South?
Mr. Jackson
There has been an increase in the overall budget made available by the Government for training.
Negotiations between particular TECs and providers must be a matter for those TECs and providers.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
May I ask the House not to indulge in private conversations.
It is difficult to hear even at this end.
Mr. Alton
If the protests that have been made about cuts in training places on Merseyside are simply synthetic protestations, as the Minister said earlier, can he explain why projects such as the Hexagon project on Merseyside face closure?
How can he explain that when 71,000 people in the city of Liverpool alone are currently unemployed?
Surely that is an area where more training, not less, is needed.
Mr. Jackson
I know that the hon. Gentleman is sympathetic to the idea of localism that lay behind the creation of the training and enterprise councils.
The TECs are in the best position to make informed judgments about the qualities of particular providers.
I will not second-guess the judgments made by Merseyside TEC in respect of any provider, including Hexagon.
North London Training and Enterprise Council
Mr. John Marshall
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what discussions he has had with the chairman of the North London TEC to discuss the contributions of trade unions to training.
Mr. Howard
None, Sir.
Mr. Marshall
Is my right hon. and learned Friend aware that the day after the Transport and General Workers Union's disgraceful decision to boycott Government training schemes, the union was described as’ the Labour party in so many ways’?
Is he aware that the right hon. Gentleman who so described it was none other than the Leader of the Opposition?
Mr. Howard
I am.
The Transport and General Workers Union voted to boycott youth training, to boycott employment training and to boycott the training and enterprise councils.
Not a word of condemnation of that disgraceful position has come from the Leader of the Opposition, who is sponsored by that union, or from the shadow spokesman on employment, who is also sponsored by that union, or by any of the renegade crew who man the Labour Front Bench.
Unemployment, North-west England
Mr. Loyden
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what new policies he has to reduce unemployment in the north-west region.
Mr. Howard
The Government's main role is to ensure a sound and stable economic framework within which enterprise can flourish and the battle against inflation can be won.
In addition, since 1979 regional selective assistance worth £326 million has been committed to the north-west, creating more than 60,000 new jobs and safeguarding more than 60,000 existing jobs.
Mr. Loyden
Is not it patently clear that the Conservative party and the Minister have no understanding whatever of what unemployment means to the unemployed, their families and communities?
After 13 years, it is an absolute disgrace that no input has been made to tackling unemployment.
The Government have failed absolutely to tackle unemployment except for some cosmetic surgery.
Is not it about time that the Government recognised that the only cure for unemployment is to get rid of the Conservative Government as soon as possible?
Mr. Howard
If the hon. Gentleman really cares about unemployed people, will he join me today in calling on his Front-Bench colleagues to abandon their policy of a national statutory minimum wage, to abandon their jobs tax and to abandon their embrace of the European Community social action programme so that we can avoid the disastrous consequences for employment that would follow from such policies?
Mr. Dickens
Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that the north-west of England is coming out of recession faster than the rest of the country?
Will he also confirm that we are leading the way in many training schemes and that there is no doubt that housing — Will my right hon. and learned Friend confirm that there is no doubt that, in housing and in many other matters, the north-west of England is showing the way and will continue to show the way?
Interruption
Mr. Howard
I agree with my hon. Friend, who will continue to champion the cause of the north-west in the next Parliament.
The only things that could put a stop to the recovery from recession in the north-west of England and elsewhere are the policies of the Labour party — for , the sharpest ever peacetime tax increase, the national statutory minimum wage, and changes in the law to encourage strikes.Those would be the policies to put a stop to recovery.
We shall ensure —
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Mr. Howard
We shall ensure that —
Interruption
Training Schemes
Mr. Flannery
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment how many unemployed people are currently engaged in training schemes.
Mr. Howard
There are currently some 300,000 young people on youth training, and around 150,000 people on employment training in Great Britain.
Last financial year, some 740,000 people entered Government training programmes, compared with 110,000 in 1978-79 — a sevenfold increase.
Mr. Flannery
Is not it a fact that during the 13 years of this Government, 25 methods have been found to try to prove that unemployment is massively smaller than it is?
Is not it also a fact that the unemployed are generally on useless training schemes and that, therefore, unemployment and the slump are far more massive than the Government care to admit?
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman is talking characteristic nonsense.
More than 80 per cent.
of those on youth training gain a qualification or a job, or enter a further education course.
We are the only country in Europe to guarantee a two-year training course leading to a qualification for 16 and 17-year-old unemployed young people.
That is what the hon. Gentleman should recognise.
Mr. Bill Walker
Does my right hon. and learned Friend agree that since 1979 the Government have introduced more training places and a wider range of training courses both in width and in depth, in a way that has never been attempted before?
We have spent far more money.
Therefore it is nonsense for the Opposition to claim that we have done nothing at all about the problems of retraining.
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is right.
We are spending two and a half times as much, after taking account of inflation, as was spent by the last Labour Government on training.
That is because this is the only Government who understand training and care about training, and are determined to make sure that our people have high-quality training.
EC Working Time Directive
Sir Anthony Durant
To ask the Secretary of State for Employment what representations he has received from the CBI regarding the draft EC working time directive.
Mr. Forth
The CBI responded fully to my Department's consultative document on the proposed working time directive.
It firmly opposed the Commission's proposals.
I fully agree with the CBI that the directive would be a needless strain on United Kingdom competitiveness, and a threat to jobs and earnings.
Sir Anthony Durant
Does my hon. Friend agree that the proposals, as attacked by civil engineers, would be a restrictive practice and would restrict the flexibility of the construction industry?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Sir Anthony Durant
I did not know that my question was so good.
Would not the proposals restrict jobs, cause inefficiency and, with the minimum wage proposals, be very damaging to industry?
Mr. Forth
My hon. Friend is correct.
No significant employer representative body in the United Kingdom has done anything other than condemn those irrelevant and damaging proposals very roundly.
Her Majesty's Government will continue to fight to persuade our colleagues in the European Community that the proposals are not only unnecessary and unjustifiable, but would be extremely damaging to employment throughout the Community, particularly in the United Kingdom.
I thank my hon. Friend for drawing my attention to the representations that he has made.
Mrs. Wise
Will the Minister explain why European companies can apparently provide their workers with better conditions in terms of hours and minimum wages than this country's employers?
Why is it that European companies do not regard looking after their workers well in terms of hours and wages as destroying competitiveness, but instead see it as a way to obtain good work from their workers?
Why is that?
Mr. Forth
There are two good reasons.
First, for many of our European partners, the rules apply on paper but not in practice.
They simply do not put into effect the rules that the Community agrees.
Secondly, investors from outside the Community, from places such as Japan, the United States and many others, look at the European Community and decide that the United Kingdom is by far the best place in which to invest due to the stability, skills and reliability of our work force.
That explanation speaks volumes and answers the hon. Lady's question.
PRIME MINISTER
Engagements
Mr. Simon Hughes
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 March.
The Prime Minister (Mr. John Major)
This morning I presided at a meeting of the Cabinet and had meetings with ministerial colleagues and others.
In addition to my duties in the House, I shall have further meetings later today.
Mr. Hughes
Is it not an appalling indictment of 13 years of this Government's economic policy that yesterday one of Her Majesty's coroners described the shortage of beds in one of Britain's principal hospitals — a shortage that has led to the death of a pensioner from Southwark — as appalling due to a 2 per cent.
insufficiency in gross domestic funding of the national health service?
As a result of the Government's policy, the pensioner's widow is more than £17 per week less well off in real terms than she was when the Government came to power.
Is that not an example of private wealth at the expense of public underfunding?
Are the Government to continue with the same policy or enact a U-turn at the last moment?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman well knows that there has been a dramatic increase in national health service spending on any measure one cares to take, far and above the amount necessary either to keep pace with the general level of inflation or to keep pace with the level of inflation in medical costs.
The hon. Gentleman knows that that is the case, and he also knows that there has been an increase in net spending at all levels of income in this country.
Mr. Onslow
Has my right hon. Friend had time to study the important report on occupational pensions by the Select Committee on Social Services?
Does he agree that it contains a great many lessons for many people, particularly on the Maxwell scandal?
Will he give the House an undertaking that, when the report calls for action from the Government, we can rely on my right hon. Friend to take action without delay?
The Prime Minister
I have seen the report.
Our first step must be to examine it thoroughly and look at all the recommendations made by the Select Committee.
It raises a number of complex and inter-related matters, some of which are for the pensions industry, some for the banks, some for actuaries, auditors and regulators.
Some relate to the present legal framework.
We need time to examine fully the findings of the Select Committee and to give our response.
It is necessary to bear it in mind that the vast majority of occupational pensions schemes operate successfully in the United Kingdom — some 100,000 of them.
The cause of the problem with Mirror Group pensioners is all too clear; There appears to have been a massive fraud, perpetuated under the very eyes of the trustees.
Mr. Kinnock
May I strongly recommend the report in question to the Prime Minister?
I hope, it will lead, after the election, to his supporting us in putting its main recommendations into effect.
Does the right hon. Gentleman recall giving the House, from that Dispatch Box, the assurance that the Government would not achieve the objective of tax reductions’ on the back of a burgeoning Government borrowing requirement now or in future’?
Does he still stand by that assurance?
The Prime Minister
Nothing that my right hon. Friend does or announces later this afternoon will change our objective, or our intention of maintaining medium-term balance in the fiscal situation.
Mr. Kinnock
I asked whether the Prime Minister stood by the assurance that borrowing requirement would not increase to pay for tax cuts, now or in future, under any Government of which the right hon. Gentleman was leader.
Does the Prime Minister still stand by that opinion — yes or no?
The Prime Minister
I did answer that question.
Before asking his second question, the right hon. Gentleman might have consulted the shadow Chancellor, who said last week that —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is very unseemly behaviour.
The Prime Minister
I am sorry that Labour Members do not like to hear what they themselves said, but I intend to repeat it.
As the shadow Chancellor said last week,’ I’— that is, the shadow Chancellor —’am prepared to go on the basis of accepting the PSBR which emerges from the Budget.’
Clearly the Opposition have no independent judgment whatsoever.
Mr. Sumberg
Will my right hon. Friend take time this afternoon to watch the recent interview by Mr. David Frost, which revealed the success of the Government's health service provisions, and also that the Opposition's figures are totally bogus?
That interview revealed also that the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) does not know his NHS from his NUPE.
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend makes his point extremely clearly.
The bogus statistics of the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) have been finally revealed.
Without the steady drip-feed of leaked documents, clearly the hon. Gentleman is in some difficulty with his figures.
As was pointed out to him in that interview, this year there has been a 7.1 per cent.
increase in the number of patients treated compared with last year, which is higher even than the Government's forecast increase in patient care.
I remind the House of the so-called Cook test.
The hon. Gentleman said that the success of the trusts must be measured’ by the simple test of whether they do more or less work for the national health service patients.’
The trusts have clearly passed that test, and I look to the hon. Gentleman to admit that.
Mr. Patchett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Patchett
Given the proposed increase in pensions, does the Prime Minister honestly feel that it is sufficient — yes or no?
The Prime Minister
The hon. Gentleman knows what is the pensions increase.
It has been announced, it is Government policy, and I stand by that policy.
Sir Donald Thompson
My right hon. Friend will have heard in recent Question Times much about medicine in London.
Will he turn his eyes to the country as a whole and to the north — to the West Riding and my own constituency, where the health service is thought to be one of the best in Europe?
The Prime Minister
It is not only thought to be so but it undoubtedly is so, and getting better in each and every part of the United Kingdom.
That is largely because of the dedication of the staff and the increased resources provided by this Government.
Sir Patrick Duffy
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Sir Patrick Duffy
I refer the Prime Minister to the barrage of criticism from the Select Committee on Defence over the Government's handling of Army cuts, and its implied call for a defence review.
Is the Prime Minister aware that among right hon. and hon. Members on both sides of the House who understand the Government's overall objectives, there is still a genuine fear that the outcome will be overstretch in peacetime and a dangerous shortage in times of tension?
Does not the right hon. Gentleman agree that that is one risk — one national lottery — which we can well do without?
The Prime Minister
The Army of the 1990s will be structured to meet our needs in the face of a changed threat, in particular the end of the Warsaw pact and the millions of Warsaw troops who previously were geared immediately to face us.
Our forward planning is designed to enable us to take stock precisely as the Select Committee advocated.
I stress that we believe our proposals are right, and we set them out clearly in’ Options for Change.’
The hon. Gentleman says that all parts of the House take that view.
Although I know that he does, I do not believe that all parts of the House do share that view.
The occupants of the Opposition Front Bench appear to advocate 25 per cent.
cuts in defence expenditure while the occupants of the Liberal Benches advocate 50 per cent.
cuts in defence expenditure, both of which are irresponsible and both of which would have a devastating effect on our capacity to defend ourselves.
Mr. Evennett
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer my hon. Friend to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Evennett
Does my right hon. Friend agree that proportional representation reduces democracy and effective government?
Will he confirm that after he has won the general election and is back in No. 10, he will have no intention of changing our voting system?
Will he condemn the occupants of the Opposition Front Bench for using the issue in a squalid attempt to lure Liberal voters into their camp and for indulging in two-faced opportunism?
The Prime Minister
I am not sure that Liberals generally need much luring into Labour policies; they are very similar.
My views on proportional representation are well known.
PR does not lead to effective government and I do not support it.
Indeed, I agree entirely with what the Leader of the Opposition said a few years ago, that’ proportional representation is fundamentally counter-democratic in any case.’
I am not sure that the right hon. Gentleman has told the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) that, but perhaps the hon. Gentleman is putting down an early marker for after the next election.
Mr. Jack Thompson
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 March.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Thompson
Will the Prime Minister explain what compensation is available under his supposed citizens charter for the late arrival of economic recovery?
Does he realise that it is not just an hour but a year and a half late?
The Prime Minister
I congratulate the hon. Gentleman on his ingenuity.
I can tell him precisely what will be there.
It will be a very low level of inflation, lower than we have known at any time in recent years, and steady sustainable growth leading to secure jobs, sustaining the Conservative party in government for many years.
Mr. Burns
Will my right hon. Friend tell me how best to reply to a constituent of mine who has recently completed a course of treatment at Broomfield hospital in Chelmsford and who tells me that the nurses and doctors were fantastic, that the treatment was magnificent and that he is fed up to the back teeth with the constant efforts of the Labour party to undermine and talk down the achievements of the health service?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend's constituent speaks for many people who have enjoyed the splendid services of the national health service in the last year or so.
I advise my hon. Friend to tell his constituent that his experience is not unusual and that it is a tribute to the service that is available from the national health service.
He might add that the reforms that are bringing that about are in danger under the plans proposed by the Labour party and that nobody could guarantee the increasing support and assistance from the NHS if those reforms were turned back.
Mr. Bidwell
To ask the Prime Minister if he will list his official engagements for Tuesday 10 march.
The Prime Minister
I refer the hon. Gentleman to the reply that I gave some moments ago.
Mr. Bidwell
Is the Prime Minister aware that the Home Office is withdrawing section 11 funding from all the colleges in the London borough of Ealing and that that adversely affects the Pathway further education centre in my constituency, where we have the largest concentration of people from the new Commonwealth?
I find that totally objectionable from a Government who are shaping up to borrow and spend to save their necks.
The Prime Minister
I am not aware of the point that the hon. Gentleman raises but, as he knows, a tremendous amount of support has been made available through the Home Office and other sources to assist members of the ethnic minorities in this country.
That continues to be the case.
Mr. Thornton
With not a red rose in sight on the Opposition Benches, does my right hon. Friend realise that the traditional red rose of Lancashire is alive and well on the Government Benches?
What message would my right hon. Friend and my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancashire give us to take back to our constituents in the light of recent research showing that nearly 200 of the top British firms believe that the best way to increase unemployment and inflation and decrease investment would be the calamity of a Labour Government?
The Prime Minister
My hon. Friend is right.
I share his remarks about the red rose belonging to Lancashire.
It also belongs to the Rugby Football Union, which shows the red flag on its grand slam tie that it was generous enough to send me this morning.
My hon. Friend is also right about the calamity of a Labour Government, because 86 per cent.
of companies in that survey thought that Labour would be bad for the economy.
I am concerned about what on earth is wrong with the other 14 per cent.
BILL PRESENTED
General Elections
Mr. Tony Banks, supported by Mr. Tom Clarke, Ms. Diane Abbott and Mr. Jeremy Corbyn, presented a Bill to make statutory provision for fixed term parliaments, compulsory attendance at polling stations, a public holiday on days set for general elections; and for connected purposes; And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time on Thursday 9 April and to be printed.
[Bill 112.]
House of Commons Wednesday 11 March 1992
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
TRADE AND INDUSTRY
Libya
Mr. Ron Brown
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement about trade with Libya.
The Minister for Trade (Mr. Tim Sainsbury)
United Kingdom exports to Libya have been about £250 million annually.
Imports have been just over £100 million.
Mr. Brown
Does not the Minister understand one thing?
During my recent visit to Libya with George More, a top Scots lawyer, the British community told us that it does not want sanctions or reprisals against the Libyan regime.
Whatever the problems about Lockerbie, surely the matter can be discussed sensibly around the table?
That has not happened.
What are the British Government doing to resolve that question?
It should be remembered that trade with Libya is important.
It is important for jobs as well.
Mr. Sainsbury
Does not the hon. Gentleman understand that, in spite of his apparent admiration for Colonel Gaddafi and his regime, the United Nations Security Council unanimously adopted resolution 731 and called on Libya to respond positively and effectively to the demands made by the United Kingdom, France and the United States?
It has not responded and further action may be required.
Mr. Bill Walker
When my right hon. Friend is dealing with trade with Libya, will he bear it in mind that the United Kingdom is happy and willing to trade anywhere in the world, because that is important to us as a trading nation, but we must never sacrifice our values and standards, particularly those concerning our attitude towards international terrorism?
We must make that clear to any country with which we deal, including Libya.
Mr. Sainsbury
As always, my hon. Friend puts his point clearly and effectively.
I am sure that the House — at least, I hope that the House — will join in condemning international terrorism, particularly when it is state inspired.
Mr. Kilfedder
Has Colonel Gaddafi yet given Her Majesty's Government a detailed list of all the guns, ammunition and Semtex explosives which Libya supplied to the Provisional IRA, much of which has already been used to kill and mutilate British citizens?
Mr. Sainsbury
The hon. Gentleman makes a valid point about the regime which the hon. Member for Edinburgh, Leith (Mr. Brown) appears to admire.
I am not aware that any such list has been provided.
Industrial Policy
Mr. Eadie
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next plans to meet representatives of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce to discuss industrial policy.
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and President of the Board of Trade (Mr. Peter Lilley)
I meet representatives of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce from time to time to discuss a range of policies.
Mr. Eadie
The Secretary of State must be aware that 125,000 jobs were lost in the first 10 weeks of 1992.
If the projection is to be believed, another 400,000 jobs are at risk unless there is a change in industrial policy.
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that the most scathing indictment of the Chancellor's Budget judgment was his admission that unemployment would increase?
What kind of Government would plan the economy on the basis of increasing unemployment?
Mr. Lilley
I am afraid that that is not the view of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce, about which the hon. Gentleman asks.
It welcomes my right hon. Friend the Chancellor's brilliant Budget for its changes in the uniform business rate, which it says are of enormous help to business, a great deal of assistance to growing firms and just what businesses have requested.
It also welcomes the changes in VAT, which are clearly of benefit to commerce, and the measures to encourage prompt payment of VAT, the delays in which it says are a vital factor affecting a great number of firms.
Mr. Charles Wardle
Will not the control of inflation continue to be the cornerstone of industrial policy, because it will allow Britain to become more competitive in world markets?
Did not the remarks made yesterday by my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer reinforce that policy?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is absolutely correct.
That point has been made by many business organisations.
Sir John Banham, for instance, welcomed my right hon. Friend's prudent Budget and the priority that he gives to reducing inflation, while the Institute of Directors said that the Budget was prudent and correct in every way.
Mr. Gordon Brown
In what will be his final appearance at Question Time as Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, will the right hon. Gentleman confirm the facts of the Budget statement?
Will he confirm that investment will fall in 1992; that business investment will fall by 3 per cent; and, that hundreds of thousands of men and women in this country are in danger of losing their jobs if the Government continue in office?
Given that the Prime Minister told us in January that a recovery had started when patently it had not, will he now apologise, tell us when a recovery will happen under Tory policies and agree with the country that the first step towards saving the jobs of thousands of people is for the Government to lose theirs?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman's response to the Budget is as empty as that of his right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition, whose comments yesterday, I thought were proof positive that the Michelangelo virus was alive and operating inside the Labour party.
It has wiped Labour Members' minds clean.
What we want to hear from them is what they plan to do about the tax proposals in the Budget: will they vote against them, or will they support them?
I shall be happy to give way to the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) if Mr. Speaker will allow him to answer that question.
Mr. Squire
Does my right hon. Friend agree that there is no serious argument about the fact that the members of the Association of British Chambers of Commerce are fearful about a possible change of Government, and that the only question open to debate is whether higher taxation is worse than higher interest rates, and whether either is worse than higher inflation?
Mr. Lilley
Indeed: that is absolutely true.
A recent study by James Capel and Co. showed that, of 105 leading businesses in this country, 86 per cent.
believe that Labour policies would make the economic position dramatically worse.
I have no doubt that, after the Budget, an even higher proportion will prefer our policies to those of the Opposition.
3
Mr. Turner
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he will next meet representatives of the West Midlands chambers of commerce to discuss industrial policy.
Mr. Lilley
Together with the hon. Gentleman, I had the pleasure of attending a meeting with the Wolverhampton chamber of commerce last Friday.
Mr. Turner
The Secretary of State is right.
He was well wined and dined by the Wolverhampton chamber of commerce last Friday.
Why, then, did the Department of Trade and Industry try to gag its president and not allow him to deliver a part of his speech that was mildly critical of Her Majesty's Government?
Will the Secretary of State answer that question truthfully because it strikes at the very heart of democracy?
Mr. Lilley
The president of the Wolverhampton chamber of commerce delivered precisely the same speech as the one of which he sent me a copy beforehand and I have it here.
He called for a reduction in the special car tax, and I am sure that he will be delighted that it has been halved.
He also called for measures to favour lower-paid employees in respect of income tax, and for measures to help small businesses.
I have no doubt that the Wolverhampton chamber of commerce will give a warm welcome to the Budget, as it did to my speech last Friday.
Mr. Gerald Howarth
Is my right hon. Friend aware that the measures introduced yesterday by our right hon. Friend the Chancellor, the harmonious industrial relations restored by the Government and the substantial investment from home and overseas mean that manufacturing in the heart of England is deeply grateful for all that the Government have done in the past 13 years?
The last thing that manufacturing wants is a Government who adopt the European social charter which would destroy the advantage that we have in the west midlands.
Mr. Lilley
That is absolutely right.
A study of leading businesses shows that a vast majority of British firms believe that if we had a Labour Government there would be slower growth, less investment, higher inflation and worse unemployment.
The hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) has spent much of his time over the past few months telling industry about his policies.
It has clearly listened and understood.
Trade Balance
Mr. Cohen
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he expects exports to reach the same level as imports.
The Minister for Corporate Affairs (Mr. John Redwood)
My Department does not forecast the balance of payments.
The hon. Gentleman might like to know that last year saw record levels of exports from this country and that our share of manufactured exports in world trade has been rising since 1984.
Mr. Cohen
Is not the truthful answer to my question,’ Sometime never’, because the Government have not invested in British manufacturing?
To achieve an export-import balance under current Tory policies would mean an even worse slump than we have at present because the only thing made in Britain under the Tories is a Tory-made recession.
Mr. Redwood
The hon. Gentleman is wide of the mark.
There have been good levels of investment for business and manufacturing in recent years, as the hon. Gentleman should know.
It is way above the levels when the Labour party was last in control and understandably so, because Britain is now a good home for investors with much better labour relations, much better quality, much better business management and much better relations between employees and management.
Mr. Norris
How much more quickly does my hon. Friend think that we might achieve a balance between exports and imports when we introduce a minimum wage, increase taxes on investment, increase personal taxes and allow the trade unions to ride rough shod once again?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend makes his point extremely well.
Those policies would be ruinous.
They would drive away inward investors, make manufacturing investment much more difficult and defer the day when we improve our balance of trade in televisions, cars and all the other things that are now improving so strongly under the Government's policies.
That is why it is important that those policies should continue.
Mr. Hoyle
Yes, but will the Minister say how he could ever expect to balance exports and imports when the Chancellor has forecast growth of only 1 per cent; when we have rising unemployment, falling investment and companies going bankrupt?
Is not that a terrible record on which to fight a general election, in which the Government will be defeated?
Mr. Redwood
The trading performance of many sectors is very good, and that trading performance has been strengthening in recent months, as the hon. Gentleman should know.
I draw his attention to the fact that we are now net exporters of televisions whereas we were net importers under the Labour party and to the fact that motor output has been expanding in recent years whereas it was declining under Labour.
That is the heart of British manufacturing and it needs our policies to carry on its renaissance.
Mr. Roger King
Does my hon. Friend agree that one way in which we can cut down imports is to buy British?
Will he extend warmhearted support to the Labour party, which advocates such a policy, but dissociate himself from the actions of the shadow Home Secretary and the Leader of the Labour party who buy foreign cars?
Mr. Redwood
I agree entirely.
What humbug it is for some Opposition Members to say that one should buy British and then travel around in foreign cars.
I bought a British car and I am proud of it.
It works extremely well.
Many of my hon. Friends have done the same.
That is the best way to back Britain and British industry.
Ms. Quin
Has the Minister had time to have a look at the table published in European Economy, which clearly shows that in terms of the annual change in the volume of exports of goods and services between 1979 and 1990, the United Kingdom had a worse record than any other European Community country?
Will the hon. Gentleman confirm that the Budget statement envisages a widening trade deficit over the next few years, especially in manufacturing products?
The honest answer to the question asked by my hon. Friend the Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) is that under this Government there will never be a balance between exports and imports.
Mr. Redwood
That last statement was wild and silly.
The hon. Lady should know that in the past 10 years exports of British manufactured goods have grown faster than those of France, Germany, America and even Japan, because manufacturing is doing so much better and needs our policies.
She might like to know that the imports of manufactured goods amount to 17 per cent.
of our national income — the same proportion as Germany.
Mr. Warren
Does my hon. Friend agree that it is appalling that the Opposition whinge on about the failure of this country to export, when we know that what we need from both sides of the House is unanimity to help exporters and not complaints about them?
Mr. Redwood
I agree and go further: let us congratulate them.
They have achieved much in recent years, but the Labour party never gives them any credit and is always moaning.
There have been fine achievements in the export of cars, televisions and other consumer durables.
Let us hear some praise for a change and congratulate exporters.
Footwear Industry
Mr. Vaz
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a further statement on initiatives to help the footwear industry.
Mr. Sainsbury
The footwear industry, like other industries, is eligible for a range of Government assistance.
Mr. Vaz
Does not that answer prove that the past 13 years have been wasted years in terms of the Government's commitment to the footwear industry?
Hundreds of thousands of jobs have been lost in Leicester, the midlands and elsewhere in the past 13 years, yet the Government have done nothing to support the industry.
Now that the election has been announced, will the Minister take the opportunity to apologise to the industry's workers and employers for failing to do anything to protect them in the past 13 years?
Mr. Sainsbury
I hoped that the hon. Member would be aware of the changes in fashion with which our footwear industry has had to deal and would have noticed the internationally competitive conditions in which it has had to operate.
I hoped that he might be prepared to congratulate it on its 30 per cent.
improvement in productivity during the past decade.
Mr. Michael Morris
My right hon. Friend the Minister should ignore the gloom and doom of the hon. Member for Leicester, East (Mr. Vaz).
In very difficult trading circumstances, footwear exports in the past 12 months were up 11 per cent.
in volume and 15 per cent.
in value.
Nevertheless, will my right hon. Friend continue to put pressure on the 35 countries that still place restrictions on our exporters?
Mr. Sainsbury
Indeed.
My hon. Friend has been a close supporter of the industry for many years and has taken a close interest in its activities.
I join him in congratulating the industry on its export achievements — something that we never hear from the Labour party.
It has almost doubled exports since 1985 and we shall continue to work to ensure that more and more markets are open to the high-quality products that are produced in my hon. Friend's constituency.
Beer
Mr. Canavan
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what response he has made to the complaints he has received about measurements relating to the head of a pint of beer in the current year.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Industry and Consumer Affairs (Mr. Edward Leigh)
After careful consideration of the complaints, I have decided that section 43 of the Weights and Measures Act 1985 should be implemented and that the trade should be allowed two years to make the necessary changes.
Mr. Canavan
Is the Minister aware that there would be widespread opposition, particularly in Scotland, to any Government imposing legislation that led to the disappearance of the traditional head on a pint of beer or to increased costs being passed on to the consumer in price increases?
We all agree about the need to protect the general public against short measures, but does not the Minister realise that flat beer is just as bad, if not worse, than small beer?
Mr. Leigh
There is no question of having to serve flat beer in Scotland.
I am only implementing the weights and measures legislation that the previous Labour Government introduced.
I should be interested to see whether an Opposition Front-Bench spokesman will intervene on this point.
Surely we all agree that no one should be served a short measure.
If one pays for a pint of beer, one should get a pint of beer.
If the hon. Gentleman and some brewers say that prices will increase, I can only quote a leading national newspaper which said:’ Why should a pint be a pint everywhere but in a pub?
Just imagine how the brewers would react if their customers decided to hand over only 99p out of every £1 they were charged.’
Mr. Nicholas Winterton
Will my hon. Friend give greater and more sympathetic consideration to the question that has just been asked, because those of us who understand cask-conditioned ale — real beer — know that it is extremely damaging for it to be dispensed under pressure?
The head is an important part of a pint of beer and if beer is dispensed in the way that he is advocating through the implementation of section 43 of the Weights and Measures Act 1985, the taste, texture and colour of cask-conditioned beer could be altered to the detriment of the discerning beer-drinking public.
Mr. Leigh
My hon. Friend is quite rightly a great traditionalist, and so am I. Nothing that I am proposing will result in hand pumps being phased out.
I am giving the industry two full years to bring in lined glasses.
The entire stock of the nation's glasses turns over in two years so there is no reason why this measure should result in any implementation costs or why the price of a pint should go up.
It is right that when one pays for a pint of beer, one should get a pint of beer.
Electronics Industry
Mr. Simon Coombs
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what is his estimate of overseas earnings by the United Kingdom electronics industry in 1979 and 1991.
Mr. Redwood
Exports of electronics from this country in 1979 amounted to £2.7 billion and rose to £13.6 billion in 1990, the last full year for which I have the figures.
Mr. Coombs
Will my hon. Friend speculate on the effect on jobs in the electronics industry in my constituency and elsewhere of a Labour party proposal to increase value added tax on luxury items to 25 per cent?
Does he agree that the right way to encourage the electronics industry to export is to help it at home by tax cuts such as those announced yesterday by our right hon. Friend?
Mr. Redwood
I agree.
Such a big increase in VAT would be very damaging.
I was delighted to learn recently that Arcam has announced that it will be the first British company in 10 years to make a cassette deck here in the United Kingdom.
That builds on the success of the television industry and other electronic industries to which I referred in answer to earlier questions.
We need to develop a good strong home market, and for that we need relatively light taxation so that people have more money in their pockets to spend.
That is what the Labour party does not understand: there is no investment unless there is demand.
Mr. Flynn
What plans does the Minister have to ensure that the British-designed and British-invented transputer continues to be manufactured in this country?
Is he aware that the parent company, which was nationalised as part of a French and Italian consortium, has threatened to remove the transputer from this country because of the British Government's failure to support British industry in the way that the French and Italian Governments have?
Is another marvellous British invention — the miracle transputer which will be sold all over the world — about to be employed and manufactured by foreigners?
Mr. Redwood
There are many examples of good inventions developed here thanks to our industrial market-oriented policies.
The United Kingdom is one of the leaders in open systems, which is a very important technological development.
As for the future of the transputer, that, of course, depends on commercial decisions, but we have the right environment for many types of technological developments.
We have an extremely lively electronics industry.
What a pity that the Opposition never tell us any success stories.
Industrial Policy
Mr. Bill Michie
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he will next meet representatives of the Yorkshire and Humberside regional CBI to discuss industrial policy.
13
Mr. Austin Mitchell
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he will next meet representatives of the Yorkshire and Humberside regional CBI to discuss industrial policy.
Mr. Lilley
Ministers and officials of my Department keep in touch with the CBI on a wide range of matters.
Mr. Michie
Does the Secretary of State recall that in answer to an earlier question of mine to his colleague at the Department of Employment, I was told that 25,000 manufacturing jobs had been lost in the past 12 months in Yorkshire and Humberside?
Has it occurred to the Secretary of State to discuss that with the CBI and perhaps also to nudge his colleague, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, to try to change that trend?
Mr. Lilley
If the hon. Gentleman is in contact with the CBI on Humberside, I am sure that he will have noticed its comments on the Budget.
It especially welcomed the measures introduced by my right hon. Friend the Chancellor to encourage late payment of bills to encourage early payment of bills, and to overcome late payment of bills.
The regional CBI believed that that would be of great benefit and was grateful for my right hon. Friend's measures to alleviate the uniform business rate.
I do not think that any business men whom I know support the Labour party's policy of unleashing local authorities to raise the poundage for the uniform business rate without capping.
During the 1980s, local authorities raised business rates by 37 per cent.
more than inflation.
We have frozen them, but the Labour party intends to unleash them again.
Mr. Austin Mitchell
With the Government, it is more a question of the late delivery of policies.
The Secretary of State will be aware how crucial the textiles and clothing industries are to Yorkshire, Humberside and, indeed, Grimsby.
Is he also aware that those industries have been losing 2,000 jobs per month in addition to the 60,000 jobs already lost and the 7 per cent.
fall in production since the recession began?
It is too late now to ask the right hon. Gentleman what he intends to do about that, as he will lose his job over it on 9 April, but can he tell me of any other Government who have allowed their textile industry to bleed to death in that fashion without helping it?
Mr. Lilley
The textile industry is and remains important to this country.
That is why we have taken up the position that we have over GATT, a position which is widely welcomed by that industry.
The hon. Gentleman's region has benefited greatly from diversification, not least because we have encouraged inward investment.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman, like me, condemns the Trades Union Congress motion which rejected’ alien investment’in this country, as the TUC saw it.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman is as amazed as I am that Labour Front-Bench spokesmen refuse to dissociate themselves from that position, and therefore stand to reject’ alien investment’.
That is one reason why they will be rejected by the electorate.
Mr. Batiste
Is my right hon. Friend aware that in many parts of the Yorkshire and Humberside region unemployment is significantly lower than it was at the time of the previous election, and that what the regional CBI fears above all else is the havoc that would be caused by a Labour Government, with their commitment to a statutory minimum wage, which would wipe out so many jobs, and to the European Community social chapter, which would make British industry uncompetitive in world terms?
Mr. Lilley
My hon. Friend is right.
I receive a great many representations from business men worried about the threat of a minimum wage and about the social chapter.
Business men find it especially odd that the Labour party intends to introduce a minimum wage with one hand while with the other hand it would remove our tax cuts for the lowest paid.
Thus its Budget — if it ever got the chance — would hit the lowest paid disproportionately.
Mr. Michael Brown
Will my right hon. Friend totally reject what the hon. Member for Great Grimsby (Mr. Mitchell) has just said, bearing in mind that only four days ago my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State was in my constituency, which adjoins Great Grimsby, to announce that Kimberly-Clark from America was to build a factory at Barton-upon-Humber involving 770 new jobs, thanks to the Government's industrial policy and a large Government grant to that company?
Mr. Lilley
Indeed, I was especially delighted that we won that contract for this country.
The investment will create 750 jobs directly and a great many more indirectly.
We pulled out all the stops and gave the company a response in record time.
Mr. Henderson
After 13 years of so-called Tory economic miracle, how does the Secretary of State explain to industrialists in Yorkshire and Humberside why manufacturing investment there is now below the 1979 level, and why there were no measures in the Budget for manufacturers and manufacturing investment?
Mr. Lilley
The hon. Gentleman knows that if we compare the position now with that of 10 years ago — at the same stage of the economic cycle — we see that manufacturing output is up by a quarter, manufacturing investment is up by a third, manufacturing productivity is up by more than a half, and manufactured exports are up by almost three quarters.
Industrialists do not want to return to Labour party policies because they know full well that that would mean Front-Bench Labour Members taking decisions instead of them.
They know that the Opposition team consists of a television producer, a psychiatrist, a social anthropologist, a trade union official and a charity worker — and that is about it.
Not one of them has a day's experience of working in British industry.
Mr. Riddick
Is my right hon. Friend aware that a survey conducted recently among the top 200 companies in this country, many based in the north of England and in Yorkshire, showed that 86 per cent.
of industrialists believed that a Labour victory at the next election would be bad for the economy?
They believed that inflation would go up and that interest rates would go up, which would clearly lead to higher unemployment in Yorkshire and Humberside.
Mr. Lilley
Yes.
I am sure that, following the Budget, support among business and industry will be even higher than the 86 per cent.
recorded beforehand.
The fact is that industrialists are scared stiff of a Labour Government and are determined to do all that they can to ensure that we achieve, as we shall, a resounding and decisive Conservative victory.
That is the best thing for industry and for a strong recovery from the recession.
Regional Development Areas
Mr. Hind
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he last discussed with his EC opposite numbers revision of regional development areas; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Leigh
Our intention is to review the map early in the next Parliament after we have won the election.
Mr. Hind
When my hon. Friend returns to his desk after the next election has been won by the Conservatives, will he bear it in mind that in the past 10 years west Lancashire has benefited greatly from being a development area?
It has attracted inward investment, there are new factories and jobs, and unemployment is now 22 per cent.
lower than it was when I was elected in June 1987.
In the negotiations, will my hon. Friend especially ensure that west Lancashire and Skelmersdale are adequately supported with European and regional selective assistance through his Department?
Mr. Leigh
When my hon. Friend has been returned with an increased majority in his marginal seat, he will no doubt wish to make representations to me as I carry on with my present job.
Our review will be objective and it will be based on supporting areas in which there is a disparity in unemployment rates.
Of one thing I am sure: the last thing that business in west Lancashire wants is the election of a Labour Government, who will put up business taxes, put up costs and impose a minimum wage.
Dr. Kim Howells
As the Minister knows, regional development grants have played an important part in helping to replace some of the jobs lost in mining and steel in south Wales.
Is he aware that many of us are concerned because the next generation of inward investment will be attracted not by a low-wage economy or a low-wage work force, but by the best trained and educated work force in Europe?
Day by day, the Government are unwilling to put more money into training.
Indeed, the Department of Trade and Industry actually agrees with cuts in training imposed by the Department of Employment.
Those cuts mean that regions such as south Wales will be less able to compete with other regions in Europe than they are now.
Mr. Leigh
That was a very moving speech.
If it is true, why is this country the No. 1 location for inward investment?
Why do we account for 41 per cent.
of Japanese investment in the EC and 36 per cent.
of American investment in the EC?
The reason is that foreign companies want to come here for a highly trained and highly motivated work force who work for good British companies.
That is the truth.
Post Office
Ms. Hoey
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry when he next plans to meet the Post Office chairman to discuss Post Office efficiency.
Mr. Leigh
My right hon. Friend regularly meets the chairman of the Post Office, Sir Bryan Nicholson.
I have no doubt that after 9 April he will meet him equally regularly.
Ms. Hoey
I am sure that the Minister is aware of the widespread concern about the threat to postal services that the Government are determined to impose by bringing in tin-pot competitors who will make the rural services a threatened species.
Does he realise that throughout the country in the election people who care about the Post Office and Post Office services will vote Labour as the only way to preserve a good postal service?
Mr. Leigh
I do not think that the hon. Lady really believes all that.
We already have the best Post Office in the European Community.
What harm is there in trying to achieve better value for money and more choice for the consumer by more competition — always giving an assurance, which I repeat today, that we will ensure that the uniform tariff structure remains in being even in rural areas?
What possible harm can there be to the Post Office from more competition?
More competition will lead to better service, and the whole House knows it.
Mr. Fry
When my hon. Friend sees the chairman of the Post Office, will he impress upon him the need for absolute efficiency in delivering election addresses from Labour candidates?
Should not every household in the country know that the Labour party officially wants to deny the low paid the tax reductions given by our right hon. Friend the Chancellor yesterday?
Mr. Leigh
It is extraordinary that the Labour party, which we all know want to tax the rich, now wants to tax the poor as well.
Are we about to hear an Opposition spokesman telling us their tax plans?
The House wants to know.
Do they intend to reverse those tax cuts?
Will they tax their people more?
We want to know.
Interruption
Manufacturing Industry
Sir John Farr
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what has been the change in manufacturing industry productivity in the past 10 years.
Mr. Leigh
Manufacturing productivity rose by over a half between 1981 and 1991.
Sir John Farr
I thank my hon. Friend for that encouraging news.
Does he agree that, at the same time, manufacturing exports increased by more than two thirds?
Is that not a significant springboard for the future for British manufacturing industry?
Mr. Leigh
I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
He is right that manufacturing exports have increased by nearly three quarters since 1981.
In fact, they have grown faster than in the United States of America, Japan, France and Germany.
Mr. Roy Hughes
Does the Minister recognise that between 1979 and 1981 much of British manufacturing industry was razed to the ground?
Will he now give us the figures for the whole period since 1979, when the Government came to office?
I believe that they tell a rather different story.
Mr. Leigh
If we compare this stage in the economic cycle with the previous stage, we see that output is up a quarter, investment is up a third, productivity is up a half and exports are up three quarters.
Opposition Members may not like it, but we will keep saying it.
One thing is absolutely clear: why should manufacturing industry benefit from a quadruple whammy with higher costs, higher prices, higher inflation, a minimum wage and more red tape?
That is the question that the Opposition need to answer.
Interruption
Iran and Russia
Mr. Thurnham
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has received about Export Credits Guarantee Department cover for Iran and Russia; and if he will make a statement.
Mr. Sainsbury
I have received a number of representations about ECGD cover for Iran and Russia.
Mr. Thurnham
Will my right hon. Friend join me in congratulating Beloit Walmsley in my constituency on winning a £63 million contract in Russia and a £90 million contract in Iran?
Is not that the way for us to gain increasing shares of world markets for the fourth successive year, in contrast with the strike-torn, tax-weary years of decline under Labour?
Mr. Sainsbury
Not only am I happy to join my hon. Friend in congratulating that successful exporter, but I congratulate my hon. Friend on the energetic and effective way in which he has supported Beloit Walmsley in winning those contracts.
Mr. Godman
Do we really want to develop trade with a country whose Government sanctions the murderous fatwa placed upon the shoulders of Salman Rushdie?
Should not the Government, in the last few days of their existence, bring to bear upon the Iranian Government the utter condemnation that is felt by the people of the United Kingdom for the disgraceful action in imposing a death threat on a British citizen in the capital of the United Kingdom?
Nothing should be done to further trade with the Iranian Government until that fatwa is lifted from the shoulders of Salman Rushdie.
Mr. Sainsbury
The Government have made clear their opposition and abhorrence for the fatwa to which the hon. Gentleman referred, but he differs from the view of his colleagues on the Opposition Front Bench if he wishes to stop trade or perhaps impose an embargo on trade with Iran or, indeed, any other country.
It is the policy of the Government to encourage our exporters and to congratulate them.
Manufacturing Output
Mr. John P. Smith
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what representations he has recently received about manufacturing output.
Mr. Leigh
My right hon. Friend has recently received the excellent report by the CBI's manufacturing advisory group which showed that there had been a transformation in manufacturing performance during the 1980s.
Mr. Smith
Given that 80 per cent.
of manufacturing jobs were lost in Barry in my constituency in the last Conservative recession, manufacturing growth is down 3.7 per cent.
on last year, we now have one of the lowest growths in manufactured output in Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development countries, and 3,000 manufacturing jobs are being lost every day, why did the Government fail yesterday to take any action to bring about a recovery in wealth-creating manufacturing industry?
Mr. Leigh
All right, let us talk about yesterday if the hon. Gentleman wants — let us talk about giving more than £1 billion to industry over the next two years to ensure that there is no increase in business rates.
If the hon. Gentleman wants to talk about that, we shall talk about it even more.
Let us talk about reductions in corporation tax, which are still feeding through the economy and will be worth £1 billion to industry in the next year.
Those are the facts that industry wants to hear.
That is why industry, the Confederation of British Industry, the Institute of Directors and the Association of British Chambers of Commerce all support the Budget.
That is what puts Labour Members on the spot.
Mr. David Shaw
Is my hon. Friend aware that high levels of manufacturing output lead to high levels of exports and that the Dover ferry industry has done well under the Government out of high levels of exports?
Can my hon. Friend confirm that he will do all in his power to ensure that the Government are returned so that the Dover ferry industry can continue to benefit from high levels of exports?
Mr. Leigh
Yes.
We will be returned.
We are winning the debate.
We are winning the debate this afternoon.
Opposition Members have not scored one hit so far, and nor will they during the election campaign.
Exports
Mr. Jacques Arnold
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will make a statement on the current performance of British exports.
Mr. Sainsbury
British exports in 1991 were at an all-time record high.
Mr. Arnold
To what does my right hon. Friend attribute that success in the middle of a world recession?
Mr. Sainsbury
My hon. Friend asks a relevant question.
British exporters achieved all-time record exports partly because in 1991 we had all-time record low numbers of strikes and days lost through industrial action.
That was because we had a sensible framework of industrial relations laws.
The success of British industry in exporting last year was also attributable to having the right framework for taxation, which encourages and rewards enterprise on the part of both individuals and companies.
This may be my last question, Mr. Speaker.
Will the Secretary of State respond to a question that I have put several times since the Select Committee on Science and Technology in another place produced its recommendations for the Government?
It said that the Government had no policy for industry and no policy for the country, and that if they did not take a new direction there would be no British-owned manufacturing industry left in this country — now answer!
Mr. Sainsbury
The success of British exporters, which apparently does not get one word of congratulation or praise from the Labour party, gives the lie to what the hon. Gentleman has just said.
Short-termism
Mr. Dunnachie
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what plans he has to combat short-termism among investors in British industry.
Mr. Redwood
The way to combat short-termism is to have the right policies for the support of industrial investment — policies based on competitiveness, lower taxation, good industrial relations and a belief in quality.
Mr. Dunnachie
Does the Minister agree that it is a disgrace, when British industry is striving desperately to find a starting point for recovery, that the Government have not provided tax incentives for investment in industry?
Mr. Redwood
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor put forward a number of measures which give a lot of cash flow help to British business — and none more important than that on the unified business rate, which means £500 million extra for business and relief from any increases in business rates.
Under Labour, businesses suffered greatly from the increase in business rates.
Labour's plans would make British companies wide open to easy takeovers because they have proposals for company law, to renationalise companies, which would leave many other companies vulnerable.
Mr. Quentin Davies
Has my hon. Friend seen the latest survey from the Institute of Purchasing and Supply which publishes a regular report based on surveys of purchasing managers throughout British industry, studying their purchasing activities and intentions.
That is an important survey.
Clearly Opposition Members do not care to brief themselves with such important information —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us get to the question.
Please hurry up.
Mr. Davies
I am sure that my hon. Friend has seen this survey — Has he noticed that for the first time, in February, the indices for orders and output show a rise?
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That was a very long-winded question.
Mr. Redwood
I agree entirely with the bit of the question that I heard.
I thought that it was a most helpful question.
Its length was entirely related to the fact that it contained good news and, once again, Opposition Members did not want to hear it.
Regulatory Burdens
Mr. Bill Walker
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what recent representations he has received from business men about the impact of regulatory burdens on industry.
Mr. Redwood
I have received a number of representations from business men about the need to cut regulatory burdens.
What a first-class job my right hon. Friend the Chancellor did by cutting a large number of them in his Budget yesterday.
The business men came, we heard, the Chancellor listened, and he has incorporated in his proposals a large number of deregulatory measures, which will ease cash flow and make it easier to deal with the VAT man and the Inland Revenue.
How much I welcome that.
I hope that Opposition Members will support it in the Division Lobby when the time comes.
Mr. Walker
Does my hon. Friend agree that the CBI, in its publication,’ Competing with the World's Best’, drew attention to the fact that industry does not want to be organised, run and intervened in by TV producers, social workers and others?
Industries want to be left alone so that they can continue to export more than the Japanese.
In particular, the Scotch whisky industry, with such a splendid export record, does not want its business to be run by politicians, who should only consume the stuff and not organise and manage the businesses.
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is a great champion of the Scotch whisky industry, and many of my hon. Friends and Opposition Members support British business by drinking Scotch — and how wise they are.
This Government will ensure that discriminatory taxes are not imposed on that industry by our friends in Europe, because it is a vital British interest.
My hon. Friend is also right that business wants regulations kept in bounds, with decent regulations so that markets are fair and open, but it does not want the masses of red tape that the Opposition are always recommending day after day in the House.
Mr. Douglas
Turning from the attractions of the Scotch whisky industry, can the Minister give us more information about the important regulatory aspects of getting companies which sub-contract to the Ministry of Defence to pay their bills or have them paid quickly?
As I am sure that the Minister will appreciate, it is important for the cash flow of small businesses that settlements be paid appropriately and quickly.
Can he give us more information on how that might be done?
Mr. Redwood
I cannot improve on the information that my right hon. Friend the Chancellor gave in his statements to the House yesterday and in the papers supporting the Budget.
Yes, the Government are insisting that the bills are paid on time when the work has been done, and that that should flow through the system from the main contractors to the sub-contractor.
I know from my discussions with business men that prompt payment is vital.
The Government should and will give a lead.
Mr. Allason
Is my hon. Friend aware that a large proportion of those employed in the south-west, and certainly in Devon, are part-time workers in residential homes?
Is he aware that the owners of those homes are already burdened by a large number of regulations and that any new regulations from Brussels should be resisted by him and his colleagues, particularly regulations on part-time workers and the implementation of a minimum wage?
Mr. Redwood
My hon. Friend is quite right.
For that very reason, the Government are standing up for British businesses and British services in Brussels as we want more jobs, not fewer.
Some of the regulations from Brussels would destroy jobs as surely as the policies of the Labour party would if they were ever to be followed.
Ms. Mowlam
Is the Minister satisfied with his Department's record on regulating financial businesses after Blue Arrow, Guinness, Maxwell and this morning's extremely critical report from the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee on the Bank of Credit and Commerce International?
Does he not recognise that his Department has failed, because the electorate will on9 April?
Mr. Redwood
The hon. Lady seems to be confusing the regulatory record of my Department with the regulators outside my Department, who were deliberately set up as independent regulators as a result of legislation passed by the House.
Unless she asks a more precise question about a particular regulator and a particular action, I cannot comment on the detailed points that she makes.
I believe that the legislation passed by the House has created a strong regulatory framework and I am always encouraging the regulators to root out fraud, incompetence and crime wherever it may be.
Home Income Equity Plans
Mr. Flynn
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry what initiatives he intends to introduce to assist those in financial difficulties arising from their involvement in home income equity plans.
Mr. Redwood
There are several ways in which assistance might be available to people who have been caught up in some of those unfortunate schemes.
If, for example, there is any question of repossession, the individual should go to his building society, because those societies have said that they want to avoid repossessions wherever possible.
If there has been an investment failure, people may be eligible for compensation either from the investment company or from the compensation scheme, depending on the precise circumstances of the individual case.
I do not want to hold out false general hope, but in some cases assistance might be available.
I suggest that any hon. Member with a constituency problem should get in touch with the Securities and Investments Board, which is taking the lead in this matter and which knows the individual details of specific cases.
Mr. Flynn
The Minister is trying to do a Pontius Pilate act on the weakness of the regulatory system set up by his Government.
There are thousands of victims of those home income equity plans.
Virtually all are elderly people, mostly widows, who have bought their own homes and were sold those plans through so-called independent financial advisers.
We should make it clear that those people are not independent at all, but profit-hungry, commission-hungry salesmen.
They have conned those elderly people who now have the dreadful prospect of losing their homes in their 60s and 70s because of that or because of the weakness of financial regulation.
Will the Minister give a guarantee in the last few days of his Government that none of those elderly people will have their home repossessed?
Mr. Redwood
Obviously I want to avoid that, which is why I said that those people or their advisers or friends should get in touch with the building societies, which have told us that they want to avoid repossession wherever possible.
The hon. Gentleman's extraordinary attack on independent financial advisers was very unwise.
If someone is registered as an independent financial adviser, it is his or her duty to give independent advice and that adviser is regulated by the appropriate body to do that.
If the hon. Gentleman can give examples of IFAs who have failed to give good independent advice, he should refer them to me, or direct to the regulatory body, which will take them up as a matter of urgency.
Of course I give the hon. Gentleman the pledge that we shall take up any of those cases, should he send the details to me.
However, the SIB is in charge of this and I refer hon. Members to it if they have problems.
Mr. Butterfill
Will my hon. Friend accept my thanks for the helpful way in which he dealt with my representations on this subject?
Does he accept that it is largely due to the regulatory framework that he has put in place that the activities of, for example, the Aylesbury Group have now been accepted for the investors compensation scheme?
Will he also impress upon the building societies involved that they have a duty and an obligation to ensure that people are not evicted from their homes until the compensation scheme can take effect?
Mr. Redwood
I give that undertaking.
My hon. Friend's comment is extremely helpful.
He has done a great deal of important work to expose the problem and to help us find a solution to it.
As he said, in some cases there are already agreements that compensation could be made under the investors compensation scheme.
I welcome that, as it is important that compensation should be made available where appropriate.
Manufacturing Investment
Mr. Alan W. Williams
To ask the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry if he will give the total of manufacturing investment in 1990 and 1991 and the percentage fall (a) in cash terms and (b) in real terms.
Mr. Leigh
Fifteen per cent.
Mr. Williams
The level of manufacturing investment is now lower than in 1979, and the growth in manufacturing output since 1979 is just 4.9 per cent.
— far lower than in Germany, where it is 26 per cent., the United States where it is 33 per cent. , and Japan where it is more than 60 per cent .
Against that appalling background, why did yesterday's Budget contain nothing to help investment in manufacturing industry?
Mr. Leigh
There is a great deal in the Budget to help investment.
How would investment be helped by the Labour party's policies of higher costs, higher taxes, more red tape and a minimum wage?
They would drive British industry into bankruptcy.
That is why industry will vote Conservative and we shall win the election.