

THE PARLIAMENTARY DEBATES OFFICIAL REPORT IN THE FIFTH SESSION OF THE FIFTIETH PARLIAMENT OF THE UNITED KINGDOM OF GREAT BRITAIN AND NORTHERN IRELAND [WHICH OPENED 25 JUNE 1987]FORTIETH YEAR OF THE REIGN OF HER MAJESTY QUEEN ELIZABETH II
SIXTH SERIES
VOLUME 198
FIRST VOLUME OF SESSION 1991-92
House of Commons
Thursday 31 October 1991
The House met at twenty-five minutes past Eleven o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
SESSIONAL ORDERS
Elections
Ordered, That all Members who are returned for two or more places in any part of the United Kingdom to make their Election for which of the places they will serve, within one week after it shall appear that there is no question upon the Return for that place; and if anything shall come in question touching the Return or Election of any Member, he is to withdraw during the time the matter is in debate; and that all Members returned upon double Returns do withdraw till their Returns are determined.
Resolved, That no Peer of the Realm, except a Peer of Ireland, hath any right to give his vote in the Election of any Member to serve in Parliament.
Resolved, That if it shall appear that any person hath been elected or returned a Member of this House, or endeavoured so to be, by Bribery or any other corrupt practices, this House will proceed with the utmost severity against all such persons as shall have been wilfully concerned in such Bribery or other corrupt practices.
Witnesses
Resolved, That if it shall appear that any person hath been tampering with any Witness, in respect of his evidence to be given to this House, or any Committee thereof, or directly or indirectly hath endeavoured to deter or hinder any person from appearing or giving evidence the same is declared to be a high crime and misdemeanour; and this House will proceed with the utmost severity against such offender.
Resolved, That if it shall appear that any person hath given false evidence in any case before this House, or any Committee thereof, this House will proceed with the utmost severity against such offender.
Metropolitan Police Motion made, and Question proposed, That the Commissioner of the Police of the Metropolis do take care that during the Session of Parliament the passages through the streets leading to this House be kept free and open and that no obstruction be permitted to hinder the passage of Members to and from this House, and that no disorder be allowed in Westminster Hall, or in the passages leading to this House, during the Sitting of Parliament, and that there be no annoyance therein or thereabouts; and that the Serjeant at Arms attending this House do communicate this Order to the Commissioner aforesaid.
Mr. Robert Adley (Christchurch)
You may remember, Mr. Speaker, that last year I raised with you the problem of coaches parked in and around Parliament square, which makes it impossible for the Sessional Order to be complied with.
You said that you would refer the matter to the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
I have been in correspondence with him since then and he tells me that it would not be possible to give enforcement’ high priority’.
There appears to be a clear conflict between your discussions and the Sessional Order on one hand, and the priorities of the Metropolitan police on the other.
Will you please ask the Commissioner to ensure that the Sessional Order is given the highest priority so that we can get to this place without being obstructed by coaches?
Mr. Speaker
I will certainly refer the matter again, although, as the hon. Member knows, there are difficulties about this.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
It has become the fashion to make a few comments about the Sessional Orders, which is very useful.
I think that the House should take the matter seriously.
I refer especially to the Sessional Order that deals with witnesses to the House.
There have been occasions —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We have already gone past that order.
If the hon. Gentleman wishes to deal with the order under discussion, I shall hear him.
Mr. Cryer
We have agreed to the order, Mr. Speaker, and I am pleased that we have: I said’ Aye’along with the others.
I want to refer to the third Sessional Order, Mr. Speaker, dealing with access — the last one to which you referred.
I do not wish to oppose the previous order, although it is debatable — merely to refer to it in passing, to say that I hope that, when the Select Committee on Health takes evidence on the national health service trusts, no witnesses will be intimidated by threats of disciplinary action intended to prevent them from giving evidence.
Mr. Speaker rose
Mr. Cryer
I now wish to go on to the order concerning access.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is ingenious, but his remarks are miles wide of the order under discussion, which concerns the Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis.
I think that we should move on.
Mr. Cryer
I was about to refer to the order dealing with access.
As you, Sir, will know, in two successive years, I have raised the question of access for Members, which is most important, because it allows us to exercise our right to come here carrying information, messages and representations on behalf of the people whom we represent.
By and large, their message is that we should get rid of this Government as quickly as we can and put a Labour Government in their place.
In two successive years, I have pointed out that, although we take serious action on giving access to Members of Parliament, we take little action on, and treat with scant seriousness, the question of access to this place for disabled people.
I have raised the question three times, and it is about time that something was done about it.
Mr. Speaker
That is a matter for the Administration Committee, not for discussion in connection with the order.
Question put and agreed to.
Votes and Proceedings
Ordered, That the Votes and Proceedings of this House be printed, being first perused by Mr. Speaker; and that he do appoint the printing thereof; and that no person but such as he shall appoint do presume to print the same.
Outlawries
A Bill for the more effectual preventing Clandestine Outlawries; read the First time; to be read a Second time.
Journal
Ordered, That the Journal of this House, from the end of the last Session to the end of the present Session, with an index thereto, be printed.
Ordered, That the said Journal and Index be printed by the appointment and under the direction of Sir Clifford John Boulton, KCB, the Clerk of this House.
Ordered, That the said Journal and Index be printed by such person as shall be licensed by Mr. Speaker, and that no other person do presume to print the same.
Queen's Speech
Mr. Speaker
I have to acquaint the House that this House has this day attended Her Majesty in the House of Peers, and that Her Majesty was pleased to make a Most Gracious Speech from the Throne to both Houses of Parliament, of which I have, for greater accuracy, obtained a copy.
I shall direct that the terms of the Gracious Speech be printed in the Votes and Proceedings.
Copies are available in the Vote Office.
The Gracious Speech was as follows:
My Lords and Members of the House of Commons I look forward to visiting Australia in February, the European Parliament and the Council of Europe in Strasbourg and Malta next May, France in June and Germany in October.
My Government attach the highest importance to maintaining our security.
For nearly half a century NATO has formed the cornerstone of our defences.
It will continue to be the principal focus, but the dissolution of the Warsaw Pact and the other welcome developments in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe permit changes to NATO's strategy and will enable us to maintain our security with smaller forces.
Nevertheless instability and other risks remain in Europe and elsewhere, and substantial and effective nuclear and conventional forces will be maintained.
The United Kingdom will work for balanced and verifiable arms control agreements including early ratification of the Conventional Armed Forces in Europe Treaty.
Efforts will continue to control the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and to encourage greater international responsibility in the transfer of conventional weapons.
The completion of multilateral negotiations on the abolition of chemical weapons will be pursued.
My Government will require full, unconditional compliance by Iraq with the United Nations Security Council Resolutions, including the disposal of its missiles and weapons of mass destruction.
They will press for long-term peace in the Middle East, including a settlement of the Palestinian problem.
They will continue their efforts to secure the release of hostages in the Middle East.
They will continue to work for a stronger, more effective United Nations.
My Government will, with our Community partners, pursue the successful conclusion of the Uruguay Round of multilateral trade negotiations.
Within the Community, they will continue to play a constructive role in the two Inter-Governmental Conferences on Political Union and Economic and Monetary Union; and will work to complete the Single European Market, to promote budgetary discipline, and to reform the Common Agricultural Policy.
They will prepare for the United Kingdom's Presidency of the Community beginning on 1st July 1992.
The United Kingdom will continue to develop our good relations with the Soviet Union and its republics, and to encourage their integration into the world economy; and will work to help Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania re-establish themselves in the international community.
My Government will further encourage the development of democratic institutions and market economies in central and eastern Europe; and pursue the completion of Association Agreements with Hungary, Poland and Czechoslovakia.
They hope for a peaceful settlement in Yugoslavia.
They will contribute constructively to the Helsinki Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe.
My Government will encourage all sides in South Africa to pursue peaceful means of constructing a democratic, non-racial society.
A substantial aid programme aimed at promoting sustainable economic and social progress and good government in developing countries will be maintained.
My Government will continue to support the Commonwealth.
My Government will continue to administer Hong Kong in the interests of its people and to cooperate in implementing the Sino-British Joint Declaration.
My Government will continue their fight against terrorism in the United Kingdom and elsewhere.
They will vigorously pursue their policies to combat drug trafficking and misuse of drugs, nationally and internationally.
The United Kingdom will work for a successful United Nations Conference on Environment and Development next June.
Members of the House of Commons Estimates for the Public Service will be laid before you.
My Lords and Members of the House of Commons My Government will pursue, within the framework of the Exchange Rate Mechanism, firm financial policies designed to reduce inflation further and maintain the conditions necessary for sustained growth.
They will promote enterprise and training and improve the working of the economy.
They will continue to prepare for the privatisation of the British Railways Board and the British Coal Corporation.
They will maintain firm control of public spending with the aim of keeping its share of national income on a downward trend over time.
My Government attach the highest priority to improving public services.
They will implement the programme of reform in the White Paper on the Citizen's Charter, including bringing forward Charters for individual public services.
Legislation will be introduced to reinforce the regulation of privatised utilities.
Legislation will be introduced to provide for a new council tax, to establish a review of local government structure in England, and to enhance competitive tendering for local authority services.
Action will be taken to improve quality and choice in education.
Legislation will be introduced to reform funding of further education and sixth form colleges and to reform higher education in England and Wales, and to make information available about the performance of individual schools.
My Government will continue to develop policies to enhance the nation's health and to improve the effectiveness of the health and social services, and the social security system.
Work for the regeneration of our cities will continue.
A Bill will be introduced to enable applications for asylum in the United Kingdom to be dealt with quickly and effectively.
A Bill will be presented to create an offence of prison mutiny and to increase the maximum penalty for aiding prisoners to escape.
Legislation will be introduced to revise health and safety arrangements for offshore installations.
A Bill will be introduced to replace private legislation as the means for authorising transport development schemes.
A Bill will be introduced to provide for a Cardiff Bay Barrage.
For Scotland, legislation will be introduced to reform further and higher education.
In Northern Ireland, my Government will resolutely seek to defeat terrorism through the even-handed and energetic enforcement of the law; to promote political progress; to strengthen the economy; and to create equality of opportunity and equity of treatment for all sections of the community.
They will maintain positive relations with the Republic of Ireland.
Legislation will be introduced to improve the supervision of charities.
Other measures will be laid before you.
My Lords and Members of the House of Commons I pray that the blessing of Almighty God may rest upon your counsels.
Debate on the Address
Mr. Speaker
Before I call the proposer and the seconder of the motion on the Loyal Address, it may be for the convenience of hon. Members if I inform the House that the proposed subjects for debate for the rest of this week and for next week are as follows:
Friday 1 November — foreign affairs and defence; Monday 4
November — employment and education; Tuesday 5 November — rights, freedoms and responsibilities; Wednesday 6 November — the council tax; Thursday 7 November — the economy.
It may also be for the convenience of the House to know that, on Friday 8 November, there will be a debate on the environment, on a motion for the Adjournment of the House.
Mr. Peter Walker (Worcester)
I beg to move, That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, as follows:
Most Gracious Sovereign,
We, Your Majesty's most dutiful and loyal subjects, the Commons of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, in Parliament assembled, beg leave to offer our humble thanks to Your Majesty for the Gracious Speech which Your Majesty has addressed to both Houses of Parliament.
I very much appreciate the honour of moving this motion, but I have one sadness — the fact that Alick Buchanan-Smith, a colleague and great personal friend of mine, a person who served this House, the Government and his constituency so well, is not with us today.
He was a remarkable parliamentarian and, as a Minister, he was with me for many years.
He loved his constituency, his country and the House of Commons, and I know that he will be sadly missed by hon. Members on both sides of the House.
There have been occasions over the past 30 years when the attendance in this House for my speeches has not been quite as large as it is today.
Perhaps the reason for that is similar to a reason given to George Ward, my predecessor as Member for Worcester, who represented the constituency from 1945 to 1959.
During his last election campaign, he arrived at Worcester guildhall for his eve-of-poll meeting.
The hall was packed to capacity, with standing room only.
Encouraged by that, he began his speech:’ Mr. Chairman, ladies and gentlemen, this is my fifth campaign as your Conservative candidate.
Never before at all the meetings that I have attended have I seen such enormous attendances as I have seen during this campaign and that is illustrated by this packed audience tonight.’
To which a voice from the back of the guildhall shouted,’ We've come to say good-bye.’
It was in 1945, as a 13-year-old schoolboy witnessing the general election campaign, that I first had aspirations to become a Member of this House.
I recognised at school that I had the talent to become a politician when, at the end of a particularly bad term, the headmaster wrote on my report,’ One cannot help but be quite captivated by him, provided one gives him no work to do.’
At the same school I also recognised the importance of freedom of choice, when I approached what was then the equivalent of O-levels.
It was suggested that, among other subjects, I should take Latin.
There was no possibility of my passing Latin.
On the afternoon of the Latin exam, a very good film was being shown at the neighbouring cinema to my school.
I went to the cinema considering that that would be of more benefit than taking a Latin exam that I could not pass.
I was caught and summoned to the Latin master, who said to me,’ Walker, you didn't turn up for the Latin exam.’
To which I replied,’ No, sir.’
He said,’ Walker, I've now known you for four years, and this is the first intelligent thing that you have done.’
I fought my first general election campaign in 1955, with eagerness and enthusiasm.
In 1961, I was fortunate enough to win a by-election in the constituency of Worcester.
After that by-election, I remember taking my place in this House and walking nervously towards Mr. Speaker.
To my surprise, voices from the Labour Benches shouted,’ Put him on the Scottish Grand Committee.’
That was a form of punishment reserved for English Tory Members at the time
Hon. Members
—’ It still is.’]
Little did I realise that I would end my ministerial career by spending much of my time on the Welsh Grand Committee.
It was a great privilege to become the Member for Worcester.
I am very proud of my constituency, which has immense quality.
It is a microcosm of England.
It has the old and the new, and it has industry and agriculture.
It is known as the’ faithful city’—
Interruption
As Opposition Front Bench spokesmen are murmuring, I will say that it has a Labour council; that has been the reason for my increasing majority.
Worcester's motto is the faithful city because we were involved in certain civil wars way back.
Shortly after I became the Member for Worcester, the Queen Mother visited my constituency.
Over the entrance to our guildhall we have an effigy of the head of Cromwell, pinned back by his ears by two large nails.
As I pointed to it, I said to the Queen Mother,’ You see, Ma'am, how badly they treat parliamentarians in this constituency,’to which she swiftly replied,’Ah, yes, Mr. Walker, but they are very good to royalists.’
It has been a faithful city, and I am glad to say that, throughout this century, it has been very faithful to the Conservative party.
Indeed, I recall the experiences of the person who was Prime Minister when I first came into this House — Mr. Harold Macmillan.
I remember how he had fought Stockton-on-Tees six times.
He said how on three occasions he won but on three occasions he lost.
He said in his own inimitable way,’ On the three occasions that I lost, I reflected upon the stupidity of an electoral system whereby everybody, no matter how ill educated, how ignorant, or even how evil, was able to vote.
On the three occasions I won, I reflected upon the inherent good sense of the British people.’
So, Sir, I have been able to reflect on the inherent good sense of the people of Worcester over the years I have been privileged to be the Member for that constituency.
We have, of course, many famous products.
We produce sauce for the benefit of tomato juice throughout the world.
We have produced, over several centuries, some of the finest porcelain the world has ever seen.
I am delighted to say that both previous Prime Ministers under whom I served are avid and enthusiastic collectors of that porcelain.
The present Prime Minister, if he has not already started his career of collecting Royal Worcester porcelain, will be very welcome if he visits the Royal Porcelain Worcester works.
Nearby is the county cricket ground.
I can think of no better, happier or more beautiful place for watching his county side being defeated than the Worcestershire county cricket ground.
It is also a constituency which inspired Elgar to his greatest music.
It is a constituency which possesses the oldest newspaper in Europe.
Those were the days, when it started several hundred years ago, when sensationalism was not the habit of the press.
Indeed, one will find the announcement about the death of Queen Anne in the right-hand bottom column of page 3 of the newspaper.
I have had the immense privilege of serving the people of Worcester over the past 30 years.
In that capacity, I particularly welcome the Queen's Speech today.
Looking at the passages in the Queen's Speech that refer to matters abroad, I reflect upon remarks made to me when I was a very young person, eager to enter politics, by the father of my right hon. Friend the Member for Brighton, Pavilion (Mr. Amery).
Indeed, I owe a great deal to Leo Amery for his wisdom, advice and the views that he expressed.
He said to me in, I suppose, 1947 or 1948:’ If you enter politics, you will find that in your lifetime the world will become a very small place.
Matters taking place in one part of the world will immediately affect the world as a whole.’
Certainly in this Parliament we have seen that happen.
The Queen's Speech refers to events in the Soviet Union, in eastern Europe and in South Africa.
For all hon. Members, our most remarkable experience over the past few years was the sight of the transformation of two regimes, both in their different ways hostile to democracy and in favour of diminishing freedom for large numbers of people.
Suddenly, two people — Mr. Gorbachev and President de Klerk — have, in such a short time, transformed the attitudes of those countries.
Whatever problems they have, and whatever disasters in some spheres affect those countries, I believe that history will judge them as two remarkable and courageous men.
As an observer of that scene, I think that, when history is accurately written, there will be great tribute to the manner in which help, encouragement and advice of considerable quality were given and to the mobilising of the western world to accept that change was taking place.
Great credit for that goes to my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher).
As I have said, we have seen enormous changes, but I advise my right hon. Friends on the Treasury Bench and all hon. Members who will continue to serve in Parliament in the coming years that the changes that have taken place in those countries in the past few years could well be repeated on an enormous scale in other countries.
The Queen's Speech refers to the relationship between China and Hong Kong.
I strongly predict that the changes that have come about in the Soviet Union are likely to come to China in a different form but to the same degree in the years that lie ahead.
There will be a change of leadership in China.
Hong Kong has transformed the regions surrounding it in the past five or six years.
If the same impact was made on the whole of China after 1997, there would be growth economies and expansion on a scale never before seen.
That will pose considerable challenges to all politicians — whatever party is in power.
The Queen's Speech is important not only for the way in which it deals with matters abroad, but also for its emphasis on matters at home.
I welcome especially its emphasis on education.
More than anything else, the key to equality of opportunity is the availability of a marvellous education service.
I welcome the efforts that my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science is making to improve the quality of education in this country.
I should like to refer briefly to something in which my right hon. and learned Friend knows that I have a passionate interest.
I hope that there will be a crusade in the coming years to encourage more reading in every home in our country.
I have had help from the right hon. Members for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot) and for Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale (Sir D. Steel) in advocating that my right hon. and learned Friend should tackle the problem of dyslexia.
Thousands of people suffer the handicap of not being able to read or write properly, but that handicap could be eradicated if we put our minds to it in the coming years.
I welcome the proposals in the Queen's Speech on the Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill.
I regret the delay that has already occurred and shall watch with great interest the manner in which the Labour party mobilises its forces to support that measure.
I also welcome the mention in the Queen's Speech of the problems in our cities and the progress that we intend to make.
I had the privilege of being the first Secretary of State for the Environment when we combined the Ministry of Public Works, the Ministry of Housing and Local Government and the Ministry of Transport.
When we were discussing the name of the new Department, I remember a senior civil servant suggesting to the Prime Minister that, with all those powers, it should be called’ The Department for Living’.
That idea was immediately rejected when somebody pointed out that that would make Peter Walker the Secretary of State for Life.
I also welcome the citizens charter.
The essence of the Queen's Speech is that it deals with the problems that affect every family in our land, such as those that they encounter with the public services and those relating to education, health and the inner cities.
Returning to the advice that Leo Amery gave me as a young man, I remember reading widely from the great autobiographies and biographies that he recommended, including the works of Lord Milner.
In one of his writings, Lord Milner endeavoured to define patriotism, which he expressed as being the desire to ensure that everybody who is born a citizen of one's country should rejoice in the birthright of being a citizen of that country.
He argued that, to achieve that, one had to carry out policies that would eradicate the poverty, misery and difficulties facing those citizens.
He said,’ Abroad, one should pursue policies so that when a citizen of one's country travels abroad, he is admired by the rest of the world for the policies being pursued in that country.’
This Queen's Speeech reflects that attitude of patriotism.
I believe that, in his attitudes to politics and policies, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has an immense desire to tackle the problems of the ordinary families of this country.
Abroad, he has already attained a high respect internationally for the manner in which he is endeavouring to help the third world and to play a responsible part in eastern Europe.
So, Sir, because of that quality of the Queen's Speech, I support it and recommend it to the House.
I believe that it will be the first of many Queen's Speeches prepared by my right hon. Friend.
Mr. Jonathan Aitken (Thanet, South)
I am delighted to second the motion that has been so ably and amusingly moved by my right hon. Friend the Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker).
He and I do not perhaps instantly fit into the standard parliamentary stereotypes of the steady old stallion and the keen young foal who are usually harnessed together for this occasion.
Perhaps we were selected by some mysterious computer which recorded the fact that we have each served a 17-year sentence — mine on the Back Benches, his in the Cabinet.
We were perhaps selected by someone with a sense of humour who thought that we might be the right couple to bring in a Queen's Speech which increases the penalties for mutiny in prisons.
Whatever the selection process might have been, we both know that proposing this motion is an honour, not so much for us as for our constituents.
My constituency of Thanet, South deserves one or two compliments.
It is at first glance a paragon of English coastal charm and tranquility.
Our traditional attractions include the beginnings of the white cliffs of Dover, historic monuments such as the landing places of St. Augustine and Julius Caesar, and the medieval cinque port of Sandwich, whose parliamentary representation stretches back in an unbroken line to the days of Simon de Montfort.
A more recent parliamentary tradition is 13,000-plus Tory majorities.
Mr. Alan Meale (Mansfield)
Unlucky for some.
Mr. Aitken
The hon. Gentleman who seems to suggest that those 13,000 majorities might not be so solid is, of course, right.
My hon. Friend the Member for Thanet, North (Mr. Gale) and I intend to increase them.
At second glance, Thanet, South is perhaps not such a typical Tory seat.
The principal town of Ramsgate, Britain's second biggest channel port, could be described as Pop Larkin country by the sea.
Our political exchanges there are robust.
On the hustings in my first election campaign in February 1974, the casualty list among officers of my association consisted of one broken nose, two black eyes and the lady chairman drenched by a bucket of water, which the candidate had ducked.
Since then, over the past 17 years, I have had to fight off challenges of various kinds from representatives of the Kent miners, the Socialist Workers party, the Communist party, the Green party, an exotic assortment of independents and the National Front.
That rich mixture is likely to continue into the next election, because already it has been announced that the prospective parliamentary candidates for the Thanet, South seat in the next election will include a Mr. William Pitt and the leader of the Corrective party, Miss Whiplash.
Her electioneering methods will, I presume, give a whole new meaning to that old political maxim,’ There is no such thing as a safe seat.’
You will gather from that thumbnail sketch, Mr. Speaker, that my constituents have had no problem in following my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister's recent exhortations to create a classless society.
Indeed, when we hold a Conservative party function in Thanet, South, it is not one of those black-tie, celebrity-packed £500-a-plate dinners at the Park Lane hotel which the Labour party holds.
No, when we have a fund-raiser in Thanet it is more likely to be in the nature of a’ Knees Up, Mother Brown’in the Eagle cafe at the end of Ramsgate harbour.
We had just such a function there last Saturday, where the consensus was that making a living was getting a bit easier, that the economy was startling to move forward, and that, by the time we get round to the season of the darling buds of May, the prospects for Her Majesty's Government might well be’ perfick, just perfick’.
We shall see.
My constituents' feelings of optimism will be increased by several of the proposals in the Gracious Speech.
In particular, there will be a warm welcome for the Government's commitment to our great public services and for their determination to improve standards by implementing the citizens charter.
I particularly welcome the priority given to the patients charter, which will reduce appointment waiting times and waiting lists in hospitals, and to the schools charter, which will make sure that parents get the fullest information on their children's education.
The citizens charter reform means that the Government are making a determined effort to move away from the era when the gentlemen in Whitehall always knew best towards a more open, accountable public service, striving to do better.
One part of the public service that is somewhat unsung is the immigration service.
We certainly appreciate it at the channel ports.
It is also being recognised that immigration may become a hot political problem on the international scene.
If one looks at the continuing difficulties in eastern Europe and the disintegration of the Soviet empire, which some now call the UFFR — the union of fewer and fewer republics — one sees that those troubles could trigger off large movements of displaced persons across national frontiers.
There are some signs that that is already happening.
It is not generally known that there are more than 1,000 applications a week at the Home Office for political asylum from new arrivals.
With that record number of 50,000 asylum-seekers each year passing through our slow and antiquated legal procedures, it has become vital that we reform the system in the interests of fairness to the genuine political refugee.
Therefore, I welcome the passages in the Gracious Speech that promise an asylum Bill to introduce these reforms.
Mention of frontiers is a reminder that the Thanet, South constituency, geographically at least, is Britain's closest to Europe.
From my home in Sandwich bay, on a clear day I can look across the English channel and see the coast of France.
I understand that from nearby Broadstairs, from the boyhood home and birthplace of my right hon. Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath), the same continental shoreline is equally visible.
It is a case of same view, slightly different vision.
There will be many different visions of Europe, particularly if it widens, as I hope it will, and extends the hand of friendship to countries such as Hungary, Czechoslavakia, Poland and member countries of the European Free Trade Association.
Laughter
I recall that my right hon. Friend and I campaigned together on the same side in favour of a’ yes’vote in the 1975 referendum on whether Britain should remain in the European Community.
We both believed, and we believe now, that Britain should be where it is, at the heart of Europe, benefiting enormously from the economic and political advantages of membership of a community of 330 million people.
Our shared experience in that campaign was in marked contrast to the role played by the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) who, throughout that campaign, spoke vociferously and vigorously against Britain's membership of the European Community.
According to Tribune on 5 May 1975, he even said:’ The EEC and its political and economic dimensions is the robber of the real sovereignty of the people.’
Talk about a poacher turned gamekeeper.
When I listen to him now, gung-ho for Delorsism, I can only reflect that Saul on the road to Damascus was nothing compared to Neil on the autoroute to Brussels.
The Gracious Speech rightly emphasises Britain's constructive role in the two intergovernmental conferences on political union and on economic and monetary union.
As we approach the climax of the negotiations, it is inevitable that there will be deep feelings and some divisions on both sides of the House.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
In your party.
Mr. Aitken
I am surprised that the hon. Gentleman should suggest that there are divisions in the Conservative party but not in his party.
Labour Members should take a journey from Stepney through Bolsover to Chesterfield, ending up at Hemsworth, where there are two Labour candidates, with two different views on Europe, in the by-election.
Then they would not talk about divisions
Mr. George Foulkes (Carrick, Cumnock and Doon Valley)
Get on with it.
Mr. Aitken
I shall not go on being hard on the Labour party, because I think it natural and right that there should be different views on Europe.
The treaties have the potential to change our constitutional arrangements and the powers of Parliament.
This is not the moment to rehearse the arguments for and against the various options with which we may be presented in December, so I leave the House with two brief thoughts.
First, we would be wise to trust our negotiators.
My right hon. Friends the Prime Minister and the Foreign Secretary are good Europeans, but also sound British parliamentarians.
They will be shrewd judges of what would be acceptable to the House and the country and what would not.
I do not share the fears of some of my Euro-sceptic friends that a giant sell-out is being secretly prepared.
Secondly, I am impressed by the way in which my right hon. Friends have negotiated so positively on some aspects of the treaties, while at the same time drawing the line so firmly with our European partners on those parts of the treaties that we cannot accept.
I occasionally wonder whether anyone in Brussels listens to what is said in the House, but my right hon. Friends have made it clear that Britain cannot accept any defence arrangement that would weaken NATO or the Atlantic alliance, and that we cannot accept any declaration of intent or prior commitment to a single currency.
Neither can we accept that Community foreign and security policy should be decided by majority voting.
The Government have taken a stand on the right principles, and when my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister goes to Maastricht to uphold them, he will have the overwhelming support of the House and the country, whatever the outcome of the summit.
Finally, the opening day of a Queen's Speech debate is one of our most agreeable parliamentary occasions.
My sense of honour and enjoyment in taking part in it has been enhanced by one sentimental memory.
Twenty-nine years ago to this day, this motion on the Loyal Address was moved by the then hon. Member for Bury St. Edmunds, my late father, William Aitken.
So far as I can discover, this appears to be some sort of first parliamentary double.
If my father could look down on our proceedings, once he had recovered from his astonishment at who was speaking, he would be even more surprised by the political symmetry between the two debates.
In 1962, the Queen's Speech debate was dominated by Europe.
Almost every speaker concentrated on that issue —
Mr. Foulkes
And we won the next election.
Mr. Aitken
Almost every speaker concentrated on the European issue, because we were then in the middle of crucial negotiations about Britain's future in Europe and our membership of what was then called the common market.
Those particular negotiations failed through no fault of anyone in Britain, but we did learn that the European process is full of second thoughts and second chances, because, later, under the leadership of my right hon. Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath), we got an even better deal.
Twenty-nine years ago, there was certainly a recognition in the House that a bad agreement was much worse than no agreement, and there may be a message in that for us today.
After all, all those who know and love this House of Commons well understand that it is not just a vehicle for legislative progress or a machine for rubber-stamping international treaties.
Above all, it is a sensitive arena of our national will and mood, in which the dogs bark but the caravan does not always move on.
Perhaps that is one of the safeguards that has made this country such a successful and stable parliamentary democracy.
I beg to second the motion.
Mr. Neil Kinnock (Islwyn)
It is a happy custom of this House that, on this occasion, the Leader of the Opposition congratulates those hon. Members who moved and seconded the Loyal Address.
I do so today with great enthusiasm in the case of the right hon. Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker) and the hon. Member for Thanet, South (Mr. Aitken).
On a sober note, I should also like to echo what the right hon. Member for Worcester said about Alick Buchanan-Smith.
He was regarded on both sides of the House not only as charming, but as very honest and courageous, and I think that we can genuinely say that he had friendships on both sides.
The same is true of an hon. Member who sadly left the Labour Benches during the summer recess, George Buckley, whose courage no one could ever fail to admire, especially the way in which he carried his mortal illness.
His honesty and loyalty is a model to everyone who wishes to be an authentic representative of the people he served in a variety of capacities for so many years.
We are going to miss Alick and George deeply.
The right hon. Member for Worcester will be leaving the House at the end of this Parliament, and I wish him well.
I know that one of his reasons for leaving is that he genuinely wants to be able to spend more time with his family.
That is understandable, especially as he obviously has such delightful children.
Last year provided an instance of that, when the television cameras were congregated around the right hon. Gentleman's home at the time of his departure from Government.
His daughter, then five years old, was asked whether she understood why there was such excitement.
She said,’ Yes, of course.
It is because my daddy is getting a new car.’
I had a similar experience back in 1978, when I was elected to the national executive committee of the Labour party.
I called home and spoke to my then seven-year-old daughter who had been rehearsed by her grandparents about what she should appropriately say.
She lisped over the telephone,’ Congratulations, daddy, on being elected to the national executing committee of the Labour party’.
Laughter
There was a pause and my daughter then said,’ Daddy, does this mean you will be getting a car with electric windows?’
Such is the nature of priorities.
The right hon. Gentleman's record in politics is not only distinguished, but it has been distinctive to say the least.
He has been a member of every Conservative Cabinet since 1970, despite the fact that, by his own testimony, he is strongly against monetarism, non-interventionism, the high interest rate policy, the poll tax, the European Community policy of the previous Prime Minister and, last but not least, the promotion of hospital opt-outs.
That record testifies to a certain dexterity in politics.
It is also proof of the high regard that the right hon. Member for Finchley had for the right hon. Gentleman and his presence in her Cabinet.
I shall not mention Lyndon B. Johnson's maxim about tents — but there may have been a slight hint of that in the right hon. Lady's strategic thinking.
The right hon. Member for Worcester has said in characteristically self-deprecating phrases that he does not have a great desire to be remembered but I am sure that, given his record, he will take it as an accolade to be thought of, in H. L. Mencken's happy phrase, as a politician who could sit on the fence and have both ears to the ground at the same time.
Clearly, the right hon. Member for Finchley prized the right hon. Gentleman's presence in her Cabinet.
When I consider the mover and seconder of the Loyal Address today, I cannot escape the feeling that, while the right hon. Member for Worcester was in successive Tory Governments because of his cleverness, the hon. Member for Thanet, South may have been kept out of successive Tory Governments for exactly the same reason.
I noted what the hon. Gentleman said in his biblical reference; it occurred to me that he should be a little more careful when talking about St. Paul.
If he is acquainted with the New Testament, he should remember that it was after St. Paul's conversion that he exercised such great influence over all future history.
The record of the hon. Member for Thanet, South shows that he is a man of persistent commitment and deep passions.
He is against the channel tunnel; he is against Government secrecy; he is against the concentration of press ownership.
To his considerable credit, he persisted with the cause of press freedom even when his stand threatened to take him to gaol 20 years ago.
He has had the great distinction of having to deny past intelligence experience — when the former Cabinet Secretary made his allegation a few years ago.
It might be thought that the hon. Gentleman's independence of mind and spirit owe something to his background.
He is, after all, the former assistant tennis and funerals correspondent of the East Anglian Daily Times.
After that experience, some might think that his career slipped a little when he joined the Evening Standard, but he is clearly thriving in that career.
As he was picked to second the Loyal Address today, I think that he can confidently look forward after the next general election to a leading position on the Opposition Front Bench.
There are proposals in this Queen's Speech which we can welcome.
The commitment to balanced and verifiable arms control, the commitment to ensure that Iraq complies in full and unconditionally with the United Nations Security Council resolutions, the commitment to fight terrorism and trafficking in narcotics — all these have our support.
Naturally, we back other elements of policy, including the efforts to achieve a successful completion of the Uruguay round of GATT and a productive United Nations environment and development conference next year.
We had hoped to be able to support measures on so-called joyriding, on the establishment of an Environmental Protection Agency and on better employment conditions for women, but it appears that the Prime Minister's enthusiasm for this last came too recently for its inclusion in the Queen's Speech.
Still, there may be chances, even during the course of what will be a relatively short Session of Parliament, for amends to be made.
Unfortunately, so far such improvements are nowhere to be seen, and we can only speculate on the reasons for their absence.
Sir Giles Shaw (Pudsey)
As the right hon. Gentleman is talking about matters in which there may be joint agreement, and as he has visited Langbaurgh and Hemsworth in recent days, will he comment on the fact that both the Labour party candidates for those constituencies have invested in newly privatised industries?
Does he agree, therefore, that he too might wish to recommend such investment, or does he propose to disown the Labour party candidates for Langbaurgh and Hemsworth?
Mr. Kinnock
As it happens, I do not share the investments that my good friends the Labour party candidates happen to have made.
The hon. Gentleman may have noticed that this is a free country.
Those candidates exercise their freedoms and I defend those freedoms — If the freedoms which Conservative Members say they want to uphold were so widespread, they would not only define freedom in terms of the power to own shares in a company but would seek to defend it in terms of being able to get a job in that company, in a country with getting on for 2.5 million unemployed.
Interruption
Mr. Anthony Beaumont-Dark (Birmingham, Selly Oak)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Kinnock
No, I shall not do so for a second, because it will prolong matters.
We are glad to see that the Government continue in their efforts to press for long-term middle east peace and the settlement of the Palestinian problem.
Today, everyone in the House will join in thanking those responsible for bringing about the peace conference that opened in Madrid yesterday.
It is appropriate on this occasion to record particular gratitude to Mr. James Baker, the United States Secretary of State.
We must all hope that, despite great odds, the process now under way will achieve a fruitful and mutually satisfactory outcome, however long it takes.
We are debating the Queen's Speech today because the Government are afraid to face the British people.
If the Government were not fearful of the electorate, we would not be debating the Queen's Speech today, because there would be a general election next Thursday.
Some Conservative Members wanted that.
The Home Secretary said,’ Go,’the chairman of the Conservative party said,’No,’and, in a bold act of leadership, the Prime Minister got the Secretary of State for Energy to call a few favourite newspapers and leak the news that there would be no November election — government by seepage.
There has still been no clear personal statement from the Prime Minister.
The nearest that we have had to a declaration so far is an off-the-cuff remark to journalists in Harare last week, when the Prime Minister said:’ There are eight months to go.’
Now that he is back among us, will the right hon. Gentleman say whether there are really eight months to go?
I shall gladly give way if he wishes to make an announcement — The Prime Minister simply smiles enigmatically but does not otherwise respond.
Interruption
It is obvious that he will subject Britain to a guessing game, while the British people must endure more of the poll tax, which they hate; more hospital opt-outs, which they oppose; more business failures and home repossessions; rising unemployment and falling investment.
Little can be more disreputable than a Government who hang on to their jobs while pursuing policies that guarantee that thousands of other people will lose theirs.
Nothing in the Queen's Speech can offer better prospects It says that the Government will promote training, but they have cut it.
It says that they will promote enterprise, but they are responsible for wiping out more enterprises than any Government in British history.
The Queen's Speech says that the Government will improve the working of the economy, but what is that pledge worth?
The Government's policies have sent the construction industry into a nosedive, brought a 30 per cent.
reduction in motor sales, caused the loss of 150,000 jobs in engineering, hit every high street in the land and resulted in the biggest fall in investment since 1932.
Who can trust such a Government when they pledge to improve the working of the economy?
Far from improving the working of the economy, with their policies they have stopped the economy from working for many families and firms throughout the land.
The Chancellor says that all that is a price well worth paying to reduce inflation — of course, the Chancellor has not yet had to pay that price, but he will.
The Chancellor and the Prime Minister are patting themselves on the back for the fact that they have managed to reduce British inflation rates to something like the German levels, but there is a difference between the two.
Germany has an inflation rate of 4 per cent.
and a growth rate of plus 4 per cent.
Britain has an inflation rate of 4.1 per cent.
and a growth rate of minus 2.5 per cent.
The Government have reduced inflation only by imposing the second Tory slump in 10 years.
That is the price the Chancellor and the Prime Minister think is worth paying — the price of decline and despair for families, the price of the dissolution of industries upon which we in this country depend for our future.
The Prime Minister and the Chancellor are now promising recovery.
To be sure, the whole country needs recovery.
People in every industry, service and region need recovery.
We need recovery in my constituency, where unemployment has risen by 39 per cent.
in the past 12 months.
They need recovery in the Chancellor's constituency of Kingston upon Thames, where unemployment has risen by 102 per cent.
during the past 12 months.
They need recovery in Huntingdon, the Prime Minister's constituency, where unemployment has risen by 111 per cent.
and youth unemployment has risen by 126 per cent.
in the past 12 months.
We all need recovery, and the question is: under this Government, when will recovery come?
The Confederation of British Industry says that the recovery will not come for many more months.
It says that it will be patchy and hesitant and that, even then, Britain will be at the bottom of the growth, investment and employment leagues for the fourth year in succession under a Tory Government.
There is the more vital question: under this Government's policy, will recovery stay, and will it be strong?
With this Government, the answer to that question must be no.
Mr. Beaumont-Dark
Why?
Mr. Kinnock
If the hon. Gentleman listens, I shall tell him.
In 12 years, all the Government have ever done, and all they are doing now, is hope that the increase in consumer demand will eventually refloat the economy.
But that cannot and will not achieve sustained recovery — experience here and everywhere else proves that.
In order to bring about sustained growth, the Government will have to reverse the cuts that they have made in the training budget and develop a long-term programme to increase the quantity and quality of skills throughout British industry.
They refuse to do that.
In order to achieve sustained growth, the Government would have actively to encourage industrial investment with a tax regime promoting the purchase of new plants and machinery.
They will not do that.
They would have to put private money into public transport projects.
They will not do that.
They would have to allow — So much of this is obvious.
££ the House that I have given way rather more often than the Leader of the Opposition did.
I now wish to consider something that I believe is of acute importance to every Member of the House and to millions of people beyond it — the negotiations in which we are currently engaged on the intergovernmental conferences.
Interruption
In the past 20 years we have gained enormously from our membership of the Community.
I believe that the Community has gained also from our membership because Britain has determined its direction in so many ways — on budget reform, on reform of the common agricultural policy, on the single market, on free competition within Europe and on free trade with the rest of the world.
Too often we overlook the extent to which Britain leads the Community and too frequently we recall the difficulties we sometimes face in it.
Mr. Frank Cook
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
The Prime Minister
I shall not give way to the hon. Gentleman at the moment; not in this speech.
I do not doubt that over the next 20 years the Community's evolution will be as marked as it has been in the nearly 20 years since we joined.
We cannot dictate what our children will make of the Community, but we must leave them in a position where they can effectively influence the shape of Europe, and that Europe must be one in which we retain our distinct national identity.
The intergovernmental conferences now under way raise vital issues for the future of this country.
They involve hard judgments of where our best interests lie.
In our approach to those negotiations, we have been guided by the views expressed in debates in the House.
We have made progress in a number of areas.
We are working to achieve an agreement at Maastricht in December, but it must be an agreement that I could make in the confident expectation that I could commend it to the House.
On economic and monetary union, it would be irresponsible for any Government to ask the people of Britain to decide now that we should adopt, at a future date, a single European currency which will have far-reaching implications for the conduct of monetary and economic union.
A move to a single currency that was not backed by convergence between the two economies of the member states of the Community would be a recipe for economic disaster.
That is not in the interests of this country, or of our partners in Europe.
This country is in the first rank of the European Community and will remain so.
But I am not prepared to commit our country to a single currency.
We must be able to judge nearer the time — Parliament must judge nearer the time — whether a single currency is in the interests of Britain.
We should not achieve what is best for Britain or the Community by giving up now our right to independent judgment then.
There is still some way to go before we have an agreement on economic and monetary union, but the discussions so far have shown that it is possible to thrash out a sensible position in negotiations.
It is our aim to do the same on the draft treaty on political union.
The issues raised are more diverse and just as difficult.
They include the conduct of defence and foreign policy, and the powers of the European Parliament, the Commission and the European Court.
We have to satisfy ourselves that, if we reach an agreement, it is an agreement in the overall British interest.
It must be in Britain's interest to work more closely with like-minded European countries on foreign policy, defence and security.
Mr. Paddy Ashdown (Yeovil)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
The Prime Minister
I shall give way to the right hon. Gentleman in a moment.
It would not be in our interests to set up new defence structures that would undermine the role of NATO in safeguarding our defence.
Mr. Greenway
Yes, I agree with the hon. Gentleman.
Adult education must be accessible to people on all income levels.
I hope that all hon. Members accept that adult education is an amazing vehicle through which people can have more fulfilled lives in respect both of leisure and of their professional careers.
Adult education is cheap.
I have worked in adult education for 12 years and I am proud, like the education spokesman for the Social and Liberal Democrats and, I think, the Leader of the Opposition, to be a vice-president of the Workers Educational Association.
I hope that the Government will consider the potential of adult education in a new way and will do all they can to devote funds to it.
The Queen's Speech also states that information is to be’ available about the performance of individual schools.’
Information about truancy rates will be available to parents.
There will also be tables showing examination successes between schools.
Somehow, schools must serve and respond to parental choices.
However, I am wary of placing excessive pressure on children and teachers where there are behavioural difficulties or deprivation.
In those circumstances, teachers do not have a chance of achieving the level of examination success that might be achieved in more favourable teaching conditions.
Where children are well motivated, well supported at home and well funded, they will be easier to teach, especially if the buildings are good, than pupils who struggle to get to school and whose parents are feckless and short of money.
I know of a school not far from this place where there are many highly deprived children, but they work well.
I do not want to let schools off: they should compete in terms of truancy or examination tables.
However, everyone concerned must understand the difficulties that some schools face.
A school prospectus is vital.
At the moment, parents find many school prospectuses dull and unexciting.
Schools should also hold meetings for prospective parents.
Many schools do not welcome the parents of prospective pupils or influence decisions about which school parents should choose for their children.
Everything should be done to increase choice in respect of schools.
We should also do more to pay good classroom teachers.
Everyone in the profession is aware that some people can be absent from teaching posts and not be missed.
In some respects, we are better off without them.
However, as a result of my 23 years in teaching, I know that people like that remain in post and nothing is done about it.
They are paid the same as people who can teach brilliantly.
Mr. Frank Cook
I count the hon. Gentleman as a friend.
He knows of my attempts to try to understand the so-called’ Irish issue’.
Is my hon. Friend — if I may use that term — sure that a solution put forward in this House would be accepted in Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic?
Mr. Mallon
I thank the hon. Member for that legitimate and serious question.
This House has a role to play because Northern Ireland exists under the Government.
The House, individual hon. Members and political parties have a role to play, as have the political parties in the Republic of Ireland and the Government of the Republic of Ireland, who have a central role.
However, our role is more central, even on the most banal basis — the £2 billion of the Government's money that goes into that bottomless abyss year after year.
Soldiers from this country stand at look-out posts and are shot.
For what?
People from this country are suffering the embarrassment of it all and that is why the primary responsibility lies here and should never be shirked.
Mr. Ivor Stanbrook (Orpington)
Does the hon. Gentleman agree that there should be a Select Committee of this House devoted to the affairs of Northern Ireland?
Mr. Mallon
If the hon. Gentleman asks me whether I agree that the Irish issue should be pushed upstairs and taken off the Floor of the House, I certainly do not.
The matter must be resolved on the Floor of the House and within this forum.
I see why many hon. Members on both sides of the House would want it to be pushed upstairs out of sight and out of mind.
That would be a substantial problem for everyone concerned with the north of Ireland.
If the hon. Gentleman says that there is a device whereby legislation could be scrutinised more efficiently, I would look at that.
Mr. Winnick
Does my hon. Friend agree that the British-Irish parliamentary body, on which we both have the honour to serve, at least provides a forum where British and Irish parliamentarians can meet twice a year?
Does he also agree that, although the violence of the provisional IRA and others who claim with no legitimacy to speak for the Irish people as a whole, is sickening, it is equally disgusting, disgraceful and sickening to see those who claim to be loyal to the Unionist cause killing, tit for tat, for no reason other than that people happen to be Catholic?
Mr. Mallon
The inter-parliamentary body has been successful.
Last week there was a successful visit by members of one of those committees to Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.
It did not sit in the hallowed tombs of Stormont or Leinster House, but went out to the border areas, saw the problems and listened to those involved.
It was a remarkable education for all of us, including me, who has lived there for many years.
The hon. Member for Stockton, North (Mr. Cook) knows my views on violence from whatever source.
Let those involved in violence — who plan it, carry it out or are in any way responsible for it — realise the damage that they are doing to people living in the district.
They damage not only the unfortunate victims and their families, and those touched in an immediate way by the violence, but the entire community.
Such violence saps hope and resilience out of a community, and induces despair.
As the rest of Europe and the world progresses, are we to be left in a quagmire of despair at the end of another parliamentary Session, another era and another century?
Is it too much to hope, ask or even start demanding that those who exercise authority in respect of the problem — those sitting in Government, whether here or in the Republic of Ireland — start to solve that problem?
We should at least be able to start anew with some element of hope.
There are no excuses left for me or anyone in my position, for Government or for Opposition.
Some people try to use the escape hatch of saying that the problem is a religious one, but it is not, although there are substantial religious overtones.
It is not a socio-economic problem, although poverty exacerbates it.
It is not an ethnic problem, although differences of identity are involved.
It is simply and solely a political problem which politicians, political parties and Governments must set about solving through the political process.
If we do not do that, we are abdicating responsibility and refusing to fulfil our primary role — to tackle and solve problems of a substantial nature.
If we do not begin to address the problem, we shall be doing irreparable damage to our political profession, which I greatly respect.
We shall be debasing and demeaning it, and allowing people involved in violence, thuggery and gangsterism to usurp the role of elected representatives.
The question I pose is the one that I asked at the beginning of my speech: do those in government and opposition have the courage to set about creating a new beginning to bring about peace, political stability, and an end to the tensions between Ireland and Britain, and can they bring the beginnings of hope for my constituents and the people in the north of Ireland?
We shall answer that question; we shall not ignore it when it crops up.
When the time is right to speak about it we shall do so.
The time was right for the Prime Minister and the Leader of the Opposition to do so today, but they did not.
Out of sight is not out of mind; the problem will not go away, but must be solved.
It is our job to do so.
Sir Anthony Grant (Cambridgeshire, South-West)
I shall not follow the hon. Member for Newry and Armagh (Mr. Mallon) who spoke about Ireland, because I am not qualified to do so, except to say that Ireland recently gave us the best rugby match in the world cup.
Many years ago I spent several happy hours playing rugby against and with the London Irish and other Irish teams of both Catholics and Protestants.
We played and fought hard, and it is sad to reflect that the plethora of political parties to which the hon. Member referred seems unable to produce the good will, fellowship and spirit that prevailed in those days.
Mr. Dixon
You wear your badge though!
Mr. Cook
At the moment, yes.
My usual reluctance was reinforced on that occasion because I should have been doubly embarrassed to admit to the Dutch travellers that I was a Member of Parliament.
My point is that I see nothing in the Gracious Speech to enable me to counter the opinions expressed by our European partners who are still proud to know us but bemused that we have a Britain which in their eyes is no longer as great as it was.
Mr. William Powell (Corby)
I begin by congratulating the hon. Member for Stockton, North (Mr. Cook) on becoming a grandfather again.
I thank him for his most generous tribute to our former colleague Richard Holt, who will be remembered by hon. Members on both sides of the House with considerable affection.
The hon. Member for Stockton, North said that, when he had only been going two minutes, Richard Holt was already on his feet challenging him.
That is the most authentic memory that many of us have of Richard Holt.
How things have changed, both at home and abroad, during the year since the last Queen's Speech.
It was almost exactly a year ago that my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe) resigned, with momentous consequences for the politics of our country.
As is well known, I was one of those who felt that adjustments and changes were needed to the Conservative party and to the policies which were being pursued by the Government.
I welcome the changes that have been made since then and the leadership which my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has given the country.
They are reflected, of course, in the contents of the Queen's Speech which we are now discussing.
I wholeheartedly welcome and endorse the proposals contained in the Gracious Speech, with only one minor caveat.
One matter which I should like to have seen included would almost certainly have merited parliamentary discussion before the inevitable dissolution of this Parliament, which will make this a short Session.
For some time we have been promised legislation to reform the laws on friendly societies.
Such legislation has been through detailed preparation including the publication of draft clauses.
Such a Bill could have passed through Parliament with considerable agreement among hon. Members on both sides of this House and another place.
I hope that my right hon. Friends will consider finding time for such legislation when they penetrate the meaning of that wonderful phrase,’ Further measures will be laid before you.’
There is absolutely no doubt that the legislation that governs friendly societies is long overdue for reform.
Many generous and warm tributes have been paid to my right hon. Friend the Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker) for not only his speech but the massive contribution that he has made to this Parliament and our country during the last generation.
I wish to pick up one matter from his speech — that of dyslexia.
As the parent of a daughter who has had to struggle and cope with dyslexia, I have perhaps more personal knowledge of the difficulties that it causes than many hon. Members.
Dounreay
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
As I rise to speak to the House on this important matter, I am conscious that it is a complex and difficult subject.
It is a farce — indeed, it is tragic — that a matter of such grave concern to the people of Scotland should be raised in an Adjournment debate when time is limited.
The matter needs a great deal of exploration.
It seems ludicrous that Scottish Back-Benchers do not even have the facility of a Select Committee on Scottish Affairs to which we could summon Ministers and ask them in detail about the problems that we face.
I wish to place on record my party's stance and my personal stance on the reprocessing of nuclear material at Dounreay.
It is our long-held view that foreign spent nuclear fuel should not be sent to Dounreay for storage, let alone for reprocessing, because it breaches what is for us a fundamental principle: that the responsibility for the disposal of spent nuclear fuel should lie with the reactor operators.
If the appropriate storage facilities do not exist, that is a problem which should and can be addressed by the reactor operators themselves.
The Scottish National party has made its view perfectly clear on many occasions and I reiterate that view this evening: radioactive material, whether it be spent nuclear fuel or waste, should be stored above ground, on site, where it can be subject to close inspection.
There is grave public concern in Scotland about the possibility of our country being used as the world's nuclear dustbin.
The Minister may think that that is a strong expression, but I use it carefully.
The matter was first drawn to our attention as far back as 1974 when the nuclear industry inspectorate's chief inspector said this about the consequences of developing reprocessing in the United Kingdom:’ The price for Britain of building lucrative business world-wide in nuclear fuel services could be that it becomes the dumping place for the world's nuclear waste.’
So as far back as 1974 it was spelt out by the industry itself.
At that stage the inspector did not mention spent nuclear fuel.
Events prove that, in the context of reprocessing spent nuclear fuel, his prediction is being realised.
In Scotland during the past year we have witnessed the distasteful spectacle of Dounreay scouring the planet and touting for business as the nuclear prostitute of the world, seeking to sign as many contracts as possible to dispose of other countries' spent nuclear fuel while the clock ticks away towards the 1994 deadline set by the Government when funding for the 250 MW prototype fast reactor will cease.
Dounreay has been attempting to fill a gap in the international market which has appeared since the United States energy department decided in 1989 to ban the import of research reactor fuel pending an environmental assessment.
It has been Dounreay's proud boast that it is the only civilian site in the western world which can reprocess the highly enriched uranium fuel used by 50 reactors in 22 countries.
According to press reports, Dounreay is attempting to build up its foreign business to £25 million.
In that context, what has been particularly difficult for all of us in Scotland to deal with has been the Government's secrecy.
What have the Government done and said?
As usual, they have been willing to sub-contract these important decisions to the nuclear industry and to stand back, like Pontius Pilate, and say,’ This has nothing to do with us.’
Recently, from a series of parliamentary questions that I tabled to the Secretary of State for Scotland, it became clear that since his appointment he had not even bothered to contact the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority to discuss the storage and reprocessing of spent fuel at Dounreay.
That is a gross dereliction of duty.
Perhaps he has been too busy writing letters to his colleagues in the Cabinet — a matter to which I shall return later.
There has been a conspiracy of silence between the nuclear industry and the Government on providing information about the contracts that Dounreay has signed and about the discussions and negotiations that have taken place or are taking place with foreign reactors.
Not only radioactive plutonium has a half-life; so does the information on these contracts, which leaks so slowly from Scottish Office canisters.
Elected Members of Parliament, councillors and others interested have been dependent, like the general public, on press reports and the monitoring activities of groups such as the Scottish Campaign to Resist the Atomic Menace, Greenpeace and the Northern European Information Group.
I pay tribute to them tonight for the work that they have undertaken in an attempt to keep us aware of what is happening out there.
Mr. Robert Maclennan (Caithness and Sutherland)
I realise that this is a short debate and that I cannot possibly ask the hon. Lady all the questions that I should like to ask.
Has she asked the Atomic Energy Authority about these contracts?
When I have done so, I have had no difficulty whatever in obtaining full and frank information at all times.
The allegation that there has been undue secrecy seems untrue.
Mrs. Ewing
The hon. Gentleman, who has a special interest in this matter, must be aware that the first information on the Iraqi contract came through a leaked letter and not directly from UKAEA.
Although Members of Parliament are constantly in contact with that organisation, we do not have the opportunity to explore the matter in detail or to discuss openly what is taking place.
We are learning now about contracts because information has been leaked.
It was confirmed in September 1990 that Dounreay had secured its first new contract for reprocessing with the Physikalisch Technische Bundesanstalt research reactor in Braunschweig to reprocess 39 spent fuel rods.
So far 20 of them have been sent to Dounreay, with a further consignment due.
We are told that Dounreay has held preliminary discussions with the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation about reprocessing spent fuel from the High Flux Australian reactor.
However, any commercial negotiations would require Australian Government approval.
In February 1991, ANSTO confirmed that talks had not progressed beyond the preliminary stage.
With the United States removed, at least temporarily, from the reprocessing marketplace, the possibility of the 450 spent fuel elements coming to Scotland should not and cannot be dismissed.
It was announced in 1985 that the 450 were destined for the United States, but they have fallen victim to the moratorium operating in the USA.
The past record shows that a consignment of 40 spent fuel elements from a research reactor in Bombay arrived at Dounreay in February 1991.
The flask arrived at Felixstowe and then travelled by road to Dounreay.
Traces of radioactive contamination were found on the flask when it was being washed after arrival.
The UKAEA insisted that that contamination was not caused by a leak.
That has aroused a great deal of fear and was referred to in a recent Health and Safety Executive report.
Unlike most of the other research reactors from which Dounreay is hoping to attract business, the Indian reactor bought its fuel from Dounreay initially.
The contract was signed in 1964.
Neither the enriched uranium extracted during reprocessing nor the waste will be returned to India.
It has also been suggested that Dounreay is on the brink of signing contracts with reactors in Canada.
Dounreay has been involved in discussions with Atomic Energy Canada Ltd. about the possibility of reprocessing spent fuel rods from AECL's NRX, NRU and Slowpoke-2 research reactors, five more Slowpoke-2s from universities and colleges — from Toronto, Montreal, Halifax, Edmonton and Kingston — and yet another Slowpoke-2 at the Saskatchewan research council in Saskatoon.
All of these reactors use highly enriched uranium, unlike Canada's production reactors.
Greenpeace estimates that fresh fuel can be turned into a nuclear weapon in only seven days, and that spent fuel can be converted for use in as little as one month.
Dounreay has apparently given AECL a quotation and AECL is now considering it.
’ Return to sender’clauses are constantly cited by the Government to try to allay fears.
The clauses, which were introduced under the 1974-79 Labour Government, were no doubt designed to reassure people that the dangers would be minimised, as the spent nuclear fuel would be returned to the country of origin.
But what certainty is there?
The contract which was signed between NUKEM in Alzenau in Germany and the UKAEA concerning the storage of this question.
One hundred and fifty storage places have been reserved for NUKEM at Dounreay, and article 3.5 of the agreement states:’ If NUKEM decide not to reprocess, all the fuel in storage at Dounreay shall be removed from the UK by the 30 September 1996’.
However, if NUKEM decides that it wants the fuel to be reprocessed, article 18.4 provides that:’ This waste, conditioned for transport and subsequent storage will be removed from the UK not later than 25 years after reprocessing and be returned to the FRG’.
In other words, Dounreay has agreed to store the spent fuel from research reactors for four years.
If the client decides that it does not want the fuel reprocessed it must be removed from Dounreay within six years.
If the reprocessing goes ahead, waste, conditioned for transport and subsequent storage, will be removed from the United Kingdom not later than 25 years after reprocessing.
This is not a question of,’ Here today, reprocessed tonight and gone tomorrow’.
Research institutes seem to have found at least a temporary solution to their problems.
The main motivation in signing reprocessing contracts will simply be to offload spent nuclear fuel on to someone else.
No wonder that the whole process has been referred to as short or medium-term dumping.
There is also the question of what will happen to the nuclear waste if the client country does not have the facilities to accept it when Dounreay is ready to return it.
Dounreay has claimed, and no doubt the Minister will concur, that there is to be no increase in the level of reprocessing.
Dounreay has in the past reprocessed just over 250 spent fuel rods annually, and a maximum of 758 in any one year.
If Dounreay intends to use the MTR plant up to its maximum capacity of 900 spent fuel rods per year, discharges will inevitably increase.
As there is such a high incidence of leukaemia clusters around Dounreay and Sellafield, we should be trying to reduce, not increase, the level of reprocessing.
No satisfactory response has been made to that research.
I now turn to the question of transport, one of the aspects which most worry the people of Scotland.
Experience suggests that spent fuel will arrive on non purpose-built ships at ports in the south of England and then travel by road to Dounreay.
The International Atomic Energy Agency requires flasks used for transporting spent fuel to be designed to survive the impact of a 9-m fall — equivalent to an impact of 30 mph — and to survive being engulfed by fire for 30 minutes at a temperature of 800 deg.
C and immersion at a depth of 200 m for one hour.
Freight trains often exceed 30 mph and trains pass over viaducts and bridges considerably more than 9 m high — sometimes as high as 42 m.
Where will the waste come from?
I want to deal in particular with the Iraqi waste controversy.
On 6 October the Scottish Sunday Mail revealed in an excellent piece of investigative journalism that, in a draft letter to the Secretary of State for Energy, the Secretary of State for Scotland had made it clear that he would not object to fuel from an Iraqi nuclear reactor, damaged during the Gulf war, being sent to Dounreay for reprocessing.
In his letter he stated:’ Such a development will cause me no little difficulty — especially from the SNP! if you and Douglas Hurd judge that the UK's overall interests will be best served then I would not want to stand in the way of UKAEA's involvement.’
I believe that the Government would have kept the matter secret for much longer if the draft letter had not been leaked.
Against that background, what assurances can the Minister give that contracts are not being pursued with other east European countries such as Bulgaria and the Ukraine to take in spent fuel and nuclear waste — given that the Iraqi contract was shrouded in secrecy for four months?
Can he state categorically that no such contracts are being considered, particularly in the light of the decision by the Ukrainian Parliament to shut down Chernobyl as soon as possible?
I do not believe that Scotland can or should avoid its international obligations, but I object to the fact that we are apparently being singled out as the one country that will be the nuclear laundry for everyone else.
I believe that the genuine fears that exist in my part of Scotland and throughout Scotland are justified.
I hope that the Government will clarify their stance and reassure the people of Scotland that we are not to be the nuclear dustbin of the world.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory)
I am grateful for the opportunity to put the record straight on this matter.
The first thing I want to make clear is that the description of the debate on the Order Paper —’ Reprocessing of Nuclear Waste at Dounreay’— contains an inaccuracy.
The United Kingdom does not reprocess nuclear waste; we do not even import nuclear waste.
British Nuclear Fuels Ltd. at Sellafield and the United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority at Dounreay reprocess nuclear fuel, not nuclear waste.
The hon. Member for Moray (Mrs. Ewing) should have learnt that by now.
Reprocessing is a necessary first step towards recycling nuclear fuel.
It also ensures that the waste that is ultimately disposed of is in a good form for long-term storage.
Secondly, the hon. Lady made great play of the possible contract between Dounreay and Iraq.
She alleged that the preparations for that contract took place in an atmosphere of secrecy.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
In a telling intervention, the hon. Member for Caithness and Sutherland (Mr. Maclennan), in whose constituency Dounreay lies, pointed out that he has never had any difficulty in obtaining relevant and accurate information from the operator.
I should also point out that, as far back as July, the IAEA — the International Atomic Energy Agency — in Vienna made public the potential involvement of United Kingdom facilities.
That was reported in British newspapers on 11 July.
If that is a cover up, it is a pretty inefficient one.
I invite the hon. Lady to read the newspapers even if she has not asked the operator about plans for the use of its facilities.
I should like to take this opportunity to emphasise that the work on the Iraqi material is being done for the United Nations and the IAEA.
The material that may come to the country from Iraq is highly enriched uranium.
If suitably processed in Iraq, that material could have been used to make nuclear warheads.
It is therefore essential that, in accordance with Security Council resolution 687, it is removed from Iraq and made safe.
That is why the IAEA approached France and the United Kingdom asking for assistance in removing the material and making it safe in specialised facilities.
This will involve reprocessing of the material to separate out the impurities and then diluting the uranium to a suitable specification for civil use.
The reason why facilities at Dounreay were offered is that the fuel is of a specialist type which the Dounreay plant can process.
So we have not offered to solve an Iraqi waste problem.
We have offered to play a part in an international effort to neutralise Iraq's potential nuclear weapons capability.
I have some difficulty understanding the hon. Lady's objections to this policy.
What does she think should be done with the material in Iraq?
Does she believe that it should be left in that country?
We believe it right that, as a member of the coalition that defeated Iraq in the Gulf war, the United Kingdom should stand ready to do what is necessary to guarantee the peace.
Mrs. Ewing
Does the Minister understand that France, one of the countries that originally supplied the nuclear material to Iraq, has recognised its moral responsibility for dealing with this problem, but that the Soviet Union, which was also responsible for it, has refused to accept its responsibility?
Will he exercise influence on the Soviet Union to accept its moral responsibility?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
It is likely that the Soviet Union will process some of the Iraqi material, but it does not have the technical competence to deal with the irradiated, enriched uranium; so it is entirely appropriate that France and this country should provide our technical facilities, which are internationally regarded, to do the necessary work.
As for the more general question of overseas reprocessing at Dounreay, I emphasise again that spent nuclear fuel has been reprocessed there for more than 30 years — safely and without any adverse effects on the environment.
Dounreay has built up an enviable international reputation as a centre of excellence for this work.
It is a great disservice to the dedicated Scottish work force at Dounreay to try to tarnish their reputation by spreading alarmist claims with misinformation.
I am determined that the highest and most stringent safety requirements should be adhered to, and the regulatory bodies must be satisfied that any work done at Dounreay is carried out to the highest standards.
About 1,700 people work at Dounreay.
Their livelihoods are important and it is entirely right that their expertise, built up over many years, should be made available to reprocess nuclear fuel when appropriate.
Of course we hope that Dounreay will diversify and look for work outside nuclear tasks, especially in the area of alternative and renewable energies; but we all know that the fast reactor programme will cease in 1994 and I do not think it right that, as a matter of policy, the hon. Lady should seek to shut off the work going on there to reprocess nuclear fuel.
The hon. Lady represents a nationalist party, which seems to preclude the idea of taking on an international responsibility for nuclear matters.
Moreover, if she were to enforce a purely nationalist policy in respect of nuclear matters in Scotland, that could have consequences that she would regret — because the quantity of Scottish fuel reprocessed at Sellafield is vastly greater than the amount of overseas fuel brought to Dounreay.
The hon. Lady also knows that the search for a long-term repository for the storage of nuclear waste is continuing but the work has been suspended in Caithness.
It is, therefore, highly likely that waste arising from Scottish reactors will eventually be disposed of in England.
According to the hon. Lady's argument, Scotland would not benefit from a nationalist solution to the problems of nuclear waste disposal.
Indeed, the Scottish nuclear industry would be left with a considerably greater radioactive waste management task if all cross-border movement of spent nuclear waste were halted, as she appears to want.
Plants in England provide substantial net spent fuel reprocessing and radioactive waste management for Scotland.
There is no question of Scotland becoming a dump for overseas nuclear waste.
The Atomic Energy Authority's current reprocessing contracts for overseas spent fuel contain return-of-waste options and we fully intend that those will be exercised and wastes returned.
Reprocessing of overseas spent fuel is a proper and appropriate business for Dounreay.
The most stringent standards are applied to safety, transport and environmental protection.
Mr. Maclennan
Will the Minister confirm that, notwithstanding what the hon. Lady has said about the cluster of leukaemia in the vicinity of Thurso, all the scientific studies that have been done fail to prove any connection with work being done at Dounreay?
Whatever the explanation for that — clusters of leukaemia occur in many places far removed from nuclear sites — no scientific connection has been demonstrated and scaremongering about Dounreay is deeply damaging and much to be deplored.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I respect that intervention from the hon. Gentleman, who is the local Member of Parliament for Dounreay.
He is entirely right because there is no proven link between leukaemia clusters and nuclear installations.
Indeed, leukaemia clusters occur in areas that are far removed from nuclear installations.
They also occur in New Zealand, which has no nuclear installations.
The subject deserves further study but it is wrong to draw premature conclusions and to scare people unnecessarily before a proven link has been established.
We are committed to the highest safety and environmental standards and put great store by the contractual arrangements in place for the return of wastes.
Mr. Brian Wilson (Cunninghame, North)
Does the Minister accept that the vast majority of people in Scotland recognise and understand international obligations, and that the whole problem of the Iraqi contract arose from a feeling that something was being put through behind the scenes?
Does he agree that, rather than arguing about what should be done at Dounreay, where a great deal of expertise is available, we should argue for open government; and that, in that respect, a lesson can be learnt for the future?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I am happy to repeat the Government's view that openness is a friend of the nuclear industry and everyone has everything to gain by open discussion and understanding of the complex issues involved.
There was no intention to be secretive about the Iraqi contract and there is no cover up.
The information was available in the summer and, as the hon. Member for Caithness and Sutherland said, it is his experience as a local Member of Parliament that the nuclear industry is much more open than has been alleged by the hon. Member for Moray.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at twenty-nine minutes past Ten o'clock.
House of Commons Friday 1 November 1991
The House met at half-past Nine o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
BILLS PRESENTED
ASYLUM
Mr. Secretary Baker, supported by Mr. Secretary Heseltine, Mr. Secretary Newton, Mr. Secretary Brooke, Mr. Secretary Hunt, Mr. Secretary Lang and Mr. Peter Lloyd, presented a Bill to make provision about persons who claim asylum in the United Kingdom and to extend the provisions of the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act 1987 to transit passengers: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time and to be printed [Bill 1.]
COAL INDUSTRY
Mr. Secretary Wakeham, supported by Mr. Secretary Howard, Mr. Secretary Hunt, Mr. Secretary Lilley, Mr. Secretary Lang, Mr. David Mellor, Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory and Mr. Colin Moynihan, presented a Bill to make provision for extending the duration of, and increasing the limit on, grants under section 3 of the Coal Industry Act 1987 and to repeal the Coal Mines Regulation Act 1908: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time and to be printed [Bill 2.]
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Mr. Secretary Heseltine, supported by The Prime Minister, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Newton, Mr. Secretary Hunt, Mr. Secretary Lang, Mr. Michael Portillo and Mr. Robert Key, presented a Bill to provide for certain local authorities to levy and collect a new tax, to be called council tax; to abolish community charges; to make further provision with respect to local government finance (including provision with respect to certain grants by local authorities); and for connected purposes: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time and to be printed [Bill 3.]
WELSH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Mr. Secretary Hunt, supported by Mr. Secretary Heseltine, Mr. Secretary Lilley, Mr. David Mellor, Sir Wyn Roberts and Mr. Nicholas Bennett, presented under Standing Order No. 48 (Procedure upon Bills whose main object is to create a charge upon the public revenue) a Bill to increase the financial limit in section 18(3) of the Welsh Development Agency Act 1975: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time and to be printed [Bill 4.]
Foreign Affairs and Defence
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Douglas Hurd)
In his speech yesterday, my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister dealt with our approach to the two intergovernmental conferences in Maastricht and also announced a two-day debate in the House later this month to examine both negotiations in greater detail.
I shall say something this morning about the negotiation on political union, in which I am most closely involved, but I do not want to concentrate on those themes today, because the world has not obligingly stood still as we prepare the approach to Maastricht.
Rarely can there have been so many upheavals in the landscape in so short a time.
Therefore, I want to deal mainly with some other aspects of foreign policy.
Some formidable and even frightening features of the familiar landscape have disappeared, and obviously that is to our great content, but elsewhere there are new commotions and new uncertainties, and I should also like to deal with some of those.
As a general message, one can say that ideology is no longer the main cause of the divisions in the world or of potential conflict.
That is because communism and its paler imitations have been decisively rejected and because there is a trend to more liberal and democratic values.
Certainly it is patchy and there are setbacks, but that trend is clearly visible in continent after continent.
Mr. Hurd
I lost the leadership contest, but the right hon. Gentleman did get a White Paper a little later.
Mr. Kaufman
Did it set out the Government's position on majority voting, federalism, the European Parliament, and a single currency?
The right hon. Gentleman could have fooled me.
As the Prime Minister has promised the House a two-day debate in less than three weeks, I hope that we shall reach a sensible conclusion about all those substantial issues, and that the White Paper will be published before that debate, setting out the Government's negotiating position at Maastricht.
It would be helpful if the House could study positive Government proposals.
During the summer, the Prime Minister kept saying how essential it was for him to be present at Maastricht in December in order to make decisions, but the word from Downing street now is that the Prime Minister's greatest ambition at Maastricht is to fend off making any decisions.
The would-be statesman is now an aspirant escapologist.
The Government's position on other issues is only too clear.
In the Queen's Speech, they refer to the requirement for’ full, unconditional compliance by Iraq with the United Nations Security Council's Resolutions, including the disposal of its missiles and weapons of mass destruction.’
I entirely agree.
As the Foreign Secretary knows, Labour has fully supported every United Nations decision on Iraq and will continue to do so.
In fact, we urged the Government to seek resolutions when they were not always willing.
I should be a good deal more impressed with the Government's determination to deal with weapons of mass destruction in Iraq if they did not have such questionable record on assisting Iraq to obtain a nuclear capability.
The Government still have not come clean about the information revealed in a Select Committee appendix.
I wrote to the Secretary of State, and my right hon. and hon. Friends wrote to the Prime Minister, but we have not received a reply.
Nor have the Government responded to reports in Conservative newspapers such as The Times and The Sunday Times which were apparently augmented by evidence brought back from Iraq by United Nations inspectors, and the details of which were plastered all over those newspapers.
When will we have an honest statement from the Government about arms supplies of every kind that they undoubtedly licensed for export to Iraq?
An extremely long list is available for everyone to see.
I wrote to the Secretary of State, but he has not even begun to justify the Government's action.
Perhaps the cheekiest passage in the GraciousSpeech is:’ A substantial aid programme aimed at promoting sustainable economic and social progress and good government in developing countries will be maintained.’
As my hon. Friend the Member for Cynon Valley (Mrs. Clwyd) has pointed out, Britain's overseas aid budget last year was not maintained but was the lowest ever as a percentage of this country's gross domestic product.
It was only 0.27 per cent.
— little more than half the 0.51 per cent.
provided in Labour's last year in office.
The world's needy have been deprived of £10 billion of aid due to the cuts made by the present Government in Labour's programme.
How can the Government conceivably justify the untruth of claiming that they are maintaining an aid programme when, according to their own figures, they have halved that provided by Labour?
We still await any perceptible Tory Government initiative in providing aid to the Soviet Union.
At Kennebunkport, the Prime Minister staged a public relations stunt about helping the Soviets.
Since then there has been a strange silence.
Today, the Foreign Secretary could only say that the Prime Minister is still’ mobilising’— though what he is mobilising is not at all clear, because very little appears to be happening.
If the Government ever had any ideas about foreign and defence policy, they have run out of them.
Labour has a clear programme for action that has been endorsed at successive party conferences, including that held last month.
I was grateful for the Foreign Secretary's friendly reference to me at the Conservative party conference, and his acceptance of my expertise on one subject — even though it was only the cinema.
Mr. Anthony Nelson (Chichester)
Despite his postscript, in which he condemned free enterprise systems and declared himself an apologist for socialism in Europe, I am pleased to be able to take up the remarks of the hon. Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing).
I share the agony that he expressed about the way in which Yugoslavia is tearing itself apart, not least because of some loose cannons in the Yugoslav army.
I listened with interest to the hon. Gentleman's proposals for a selective approach towards a recognition of states such as Slovenia and for some form of loose federation for the rest of Yugoslavia.
We must all hope fervently that a peaceful solution will be found sooner rather than later, that lives will be saved and that great cities such as Dubrovnik do not fall to be perished, as others have.
I join those who have given an enthusiastic welcome to the Queen's Speech and to the measures within it.
In my view, it is a programme of legislation which matches the needs of the time.
It contains some important proposals for Bills on local government and on education.
There are proposals for less contentious but equally important Bills.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and all his Ministers on being sensitive during the last Session of this Parliament and on continuing the radical and responsive approach that our people need.
It is a programme for victory at the next general election and one which the people will support.
I shall speak to the part of the Gracious Speech which refers to Europe.
I was pleased that the Government confirmed their commitment to play a constructive role in the two intergovernmental conferences on economic and monetary union and on political union.
That will undoubtedly be the political battlefield or frontier in the months ahead.
I shall set out what I see as the main objectives and the minefields that lie ahead.
To me, the argument about Europe is simple.
It is whether we want to be rich or poor — rich in Europe or poor outside it.
All too often we ignore the bottom line.
The standard of living and individual prosperity of our west European neighbours are increasingly outstripping ours.
Where is the wealthiest part of Europe?
Is it in Bavaria or is it around Madrid?
Is it on the Cote d'Azur?
Is it in the home counties?
No, it is in northern Italy.
Who would have thought it?
Who knows it?
Over the next 20 years or more western Europe will forge ahead as a prosperous single market.
It will attract global investment, employ the latest technology and use the advanced skills of its people to provide goods and services to nearly 3 billion people.
The affluence of modern-day continental Europe is open to inspection.
Even the most casual visitor cannot fail to notice the quality of homesteads, the increased personal incomes, the efficiency and comfort of transport systems and the pride in culture and heritage, which is so often a reflection of economic security.
To the great credit of the Conservative Government, the opportunities and aspirations of our people have been transformed; but only by being at the heart of Europe, in the words of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, can we realise our full potential.
My younger constituents want to look forward to higher incomes, more spending power, home ownership, the accumulation of savings and investments and time to enjoy the fruits of their labour.
My older constituents want to protect what they have saved and to be assured of first-class public services, especially in health and social security, when they need them.
Only by being in the economic powerhouse of the European Community can we satisfy those aspirations.
Only by hitching our wagon firmly to the pioneers of the new Europe can we achieve economic growth to provide the quality of public services that people rightly demand and the prospect of higher personal wealth, choice and freedom.
From the time of Churchill's vision of Europe, through accession to the European Community and to the signing of the Single European Act, Conservative Governments have led the way towards ever closer political co-operation and economic convergence.
We now stand poised on the brink of a great new episode in European evolution and I am proud that the party of which I am a member has taken our country forward and is now leading the way to a sustainable economic and political union.
Those of us who believe that our future and national interest lie in such a course do not do so in a spirit of emotional faith or constitutional adventurism; rather, we take a hard-headed view of where our economic interests lie and where the money will come from in the years ahead.
My enthusiasm for economic and political union is therefore built quite simply on the financial interests of our nation.
Were it not so, I might well have more sympathy with an isolationist approach.
If we would not be better off, it might be better to go it alone.
However, not just on the economic front does our interest lie in closer co-operation, but in defence and foreign affairs the collective strength and influence of the European Community will assume new importance with the demise of the Soviet Union and the disarray of eastern Europe.
For all those reasons, it is essential that there is a successful conclusion to the Maastricht summit next month.
From what I have said, it follows that political union is more likely to be achieved when there is economic advantage.
Conversely, political integration will inevitably fall apart if there is no financial benefit.
We have only to consider what happened to East Germany and ask what was the underlying reason for secession from the Warsaw pact and reunification with West Germany.
Over the course of time, it was clear that that was where its economic interests lay.
When a country can no longer afford to feed its people under an outdated political system, it will look elsewhere for its material prosperity and survival.
I wish to deal with some of the key issues in the intergovernmental conferences — first, the question of a single currency.
I believe that there may be distinct advantages to the adoption of a single currency at some time in the future and so do most of the business men I know in my constituency and elsewhere.
The Government are right not to rule out progress towards that, and to point out that a high degree of convergence of economies will be necessary before any single currency can be contemplated, agreed by this House, or sustained thereafter.
Let us consider what people actually want.
So often the debate about a single currency is dominated by misunderstanding and emotion.
We would do well to reflect on the interests of those whom we seek to represent.
Most people want to be paid in a valuable, stable currency that is a sound store of wealth.
People want to save in a currency that does not depreciate every year as much as the pound has done over many years.
People want to be able to borrow for their homes or businesses in a currency where the interest rate is not exorbitant.
For too long we have regarded the pound as sacrosanct, but who wants to be paid in funny money that is for ever being debased by inflation and buffeted on the financial and foreign exchange markets?
Just as benefits were clearly derived from the Government's decision to join the exchange rate mechanism this time last year, so will advantages be derived by moving to the new narrow rate band and possibly, in time, to a single currency.
What happened to Italy when it decided to move from the wide band to the narrow band within the ERM?
Did that make its currency, economy, inflation rate or fiscal policy more restrained and more problematic?
It did not.
Instead, the value of Italy's currency shot to the top of the parameters and there was a mass inflow of money as people realised that it was a more stable currency and there was less of a case for high interest rates, which were brought down still further.
Were Britain to join the narrow rate band, the effect would be the same, and the economic dividend is there to see.
We would pay lower interest rates, with all that would mean for our constituents.
My right hon. Friends the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer deserve every praise for joining the exchange rate mechanism at a sustainable parity, despite prophesies of doom from Europhobes; they were wrong and my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister got it right.
We have been able to maintain parity within the ERM, interest rates have been reduced on eight successive occasions and we now have one of the lowest, if not the lowest, monthly inflation rates in the Community.
The Government's courage and confidence and the decision that they took have been vindicated by events and they deserve recognition for their action.
The emerging treaty proposals on economic and monetary union seem to meet British requirements in full, but I will address some of the critical issues.
As to a two-speed Europe, Britain already meets most of the criteria drafted by the Dutch presidency for membership of the fast track, in terms of having a low rate of inflation and the stability of our exchange rate.
I hope that there will be no question of the British being regarded as second-rate Europeans and members of some slow track to economic and monetary union.
Although I am much in favour of that union, the Government were right to rule out signing a declaration of intent alongside their treaty commitment.
We must stick to the view that only the treaty matters.
Once we start encouraging member states to sign declarations of intent, we risk undermining the integrity and force of the treaty documents and obligations.
I want to see the development of a European central bank emerging from the European monetary institute, in stage two, beyond 1996.
That is essential.
Where is the sovereignty in going it alone?
My right hon. Friend the Chancellor would be much more constrained in his fiscal and monetary policies if Britain tried to go it alone.
He would have to bump up taxes, or impose higher interest rates or stiffer credit controls if we did not have the security of being a monetary member of the Community.
I share the belief of my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, which he reiterated yesterday, that convergence is important, but we must not allow total convergence to be an absolute precondition for further steps towards economic and monetary union, for that could be used as an excuse for never-never progress.
As to European political union, it is vital that we consider favourably proposals for increased confidence for qualified majority voting and for co-decision, not just because the Community's budget is so large that we need improved accountability and democratic restraint, but because in so many other areas — such as in respect of the environment, conditions of employment and judicial co-operation — common responsibility requires the same observance of high standards.
It is an extraordinary paradox that those who ostensibly seek to defend the sovereignty that Britain already enjoys deny the accountability that should be imposed within the Commission.
I should like to see more control over the Commission, and its executive being checked.
There is much more to gain than to lose from the proposals for co-decision.
I share with my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister the hope that the Community will one day be able to enlarge its fold and that that enlargement will include some of the currently problematic countries of eastern Europe.
Frankly, I do not see that as an early prospect.
Their problems are so deep and the solutions will take so long that it will hold back political and economic progress in western Europe if we insist that they are brought into the fold sooner rather than later.
It would be far better, as my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary said, to conclude association agreements with those countries and to help them in every way to catch up and to adopt the principles of a single free market rather than trying to integrate them within new political structures.
I agree with my right hon. Friend's approach to foreign affairs.
As with defence, foreign affairs are a difficult issue.
In principle, and in theory, it may be appealing to believe that we can all unite and go along together with common defence and foreign policies, but the reality — and after the Gulf war, I must say, the experience, too, to some extent — suggests that we have not yet developed the degree of cohesion and common purpose that must must be a prerequisite for common foreign and defence policies.
Nevertheless, my right hon. Friend is right to point out the role that we can play, where countries come together on issues, whereas on other issues — certainly on major critical and substantial issues — they must retain absolute national sovereignty in the development of their own foreign policies.
That much is clear on defence, too.
The Government are right to seek a twin-track approach whereby we retain the essential strength and security of NATO while developing a new role for the Western European Union.
I attach great importance to the proposals for discussions at NATO level between Ministers of eastern European states — the former Warsaw pact countries — and those of NATO countries.
That will be greatly for the security of western Europe and, it is to be hoped, will mean that, in time, there will be a more practical integration, exercising and deployment of our defence capability.
It is vital to remember how important and unique is the protection of our alliance with the United States — and with Canada, too, whose defence training facilities are essential for our country.
I mean more than the nuclear umbrella and the massive and rapid reinforcement capability that America offers within a NATO structure.
It is, as we saw clearly during the Gulf war, the very sophistication of America's procurement and the new technology of weaponry that demand that we count the Americans as friends and allies rather than trying to go it alone.
I believe that I speak for many others, both in my party and outside it, who want to see a successful conclusion at Maastricht and who want political and economic union in Europe to go forward.
Ministers are right to protect our national interest at every stage.
It is right that in the negotiations, which must remain confidential, they should seek to prevent us from going too far too soon.
I am delighted that the Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office, my hon. Friend the Member for Watford (Mr. Garel-Jones), who is one of the most influential Ministers in the discussions, is here today, and I say to him and to others that I want Ministers to be more positive.
There should be less negativism about our role in Europe.
It may be necessary to appease, reassure and satisfy those who, understandably, for generational and other genuine reasons, have objections and fears about further progress.
At the same time, many of us strongly believe that our future and our interests lie in Europe.
The Conservative party will go along with what the Government decide.
It will support the Government if they lead, provide the vision and deliver at Maastricht an agreement and draft treaty proposals that will give the people we represent the standard of living, the incomes and the prosperity that they deserve.
We place a great duty of trust on the Government.
I, for one, have every confidence that they will discharge that duty with distinction.
Mr. Stuart Bell (Middlesbrough)
It is a refreshing experience to follow the hon. Member for Chichester (Mr. Nelson) and I hope that the level of debate on the European Community that we have attained today will be reflected in our two-day debate on 20 and 21 November.
The Prime Minister said yesterday that, in discussing these matters at Maastricht, the Government would reflect the views of the House of Commons.
I look forward to hearing thoughtful and far-reaching speeches such as that made by the hon. Member for Chichester when these matters are discussed at Maastricht, and I hope that views such as his will be reflected in Maastricht — a subject to which I may return in due course.
The Foreign Secretary opened his speech by referring to the monumental events that now surround us.
Maastricht is in prospect and we also have the Madrid conference.
Great praise has been given to Mr. Baker, the United States Secretary of State, for arranging that conference and so fulfilling the commitment that he gave at the time of the Gulf war, when he said that he and President Bush would do all that they could to bring the parties to the negotiating table.
That has now been achieved and, although we know that a long road awaits the negotiators, it is refreshing to see the leaders of the Palestinian people at the conference table and to watch their demeanour as they approach the massive problems.
It is important to understand that they are the people living in the area — the people who have suffered so much since 1947.
Those at the conference table are not Palestine Liberation Organisation representatives working out of Tunis but people who actually live in the occupied territories, who have been deprived of their homeland, as they see it, and who are now looking to the future and trying to negotiate some kind of settlement.
The world has changed greatly since 1967 and it is not easy merely to return to United Nations resolution 242.
The peace conference in Madrid seems to me to subsume all past resolutions.
When we reach the face-to-face negotiations, the parties themselves will be able to confront their ideological and territorial difficulties and seek to reach some kind of compromise.
Since 1967, we have seen the rise of the concept of Judea and Samaria within the Israeli people.
Personally, I do not support that concept, but the fact is that it has given rise to a large number of settlements on the west bank and even in the Gaza strip.
We have also witnessed the rise of Islamic fundamentalism and the influx of thousands of Soviet Jews into the area as a result of the changed policies of Mr. Gorbachev.
The Palestinians are now calling for the return to the area of 4 million Palestinian people from the diaspora.
Thus, great complexities have arisen since 1967.
We should note important changes that have already come about.
The area is no longer an area of global conflict, with the United States and the Soviet Union locked in battle through their surrogates, Israel and Syria.
In the early 1980s, American troops were stationed in the Lebanon and Soviet troops were stationed some 40 miles away, in Syria — that was the closest that we have come to conflict between Soviet and American soldiers on the ground since 1945.
The fact that the Madrid conference is sponsored by the Soviet Union and the United States means that this is no longer a global conflict.
The area is now faced with a regional conflict — deep and dangerous for those who live there and tragic for those who lose their lives.
A little noticed event, perhaps, is that the Soviet Union has now re-established diplomatic relations with Israel.
As a consequence, it is now back in the game as a sponsor of a conference that can lead to peace, as we all hope it will.
In my view, it was a monumental error by the Soviet Union to withdraw its diplomatic mission in Tel Aviv following the six-day war in 1967 because, in doing so, it kept itself out of the area as a serious negotiator.
Let me refer to the problems of Europe that the hon. Member for Chichester mentioned.
One of our difficulties — and one reason why debates such as this are so welcome — is that we do not yet quite understand or know what we are trying to achieve.
Is the purpose of a single European currency and the central bank to assist us in improving living standards by providing a level playing field or are they steps towards some kind of federal Europe?
No one has been able to answer that question.
There are different views throughout the European Community about whether we are moving towards a federal Europe or whether all these issues are steps on the way towards improving trade and increasing standards of living.
I agree with the hon. Member for Chichester that it does not matter to the British people whether they have a pound sterling or an ecu in their pockets if their level of prosperity is being maintained and enhanced.
The duty of Her Majesty's Government, whoever may form that Government, is to maintain and improve those standards of living.
We have not yet, however, resolved the dilemma over whether that is part and parcel of the free trade area or part and parcel of the advance towards a federal-style Europe.
All of that may, sooner or later, be made clear to us.
The Foreign Secretary made a careful distinction between a common foreign policy and a common defence policy.
The hon. Member for Sevenoaks (Mr. Wolfson) raised that point with him.
The fact is, however, that our foreign and defence policies are linked.
Our defence policy is based on our massive commitments, due to our former empire and colonies, now our Commonwealth, and the variety of organisations with which Britain is involved while our European partners are not.
We witnessed recently a singular event in Zaire when Belgian and French troops went in to protect their citizens.
They, too, had colonies.
They too, therefore, have difficulty in arriving at a foreign policy reached by means of a unanimous decision rather than a foreign policy based on a majority decision.
I was interested in the Foreign Secretary's definition of the Western European Union.
I agree with him that it is important and significant to develop the Western European Union and to have a defence force, but if such a force existed now, would it have gone into Yugoslavia to separate the Serbs and the Croats?
Is that what such a force would have done, acting at the behest of the Council of Ministers?
Would we not have repeated the errors of 1914 by involving ourselves again in that region?
The consequences of the 1914-18 war are only now being reversed.
After that war we saw the rise of communism and fascism and of Hitler.
All those events shaped the world after 1945.
Only now are we returning to the age-old problem of nationalism to which my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) referred.
That distortion of history is only now being reversed.
The danger, however, is that by creating a western European defence force we may repeat the errors of old.
We ought to take that serious danger into account.
Another difficulty of the last 11 or 12 years is that we have always faced west, towards the United States of America.
During the war, Churchill quoted Longfellow to Roosevelt:’ And not by eastern windows only When daylight comes, comes in the light.
Out front the sun climbs slow, how slowly, But westward, look, the land is bright.’
The fact that we were looking towards the United States might have been an acceptable concept during the war, but it has been an unacceptable concept for the past 12 years, during which Europe has been creating itself and showing an enthusiasm for a single European currency and a central bank and for increasing the powers of the European Community's institutions.
The British Government have lagged in their support for events in Europe and have not been so enthusiastic as our European partners.
My hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, West Derby was right to say that we are witnessing the creation not simply of a free market in Europe, but a free market which is linked to the Delors principles and will ensure proper working conditions and adequate social provision.
The only way in which the European Community can work in the future is by linking the concept of the free market with that strong collective provision.
There must not be an imbalance in Europe between those who work and those who do not, and between relative social and living conditions.
That would make the European Community unworkable.
We must link the free market with the provision of proper social and working conditions.
In that way we shall have a Europe that is stronger, more sympathetic and a better one in which to live.
What are we seeking to do in Europe?
Are we seeking to create a federal Europe or a new free trade area or a Europe that is neither federal nor based upon a free trade area?
Are we seeking to create a totally different entity?
That entity must be based on consensus and it must be one to which the British people will willingly belong because they appreciate the advantages to which the hon. Member for Chichester has already referred.
It must be an entity that this Parliament can recognise.
I welcome the cautious approach that has been adopted towards the Maastricht negotiations.
I do not believe that Maastricht will be the ultimate summit on such matters.
I believe that it will be another stage towards reaching an agreement that will take us forward.
Earlier I quoted Longfellow and I should like to conclude by quoting from Anton Chekhov.
I know that the Foreign Secretary is a literary man and he may read this speech.
Chekhov said:’ In search of truth a man takes two steps forward and one step back.
Suffering mistakes and the weariness of life thrusts him back, but the search for truth drives him on and on.
And who knows?
Perhaps he will find the real truth at last.’
As a result of the Maastricht conferences and the debates that we shall have in the House we shall create a real, true Europe — a new Europe that is neither federal nor based upon free trade alone.
It will be something in which we all participate.
We shall be able to reach conclusions on the current problems through debate, consensus and, at the end of the day, the unanimity of Parliament.
Sir Michael McNair-Wilson (Newbury)
The Gracious Speech is that annual event when our Queen and her Government set out for this Parliament those national and international policies that are in the best interests of the United Kingdom, and only the United Kingdom, whether they relate to domestic legislation, to our defence commitments or to those foreign policy objectives which, to quote my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary, protect and promote the British interest.
That is no more or less than a sovereign Parliament within a constitutional monarchy should be able to expect.
I hope that it will continue.
Now, however, I have grave misgivings as we begin to hear from the European Community more and more talk about a federal Europe and closer political integration.
Such talk might reasonably follow if the EC had achieved all its earlier aims, but, as we know, it has not.
We also know that, in 1992, the 12 member states will prepare to open the single European market at the end of that year.
If the single European market can be established and made to work as that common market that has been talked about for the past 30 years, it will be a considerable achievement, but it will not be easy.
It will have its costs.
Even today, we are told that it would cost the Inland Revenue about £250 million, because of the reduction in customs barriers.
We already know that many of the existing members of the Community currently pay little more than lip service to EC directives.
Despite the requirement to open contracts and business opportunities to all comers, somehow those countries manage to choose their own nationals.
The recent decision by the French Government to give in to their farmers on the lamb war only underlines the position.
At a moment like this, one might think that the single market should dominate the Community thinking, but that is not so.
At Maastricht next month, political, economic and monetary union will take pride of place.
I find that surprising.
Since the Community's inception under the treaty of Rome in 1957, mutual self-interest has been the driving force behind it.
The Six each saw benefits to themselves from joining the Common Market and hence signed the treaty of Rome.
In 1972, after our brief flirtation with the European Free Trade Association, we thought that our self-interest would be better served within the EC, so we joined, and I supported our membership in this House.
I do not believe that altruism, good neighbourliness or even the visions of Jean Monnet have been the motivation behind the EC but simply hard-headed self interest.
Because that self-interest has continued, we have maintained our membership, even though we continue to run an imbalance on our trade.
Last year it was £9.5 billion, and in the first nine months of this year it is £2 billion.
We all know that the common agricultural policy has not given our farmers the return that their efficiency deserves or our housewives the food prices that they should be able to expect.
But, even if one accepts those difficulties, the balance of advantage has lain in our continuing membership and in arguing from our position within the Community — from the’ heart of Europe’to use the words of the Prime Minister — as my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) did so successfully over our budget contribution.
I have never understood why she was criticised by the Opposition for speaking up for Britain, but I am not exactly clear about their present position, except that they seem to be claiming that they can negotiate better conditions than the Government, despite their failure when in government in 1975 to negotiate proper terms for our entry.
Indeed, that negotiation was something of a farce and I have no reason to have any greater confidence in the present Opposition's ability to do any better.
If the balance of advantage has stayed with our continuing membership of the Community, we have paid a price for it.
In publications as diverse as Pharmaceutical Marketing and Country Life, reference has recently been made to the arguments at Westminster seeming increasingly academic, as EC directives move us irrevocably towards the single market.
Perhaps we should draw satisfaction from our willingness to accept such directives, unlike so many of our European colleagues, but if that is the situation now, when most Members of Parliament believe that we are still Members of a sovereign Parliament, what might it be like if we were to surrender the rest of our sovereignty to Brussels or to the European Parliament, in which we have only 16 per cent.
of the seats, and to majority voting?
Mr. Delors has already warned us that, in a few years, 80 per cent.
of the major economic and social decisions facing member states will be made in Brussels.
If European political union comes about, he will undoubtedly be right.
But why should it?
Where is the self-interest that should make it attractive to us?
We are told that, having lost an empire, we can have a new role in a European superstate, as if we were being asked to be its leader — which we are not.
I find nothing especially attractive about a European superstate.
I do not want to be part of some supposedly dominant united states of Europe which, it is argued, would exert a similar influence to the United States of America and the now defunct USSR in world affairs.
If that is the carrot to persuade this Parliament to give up such independence as it possesses and to move it on from the treaty of Rome, I would want a lot of persuading that that was in our best interests.
I want the United Kingdom to live at peace with all its European neighbours — to trade and to co-operate with them but to retain control of its defences and of its foreign and economic policies.
I want this Parliament to continue to be the forum of our nation and I believe that the vast majority of our people share my wish.
Where political union and sovereignty are concerned, I can see no natural political affinity between the United Kingdom and Luxembourg — a country with a population smaller than Berkshire — or with Belgium, with its divided population, Holland, with its total dependence on its neighbours, or Italy, which has so much difficulty in implementing EC directives, which moralises over other people's shortcomings and has a new Government roughly every 18 months.
A former Minister of the Republic of Ireland told me recently that sovereignty did not mean the same for the people of Ireland as it did for us.
They were so dependent on Britain for their trade and knew that they were accepted into the EC only because we had become a member that it was not a subject that exercised them overmuch.
Thus, while a Luxembourger, an Irishman, a Dutchman or a Belgian may see a European superstate as giving them a much larger stage on which to perform and one that would cost them nothing in sovereignty since what they have is already so diluted, to us it would mean the end of that independence which has allowed us to play a unique and continuing role in world affairs and to have this Gracious Speech setting out our parliamentary programme.
It was that independence which enabled us to participate in the Gulf war and to initiate the Falklands conflict without having to secure the agreement of our 11 Community colleagues.
All that we required was United Nations approval for the legality of our action.
If, as I have suggested, the 12 members of the Community do not have much in common with us over sovereignty, what do we have in common over foreign affairs?
The failure of the 12 to act in concert does not give much ground for optimism.
They could not agree on the Gulf conflict and seem to have no agreed middle east policy.
They have made no impression on the Yugoslavian tragedy — so much so that I wish we had developed our own foreign policy towards the future of Yugoslavia in general and to the states of Slovenia and Croatia in particular.
We could hardly have achieved less than the Community's observers.
I take issue with the Foreign Secretary's remarks this morning about it being expected that the EC would take the initiative.
Expected by whom?
To pretend that the 12 can beat out a constructive, flexible, foreign policy based on majority voting seems wholly unrealistic.
Quite simply, not only do we and they not share common objectives, but we do not even make similar appraisals of world events, as the President of France demonstrated at the time of the coup in Moscow, when he seemed willing to negotiate with the coup's leaders.
Now we are told that there should also be a European defence force, to which the 12 members would contribute.
It might have sounded relevant if the Community had become a unitary European state, but it has not.
Each of our national defence forces has its own command structure and its own training methods, and chooses its own equipment with little or no standardisation.
Some have conscript armies, others do not.
True, even with those drawbacks, NATO functions well, but it has had the advantage of 350,000 American service men and ourselves, all of whom speak a common language.
I suspect that the European defence force owes more to the French belief that, by merging German and French forces together, it effectively removes the threat of German militarism, while resurrecting the long-held French ambition to remove the immediate American influence from European defence, which is the case with NATO.
I am glad the Government have set their face against that, and I welcome the further commitment to NATO in the Gracious Speech.
On European monetary and economic union, I will say only that I wholeheartedly support the views expressed by my right hon. Friends the Prime Minister, the Foreign Secretary and the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
The time is not right for us seriously to consider the proposition.
Indeed, if I may build on what they have said and sum up my position on the future of the European Community, it is this: in the new Europe that has emerged from the ashes of the second world war and now from the grim shadows of the cold war, new possibilities for peace and prosperity across Europe exist which have probably never before been seen on that continent.
A huge amount of political and industrial restructuring will have to take place as the east European states shake themselves down into the national structures that most suit their individual aspirations.
Those national structures cannot be enforced, because to do so would be self-defeating to the idea of a free Europe and to their struggles to break away from the Moscow-dominated communist monolith.
By the same token, the treaty arrangements that these countries may individually wish to make with other states must be matters for them.
That seems implicit in the sentence in the Gracious Speech which states:’ My Government will further encourage the development of democratic institutions and market economies in central and eastern Europe.’
It would seem amazingly out of step for east European countries to be finding their national indentities after 40 years of being forced into artificial political groupings while the rest of Europe was seeking to impose federalism and political union on its member states at the same moment when they are starting down the road to a single European market — perhaps the acid test of how much one of us wants the Common Market to succeed.
A single market will not be easy to achieve.
If it can be made to work — and time will show whether it can become a reality — that may be the moment to return to subjects such as political and economic union and the benefits of a different defence structure.
Until then, let us seek to trade together, the Community with EFTA — I welcome the agreement to create a European economic area combining the two in 1993.
We should trade with eastern Europe and, from mutual self-interest, which is essential to trading, see what new political alliances emerge.
After all, the European Community of the 12 may already have been overtaken by the events of the past 18 months.
As eastern Europe transforms its economies to a western pattern, Europe in terms of the Community need no longer stop at the Oder, because the Community, as we use that term, has now become the western European Community.
It is no longer a counterbalance to the COMECON block of east European countries dominated by Moscow.
That has disappeared and so, to some extent, has the European Community's reason for existence with it.
Yet the EC continues to think politically in treaty of Rome and divided Europe terms.
To that extent, the EC does not seem to have accepted the ramifications of the post-communist years and has not decided whether it wants to consolidate itself as a rich man's club at the western end of the continent of Europe, to which the east Europeans can apply for associate membership, or to widen its institutions, starting with freer trade.
That is surprising, for the future of the east European nations is now the most important issue involving Europe's mutual peace and prosperity.
Several hon. Members have spoken about the dangers of instability in the newly emerging eastern democracies.
Surely this is the moment when the strong west should be able to offer a hand of assistance to those countries, rather than holding them at arm's length while it completes its own internal workings.
The creation of a pan-European Community deserves the most serious consideration by the Twelve.
It deserves to take pride of place at Maastricht, ahead of arguments about creating federal institutions, transfers of sovereignty and the powers of the west European Parliament.
Sooner or later, someone in western Europe must take the lead in this matter.
Perhaps that will be our task when we take over the presidency of the Community next July.
Mr. Jeremy Corbyn (Islington, North)
I am glad to be able to participate in this debate.
Having read what the Queen's Speech says on matters of foreign policy, I must say that I found it a bit of a mish-mash.
In the past year the most horrific events have taken place in the middle east, with the Gulf war, and the most amazing changes have taken place in Europe, with the upheavals in the Soviet Union.
It is important also to put on the record the serious growth of racism and neo-Nazi activity throughout much of western Europe and what was formerly termed eastern Europe.
I was disappointed that in his opening speech the Foreign Secretary did not even mention the horrific growth in racial attacks and neo-Nazi bands that are now rampaging around the eastern part of what is now the unified Germany.
I was also disappointed that no mention was made in the Queen's Speech of one of the major consequences of the Gulf war — the plight of the Kurdish people throughout the region.
Kurdish people are hanging on in the northern part of Iraq, desperately in need of support and aid that must come to them before a harsh winter sets in.
The situation is desperate.
Many have been homeless, not just for the past six months but for several years and they have been pushed from pillar to post within that area.
Across the border, the Turkish army is continuing vigorous armed raids against Kurdish placements throughout south-eastern Turkey and is crossing the border and bombing Kurdish villages in Iraq.
As there is supposed to be a degree of coalition forces air control in that region, the British and American forces must know about the aerial bombardments.
They have access to the villages that have been bombed and can see that civilian targets have been hit by Turkish air force planes that are bombing northern Iraq.
Their plight has vanished from the headlines, other stories have taken its place, but the killing continues and the loss of life continues.
I hope that the Minister will say something about it this afternoon.
A great deal has changed in the world recently.
As I said to the Foreign Secretary in an intervention, I was never one to support the idea of the cold war — the idea that there was an imminent threat of a Soviet invasion of western Europe.
NATO, created in 1948, was the major bulwark of the cold war.
The Warsaw pact was created in 1955.
For some time my party held the perfectly logical view that NATO and the Warsaw pact should both be dissolved.
Now the Warsaw pact has completely dissolved itself, so the experts in SHAPE headquarters at NATO are left looking for a role for NATO to perform.
Increasingly, they use phrases such as’ out-of-area activities’.
They maintain a significant degree of nuclear strength.
This country is building three Trident submarines and there is increasing pressure to build a fourth.
Where is the external threat to Europe?
How can nuclear weapons possibly be used except to destroy many lives — the lives of those on whom they are targeted and of those who fired the weapons in the first place?
A report published last week on the consequences of the Chernobyl explosion — a minor explosion compared with that of a series of nuclear warheads — showed that there were several thousand deaths from cancer in the Soviet Union and in northern and western Europe as a result.
The idea that nuclear weapons deter anyone is laughable and horrific.
We have the greatest chance ever to rid the world of nuclear weapons now, yet the consensus in this country is apparently that we need to maintain three Trident systems and possibly build a fourth at a total cost of more than £23 billion.
Mr. Tony Banks
A waste of money.
Mr. Corbyn
My hon. Friend is correct.
My next point develops a point made by my right hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) this morning.
He said that last year the World bank derived a greater income from interest payments and debt repayments than it paid out in development aid and investment in the poorest countries.
That is an horrific statistic.
We live in a world that is not developing uniformly.
Most of the world's population have no expectation of rising living standards.
They cannot be sure that their children will be able to go to school or that they will receive medical treatment throughout their lives.
They cannot even be certain that they will have jobs in the future.
The lives of a large proportion of the world's population are nasty, brutish and short.
Increasingly they live in giant slums centred on the world's major cities and their countries' limited social services and education and health systems are being ravaged by the market economy.
History will decry our time as a period of market soothsaying when it was believed that the market could provide everything and solve all problems.
The lives of the people in Africa and Latin America prove that that is not so.
The countries in which they live labour under a massive debt burden — £784 billion of it.
Repayments by the sub-Saharan countries alone amount to 500 per cent.
of their export earnings.
This debt is unpayable, as is the interest on it.
We do not need to look far back to find the origins of the crisis — the oil crisis of the early 1970s and the proliferation of large loans at low interest rates to third world countries.
Between 1980 and 1985 interest payments by third world countries more than doubled from 9 to 20 per cent., at the same time as average prices for their commodities fell by an average of more than 25 per cent .
The gap between the two has resulted in the debt burden, in the loss of national sovereignty and in the loss of so many of the nascent social services in those countries.
We must face the issue seriously and not in the way in which the Prime Minister faced the issue at Harare when he said that he would write off some of the debts in return for the acceptance of an economic model imposed by the International Monetary Fund, and say that there has to be a write-off of debt.
The current round of talks on the general agreement on tariffs and trade should not emphasise so much the free market in food, which will be very much to the detriment of the economies and the environments of third world countries.
Instead, the talks should examine seriously the problem of underpayment for the major commodities that the third world countries produce, which would be a step forward.
However, I fear that the GATT talks will go in the opposite direction.
The GATT talks are motivated by a desire for a world free market which will give greater power to multinational corporations and less power to national Governments.
It is a desire which will continue to impoverish many of the poorest parts of the world.
The situation has not arisen overnight.
All the development aid that has gone to many third world countries comes back twofold and threefold through interest payments on the debt, underpayment for commodities and the over-profitability of multinational corporations.
We live in a desperately and grossly unfair world.
I hoped that in the Queen's Speech the Government would set out a programme that showed that we were prepared to play our part in removing the scourge of poverty, of short life and of environmental destruction which is the lot of so many people in the world.
Instead, there is a narrow vision of a world dominated by market forces.
We require a change in vision and in direction.
Future generations will not thank us for spending our energies and money on nuclear weapons, and on the unseemly attraction of enormous wealth to a tiny minority in north America and western Europe while the majority of the population of the world sees nothing but environmental destruction and the continuing decline in living standards.
We live in short-sighted times.
Future generations will condemn us for inaction in the face of what is obviously happening in the world at present.
Mr. Jim Lester (Broxtowe)
It is inevitable that much of the debate has been on the European Community and on what my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary said in his opening speech.
I do not intend to follow that, because we shall have an opportunity to do so on another occasion.
I say simply that I support the views of my hon. Friend the Member for Chichester (Mr. Nelson) and of the hon. Member for Middlesbrough (Mr. Bell) rather than other views that have been expressed today.
This is the last occasion on which we shall have the opportunity to debate foreign affairs and the Gracious Speech in this Parliament.
I may share with others the sense of wonder that none of us could have believed in 1987 that the most significant international changes would take place.
Those of us who have been here since 1987 have a sense of fortune in being involved in the tremendous and dramatic changes in the world scene, which are reflected in the Gracious Speech.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker) mentioned the two largest — the changes in the former Soviet Union and in South Africa.
However, none of us should forget the relief of misery and the ending of conflict which have come about through the changes in Ethiopia, in Angola and in Cambodia, and we should not forget the changes in Vietnam, in Mozambique and in the western Sahara.
Apart from the big changes, the populations of many other countries have had tremendous relief.
The changes represent diplomatic outlay by and diplomatic ability in this country.
Although we may recognise that, those involved are often not thanked.
Successive Foreign Secretaries, the ambassadorial input, the input of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and especially the input of those who beaver away at the top of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in dim Victorian rooms have made a tremendous contribution to the unique catalytic role which my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary mentioned.
We have invented new forms of assistance to match the overall situation.
The know-how funds, for example, are widely appreciated in the newly emerging countries in eastern Europe.
I mention especially the way in which we distributed aid in South Africa through the ambassadorial fund.
We found a way in which we could help the black community directly and in the most positive way with considerable sums.
We should repeat that in other countries and in other forms.
I should like to see both that and the use of know-how funds extended.
I recently saw a delegation from the new regime in Ethiopia, and it is obvious that that country needs know-how as much as anything.
I hope that the Foreign Secretary will consider the extension of know-how to a much wider range of countries.
The authority of the United Nations is mentioned in the Queen's Speech and the Foreign Secretary spoke of what we are trying to do and of the involvement of the United Nations in Yugoslavia.
The Queen's Speech also mentions the importance of making sure that Iraq complies with United Nations resolutions.
It is equally important that the authority of the United Nations is upheld and supported wherever it is necessary.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office said today in an answer that we are giving £2 million or £3 million to assist with the repatriation of refugees in camps in Thailand.
It is essential that the United Nations should be in there and that, having made this contribution, we should be in there supporting it, to make sure that the inhabitants of these camps, whether they are Khmer Rouge camps, Prince Sihanouk or Son Sann camps, are properly protected against being forced, against their will, across borders.
I agree with the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) that the same thing applies in the western Sahara.
It is essential that the United Nations operation there is properly supported and that everything is done fairly.
If we want to support the United Nations in its role and in the reorganisations that we have suggested, it is essential that we vote the means for that as well as talking about it.
Those of us who work with refugees recognise how stretched are the resources of the United Nations, particularly those for the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees, and those who have responsibility for coping with the enormous problems about which the hon. Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn) has just spoken.
We should be looking not just at what we give, but to ensuring that the United States and others pay their back dues.
It is no good giving the United Nations a role and wanting it to carry out these measures on our behalf but not giving it the means to do so.
The same principle applies to the Foreign Office.
We have seen significant changes world wide and that means that we should reappraise the amount of money that we devote to the diplomatic corps and to our aid budget.
It is nonsense to close missions so that we can meet the new and welcome demand from the Baltic states and, for example, Phnom Penh.
This applies also to the British Council, our arm of cultural diplomacy, which is facing unprecedented demands from the newly liberated countries which are looking out for English language teachers.
I often say that if we thought as much about the English language and teaching it and all that that means as the French do about their language and the Alliance Francaise, we would back the British Council to the hilt.
Wherever one goes in the world there is a constant demand for the teaching of the English language.
I was interested to see that the first thing for which the Cambodians and Vietnamese asked — even before getting rid of mines in Cambodia — was English language training.
I am delighted that the Government have responded to that and are providing English language training as part of our aid.
The same thing goes for the World Service of the BBC.
It is all part of our input into the world.
I welcome the opening of the World Service television broadcast, which will have a tremendous impact throughout eastern Asia and places such as Burma and the middle east.
The impact of the visual world, which cannot be kept out by undemocratic and dogmatic regimes, will have a tremendous effect on many communities.
Furthermore, it applies to the aid and trade provision.
As countries become more prosperous, they will want to improve their infrastructure, but the aid and trade provision is exhausted because not enough money has been allocated, so even schemes that are within the rules are not approved.
In all those sectors, we need a reappraisal, because this is the defence of the future — our information, our ability to influence, our use of the English language.
Refugee asylum is also mentioned in the Queen's Speech.
I am chairman of the Africa committee of the British Refugee Council, so I have worked closely with refugees for a long time.
I understood what my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary said about economic migration and refugees under the 1951 convention.
Whether we see the Hong Kong boat people as economic migrants or refugees, and irrespective of how we see the hapless millions in Africa who move across boundaries, we must understand that these people need protection and help, even in the short term.
It is no good closing our eyes to asylum and the pressures on our European borders — the borders of affluent countries — if we do nothing to resolve economic problems that cause people to become economic migrants.
The two factors go hand in hand.
Unless there is a transfer of resources of the dimension that is necessary in terms of trade agreements and aid, we are not beginning to tackle the problem of economic migration, which I forecast will be the greatest problem that Europe and other parts of the world will face over the next 50 years.
It will be a growing problem.
There will be enormous pressure from the poorer peoples of the world as they seek to improve their situations by moving into more affluent countries.
With any changes to any rules about asylum or about dealing with short-term refugees, we must consider the essential element of the transfer of resources in a meaningful way.
I believe that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has the necessary vision.
When he was Chancellor of the Exchequer he started the orginal debt initiatives.
He has gone it alone at Harare and I am sure that we all support that in every possible way.
I hope that he will put forward this essential consideration in his various roles.
One of the ways in which that can be done — again, this is mentioned in the Queen's Speech — is by our support for the conference that will take place in Buenos Aires in June 1992 on the environment and on aid.
It might be the opportunity of a world summit, or an earth summit, at which we can involve the public in Britain and throughout Europe in understanding that we have a common environment throughout the world.
We all share that.
We have a common economic future in this world and we all share that, too.
The summit may be an opportunity — I know that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister is encouraging other Heads of State to attend it — that will enable us to put over to the British population the need to recognise that there is a balance, an interdependence and a need for the transfer of resources.
Mr. Tony Banks (Newham, North-West)
The hon. Member for Broxtowe (Mr. Lester) holds the attention of the House when he speaks on foreign affairs, and rightly so.
He has such expertise and a liberal attitude to such matters.
His speech was both thoughtful and exceedingly interesting.
I wish to underline his support for the United Nations in the new world order that everyone talks so much about these days, and especially his comments about the British Council, the work of the council, and the BBC World Service.
All Governments have failed in many respects in not giving to the British Council and the BBC World Service the resources that they merit.
People throughout the world seem to admire these institutions, and far more than we appear to do in Britain.
That is strange.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman's words will fall on sympathetic ears when the Minister of State replies.
I listen to the BBC World Service all the time.
I like to think that I share a love of the World Service and an interest in it with Mr. Gorbachev, who gave it one of the best unsolicited testaments that anyone could when he said that while being held prisoner he heard about what was going on in the world by listening to the World Service.
I do not think that anything could have a higher commendation.
I shall be brief because I realise that at least two other hon. Members wish to take part in the debate.
I shall refer to two subjects, neither of which will meet with the accord of my very good friend, my hon. Friend the Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner).
I shall not, however, let my hon. Friend hold me back during the few minutes that I shall use to unbridle myself.
I shall refer first to Yugoslavia.
I listened with great interest to my hon. Friend the Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) when he recounted all the difficulties that one experiences in that unhappy country, or what is left of it at the moment.
I do not claim to have my hon. Friend's detailed knowledge, but I remember my attitude when the Council of Europe recently passed a resolution calling for an armed intervention force in Yugoslavia under the aegis of the United Nations.
I supported it as someone who opposed armed intervention in Iraq.
I have the feeling that if oil supplies were somehow caught up in the Yugoslavian position, an armed intervention force would already be in that country.
I was pleased to note that the Gracious Speech referred to the Queen attending the European Parliament and the Council of Europe.
That is excellent.
Mr. David Atkinson (Bournemouth, East)
My understanding is that Her Majesty the Queen is visiting the Council of Europe because its headquarters are also the seat of the European Parliament.
However, I regret that it does not appear that she is to address the Council of Europe, of which the hon. Gentleman and I are Assembly members.
Mr. Banks
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman because that point was not made clear in the Gracious Speech.
Perhaps someone should point it out to the Queen, who may think that she will be addressing the Assembly of the Council of Europe.
I believe that she should address that Assembly.
As the hon. Gentleman and I know, it is usual to ask questions of visiting heads of state, but I suspect that we would not be allowed to ask the Queen any questions.
I should like to ask her a few questions, such as what she really feels about the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher).
Perhaps the Prime Minister, in the few months left to him in that position, will think about visiting the Council of Europe Assembly so that we can determine whether the British Government actually envisage a role for the Council of Europe.
I hope that the Government will provide time for a proper debate on Council of Europe affairs.
I attend the Assembly as a Member of this House and I should like the opportunity to report back to the House, during a proper debate, on what I am doing in the Council of Europe.
I want to return to the question of an armed intervention force in Yugoslavia under the aegis of the United Nations Security Council.
That seems to be an appropriate way to proceed.
It is a European problem that must have a European solution.
We cannot sit idly by and watch Yugoslavia tear itself to pieces, watch people being killed in vast numbers, and watch the wonderful archaeological and architectural gems being destroyed, while saying that there is nothing that we can do.
We cannot even get the Government to say that they will fully support oil sanctions against Yugoslavia.
The Minister of State said that the Greeks would not be too happy about imposing oil sanctions.
That is not acceptable.
It is no good doing one thing in Iraq and something completely different in Yugoslavia.
We should intervene and it is something that the Western European Union could undertake.
I understand the problems, but an armed intervention force would give everyone the opportunity to seek a political solution.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Bolsover said, the answer does not lie in a permanent military force in Yugoslavia, because that would not lead to a political resolution of the problem — as is the case in Northern Ireland.
However, we now have an opportunity to show that Europe can address European problems and that we will intervene in a way that will give the people of Yugoslavia the opportunity to sit down together and find a peaceful solution to the problems.
My other point relates to developments in Europe, and especially the run-up to the Maastricht intergovernmental conference.
When there was a change of leadership in the Conservative party, many European leaders — and, indeed, hon. Members — felt that that would lead to a dramatic change of attitude on Britain's position within the EEC.
There have been some changes, but they have not been dramatic.
It is clear once again, Britain is in a minority of one within the EEC, especially on monetary union.
The opt-out clause is a fig leaf that the Prime Minister is clutching to his private parts to cover the serious disagreements in his party, and especially the objections from its right wing.
— The right hon. Gentleman does not need a fig leaf to protect himself against my hon. Friend the Member for Bolsover, he needs a suit of armour.
Interruption
Mr. Skinner
He wears his pants outside his shirt as well.
Mr. Banks
That is probably why he needs to hold a general election, to get his clothes on the right way.
We know that ultimately there will be a single European currency and that Britain will go along with it.
The right hon. Member for Finchley used to stand on the sidelines wringing her hands, carping and whingeing, but in the end she went along with things.
Unfortunately, she was never able really to influence developments in the way that Britain should, by being right in the middle of events, and being seen as a joint, willing partner in Europe — not a country that is always ducking and diving and looking for ways of putting party and even narrow national interests before those of the wider European concept.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Bolsover knows, I changed my position on Europe.
Yesterday, the Prime Minister had a go at my right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition for having changed his position.
The world has changed so dramatically, as speech after speech has emphasised.
Who could have believed, when we debated the Queen's Speech two or three years ago, that such changes would occur?
And so, too, must the positions adopted by political leaders and other politicians change.
I used to view the European Community as being an economic and political bloc confronting the East and COMECON, and that is why I did not believe that it was uniting Europe.
It seemed to be dividing it.
However, when I heard Mr. Gorbachev speaking at the Council of Europe in Strasbourg in 1989, about a common European home, I could perceive an image of Europe that made me feel far more European than I had ever done before.
I felt that there was nothing to fear from a united states of Europe with a single currency.
We must look forward to such developments.
They are historically inevitable.
As I have told the House before on numerous occasions, the days of the nation state are coming to an end.
What does parliamentary sovereignty mean?
We lost ours a long time ago, but some people are still clinging to it, as they would to a piece of wreckage, in the hope that it will remain afloat.
It is nonsense to think in those terms.
Mr. Skinner
My hon. Friend is right to talk about nation states in some respects, but today we are seeing the dismantling of conglomerations.
The Soviet Union now has 17 different nation states.
My hon. Friend spoke earlier of his desire to see armed intervention in Yugoslavia on behalf of the Pope.
I remind him that there are examples of states coming together — as they have done in the Common Market — but then having to co-exist so closely that they cannot stand the sight of one another and begin to fall apart.
In another 10 or 12 years, history will show that it is more likely that nation states will look after themselves to a greater extent than hitherto.
That is my view of what will happen in the Common Market, especially now that there are 5 million homeless people in the Community and on its borders.
It is not the great economic miracle that we have heard about.
Mr. Banks
I have been accused of many things, but never of being a papal legate.
I am not taking sides in respect of Croatia and Serbia.
There probably is no future for a united Yugoslavia, and Marshal Tito's ability to hold that federation together was a marvellous testimony to his abilities.
Mr. Tim Janman (Thurrock) rose
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Does the hon. Gentleman have the consent of the hon. Member for Basildon (Mr. Amess) and the Minister?
Mr. Amess indicated assent.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell) indicated assent.
Mr. Tim Janman (Thurrock)
I thank my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon (Mr. Amess) for allowing me to say a few words on a matter that is so important to my constituents and to his.
I echo his remarks, supported by some impressive statistical evidence, about the way in which the national health service in Thurrock and Basildon is improving and treating more people.
It is worth remembering that Basildon and Thurrock health authority now treats 11,000 more patients in hospital each year than it did when it was first created in 1982.
As I have said in the local press, my only sadness is that we were not afforded trust status a year ago.
We could then have enjoyed benefits such as those evident in Southend — where there has been a 9 per cent.
increase in patients treated since trust status was granted — a year earlier.
We now have trust status, however, and I take this opportunity to congratulate the team on its application.
I have a great deal of confidence in the management team on the clinical side at Basildon and Orsett.
That application, which, thankfully, was approved by the Secretary of State, has received a lot of support from the medical profession and from people working in the health authority.
Moreover, it was not the subject of opposition among the public at large.
My hon. Friend the Minister may like to know that the local Labour party circulated 50,000 or 60,000 leaflets, with voting slips attached, right across the borough, which has a population of 130,000 people.
It received only about 3,000 returned forms, although there were about 6,000 votes because I understand that there were two votes on each one.
The vast majority of people in Thurrock took my advice and put the silly leaflet in the bin.
There is no local opposition to trust status because people are beginning to understand that trust status means the devolution or delegation of decision-making power to those who are in the best position to make the decisions about how local hospitals should be run.
Those people are local managers sitting at desks in those hospitals, not bureaucrats sitting in a tower block in Paddington at the North East Thames regional health authority offices.
There is another piece of evidence to suggest that there is not hostility.
Only about 60 people turned up to a recent candle-lit vigil outside Orsett hospital supposedly a protest against trust status being given.
Subtract from those 60 people members of the Labour and Liberal parties and the odd left-wing GP and I doubt whether there would be anyone left.
The majority of people in my constituency are either totally in favour of trust status or are prepared to say,’ Let's give it a try.
Let's give the Government the benefit of the doubt and see whether they are right.’
I know that we will be proved right and that trust status will be good for my constituents and for those of my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon.
It is certainly true that, a few years ago, waiting lists in North East Thames area were among the worst in the country.
We had some particularly bad waiting times in our own district.
However, as my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon so lucidly explained, we are making great progress in reducing those waiting lists.
It is worth noting — and I say this for the benefit of my hon. Friend the Minister if for no one else's benefit — that there has been a great deal of hyprocrisy on the part of the Labour party in Thurrock and Basildon concerning the centralisation of casualty services at Orsett.
Although my hon. Friends the Member for Billericay (Mrs. Gorman) and for Basildon and I had certain concerns about the overall reorganisation proposed — my hon. Friend the Member for Billericay and I expressed them very forcefully, as my hon. Friend the Minister knows — we took exactly the same line as the community health council on the centralisation of casualty.
Our CHC did not oppose the centralisation of casualty at Basildon and the Labour district and borough councillors from Basildon and Thurrock who served on the CHC did not demur from that position.
Privately, those Labour councillors knew what was going on and why, and that the vast majority — if not 99 per cent.
— of doctors and surgeons in the two hospitals involved supported the change.
Therefore, they did not demur.
It was left to other more prominent and vocal members of the Labour party to stir up people's fears with irrelevant and inaccurate claims about the consequences.
I have been delighted to have the opportunity to add to what my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon said.
I know that we have an excellent management team which will take the trust forward.
Some organisational changes have been made already.
For example, 12 clinical divisions have been created, with 12 cores of people committed to making everything happen.
Over the next year or so, my constituents will see tremendous improvements, on top of what has been achieved during the last 12 to 18 months in terms of the quality and quantity of health care that they will receive from the Basildon and Thurrock NHS trust.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Health (Mr. Stephen Dorrell)
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon (Mr Amess) on taking this opportunity to raise in the House the granting of trust status to the Basildon and Thurrock hospitals and on providing the House with the opportunity to mark the granting of trust status.
I am grateful to him for pausing for a second, at the end of a busy day, to take note of and observe the great benefits to his constituents and those of my hon. Friend the Member for Thurrock (Mr. Janman) as a result of the establishment of the new trust.
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon, before considering trust status may I refer to what has already happened to his constituents and to all the other residents in the Basildon and Thurrock health authority.
My hon. Friend gave impressive evidence regarding the improvement in health care for his constituents.
I shall add a little more evidence.
My hon. Friend did not refer to the increase in the number of in-patients treated in the district during the last 10 years.
It has increased by 40 per cent.
Moreover, the number of day cases treated in the district has increased by 64 per cent.
during the last 10 years.
That is slim evidence of cuts in the national health service if we are treating more than half as many again day cases and 40 per cent.
more in-patients than 10 years ago.
It is evidence of a growing service that offers a wider range of facilities to a growing number of patients.
I remind the House of the benefits that will come to Basildon and Thurrock as a result of the Government's commitment to introduce weighted capitation.
Both of my hon. Friends know that their constituents live in an area which for generations has had health care that has been relatively less generously funded than that provided in the central London parts of the Thames regions.
The Government's commitment, through the weighted capitation mechanism, is to ensure that NHS resources reflect population densities and the health needs of those populations, and is an important commitment to the constituents of my hon. Friends.
It will ensure that the growth that we have established over the last 10 years in terms of the range and volume of health care facilities continues under future Conservative Governments, partly because we are committed to ensuring a fairer distribution of resources within the NHS, which will secure benefits for the constituents of my hon. Friends, and partly because of the commitment given from this Dispatch Box yesterday by the Prime Minister — that under a Conservative Government the national health service will have its real resources increased year by year — something which the last Labour Government were unable to do.
They are the only Government in recent history to have cut the real resources available to the NHS in a particular year.
The constituents of my hon. Friends have a considerable amount to gain from weighted capitation and from the commitment to ensure that the total resources available to the NHS continue to grow year by year.
My hon. Friend the Member for Basildon gave clear evidence of the improvement in waiting lists for his constituents and for those of my hon. Friend the Member for Thurrock.
He also listed the capital investments that have been made to improve health care in his constituency.
The record of the NHS in the Basildon and Thurrock health authority over the last 12 years is one of which both my hon. Friend and all those involved in the NHS have every reason to be proud.
It clearly substantiates this Government's commitment to ensuring that we maintain a national health service that is the envy of the world and that we continue to improve upon it.
As I have already mentioned, the record of the NHS over the last 12 years in the constituencies of my hon. Friends is good, but we are not complacent.
We recognise the need to do even better in the future and we want to meet that need.
That is why we have invented the concept of trust status, which gives us the opportunity to entrust to local people — those who work in the hospitals — a greater discretion and influence over the way in which resources are used in their institution.
Occasionally people say to me that the Government are seeking to turn health care into a business.
That is completely wrong.
We understand that the delivery of health care is not a business.
However, our oppponents fail to recognise that we have a great amount to learn from those in business who have developed techniques to ensure that large organisations improve their efficiency and deliver their objective more effectively than was the case.
I am not seeking to make health care into a business, but I make no apology for seeking to employ business techniques in the health service in order to deliver the central objectives of the health service more effectively than in the past.
My hon. Friends will recognise that there is no conflict between the commitment to care and that to run the health service efficiently.
The two objectives are designed to achieve the same end.
If one wants to deliver a caring service one will deliver a better caring service if one manages it efficiently and uses the resources committed to it by the taxpayer to the maximum possible extent.
The alternative is to tolerate waste; to see taxpayers' money go off hospital sites in skips.
We are opposed to that.
We are committed to using the resources available to the health service to treat the maximum number of patients and to offer them the highest possible quality of health care.
The inescapable conclusions from studying the management practice in large organisations, including the health service, in the past 40 years is that management is best carried out as close as possible to the chalkface.
That is why we are committed to provide the opportunity afforded by trust status and to grant it to those health care units that seek it, where they can show that they will use the freedoms that that status involves.
The motivation behind the introduction of trust status is the desire to localise management and to create a greater sense of ownership and pride in the service delivered.
My hon. Friends are right to emphasise that that status operates within the NHS.
Earlier this week I debated the management of the health service with Mr. Bruce Kent.
He took to task a nurse from Guy's hospital who interrupted him to say that those at the hospital were improving the quality of the health care they delivered.
Mr. Kent replied that the nurse was wrong to talk about the staff improving the quality of health care.
He sought to represent trust status as an invention of the management.
That nurse was absolutely right.
Trust status engenders in staff a sense of pride and commitment to the service delivered.
It is precisely for that reason that trust status will be a more successful means of managing the health service.
It is the blinkered approach typified by Mr. Kent's response to the nurse that we want to eliminate from the NHS.
What are the people in the new trust for Basildon and Thurrock, be they the managers, doctors, nurses or porters, committed to do?
I can do no better than to quote from the trust application document.
My hon. Friends' constituents should be aware of the exact commitment made by those who are to manage the trust once it is established on 1
April 1992.
All those working within the trust are committed to:’ Reduce waiting lists and waiting times.
It will seek to ensure that all priority patients are treated within three months and that nobody should wait more than twelve months for treatment.
To help achieve this, the proposed Trust would aim to give all patients a date for admission to hospital when first placed on the waiting list.’
That is an important assurance and it stands four-square with the patients charter that we published earlier this week.
The second commitment from the trust states that it will’ Complete the agreed building works to bring all Maternity and Gynaecology services together on the same site as Intensive Care for newborn babies and the Special Care Baby Unit at Basildon Hospital.’
The trust also makes a commitment to’ Develop a purpose built ward for Day Surgery at Orsett Hospital.’
That means that the trust will be able to improve on the successful record for day surgery that the hospitals established in the past 10 years and to which I referred earlier.
The hospitals that are the subject of the trust status already offer a record of success.
The trust status will ensure that that record of success continues into the life of the next Conservative Government and the one after, just as we established that record during the lifetime of the previous three Conservative Governments.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at one minute to Three o'clock.
House of Commons Monday 4 November 1991
The House met at half-past Two o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Musgrave Park Hospital (Bombing)
The Secretary of State for Northern Ireland (Mr. Peter Brooke)
I regret to have to tell the House that a bomb planted by the Provisional IRA exploded in Musgrave Park hospital at 3.53 pm last Saturday, killing two soldiers and injuring 11 other people, among them a five-year-old girl and a baby of four months.
The murdered soldiers were Warrant Officer Philip Cross of the Royal Army Medical Corps and Driver Craig Pantry of the Royal Corps of Transport.
Two of those wounded have very grave injuries.
I am also sorry to report that early on Sunday morning in a separate incident a young man was found dead in west Belfast in a car which had earlier been seen in suspicious circumstances and pursued by police; that incident is being investigated by a senior police officer and the Independent Commission for Police Complaints has been asked by the RUC to supervise the inquiry.
I know that the House will join me in extending sympathy to the families of all those killed and injured.
The bomb which the IRA left in the hospital is estimated to have contained 20 lb of Semtex.
It was part way along a service tunnel between two hospital buildings: first, the Withers block, containing orthopaedic and childrens' wards; and secondly, wards and other medical facilities administered by the RAMC for the benefit of service men and their families, and some civilians.
I must stress the fact that this building is not, as the IRA has callously and cynically claimed, an operational military base.
Rather, like the rest of the Musgrave Park complex, it is purely and simply a hospital dedicated to healing and the relief of suffering.
The nearest security force base is more than a quarter of a mile away and was manifestly not the target of the attack.
In addition to the deaths and injuries, the blast from the explosion caused severe damage to both buildings.
In particular, a newly refurbished children's ward in the Withers block was damaged, with debris falling on a father who was nursing his baby daughter.
Other children in that ward were immobilised in traction.
So far, 97 operations due to have been performed early this week have been cancelled, 80 out of the 200 national health service beds in the hospital have been rendered unusable and damage totalling at least £250,000 has been caused.
I am sure that the whole House will join me in utter condemnation of this appalling attack.
But the cynical depravity of this outrage — placing a bomb that would inevitably cause massive damage to a national health service hospital and was intended to kill medical staff when it exploded and which, only by great good fortune, did not cause many more deaths and injuries — must surely mark one of the lowest points in the IRA's inglorious history.
I reject all attempts to justify this attack.
Let there be no doubt that it has shown the IRA in its true colours.
It was an attack on the whole community — on sick children and their parents, on old people whose much-needed operations will have to be delayed, on the medical staff who devotedly care for them, and on the security forces who will continue to defend the community and bring terrorists to justice.
Such attacks will not deflect the Government or the security forces from doing their duty in seeing off those evil men who want to destroy all that is best in our community.
The horrible nature of the attack only underlines the fact that those are the sort of people whom all democrats oppose.
Just as the emergency services and the staff at Musgrave Park hospital reacted with superlative speed and dedication to allay the effects of this atrocity, so the security forces — to whom I pay the warmest of tributes — will continue with vigorous and impartial professionalism to defend the community and to bring suspected terrorists to justice.
Mr. Kevin McNamara (Kingston upon Hull, North)
I thank the Secretary of State for his statement, and I bitterly regret the circumstances that made it necessary.
On behalf of the Opposition, and indeed the whole House, I wish to express our sympathy to the victims and their families of what can only be described as a crime against humanity.
I should also like to extend our sympathy to the relatives and friends of all those who have been killed in recent incidents in Northern Ireland.
We all know how difficult it is for members of the security forces and their families, and we should now be aware that they are at risk all the time.
We owe them a great deal and can best repay them by finding a political solution to the conflict in Northern Ireland.
The hon. Member for Wiltshire, North (Mr. Needham), the Under-Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, has rightly pointed out the complete disregard for the Geneva convention on the part of the perpetrators of this appalling outrage.
It is worth noting what that convention says.
In the second protocol to the Geneva convention of 1977, article 7 specifies:’ All the wounded, sick and shipwrecked, whether or not they have taken part in the armed conflict, shall be respected and protected’.
Article 9 states:’ Medical and religious personnel shall be respected and protected and shall be granted all available help for the performance of their duties’.
Clearly the IRA has cruelly and inhumanely violated those principles.
The members of the IRA claim to be soldiers fighting a just war, but real soldiers are bound by the terms of the Geneva convention.
The IRA has destroyed the credibility of its own claims.
Members of the IRA are not soldiers, but assassins, carrying out a squalid murder campaign.
I have to say to the IRA and its supporters that their actions only strengthen the determination of all democrats in Britain and Ireland to reject them.
We are not prepared to listen to lectures on human rights from people who have such a callous attitude to human life.
However, it is important that we do not descend to their level.
We must ensure that the security forces are the real defenders of human rights and freedom from fear and violence, and that they are clearly seen to be so.
There can be no substitute for the courageous and difficult efforts of the security forces in upholding, impartially, the rule of law.
There are no’ quick fix’measures that will put a stop to the violence overnight.
No doubt voices will be raised in support of such measures, but I must urge the Secretary of State not to be hustled into steps that can only aggravate the situation.
Finally, I should like to ask the Secretary of State what progress has been made in an area where I believe it would be sensible to take action.
Can he tell us the position on the police authority's request for 400 more officers?
We would urge him to act rapidly on that request.
Such a decision would be complementary to the steps already taken by the Chief Constable following the sectarian killings of the past few weeks.
I believe that it is an item of additional expenditure that would win the approval of the whole House.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman not only for the sympathy he expressed to the families of those killed and injured, but for his support for the courageous efforts of the security forces.
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for reminding the House of the terms of the Geneva convention.
However, I think I should add that, as the hon. Gentleman implied, there are no legitimate targets on such occasions as Saturday.
The hon. Gentleman condemned the IRA as assassins and I am sure that the whole House would wish to do so.
The hon. Gentleman asked a specific question about the RUC's bid for further manpower.
That bid is at the final stage of its examination and I expect to be able to make an announcement soon.
Mr. Ken Maginnis (Fermanagh and South Tyrone)
On behalf of the Ulster Unionist party, I join other hon. Members in expressing our sympathy to the families of those who have been killed and to all who were injured in the incident at the Musgrave Park hospital at the weekend.
Indeed, we sympathise with all the families of people who are killed unnecessarily because of terrorism and violence.
I find it not a little peculiar, however, that the Secretary of State chose to combine his statement on the deaths of the two young men whose duties involved the care of the sick in this hospital with a statement on the death of a car thief.
The Secretary of State did not take the opportunity to mention that Roger Ellwood was killed by a stolen car driven by terrorists on 1 October this year.
So I fear that some doubt may be placed in the minds of hon. Members about the cause of the shooting that resulted in the death of the young man that the right hon. Gentleman referred to.
I am disappointed that we have still been given no sign that the means necessary to contain violence and to disrupt the command and control structure of the IRA are about to be implemented.
The need for internment is staring us all in the face.
People who suggest that to intern is to bring the community on to the streets cast doubt on the integrity of the vast majority in Northern Ireland.
The majority in the community from which I come would welcome internment at this time, and I cannot believe that the integrity of the Roman Catholic community is such that its members would choose this continued slaughter in our Province in preference to removing from the streets those who command and control the violence that besets us.
It is up to the Secretary of State, if he keeps internment on the books as he has told us he will, to begin to educate people throughout this kingdom about the need to implement internment at a time that he judges correct — when he is advised by the Chief Constable and the GOC to do so.
It is unhelpful if Ministers or others speaking on the right hon. Gentleman's behalf suggest that internment will not be used or that it is not a viable and justifiable means of dealing with those whose training and speciality is keeping themselves out of the courts and out of the hands of those on whom we depend to impose justice for the deaths that have occurred in Northern Ireland.
Mr. Brooke
In preparing my statement so as to include another recent event, I was following the behaviour of my predecessors, who have done the same on such occasions.
I entirely endorse what the hon. Gentleman said about the death of Roger Ellwood.
It seems to me to have been one of the greatest tragedies in the Province in the 27 months I have been Secretary of State.
I, too, express my sympathy to his family and to his fiance e and her family.
The hon. Gentleman said that I had said that we would keep internment on the statute book.
I would go further and say that we have kept it on the statute book already — there was an opportunity not to retain it during the passage of the emergency provisions Act, but we did retain it then.
The introduction of internment would be a serious step involving difficulties of implementation whose consequences would be difficult to predict.
I repeat what I have said before: internment has been retained on the statute book.
I would consider using it only in particular circumstances; for obvious reasons I will not predict what they might be.
The fact remains that internment is on the statute book and is available to the Government to use.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I fully share the concern felt about the dastardly acts in Ulster and the United Kingdom as a whole, but I ask hon. Members to keep their questions brief.
Rev. Ian Paisley (Antrim, North)
I should like to express to the House on behalf of the people whom I represent and my party our deep feeling of revulsion at what has taken place and our deepest sympathy for those who have suffered.
All right-thinking people in Northern Ireland, whatever their creed, politics or vision, will join with us as we express that heartfelt sympathy and deep revulsion.
On the issue that the Secretary of State has just discussed with the defence spokesman of the Ulster Unionist party, the hon. Member for Fermanagh and South Tyrone (Mr. Maginnis), while holding that it should be a weapon in the armoury of any civilised Government to take out of circulation those who are seeking to destroy, murder and maim, will he give a full assurance to the House that he will undertake that act, if he has to do so, as a British Minister responsible to this House, and not in cliques with the Dublin Government who say that they would need to approve such a move?
The Secretary of State must say today that he is in charge of security in Northern Ireland and that he will not allow his hands to be tied by any reference to matters coming from the South.
Is he not worried about the rising scale of explosions and the rising tide of murders that are taking place?
Is it not time for him to reconsider his whole security policy?
Although it may be all right for the spokesman for the Opposition to talk about taking no measures, surely from all parts of the Province there is a cry for a security policy now to carry out what his own colleagues said would have to be done: to extirpate the IRA?
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for the way in which he expressed his sympathy and that of his party and his revulsion at the events that have occurred.
I give him and the whole House a full assurance that in the event of the introduction of executive detention, it would be carried out by Her Majesty's Government in line with legislation passed by this House and retained by this Government on the statute book.
Of course I agree with the hon. Gentleman about the level of violence during the past two or three months.
I also want to pay tribute to the security forces for their response to the security situation.
I remind the hon. Gentleman that 97 people have been charged with terrorist crimes during the past two months, including 11 for murder.
Hon. Members should not doubt, either, the response of the security forces and the Government to that level of violence.
Mr. Seamus Mallon (Newry and Armagh)
In paying my respects and tribute to the bereaved of the two soldiers and the young man killed, I am tempted to say that I thought that I had seen it all.
The young baby in the carry-cot described by the IRA as an accident of war, the young nun serving the community described by the IRA as being in the wrong place at the wrong time and a fireman trying to put out a blaze described by the IRA as helping the British war machine — we did not expect to reach the stage where the IRA would break every precept of human compassion and morality by bombing a hospital.
I recognise and welcome the fact that the Secretary of State has said that there is no such thing as a legitimate target anywhere, because once that concept is accepted, we are in effect saying that murder is proper in certain circumstances.
We should take this opportunity to restate that.
I am not about to tell the Secretary of State what to do.
I do not know of any known way of preventing evil men from planting a little piece of plastic explosive in a vast complex like the Musgrave Park hospital.
What I know, and what I would like to tell those who, like me, are involved in the political process, is that we have a responsibility.
There is something that we can do — we can give leadership, and we must play our part in trying to end this terrible spiral of despair and killing in the North of Ireland.
Rather than give the Secretary of State expert opinions that I do not have, I suggest that all those involved in the political process here, in Northern Ireland, in the Republic of Ireland and everywhere have a bounden responsibility to start proper negotiations to end the nightmare that continued this weekend.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Member for the manner in which his question was posed.
I am not in the business of calibrating the relative evil of the atrocities carried out by the IRA, but I am conscious that the events that we have just witnessed come in the train of the attack on the remembrance day ceremony in Enniskillen four years ago, when 13 civilians were killed, and of the proxy bomb a year ago, which killed a civilian who had been tied to the driver's seat of his vehicle.
These are crimes against humanity, as has been said.
The hon. Gentleman referred to the political process.
All who are constitutional politicians in Northern Ireland have a responsibility towards the political development process.
We are quite clear, and we were clear when we conducted the talks this summer, that they were not peace talks because they would not bring an end to the violence, but were one of the pressures that can be mounted against the terrorists.
If we can bring such talks into being, we shall be making our contribution.
Mr. Barry Porter (Wirral, South)
I do not know what the answer is, but I know what the answer is not.
I hope that my right hon. Friend will join me, the rest of the House and the country in issuing a warning, in the hope and expectation that those who describe themselves as loyalist paramilitaries will not, under any circumstances, physically react to this ghastly occurrence.
If they do, or even think of so doing, they will get no support from the House or the country, and no sympathy, direct or indirect.
I hope that they hear that loud and clear.
Mr. Brooke
I am most grateful to my hon. Friend for that expression of view.
I join him in saying that the enforcement of law and order in the Province of Northern Ireland lies with Her Majesty's Government, the Chief Constable and those who support him.
Mr. Harry Barnes (Derbyshire, North-East)
I join hon. Members in unreservedly condemning the act by the IRA.
I also speak on behalf of the group New Consensus, of which I am chairman and which is both all-party and none.
It fully condemns acts such as this, and acts committed by the Ulster Freedom Fighters, such as attacking Belfast taxi drivers.
Does the Minister recognise that, as well as an escalation of violence, there is an escalation of the peace movement in Northern Ireland?
Groups such as Families Against Intimidation and Terror, the Newry hostage support group, Enough is Enough, the Peace Train Movement and New Consensus in Northern Ireland are standing up against the people of violence so as to ensure that there is another approach and a different tactic.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for the sympathy that he has expressed, and I share his sense of encouragement, brought about by the action taken by individual members of the community and groups which are seeking to call an end to the terrible experiences that we have all had.
Those of us who live and work in Northern Ireland would say that the feeling on the part of the community about bringing these matters to an end is not the result of any war-weary or defeatist feeling but because we want to bring them to an end and restore peace, and it is a very strong feeling.
Rev. William McCrea (Mid-Ulster)
I join the House in expressing sympathy to the families who have been so griveously bereaved through this tragedy, a tragedy that has been the experience of so many of the British people in Ulster over the past 20 years.
Does the Secretary of State agree with the Under-Secretary's statement that these’ fascist beasts’should be consigned to hell?
Having said that, however, he asks the members of the Unionist community to sit in council chambers with the spokesmen of the’ fascist beasts’.
In the statement by Her Majesty's Opposition, the Secretary of State heard a continuation of the velvet glove policy, which means, do little or nothing against the terrorist.
Does the right hon. Gentleman agree that the people of Northern Ireland demand equal rights with those on the mainland?
They have a right to be protected, and after 20 years, a flawed and failed security policy must be radically changed.
The IRA, and those who support them, having listened to the Secretary of State's statement, will he tell the House what part of his statement will have driven fear into the terrorist's heart?
Mr. Brooke
I am conscious that one of the ways in which my colleagues in the Government, and even on occasions myself, identify with the Province is to relapse periodically into theological language.
I recognise what the hon. Gentleman is saying.
It is important that it is on the record in the context of Sinn Fein 's reaction to the attack that occurred on Saturday that I understand that its president, Mr. Adams, when asked last night, specifically refused to condemn the bombing.
I hope that the people of Northern Ireland will draw significance from that.
I have said before to the hon. Member for Mid-Ulster (Rev. W.
McCrea), in the context of security, that the Government's policy must always be conducted within the rule of law, and that that is a critical factor in bringing terrorism to an end.
Mr. John D. Taylor (Strangford)
I join right hon. and hon. colleagues, obviously, in expressing sympathy for the families of the bereaved.
I pray that those who have been injured will recover quickly.
It is always popular in the House to condemn the IRA.
I have more reason than most to do that, having been shot 10 times by the IRA.
There must also be condemnation for those who fail to take on the IRA, and the finger must be pointed at the Secretary of State and those who sit behind him.
The Government introduced Dublin rule through the Anglo-Irish Agreement.
They gave encouragement to the terrorists, and they are responding in kind.
When the people in Northern Ireland were listening to these matters on the radio, they were wondering why a statement was to be made.
Two Ulster Defence Regiment men were killed on the Killylea road in Armagh.
Four UDR men in my constituency were killed in Downpatrick.
They were from Newtownards.
Three were killed recently, in June, in Glenanne.
No statements were made to the House following those events, so why is there a specific statement today?
We thought that there would be something in it, but instead there were just bland generalities.
There is nothing to offer the people of Northern Ireland.
We must be given confidence in the Government who rule us without our consent.
We must be given confidence in the Army and the police.
The Government must encourage the people of Northern Ireland to give their support for the security forces by giving the correct political leadership.
The Secretary of State has given nothing today but bland generalities, and the situation will continue as it is until there is a change of Government policy.
Why did the Secretary of state make a statement today?
Mr. Brooke
The right hon. Gentleman quotes a number of incidents in the Province that are within the memory of us all and on which statements were not made.
I remind him that there has been criticism historically when statements have been made about incidents in Great Britain, when it was commented that similar statements had not been made in the context of Northern Ireland.
If the right hon. Gentleman goes back to the incidents to which he was referring, he will find that they were not ones that could naturally and immediately be followed by a statement.
When, on certain occasions, private notice questions were tabled because of the circumstances of a particular incident, you, Mr. Speaker, in your wisdom, declined to accept them.
I made my statement because, against the criticism that on occasions we have not made statements on incidents in Great Britain, I believed it important that there should be one.
Mr. James Kilfedder (North Down)
May I join in the expressions of sympathy to the bereaved and those who were injured in Saturday's incident?
Will the Secretary of State call on the Roman Catholic Church — many of whose members have suffered at the hands of the IRA — to excommunicate those members of the IRA whose hands are dripping with the blood of innocent victims?
Mr. Brooke
It is my understanding that Cardinal Daly has outrightly condemned the events of last Saturday.
As I am not a member of his Church, it would be improper of me to make any theological observations.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I understand the importance of the statement, but we have a heavy day ahead of us.
I shall call one more hon. Member from each side.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North)
In deploring this latest IRA atrocity, and hoping that those responsible will be brought to justice — like all those, from both sides in Northern Ireland, who carry out squalid murders — may I ask whether the Secretary of State agrees that it is important that we do not play into the hands of the Provisional IRA by following policies which, although the IRA deny it, they want for propaganda purposes in the Republic of Ireland and the United States?
I refer mainly to internment and other measures that cannot be justified.
We should be careful not to play into the hands of murderers.
Mr. Brooke
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his advice.
The considerations that he mentioned are, among others, taken into account when determining policy.
Mr. Keith Speed (Ashford)
I associate myself with the expressions of sympathy.
Will my right hon. Friend have a word with our right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary about utilising the British information services to maximum effect, especially in north America, in the hope of cutting off the supply of money, sympathy and support for the sort of depraved attack that occurred on Saturday, and to show IRA sympathisers in America precisely what is happening?
Mr. Brooke
I am always content to discuss these matters with my right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary.
However, I think that there would be fairly wide agreement that Government actions in north America during recent years have resulted in the proportion of funding coming from north America being greatly diminished.
BILLS PRESENTED
Further and Higher Education (Scotland)
Mr. Secretary Lang, supported by Mr. Secretary Rifkind, Mr. Secretary Clarke, Mr. Michael Forsyth and Mr. Francis Maude, presented a Bill to make new provision about further and higher education in Scotland; and for connected purposes: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time tomorrow and to be printed.
[Bill 5.]
Cardiff Bay Barrage
Mr. Secretary Hunt, supported by Mr. Secretary Heseltine, Mr. David Mellor, Sir Wyn Roberts and Mr. Nicholas Bennett, presented a Bill to provide for the construction by the Cardiff Bay Development Corporation of a barrage across the mouth of Cardiff Bay with an outer harbour and of a tidal lagoon and for related works; to make provision for the acquisition and use of land for the works; to make provision about the operation and management of the barrage, the outer harbour, the water impounded by the barrage and the lagoon; to make provision for dealing with property damage resulting from any alteration of groundwater levels which may occur in consequence of the construction of the barrage; to enable other protective provisions to be made; and for connected purposes: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time tomorrow and to be printed.
[Bill 6.]
Employment and Education
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Before I call the Secretary of State for Employment, I must tell the House that because of the numbers of right hon. and hon. Members who wish to participate in today's debate, I am placing a precautionary limit of 10 minutes on speeches between 7 and 9 pm.
If those who are called before that time are relatively brief, it may not be necessary to impose the limit.
However, under the Standing Orders I must make my announcement now.
The Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Michael Howard)
The policies set out in the Gracious Speech will expand opportunity, choice and quality in our nation's education and training.
They will lay the foundations for the creation of yet more jobs, in addition to the 800,000 created since 1979 and the 2.6 million created since 1983.
They will ensure that Britain is ready for the challenges of the 1990s.
Those who report on our deliberations in this place have predicted that our exchanges over the next few months will be blighted by charge and counter-charge, by accusation and counter-accusation, and by statistics from both sides crossing each other in the night.
I have now faced the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) across the Dispatch Box on nine occasions during the past 21 months.
Neither of us could claim that those exchanges have been free of the features that I have just identified.
Indeed, the hon. Gentleman might acknowledge that his universally pessimistic approach to these matters is at times all too reminiscent of Private Fraser in’ Dad's Army’, whose response to every situation is to cry out,’We're doomed — doomed, I tell you.’
I offer the hon. Gentleman an opportunity this afternoon to engage in more constructive debate.
I begin by identifying those objectives which — I hope he agrees — the hon. Gentleman and his party share.
I will describe the extent to which the considerable progress has been made by the Government towards achieving those objectives.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will have the grace to acknowledge that progress and those achievements.
I will consider what more needs to be done — because undoubtedly more needs to be done and formidable challenges remain — and whether further progress towards the achievement of those objectives is more likely to come about if the policies of the Government continue to be pursued than if the policies that the hon. Gentleman's party advocates were introduced in their place.
We all want to see better education and training for our people.
That is fundamental to the needs of our economy in the years ahead; fundamental to the prospects for unemployed people; and fundamental also to the creation of opportunities for our people not only to obtain work, to have and to hold down a job, but to obtain work and jobs which give them satisfaction, which are truly rewarding and which enable them to fulfil their potential to the greatest possible extent.
We need to see more of our young people staying on at school, more of them going into further and higher education and more of them achieving qualifications.
We need to improve the levels of skills and qualifications of all our people and to increase the quantity and quality of the training that is available to them.
Mrs. Gwyneth Dunwoody (Crewe and Nantwich)
Will the Secretary of State send a message to those Rolls-Royce apprentices who will soon complete their training at what once was one of Britain's best motor car factories, but who will be unable to obtain employment in that factory or in any Rolls-Royce subsidiary?
What does the right hon. and learned Gentleman suggest that those apprentices should do with the training to which they committed a lot of their time?
Mr. Howard
I am sure that those young people fully understand that no Government could ever offer them a guarantee of employment with any specific employer or at any particular workplace.
However, I am equally sure that the qualifications and experience that those apprentices have gained will stand them in excellent stead in achieving employment when they come to look for jobs.
We need above all — because it is the key to everything else — to increase the productivity and the competitiveness of our industries, because that alone will encourage more job creation.
That alone will provide the resources that are essential if we are to build a steadily more prosperous society.
Those objectives are scarcely controversial.
I have no doubt that the hon. Gentleman accepts them — although it is true that he has surprised me more than once in the past by failing to agree with the most obvious proposition.
Let us then examine the progress that the Government have made towards achieving those objectives.
First, on education and training, more young people are graduating from higher education than ever before — the number is up by nearly one third since 1979.
More of our young people have higher education qualifications than do young people in Germany or Italy.
More of our school leavers have qualifications than ever before, as do more of our work force.
For the first time, no fewer than two thirds of those who work have a qualification, and 39 per cent.
have A-levels or higher qualifications — an increase of no less than one third since 1979.
Mr. David Tredinnick (Bosworth)
Were not the training and enterprise councils, the employment training programme and the youth training programme all the brainchilds of the present Government?
They did not exist under the previous Labour Administration?
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is entirely correct and it would be as well if the House bore that important fact in mind when considering some of the allegations that are made — although I hope this afternoon for a more responsible tone in the remarks of the hon. Member for Sedgefield.
Mr. John Fraser (Norwood)
In my borough, unemployment has risen by 69 per cent.
over the past year, but, because of poll tax capping, virtually no one in Lambeth will receive a discretionary grant for vocational training.
Often, a graduate has to complete a year at college or at law school after taking a degree.
Such a period of further study could qualify for a discretionary grant, but, because of poll tax capping, almost no one in my borough will receive one.
Does not the right hon. and learned Gentleman agree that it would be better to replace dicretionary grants for vocational training, which are a burden on local authorities, with mandatory grants paid for by central Government?
Mr. Howard
I wonder whether the hon. Gentleman is citing Lambeth council as a model of efficiency and good practice.
If that council harboured its resources sensibly and deployed them effectively, it would be able to spend them in the way that the hon. Gentleman suggests.
As my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science will no doubt point out in due course, Lambeth spends less than its standard spending assessment on education.
I suggest that the hon. Gentleman direct his remarks to Lambeth council: a reordering of its spending priorities seems to be long overdue.
We are laying the foundations for further progress.
More of our young people are now receiving higher education than ever before — an increase from one in eight in 1979 to one in five today and nearly one in three by the end of the decade.
More 16-year-olds are staying on at school than ever before — more than 50 per cent.
of the age group, for the first time ever.
Indeed, last year it is likely to have been as high as 60 per cent.
and it will be higher still this year.
As for training, as my hon. Friend the Member for Bosworth (Mr. Tredinnick) has just reminded us, the Government have introduced the first and only guarantee anywhere in Europe of a two-year training place for every 16 and 17-year-old who needs it.
That has been made possible by an increase in the number of training places for young people from a grand total of 6,000 in 1979 to more than 260,000 today.
Taken together, the progress that we have made in education and training has led to an increase of more than two thirds in the proportion of 16 to 18-year-olds receiving full-time education or training since 1980.
It is not just a question of quantity; the quality is improving, too.
In our schools, the reforms introduced by my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State and his predecessors are bringing results.
A recent academic study compared the training available to young people in this country and that available to young people in Germany — for so long held out as the model that all other countries should follow in this regard.
It reached the conclusion that, in many important respects, our training was not merely the equal of that provided in Germany; it was actually its superior.
My Department's spending on training and enterprise has increased two and a half times in real terms since 1979.
The proportion of our gross domestic product devoted to taxpayer-funded training is higher here than it is in Germany, the United States or Japan.
Mr. Frank Haynes (Ashfield)
Will the Secretary of State give way?
Mr. Howard
I will always give way to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Haynes
I do not know which gramophone company the Secretary of State works for, Mr. Speaker, but we hear the same old gramophone record every time he comes to the Dispatch Box.
When the previous Secretary of State, the right hon. Member for Sutton Coldfield (Sir N. Fowler), occupied his post, the unemployment figures were going down.
Ever since the right hon. and learned Gentleman has occupied it, they have gone up.
Now they are rocketing.
He is flipping useless and it is time that he was looking for another job.
I am not talking about statistics.
I am talking about the real world — about what is happening out there.
The Secretary of State should join that lot out there who keep losing their jobs and the people who cannot get a job.
He has been to my constituency recently, although he did not inform me of the fact.
He was telling people how wonderful things would be in the future; I want to see that future.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman has not told me about it yet.
He should get stuck in, or get out.
Mr. Howard
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his helpful intervention.
It is perfectly true that some of the things that I am saying today I have said before; that is because they are true.
It does no harm to repeat the truth, or to establish a degree of consistency.
Of course, that is not something that the hon. Gentleman is used to observing on the Opposition Benches.
I quite understand why he is somewhat mystified by consistency, with which he is not entirely comfortable or familiar.
It is, however, something that he will be given by Conservative Members and I am sure that he will want to make the most of it before — sadly — he retires from our midst at the next general election.
Mr. Nicholas Soames (Crawley)
Does my right hon. and learned Friend accept the good news, contrary to what was said by the hon. Member for Ashfield (Mr. Haynes), that although in recent times my constituency has experienced economic difficulties, so successful has my right hon. and learned Friend's training and enterprise programme been that the Crawley and District Industries Association has told me that this is the first time during a downturn in the economy when training by companies has increased rather than decreased?
Mr. Haynes
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
The hon. Gentleman is bragging about unemployment in his constituency being 3.4 per cent., but unemployment is between 9 and 11 per cent .
now.
The hon. Gentleman has got a nerve.
Mr. Speaker
I have heard better points of order than that.
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend the Member for Crawley (Mr. Soames) makes an extremely important point.
The experience that he reports in his constituency is mirrored throughout the country.
It is one of the most significant and important respects in which the recession from which we are recovering is different from all previous recessions.
We are using the additional resources to excellent effect.
We are improving both the quality and the quantity of our training and we are improving and creating the skills that our people will need in the 1990s.
Our progress in these vital areas can be summarised as record resources, record commitment, record results.
I hope that there will be some acknowledgement by the hon. Member for Sedgefield of the progress that we are making.
Of course, the Government cannot do it all alone.
Their success in these matters has been matched by record increases in the commitment of employers to training.
There has been an 85 per cent.
increase in the proportion of employees being trained over the last seven years alone.
Over the last year alone, 92 per cent.
of employers have increased or maintained the volume of off-the-job training that they provide.
The latest Confederation of British Industry survey of manufacturing companies shows that more than six times as many companies expect to maintain or increase their investment in training over the next year than expect to reduce it.
Today the Industrial Society published a survey of its members which shows even higher expectations of increased training over the next year.
There is an overwhelming body of evidence that British employers are more aware of the importance of training for their future than has ever been the case in the past.
The proportion of employers with a training budget has increased by more than a tenth in the last year alone.
The proportion of employers with a training plan has increased even more rapidly.
The key to our success in this area, the cornerstone of our achievements, is the establishment of a nationwide network, now complete, of training and enterprise councils, ensuring that training is delivered in a way that fully respects the needs and requirements of local areas and is fully tailored to local circumstances.
The hon. Member for Sedgefield spends a good deal of time travelling up and down the country proclaiming his devotion to training and enterprise councils.
I welcome that.
Even though the hon. Gentleman occasionally speaks with forked tongue — and, as we shall see later, his views are not shared by his Front-Bench colleague, the hon. Member for Fife, Central (Mr. McLeish)— I welcome the fact that he proclaims his support for the TECs.
But when is he going to give an ounce of credit to the Government for having set up the TECs, for having put in place the instrument of the training revolution that is now taking place in this country, and for having taken the most imaginative step that we have ever seen in our training history?
The hon. Gentleman has been noticeably reticent in this respect in the past.
I invite him to be more forthcoming here and now.
Mr. Tony Blair (Sedgefield)
If the right hon. and learned Gentleman supports the TECs so much, why has he started them off with a significant cut in funding?
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman is not, I hope, going to return to that.
Today the shadow Chancellor told the nation that the Government are spending too much money and that this is a profligate Government.
However, in the very first debate in the House after the shadow Chancellor's statement, up pops the hon. Gentleman and, in the first intervention from the Opposition Front Bench, says,’ Spend more, spend more.’
It is about time that there was some consistency among Opposition Members.
Mr. Blair
Before the right hon. and learned Gentleman gets too carried away, does he accept that he started the TECs with a cut in funding?
Has the funding been cut — yes or no?
Mr. Howard
I have explained to the hon. Gentleman and to the House on countless occasions that we have provided TECs with the resources that they need to do the job that I have asked them to do.
We carefully considered — I explained how we did so — how best to help unemployed people back to work.
Survey evidence showed that although training is an important and effective way of helping some unemployed people back to work, it is not the only way or always the best way.
We adjusted our provision to take that into account.
I hope that the hon. Member for Sedgefield will not tell the House that he gives the Government credit for having set up the TECs.
Will the hon. Gentleman, just this once, give us an ounce of credit for that?
Mr. Blair
I would understand it if the Minister were saying merely that he is reorganising the same amount of resources, but he has cut resources.
Does he accept that there has been a cut in the TEC's budgets and that many are expressing concern about meeting his guarantees as a result?
Will he accept that or not?
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman has been exceptionally churlish this afternoon.
He has talked about TECs and has risen three times to intervene, but has declined to give the Government an ounce of credit for having established the TECs and for having taken that most imaginative step.
One thing is clear from the hon. Gentleman's attitude: were there ever a Labour Government, there would be no review of programmes and there would be no assessment of the way in which help is given to ensure that it is cost effective or of how Government resources are deployed to ensure that the taxpayer gets the best value for money.
According to the hon. Member for Sedgefield, once a programme is introduced it must carry on for ever, regardless of whether it is the most effective way of achieving those aims.
The Government's job creation record is remarkably successful.
There are now more than 800,000 more jobs in our economy than in 1979 and 2,600,000 more than in 1983.
The key to job creation lies in productivity and competitiveness.
In the 1980s, Britain achieved the fastest growth in productivity of any major industrialised country.
We had been bottom of the league in the 1960s and 1970s, but our GDP, business investment and manufacturing productivity grew faster during the 1980s than in Germany, France or many other countries.
That was the best relative performance by Britain in any decade since the second world war.
The new competitiveness of British industry has been sharply shown by the increase in our share of world trade for two years running, halting and reversing decades of decline.
The attractiveness of Britain today for new business and job creation has ensured that we have consistently secured more Japanese and American investment than any other member state of the European Community.
One of the most important factors in the creation of jobs during the lifetime of the Government has been the sharp reduction that we have achieved in the number of strikes.
Few people will dispute that that is largely a result of the legislation that we passed to reform industrial relations.
That legislation was passed in the teeth of the unflinching opposition of the Labour party and of the hon. Member for Sedgefield in particular.
He described the introduction of trade union ballots as’ a scandalous and undemocratic measure against the trade union movement.’
The reduction in strikes has been overwhelmingly important in attracting foreign investment to this country on a scale for which there is no precedent.
That observation is not just my unsupported assessment; an independent survey conducted by the Invest in Britain Bureau which was published in July showed that 96 per cent.
of foreign firms believed that Britain's industrial relations improved significantly in the 1980s.
Those are some of the achievements for which the Government can take substantial credit.
I am prepared to wait until the hon. Member for Sedgefield makes his speech for some sign of acknowlegment of that progress.
But what of the future?
On training, we plan to take forward the dynamic of the TEC movement.
The enthusiasm and excitement that TECs have generated are without parallel in our past.
They will harness those qualities to ensure that we continue to make progress.
Employers and, indeed, trade unions have committed themselves to the CBI's testing and challenging education and training targets.
Those targets will sharply improve the qualifications of the British work force.
Mr. Jack Straw (Blackburn)
The Government did not adopt them.
Mr. Howard
The Government supported them.
I was on the platform with the general secretary of the TUC and the president of the CBI when the targets were announced.
Building blocks of the training revolution are being put in place — this country's first national system of job-related qualifications — with new qualifications being produced, recognised and attained every month.
Three hundred vocational qualifications are now accredited.
By the end of next year, about 800 will have been accredited, covering 80 per cent.
of the work force.
That means that over the next 14 months new national vocational qualifications will be accredited and put in place at a rate of well over one a day.
Perhaps the hon. Member for Sedgefield will tell us whether he approves of that development.
Perhaps he will at least acknowledge the progress that is being made.
Last month, I presented the first Investors in People awards.
The companies that received them had achieved tough, testing and challenging targets of commitment to training.
I presented 29 awards and was able to announce that a further 500 companies are committed to meeting this standard.
I believe that that standard has an important part to play in enhancing employer recognition of the importance of training and career development for the whole of a company's work force.
Investors in People is a standard designed by business, which will be met by business, because it is in the interests of business.
That is why it will succeed.
From next April, tax relief will be available for the first time for individual training expenses — encouraging a further increase in the commitment of individuals to train to improve their future career prospects.
Career development loans — about whose future the hon. Member for Sedgefield registered such heartfelt concern a couple of weeks ago — are being taken up with increasing enthusiasm.
Well over 20,000 people have already been encouraged to invest some £53 million in their own training with the benefit of those loans.
Other new measures are foreshadowed in the White Paper’ Education and Training for the 21st Century.’
Some of them were included in the Gracious Speech: removal of the artificial divide, imposed by a Labour Government, between universities and polytechnics; independence for further education colleges; and more information for parents, leading to higher standards of education in our schools.
I have no doubt that my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science will have more to say about those matters later in the debate.
Progress is also being made on the other matters referred to in the White Paper.
I refer in particular to the expansion of training credits.
Training for young people is being revolutionised by the phased introduction of training vouchers across the country.
Already, one school leaver in 10 is offered a training voucher — a means to encourage a sharp improvement in the quality and quantity of training available to that age group while increasing the choice and opportunity open to young people.
By the end of the next Parliament, every 16 and 17-year-old school leaver will be offered a training voucher — perhaps the biggest single leap forward of individual choice since the introduction of the right to buy.
Mr. Matthew Taylor (Truro)
As the Secretary of State knows, training vouchers are being piloted in Devon and Cornwall and other areas.
I have had many meetings with those involved.
There is a problem with training vouchers, just as there is without them.
Because of the economic climate, it does not look as though training places will be available.
That is the guarantee for which people are looking and which the Government appear to be failing to deliver.
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman is wrong.
The guarantee is in place.
We are committed to it and we shall continue to deliver it.
The hon. Member for Sedgefield has been uncharacteristically coy about the Labour party's attitude to training credits.
Is the hon. Gentleman in favour of them, or is he not?
Perhaps this afternoon he will tell us the Labour party's attitude to this imaginative development.
I referred to the Government's record on job creation.
Despite that record, it is, of course, the case that unemployment has risen in this recession, as it has in all other recessions.
Of course, the problem is not unique to this country.
In fact, unemployment is rising in every member state of the European Community except Spain — where it is already nearly double our level — and in every member country of the European Free Trade Association, and it is higher today than it was a year ago in every G7 country.
The response of government to rising unemployment must have two elements.
We must strive to create the economic framework in which record numbers of jobs will once again become available.
I have already referred to the progress that we have made in increasing productivity and competitiveness.
Competitiveness is the key to job creation and the key to competitiveness is the control of inflation.
Clearly, we have made great progress in bringing inflation under control and we shall soon have a lower rate of inflation than Germany for the first time in a generation.
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
Will the Secretary of State reconsider his answer to the hon. Member for Truro (Mr. Taylor)?
The truth is that the youth training guarantee is not being delivered by Devon training and enterprise council.
Those are the facts.
Does he not know what the facts are?
Is he telling me that every young person in Devon who does not have a job has a YT place?
If he is, I am telling him that he is wrong.
Mr. Howard
The guarantee will be met in Devon and Cornwall as in every other training and enterprise council, and every young person of the relevant age who leaves school and cannot get a job will be offered a training place.
That is a commitment which the Government will deliver.
That will be the case and I can give the hon. Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton) that undertaking.
When the hon. Member for Newham, North-East mentioned that important matter I was referring to the progress that we have made in bringing inflation under control.
That is already improving our competitiveness and we shall see its effects on job creation before much longer.
A reduction in the rate of inflation is the only route to reduction in unemployment.
Of course, unemployment brings great difficulties in its train and no one regrets that more than I. That is why in recent months we have put in place the widest range of measures that we have ever had to help unemployed people get back to work.
I have described them to the House on many previous occasions and, although he is no longer in the Chamber, I do not wish to incur the wrath of the hon. Member for Ashfield (Mr. Haynes) by repeating them.
Mr. Haynes
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I am here.
Mr. Howard
I beg the hon. Gentleman's pardon.
I had not appreciated that he had moved in the Chamber.
He has changed his position and perhaps there is still time for him to cross the Floor before he leaves the House at the end of this Parliament.
Those measures provide practical positive help to unemployed people.
This year, I have set the Employment Service the task of placing 1.3 million people in jobs — 5,000 every working day — and it is achieving that target.
What is the Opposition's attitude towards job creation?
They support a whole range of policies, the inevitable result of which would be to make unemployment higher than would otherwise be the case.
Every Labour Government since 1929 have increased unemployment.
Putting Labour in charge of reducing unemployment would be like sending a fire fighter to tackle a blaze with his hoses full of petrol.
Their unpicking of our trade union law reforms, which would deliberately make strikes easier, longer and more frequent, their support for every last dot and comma of the European Commission's social action programme, just one directive of which could add £5 billion to the costs of British employers —
Mr. Blair
For the sake of clarification, could the Secretary of State say whether his position has changed on maternity leave and the pregnant women at work directive of the EC?
A few weeks ago, he told us that that would ruin employment opportunities for women.
We understand from the Sunday papers that he will not now dissent from it.
Is that correct?
Mr. Howard
The Commission's original proposal on maternity leave would have added £0.5 billion to the costs or either employers or taxpayers in this country.
We have been negotiating steadily and patiently — and I hope successfully — to reduce that burden.
The attitude that the United Kingdom Government will take to that directive will depend upon its final form.
We do not yet know what that will be, as the negotiations are continuing.
I should like to know whether the Opposition welcome the reduction of that £0.5 billion burden on British employers or taxpayers or whether they regret it and I am happy to give way now to the hon. Member for Sedgefield if he will answer that question.
Mr. Blair
We do not believe that the proposal would add significantly to costs.
We believe that it would be good for work in Britain.
As the Secretary of State was never coy about telling us that he opposed the directive, will he tell us — as there is a meeting on Wednesday, I assume that he has made up his mind about whether he will agree to that part of the social charter — whether he has changed his mind or whether the Prime Minister has changed it for him?
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman does not seem to have the first idea of what happens at Social Affairs Councils.
What happens is that negotiations take place.
I cannot tell the hon. Gentleman now what my attitude will be at the end of a meeting that is due to take place on Wednesday because the whole purpose of that meeting is for negotiations to take place.
I am sure that the House will have noted the hon. Gentleman's invention of a new doctrine — cost-free pay.
He says that he does not accept that the new regulations, which will have the substantial effect of increasing pay, will lead to any costs.
The Labour party approaches all economic matters on the basis of the new wonderful world of cost-free pay.
That is the world inhabited by the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Spencer Batiste (Elmet)
Does my right hon. and learned Friend at least give the hon. Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) the benefit of consistency?
He says the same thing about a range of measures, including the measures advocated by the Labour party, which would put many part-time women employees out of work.
Mr. Howard
My hon. Friend is entirely right.
That is the kind of consequence to which Labour Members are characteristically blind, as they are blind in their continued support for the national statutory minimum wage.
Last month, the hon. Member for Barking (Ms. Richardson), perhaps aware — given her shadow portfolio — of the immense damage that the proposal would do to jobs for women, told Channel 4 news that if the minimum wage caused job losses,’ We'll look at it’.
She may wish to look at it, but the shadow Chancellor has made it plain that he will not, telling readers of the Morning Star, the only newspaper to support the minimum wage, that he regards it as’ an unwavering commitment not open to negotiation.’
I want to put to the hon. Member for Sedgefield some important and fundamental questions relating to his party's attitude to training and I hope that he will do the House the honour of answering them.
While the hon. Gentleman has been travelling up and down the country assuring the training and enterprise councils of his support, the hon. Member for Fife, Central, his fellow Front-Bench spokesman on these matters, has been singing a somewhat different tune.
He wrote an article in the magazine Training Tomorrow which he entitled, unequivocally if rather presumptuously,’ Labour's Approach to Tecs’.
I have a copy of the magazine and the hon. Member for Sedgefield may like to read it.
Perhaps the first thing that he will tell us is whether his hon. Friend cleared that article with him in advance.
Do the views expressed in it represent his views and the views of the whole of his party, or the views of only one part of his Front-Bench team?
Let us examine the views of the hon. Member for Fife, Central on the subject of TECs.
The hon. Gentleman thinks that TECs are a symbol’ of deep rooted mistakes of political philosophy’.
Does the hon. Member for Sedgefield agree?
Hon. Members
Answer.
Mr. Blair
When the Secretary of State last raised the point in debate in the House, he was told unequivocally by my hon. Friend the Member for Fife, Central (Mr. McLeish) that he fully supported the TECs.
I do not know what the Secretary of State is doing now to an article.
Mr. Howard
I have never raised the point before.
It is a rather recent article in this publication and was drawn to my attention only a week or so ago.
I hope that the hon. Member for Sedgefield will do the House and the TECs the credit of taking these matters seriously.
The hon. Member for Fife, Central says that TECs have been set up’ at breakneck speed with scant regard to the complex and interrelated problems underpinning Britain's skills crisis.’
He says that there are’ fundamental differences between the Labour party and the Government’on’the philosophy behind the TEC initiative.’
Does the hon. Member for Sedgefield agree?
Mr. Blair indicated assent.
Mr. Howard
The hon. Gentleman agrees with that — I am grateful.
Does he also agree, then, that the philosophy behind the TECs is, in the words of the hon. Member for Fife, Central,’ deeply damaging to the long-term need of this country’?
Those are important questions and I hope that the hon. Member for Sedgefield will deal with them specifically.
Mr. Janman
I certainly do not doubt the sincerity of the right hon. Gentleman's remarks, but throughout modern economic history, when any Government have sought to misdirect national resources in a manner that goes completely against the grain of the marketplace, has not the result of such a regional policy been exactly the opposite to what the right hon. Gentleman has sought to achieve?
There is no better example than the fact that every Labour Government since the war have increased unemployment.
Mr. Foot
I am glad to be able to enlighten the hon. Member for Thurrock (Mr. Janman), especially when he talks in terms of what has happened to the numbers of unemployed during Labour Governments.
There has never been a Labour Government who have had to face unemployment on this scale.
Never in the history of recorded figures have a Labour Government tolerated unemployment on this scale, whether in the United Kingdom as a whole or in Wales, Scotland or anywhere else.
So I hope that that lie will never be preached again.
The hon. Member for Thurrock asked whether I did not know that if one took economic resources from one area and instilled them into others that was merely a way of upsetting the ordinary economic mechanism and that it did not result in any advances.
The last time that I heard that argument so brazenly presented was by Mr. Neville Chamberlain's spokesman before the war.
That is what they said in the 1930s.
They said that one could not solve unemployment on such a scale and that if one invested £1 million in one area, having taken it away from profitable Birmingham or wherever, it would leave us worse off in the end.
It is partly because of that false economics that the Conservatives have never had a regional policy.
That policy does not work and if one applies it in that way one can only deepen slumps — just as the Government are doing now.
Every time the Secretary of State comes to the Dispatch Box to reaffirm that laissez-faire doctrine, about 100,000 people are added to the unemployment figures.
We can deal with mass unemployment on this scale only if we have a Government who are determined to do so, and we can deal with it better if, internationally, Governments are determined to do so.
I hope a new Labour Government will not only apply those policies but will lead the rest of Europe instead of squabbling behind them or relinquishing the whole of the case.
We have the chance to do that.
The idea that one cannot do anything about unemployment is the real gospel of despair.
This country is not prepared to accept the gospel of despair in mass unemployment, which is returning on such a scale today.
Mr. Andrew Rowe (Mid-Kent)
I am always interested to listen to the long-extending memory of the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot).
His memory goes back further than I could possibly hope to remember.
I was interested in his reiteration of the value of regional policies, because the criteria on which such a policy would be administered is of interest to one who comes from a county which is probably being hit by a more rapidly rising rate of unemployment than almost anywhere else.
One must ask whether, in those circumstances, if a regional policy of the kind that the right hon. Gentleman had in mind were in place Kent would be a prime recipient of assistance.
Such questions have become much harder to answer as a consequence of the Government's astonishing success in closing the north-south divide, which was thought to be wholly irremediable when they came to office.
The Government have seen an increase in prosperity throughout the United Kingdom and a sharing of both good times and bad.
Mr. Tony Worthington (Clydebank and Milngavie)
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that the rate of male unemployment in Glasgow is 20 per cent.?
What is it in his constituency?
Mr. Rowe
The rate of unemployment in Glasgow has been very high for a long time, and I accept that that is unfortunate.
However, the truth of the matter is that the Scottish economy is in a better state now than it has been for many years and is continuing to thrive.
I realise that it is constantly in the interests of the Opposition to belittle the Government's successes, but that is certainly one.
Two things were said when the Government took office.
It was said, first, that the country was ungovernable, and secondly, that there was an unbridgeable north-south gap.
Neither of those points is true after the years in which we have been in office.
I especially welcome the sentence in the Queen's Speech which points to the privatisation of British Rail.
This is not the occasion for a detailed analysis for the evaluation of the alternative proposals for a high-speed rail link to the channel tunnel.
As some hon. Members may know, I have some interest in that subject, and I hope that I shall be able to have an Adjournment debate in which to discuss the process by which we arrived at the present stage of the project.
Mr. Alan Haselhurst (Saffron Walden)
I had hoped to have had the privilege of catching your eye, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the first day of this debate, when it is acknowledged to be a free-for-all and any subject can follow another.
Thereafter, it is slightly intimidating when subjects are set down for each day's debate, and we feel a little restricted in moving beyond the sphere of the Ministers on the Front Bench.
However, as my hon. Friends the Members for Ashford (Mr. Speed) and for Mid-Kent (Mr. Rowe) have strayed into the area of transport, and as the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot) got as far as Yugoslavia, I feel that I, too, can stray a little from the main theme of the debate without attracting too much criticism.
I shall pay particular attention to that part of the Gracious Speech in which the Government say that they will promote enterprise and training, attach the highest priority to improving public services, improve quality and choice in education, and improve the effectiveness of the NHS.
I derive the greatest satisfaction from the fact that the Government, through the Gracious Speech, are saying that the highest priority will be given to the improvement of public services.
Indeed, that statement might be described almost as’ outing’.
The Government have put large sums of money into the public services for many years, but have not proclaimed it as a great virtue.
Now, it appears that they are to take great pride in the fact that we are spending more on public services, and it is right to acknowledge that.
Health and education are probably the most basic of the public services that deserve the highest priority.
Certainly, they are the services that will receive the most attention between now and the general election, and during the election campaign itself.
It is clearly stated in the Gracious Speech that the highest priority will be attached to health.
That is on the Government's agenda for the final Session of this Parliament — not privatisation.
While my right hon. and hon. Friends will be talking about priorities for health, no doubt we will hear again and again from Labour about privatisation, privatisation, and nothing but privatisation.
The word’ privatisation’is redefined by Labour as it suits it, as is the case with so much else in the Labour party.
The Government are no longer accused of actual privatisation but of creeping privatisation.
How does Labour define that?
On 13 October, the Leader of the Opposition described it in three different ways — which is typical of him.
One was’ the grim reality of paying or waiting.’
Presumably he meant an individual's inability to have a national health service operation on demand.
I wonder when that has ever been possible during the lifetime of the NHS.
Does Labour pledge that, if it is elected to government, no one will wait any length of time for an operation?
The Government's patients charter suggests that a waiting period of two years is a realistic target, beyond which no individual should have to wait.
It is realistic when one considers the number of new operations developed as a consequence of medical research.
A few weeks ago, a lady interviewed on television complained about her wait for a hip replacement operation.
One naturally sympathised with her discomfort and pain.
She asked,’ What is the NHS coming to, that I should have to wait in pain, discomfort and distress for my operation?’
The riposte must be that what it is coming to is that it is now technically possible to perform that operation, and naturally a huge demand for it has developed.
The same situation arises time and time again, as new medical techniques are developed and demand for them rises.
One must be realistic in one's promises to patients in respect of their admission to hospital for non-life threatening operations.
There are many vulnerable people — such as the lady whom I mentioned — who are waiting for treatment, and whose fears and emotions can be exploited.
I suspect that the hon. Member for Livingston (Mr. Cook) will skulk around the back alleys of the national health service scavenging for distress stories with which to regale us between now and the general election.
Every Government have an uphill task in persuading the public that their stewardship of the NHS is adequate.
When Mrs. Jones or Mrs.
Robinson has a daughter who has to wait 12 months for an operation, it is no use telling her that 10, 20, or 25 years ago the situation was similar or much worse, because Mrs. Jones or Mrs. Robinson will still consider that the NHS is unsatisfactory today, and will naturally blame the Government.
Mr. Spencer Batiste (Elmet)
It is particularly fitting that we should have the debates on education and employment on the same day, because education is a continuing process throughout life upon which employment is heavily dependent.
What is more, any forecast about the way in which industry will develop within the United Kingdom and the European Community in the remainder of this century suggests that national prosperity will depend to an increasing extent on the successful skilling up of the national work force to meet the new demands that will be made by industry, technology, the professions and academia.
Anyone who studies academic standards in our schools over the past 20 years must recognise that there have been considerable improvements.
International comparisons are of relatively little value because they tend to highlight the different priorities and practices of different countries.
We are better than other countries in some things and they are better than us in others.
Mr. Tim Janman (Thurrock)
I intend to concentrate on the two subjects of today's debate, education and employment.
I shall deal mainly with the latter subject, but I intend to spend just a few minutes on education.
Tremendous proposals are made in the Queen's Speech, in particular the proposal to provide information to parents.
Without proper and relevant performance data about how a school is performing, it is not possible for parents to make an informed and therefore correct choice about a school.
I welcome also the introduction of annual written reports, which I hope will contain grading for each child.
Parents wish to see not just how their child is doing but how he or she is doing when related to a grading benchmark.
I hope that the Minister will confirm that a child's performance will be measured by grading.
Probably the most important of our education reforms concerns grant-maintained status.
It is essential that we should do all that we can to take as many schools as possible out of local education authority control and place them under the control of governors and parents.
My right hon. and learned Friend will be pleased to know that Torrells comprehensive school in Grays in my constituency is conducting a ballot.
I hope that, at the end of that procedure, there will be a majority in favour of grant-maintained status.
If that is the case, I hope that my right hon. and learned Friend will approve the application.
He will be even more interested to know that, through the grapevine, I have heard that one Labour county councillor in my constituency supports the application and that another Labour county councillor, who publicly opposes it, privately supports it because she has a child at Torrells comprehensive school.
The Minister will be pleased to know that unemployment in my constituency fell by 41 last month.
Unemployment is still only just half of what it was seven years ago.
It is important that we should evolve out of this recession and out of rising unemployment and that we should not create a false boom by lowering interest rates too quickly or by Government over-borrowing.
Although the current rise in unemployment, now slowing down, which we are witnessing is frustrating and to some extent avoidable, the Labour party's criticism of the Government's record is both hypocritical and deceitful.
There are four main reasons why Labour's criticism is hypocritical and deceitful.
First, the policies of every Labour Government under which this country has suffered since 1929 have led to higher unemployment when they left office than when they took office.
However, this is the party that goes on about unemployment as though it had a good record on unemployment.
It has an appalling unemployment record, just as it has had since the war an appalling national health service waiting list record.
Secondly, the Labour party tried to blame my right hon. Friend the Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) for the recession.
In the autumn of 1987 and during the early part of 1988, some of us, it is true, questioned the lowering of interest rate levels, but the Labour party did not criticise the lowering of interest rates to under 8 per cent.
It asked for interest rates to be lowered even further.
Thirdly, the Labour party's support for the social action programme of the social charter and for a minimum wage represents a political double-barrelled shotgun aimed at the working population, particularly those in lower-paid jobs.
For millions of people, a Labour Government would replace low wages with no wages.
The fourth reason why the Labour party's hypocrisy and deceit on unemployment is incredible is that the Labour party — I shall not talk about its Common Market Safeguards Committee, of which eight members of the Shadow Cabinet are still members — and the Opposition Front Bench are just as committed as the Government to membership of the exchange rate mechanism.
As their only specific spending pledges are on child benefit and pensions, I do not see how a Labour Administration would make one iota of difference to unemployment.
No doubt Labour's answer would be training, but the Government are already pumping billions of pounds of taxpayers' money into training, in addition to the £20 billion that is spent annually by the private sector.
Labour's training levy — the introduction of yet another socialist tax on industry — would either reduce profit margins and therefore investment or, if it expanded the money supply, would lead to an increase in prices.
Those are the four clear reasons why, whatever the rhetoric and sincerity, a Labour Government would make no difference to the economy in the next 12 or 18 months.
Nowhere in the world has a minimum wage not caused higher unemployment.
In France, which has a minimum wage, unemployment is about to peak at more than 3 million.
Extremely high youth unemployment in Germany is being blamed on its minimum wage.
When a minimum wage was introduced in the United States, it caused only large increases in black unemployment.
Many people have summed up the effect of a minimum wage.
On 5 June, Gavin Laird of the Amalgamated Engineering Union rightly said on’ Channel 4 News’:’It has never worked in the past; there is no logic for it; it does not work in any other country and it certainly will not work in Great Britain.’
I could not have put it better myself.
Eric Hammond of the Electrical, Electronic, Telecommunication and Plumbing Union said in The Daily Telegraph:’ It is so fundamentally wrong that it will increasingly threaten Labour's prospects of a national victory.’
The hon. Member for Birkenhead (Mr. Field), in’ The Minimum Wage — Its Potential and Dangers’, which was published in 1984, said:’The employment consequences will be little short of disastrous.’
No wonder the Labour candidate in the Langbaurgh by-election has admitted that a statutory national minimum wage would increase unemployment.
Neutral commentators may disagree about exactly how much a statutory minimum wage would increase unemployment, but they all agree that it would increase it by between 64,000 and 500,000.
They agree that it would have a negative impact on growth in the economy of between 0.5 per cent.
and 2.5 per cent.
and that it would add between 1 per cent.
and 3.1 per cent.
to the retail prices index.
That is only if stage one of the Labour party's proposals are implemented; it does not take into account the effect of stage two.
The social action programme is another example of the Labour party's naive employment policies.
It is further evidence that its policies are merely the result of what its paymasters, the trade unions, say.
That is why it will try to con the public that it will not repeal most of the trade union reforms that we have made in the past 12 years.
In a quantitative sense, in terms of the number of laws that have been passed in the past 12 years, that is correct, but if the totality of the laws represent a house, it will ensure that the laws that it changes will result in the foundations being decimated, with the result that it will fall down.
What is the point of maintaining a proper legal framework for trade unions if law-breaking unions cannot be properly punished by the courts?
What is the point of a legal framework if companies cannot get a court injunction to stop illegal strike action?
The crucial question on secondary picketing is the definition of the wording in Labour's policy document:’ where there is a direct interest between two groups of workers of an occupational or professional nature’.
That means power and coal workers bringing the country to its knees once again.
It means COHSE and NUPE members stopping the sick being admitted to hospital, and it means rail, tube and bus workers striking on the same day and bringing our capital city to a grinding halt.
That is what the wording of Labour's policy document really means, and that is what will come about if we are mad enough to elect a Labour Government again.
Conversely, Conservative Members wish to protect the public further from trade union activities.
I welcome the proposal in the Green Paper’ Industrial Relations in the 1990s’to extend to the general public the same legal right to request an injunction from a court of law to stop illegal industrial action affecting a public service or an essential utility as is available to companies in law.
If such court injunctions are ignored, sequestration of trade union assets will follow — but not, of course, if the Labour party is elected.
We can contrast the Government's approach with Labour's approach, which goes in the opposite direction, once again leading industry and the public as lambs to the militant trade unionist slaughter.
Mr. Jack Straw (Blackburn)
This has been a wide-ranging debate.
We heard an eloquent and powerful contribution by my right hon. Friend the Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot) about the situation in Croatia.
We also heard an interesting contribution by the hon. Member for Mid-Kent (Mr. Rowe), who strongly criticised the Government for what he described as their extraordinary’ confusion’over the channel tunnel route and their lack of strategy for rail freight.
It was a quaint speech, telling us of the Government's’ astonishing success’in bringing the north and south of the United Kingdom together.
The way in which the Government have brought the north and south together was well spelt out by my hon. Friends the Members for Glasgow, Rutherglen (Mr. McAvoy), for Wansbeck (Mr. Thompson) and for St. Helens, South (Mr. Bermingham).
Essentially, especially during the past four years, the misery and unemployment which the Government inflicted on Scotland and the north and west of this kingdom have been inflicted on the south as well.
That is one more reason why, across the south, there has been a greater swing to Labour than in any other region and why, I must point out to the hon. Member for Thurrock (Mr. Janman), who seeks to speak for my native county, we look forward to a smashing victory in his constituency at the next election.
I regret the fact that I was not in the Chamber for the speech of the hon. Member for Pudsey (Sir G. Shaw), but my hon. Friend the Member for Durham, North-West (Ms. Armstrong), who was here, told me that he made a heavily veiled criticism of Government policy for its lack of recognition of progress as a key measure of the effectiveness of schools, and expressed concern about the morale of teachers who, he said, were not sufficiently recognised by society.
The hon. Gentleman spoke for himself, which cannot be said for the hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth (Mr. Pawsey), who is not in his place, the Back-Bench chairman of the Conservative party education committee.
I listened to his speech and thought that I had heard it before.
Suddenly I realised that I had not heard it before but read it before — word for word in the article that the Secretary of State for Education and Science wrote last Friday in The Times Educational Supplement.
He was almost, but not quite, word perfect.
There must have been some error in the Conservative Central Office word processor as it churned out yet another brief for the hon. Gentleman to repeat.
The hon. Member for Dartford (Mr. Dunn) let the cat out of the bag about the Government's true intentions towards Her Majesty's inspectorate.
The Secretary of State has been trying to say that he is a friend of the inspectorate, despite his proposal to cut it to a third of its current size, and he has created pandemonium.
If he is a friend, he has not communicated that fact to any member of the inspectorate.
The hon. Member for Dartford — who, as ever, was frank — did not speak any honeyed words about the inspectorate but said that it had been captured by the left in the 1960s and remained captured, and that it was a self-perpetuating oligarchy.
I am sorry that the Secretary of State was not in the Chamber when the hon. Gentleman ended by saying that his last ambition in politics was to abolish the Department in which he served for eight years.
Mr. Robert Atkins
Including me.
Mr. Straw
The hon. Member for South Ribble (Mr. Atkins) says that he will be among those abolished, but he has already abolished himself — there has never been such a secret and silent Minister for Sport.
Mr. Atkins
Answer the question.
Mr. Straw
All he has to do is talk to the Whips, and we will have a debate on sport any time he likes.
The hon. Member for Dartford (Mr. Dunn) raised an important matter — the quality of education in Dartford and the part of Kent that he serves.
He often raises that subject, and we understand his desperation about what will happen to his seat at the next election.
We have seen the bloodcurdling letters that he has sent to electors about what may happen if Labour is returned.
The reason that we have a different policy — we want good comprehensives in Kent — is because we are concerned about the standard of education there.
I shall quote Mr. David Brown, Kent secretary of the National Association of Governors and Managers:’ Kent youngsters are being short-changed with an education fit for peasants’.
He went on:’ when comparing Kent with 13 southern counties it had the lowest number of school leavers with five GCSEs grade A to C the second highest number of pupils leaving with no qualifications, the 12th lowest number staying on at 16.’
The Secretary of State for Employment opened the debate and has given my hon. Friend the Member for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) and myself his apologies for the fact that he is now absent.
Of course we accept his apologies with every grace.
He has gone to Kincardine and Deeside to put the Government's side on the amalgamation of the highland regiments.
We very much hope that on his way there he works out which side of the Government he is on with regard to that amalgamation.
The Secretary of State for Employment and the Secretary of State for Education and Science, in an interesting double act at the Dispatch Box, sought to challenge my hon. Friend the Member for Sedgefield about Britain's position in the league tables of numbers staying on between 16 and 19.
League tables of international comparison are one measure by which the Government's education record can be judged.
There are others, such as the number of children who have received a nursery education, where we are very near or at the bottom.
There are measures of expenditure, which has dropped from 5.5 per cent of gross domestic product to 4.8 per cent.
in the past 12 years and also the whole issue of the quality of the education service provided.
Mr. Dunn rose
Mr. Straw
I shall give way in a moment.
The Secretary of State for Employment sought to protest when my hon. Friend the Member for Sedgefield suggested to him that we were near the bottom of the league tables, saying that we should not take too much account of them.
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
He did not say that at all.
Mr. Straw
He did.
He said that they were not terribly reliable.
Whichever way one considers the league tables, Britain is at or near the bottom for the proportion of pupils staying on.
Figures provided by the Office of Population Censuses and Surveys show that, except for Portugal, we would be bottom of the league in Europe.
Those are figures for the number of 14 to 18-year-olds staying on for training or full-time education.
Education participation rates
Mr. Clarke
I shall give the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) time to read the newspaper cutting that he was trying to wave at us to make his great point.
The figure for 14-year-olds in full-time education is 100 per cent.
— that is difficult to beat in any country in the world.
I think that he will find that the number of 15-year-olds is the same.
According to latest figures, 93 per cent.
of 16-year-olds are in education or training.
I do not know what he is waving about, but he ought to read it before he does so.
Mr. Straw
The figures that I am quoting come from the Government.
The number of 14 to 16-year-olds is indeed 100 per cent., but in the case of 14 to 18-year-olds the position is even worse than that emerging from those figures.
It makes matters worse that the Secretary of State for Education and Science cannot even understand that.
Let us take the number of 16 to 18-year-olds.
The source is’ Education Statistics’for 1990 from the Secretary of State's own Department.
If he wants the figures, he can have them.
Britain is second from bottom of the league according to the figures for 16 to 18-year-olds published by the Secretary of State's own Department.
Let us consider the education participation rates —
Mr. Clarke
For what?
Mr. Straw
For 16 to 18-year-olds in education and training.
The source is the education statistics for the United Kingdom for 1990.
The Secretary of State should apply himself to his own evidence.
The Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development education statistics show that for 18-year-olds staying on in education, Britain is fourteenth out of fifteen.
Let us take table D1.1 in the’ Training Statistics 1991’, which the Secretary of State denied existed earlier in the debate.
They show again that Britain is second from the bottom, with only Spain below it.
The Secretary of State sought earlier today to suggest that this comparative survey’ Youth and work: transition to employment in England and Germany’somehow backed up the Government's record.
It does nothing of the kind.
Indeed, the author of the work was so outraged by the Government's claims about what was said in the work that he wrote to the Evening Standard on 1 October and said:’ We found much to criticise about the British arrangement for training young people.
Far too many of them lost all contact with the education system after the age of 16 and far larger numbers in England than in Germany were in dead-end jobs without any training at all.’
Mr. Dunn
I want to go back to a comment made by the hon. Member for Truro (Mr. Taylor), which led the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) to go into a spate of incontinent muttering.
The Leader of the Opposition apparently said in the campaign for the Langbaurgh by-election that £2.6 billion extra would be spent on education by a future Labour Government.
Could we have the truth of it?
Was the Leader of the Opposition right and, if so, does the hon. Member for Blackburn agree?
Or was the Leader of the Opposition wrong and does the hon. Gentleman agree with that?
Mr. Straw
It would help the hon. Gentleman — because it is unusual for him — to check his facts or to read his Conservative Central Office brief before he speaks, or at least to memorise it.
The Leader of the Opposition simply pointed out in an article that he wrote just before the party conference that the proportion of gross domestic product — national income — devoted to education since 1979 had dropped, and that if it had remained the same, the difference would be the figure to which the hon. Gentleman has referred.
Our commitment is very different from the Government's.
Our commitment is that there should be a steady increase in the share of national income devoted to education and training over the lifetime of a Government.
There are four main elements to the Government's proposals in the Queen's Speech: on higher education, on further education, on adult education and on the so-called parents charter.
On higher education, we will support the transfer to a single funding council because that was our policy.
We argued for it and voted in favour of it in 1987 and in 1988.
The Government refused to accept our arguments then and we are delighted that they accept our arguments now.
We will not support the Government's proposals in relation to the maintenance of quality in higher education because we think that it is wrong for the people who determine quality in higher education to be the same as those who determine funding —
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
Why?
Mr. Straw
Because there is every possibility that if the fund payers determine quality, they will tend to overlook areas in which quality is going down as a result of financial pressures —
Mr. Clarke
Why?
Mr. Straw
I cannot understand the Secretary of State is looking perplexed.
The reason is the enormous pressures that the Government, through the funding councils, are imposing on higher education to take in ever more numbers without at the same time being concerned about quality.
If the Government are confident that quality will not be affected by the financial pressures that they are imposing on higher education to cut the inward resource year after year, the answer is to ensure that the inspectorate for higher education is wholly independent of the funding system and solely concerned with the issue of quality.
Mr. Clarke
With the greatest respect, I must say that I am puzzled and that I could not follow the argument as first expressed.
For the sake of argument — and I do not concede this — I recognise that the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) is asserting that there are downward pressures on university funding.
I think that he refers to our attempts to get cost-effective expansion.
If those pressures exist, as the hon. Gentleman asserts, they are spread evenly across the system and do not affect one institution more than another.
The argument for separating judgments of quality from the funding have been put to him by some people in higher education who are afraid that quality judgments might have a practical effect on the universities.
Making quality separate would merely make quality control ineffective and of no practical consequence.
The hon. Gentleman always gives in to lobbies and should not have given in to that one.
Mr. Straw
That is an absurd argument.
It fails to take account of the practice of the Council for National Academic Awards and the Polytechnics and Colleges Funding Council.
One of the reasons why the polytechnics have done so well in the past 21 years is that a clear decision was taken by Governments of both parties to separate funding and quality control.
That was accepted even by the Secretary of State's predecessor but one, who introduced the Education Reform Act 1988.
Had a system of funding and quality control been merged, I doubt whether the polytechnics could have achieved such high quality and cost-effectiveness.
I want to ensure that, in pursuing cost-effectiveness, there is independent arbitration on quality.
Besides the higher education proposals, many of the Government's proposals are damaging.
The Government have done nothing to reassure the public that their proposals for adult education will not be highly damaging if the Bill goes through.
Their proposals for further education will transfer elected local authority control over further education to control by seven or eight appointed regional boards.
Elected people will no longer have an influence on local further education; instead, the position will be similar to that set up by the Secretary of State for Health, where appointed quangos are in control.
That too is unacceptable to us.
By far the most damaging proposition which the Secretary of State has advanced in his 12 months in office is likely seriously and adversely to affect the standard and quality of education in our schools.
That is his plan to dismember Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools and to privatise the local inspectorate of schools so that inspectors are picked and paid by their own schools.
That proposition was suddenly launched from nowhere on 30 July 1991 at a curious press conference which the Secretary of State gave in the Adelphi hotel, Liverpool outside a meeting of the Professional Association of Teachers.
It has been condemned from all sides; there is virtually no advocate for it outside Government and there are precious few inside.
The chronology of the proposal tells its own story.
In February, the then senior chief inspector, Eric Bolton, decided to resign.
On 4
March, the Secretary of State told me in a parliamentary answer that he was setting in train a new procedure for the appointment of a successor to Eric Bolton.
He said that the post would be advertised, which was duly done at some cost to the public purse.
Then, on 8 May, the Secretary of State suddenly announced out of the blue that the advertising of that post was to be put on ice.
He said that instead there would be a thorough internal review of the inspectorate, which would report by July.
In answer to further questions from me, he said that no formal evidence would be sought but that there would be wide informal consultation.
The Government say that they believe in open government.
They have published such reviews of the machinery of government in the past — in 1983, they published the Rayner scrutiny of the HMI — but the Secretary of State has refused to publish the latest internal review.
Indeed, it has been kept so secret that no summary or abstract of the review is to be made available — If the Secretary of State wants to say that he will publish the review so that the House can measure the current proposals against his madcap scheme for dismembering the inspectorate, he should say so now.
It is my belief that the right hon. and learned Gentleman's refusal to publish the review — this is from the man who believes in open government — stems from the fact that it bears no relationship to the scheme that he is now putting forward.
If that is not true, let us have the review.
Interruption
The only evidence of the proposition's authorship that we can find is a pamphlet written by the chief inspector of Wandsworth, Mr. John Burchall, for the Conservative Centre of Policy Studies.
That action is in clear breach of the Local Government Act 1986 and the Widdicombe rules.
If that had been done by a chief inspector of a Labour local authority for a Labour think tank, Conservative Members would have been the first on their feet to complain about Mr. Burchall.
The scheme with which the Secretary of State has been landed is almost word for word the proposition set out in the pamphlet in 13 rather badly argued pages.
It is proposed that HMI should be reduced from 500 inspectors to 175.
Allowing for those to be transferred to the higher and further education funding councils, that is equivalent to a cut of almost 50 per cent.
The Secretary of State says that HMI will achieve greater independence.
However, the independence that HMI has had up to now has been deeply embarrassing to the Government.
Each year it has produced a report setting out the state of the education service, and each year Ministers have treated that report as though it were a piece of stinking fish.
In the past 11 years, the publicity budget for the Department of Education and Science has gone up 28 times.
In the past two and half years it has risen four times in real terms to pay for the publication of more and more glossy pamphlets such as the parents charter — party political propaganda produced at the taxpayers' expense.
None of that money has been used on the HMI reports — not a penny piece.
The annual report published by HMI has always been a loose-leaf, photocopied document, shoved out at a time designed least to embarrass Ministers.
Is it the Secretary of State's intention that the current senior chief inspector should publish his annual report in February, as has been done in the past, or is it his intention, as Secretaries of State managed to do in 1983 and again in 1987, to delay publication of that report until after the general election?
Mr. Kenneth Clarke
I have not given much thought to that question, for the simple reason that I do not follow the elaborate paranoid theory advanced by the hon. Gentleman who believes that I am so worried about those annual reports.
The hon. Gentleman may have noticed that my proposals increase the independence of Her Majesty's chief inspector.
They leave him free to publish his own report.
I believe that he should be more independent of the Department and of the Government of the day.
I assume the present senior chief inspector will produce his annual report next year.
I do not fear that report.
I believe that the hon. Gentleman and his friends have misused those reports in the past, but cutting down the scope for reports from the inspectorate has nothing to do with my proposals.
Mr. Straw
I shall table a parliamentary question about that and I look forward to confirmation of what the right hon. and learned Gentleman has just said.
When the inspectorate is reduced to 175, it will be virtually impossible for it to produce a report with anything like the quality of those produced in the past.
Mr. Clarke
I hesitate to intervene again, as the hon. Gentleman is getting near to the time left for my contribution.
However, in future, the inspectorate will have the results of 6,000 inspections each year from which to draw the basis of its report — and that is in addition to the inspecting that the inspectorate will carry out.
One hundred and seventy-five people is the best estimate that the senior chief inspector and I could produce between us of the numbers required to carry out the functions of the new independent HMI.
There will be more information on which to draw and the reports will still be available.
What the hon. Gentleman is spelling out about the proposals is an elaborate, but nonsensical, theory.
Mr. Straw
To try to suggest that the senior chief inspector agreed to 175 is preposterous.
The right hon. and learned Gentleman knows that that figure was forced upon him by Ministers collectively.
From documents that I have been sent by the senior chief inspector it is clear that the total number of inspectors will be used as follows: 11 will conduct high-profile surveys and focus inspections, six will inspect schools at risk and another 26 will undertake inspections to supplement database evidence.
Privatisation used to be a badge of honour worn with pride by these Ministers.
Now Ministers utter the word only in order to deny that it has happened.
But the truth is that HMI is to be privatised by the back door because the half of HMI who will not be employed by it will have to go and set up as private consultants.
The local inspectorate is to be privatised.
As the documents make clear, many of these so-called inspectors will not be educationally qualified but will be drawn, in the senior chief inspector's words, from the top of the Clapham omnibus.
What is so damaging to the maintenance of educational standards is the perverse belief of the Secretary of State that to secure competition between the providers of education, there must be competition between the regulators.
That is as absurd as if there were to be competition locally between environmental health officers or, nationally, if British Telecom and Mercury were to pick and pay for their own regulators.
The Secretary of State's proposal runs contrary even to the better parts of Thatcherite philosophy, which sought to separate regulator from provider.
The Secretary of State is making the provider the regulator — it is the provider who pays the regulator.
The regulators will be picked and paid for by the providers.
It will become impossible to secure any sensible maintenance of a consistent standard of education.
There is another bad aspect of the proposals.
The Secretary of State emphasises regular inspections.
That is fine — so do we.
But a regular inspection every four or five years cannot by itself be sufficient protection for the parents or the children; nor can it provide enough information by which to judge the effectiveness of a school.
Mr. Roger King (Birmingham, Northfield)
That is why we are going to publish exam results.
Mr. Straw
Publishing exam results is fine — We have been saying that for three years, but as the Secretary of State managed to point out in his contorted evidence to the teachers' pay review body, exam results alone provide only an elementary indication of the effectiveness of a school.
A continuous flow of information about the effectiveness of schools is also needed, and it can come only from a corps of local inspectors, properly supervised by a national inspectorate.
If inspection is handed over to companies such as Coopers and Lybrand — to consultants — there will be no corps of people at local level to produce the necessary data.
Interruption
This Government have the worst record of any Government on nursery education.
They are bottom of the league for 16 to 19-year-old education and training.
They have produced a £3 billion backlog of repairs and renewals needed for our crumbling schools.
They have left the teaching profession demoralised and undervalued.
They have left students from low income homes in serious poverty.
They lack commitment to the service, and they do not use it.
They have applied double standards by funding favourably a few pupils in CTCs and grant-maintained schools while denying most schools the funds that they need.
The proposals in this Gracious Speech are either irrelevant or positively damaging to the raising of school standards.
They exhibit no commitment, no leadership and no ambition on the part of the Government to and for our children.
We need a Government who will do better for our children and our young people, a Government with policies dedicated to making this country the best educated and trained nation in Europe.
This country needs and will get a Labour Government.
The Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Kenneth Clarke)
Unusually in a debate of this kind, the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) has sat down leaving me with only 22 minutes in which to reply.
I make no complaint about that.
I would have been quite happy if he had gone on for longer.
He exposed the paucity of his case as he went on and every now and again he made a tantalising admission that he — rather surprisingly — agreed with certain aspects of the policy embodied in our forthcoming legislation.
Like the hon. Gentleman, I must acknowledge that in such a wide-ranging debate I will not have time to deal with many of the points raised.
My hon. Friend the Member for Ashford (Mr. Speed), the hon. Member for St. Helens, South (Mr. Bermingham) and my hon. Friend the Member for Mid-Kent (Mr. Rowe) touched on aspects of British Rail to which I was tempted to respond.
It is, however, many years since I was at the Department of Transport, so I shall concentrate on education this evening.
I am surprised not only that 20 minutes is left to me, but that education has been tabled at this stage in the debate on the Loyal Address.
Hon. Members will realise that the conduct of the debate on the Gracious Speech is in the hands of the Opposition, and rightly so.
They determine the subjects for each day and the deployment of speakers.
The Gracious Speech contains three Bills on education; two English and one Scottish.
They are drastic pieces of legislation which should rightly occupy a large part of the time of the House.
One is on the parents charter, one on further and higher education in England and one on further and higher education in Scotland.
These three large Bills probably rival the Bill that introduces the council tax and the asylum Bill as the heaviest pieces of legislation in this year's Queen's Speech.
This debate was tabled for a Monday night when, for the replies, Labour Front-Bench Members greatly outnumber those on the Back Benches, which is not surprising as it is a one-line Whip night.
I take that as a compliment.
The proposals in the three Bills presented by my right hon. Friends and myself have captured the public imagination and caught the Labour party without a policy.
What is more, they have caught the Labour party without a spokesman able to put its objections clearly when he is called upon to address them.
I would not normally have said that that was a reflection on the respective debating abilities of the hon. Members for Sedgefield (Mr. Blair) and for Blackburn.
It would be invidious for me to make the choice.
I should like to reply to more of what was said by the hon. Member for Sedgefield when he opened the debate.
I have not heard the’ white heat of the technological revolution’speech made so well for many years.
I understand that the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) made it fairly well at this year's party conference.
On the other hand, going back to my days in employment debates, it was curious that the hon. Gentleman skated over his party's policy on the minimum wage, enhanced benefits for maternity leave and so on.
I trust that at some stage I will have the opportunity to tax him on the curious proposal that legislation which increases the wage bill of companies does not necessarily increase the costs of those companies and therefore can be regarded as having nil effect on their competitiveness.
I had not heard that theory advanced with such bravura before.
Mr. Blair
The House will hear it again.
Mr. Clarke
The hon. Gentleman says that we will no doubt hear it again.
The hon. Gentleman got on to my area by making comparisons on education and training between this country and other countries.
Some statistics were trotted out again both by him and, later, the hon. Member for Blackburn, seeking to show that we are miles behind other European countries in the league tables.
The hon. Member for Blackburn, in a frenzied passion, was throwing pieces of paper into the air, saying that we were bottom of this league table and bottom of that league table, apparently without having read any of them.
The cutting that he tossed across to us is part of an article from The Times Educational Supplement.
The text reveals:’ the survey format does not allow for the fact that some respondents, both in the UK and elsewhere, are in part-time, rather than full-time, education.’
I find that league table for 14 to 18-year-olds as unintelligible as the hon. Gentleman did.
The text states:’ An EC spokesman admitted there were conceptual problems' in compiling the statistics, but it was the nearest they could get to being comparable.’
The hon. Member for Sedgefield and I agree that the Anglo-German study is a useful basis for comparisons.
When I quoted the study back at him, he resorted to some rather irrelevant quotation about the youth training scheme, in an attempt to fend off my criticisms.
As I have the text in front of me, let me just remind him of the conclusions of the comparison between the preparedness of British young people and German young people for employment on the strength of the education and training systems in the two countries.
Page 235 states:’ In our surveys the British samples reported the greater number of vocational learning experiences.
In both cohorts, higher proportions of the British respondents reported experience of information technology, learning new skills, being challenged or tested, using their initiative and working co-operatively in groups.’
I shall quote further from page 239, to give us an overall picture of the report.
It says:’ Nevertheless, the overall picture of greater breadth of experience and skill in the British system, and the more positive appraisals by the British young people of what they were learning, is sustained.’
I quote that not to be complacent and not to say that, in this competitive world, we should not be striving, as the Bills outlined in the Gracious Speech help us to strive, for higher standards.
The argument used by many commentators on our system — that the grass is overwhelmingly greener on the other side of the hill in every respect in Europe — is exaggerated.
Every year, participation by our 16-year-olds increases by 4 per cent.
We shall catch up and, I hope, forge ahead of the best.
However, we should not assume that a great deal has not been achieved quite spectacularly in the past few years.
I admired the speech of the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot), one of the more distinguished orators in the House, against whom I debated only a week or two ago in the Oxford Union.
I could not help thinking, when he criticised us for not participating in European Community efforts on education, that here was the last and most remarkable convert come to the communautaire viewpoint on these matters.
I have listened to many of his speeches and I have never heard him advocate that before.
The Labour party must be desperate to get into power if even such venerable leaders as the right hon. Gentleman have to make these obeisances in the direction of Brussels.
Mr. Foot
The right hon. and learned Gentleman is catching up.
He should understand that I was in favour of a social charter in Europe before there was any such thing as the European Community.
I hope that, when he is reporting our debate in Oxford, he will tell the House who won the vote.
It would be satisfactory to have such a vote in the country.
Mr. Clarke
I concede the vote in the Oxford Union.
The right hon. Gentleman still has the ability to mislead the young that he has shown in his distinguished past.
I can well believe that he has always been in favour of a social charter in Europe, but he has never before asked us to be in Europe enjoying its disadvantages.
I return to the subject of educational policy and the Bills that must consume most of our attention.
I commend my hon. Friends the Members for Rugby and Kennilworth (Mr. Pawsey), for Dartford (Mr. Dunn) and for Battersea (Mr. Bowis) for their overall appraisal of our policy.
I shall concentrate on the point made by the hon. Member for Blackburn.
One major Bill that will come before us is that putting into effect the parents charter.
Until the hon. Gentleman turned to the future of the HMI, he was hard pressed to find anything that he wanted to oppose in the parents charter.
His main concern appeared to be that he did not want too many parents to be able to read it because they would find it attractive.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Rugby and Kennilworth correctly said, the parents charter is based on two policies designed to help all the other steps that we shall be taking to raise standards of education.
The first is a much better range of objective factual information about the performance of schools for the parents and local public in the communities that the schools serve.
The so-called league tables will publish not just examination results but truancy rates, staying-on rates, the destination of pupils and other information.
Knowledge of how schools perform will help to improve the choice of parents.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Dartford said, in an intervention in the speech of the hon. Member for Truro (Mr. Taylor), not only will it help parents to choose in those parts of the country where choice is practicable because transport is readily available, but, even in rural areas where choice is difficult, it will, for the first time, give parents better means to influence schools because they will be able to see, set out objectively, the performance of those schools.
Mr. Matthew Taylor
Newspapers will use the raw detail that will be supplied by the league tables, especially on examination results.
What will the right hon. and learned Gentleman do to protect schools which have many students with special needs, especially students who are not statemented but who are seen to have special needs?
The right hon. and learned Gentleman nodded when I asked him the same question earlier, but he has not said how he will ensure fairness between schools and therefore, no discrimination against students with special needs.
Mr. Clarke
Any intelligent parent, intelligent governor or intelligent newspaper person will bear it in mind that various factors influence results.
That is what will happen when we get what the hon. Gentleman describes as the raw data.
It will be a complete change to report these facts instead of keeping them secret.
There is no reason why information such as the number of statemented children and attainment levels in national curriculum tests should not be made freely available by our schools.
The information will be accompanied by statements on the purpose of a school and its particular aims.
The arrangements remain the same for special needs.
If I do not get the chance later in my response to answer the comments of the hon. Member for Caernarfon (Mr. Wigley) on students with special needs in further education, I say now that I attach great importance to those students.
There will be a duty on the Further Education Funding Council specifically to ensure that further education is provided for those with special educational needs beyond the age of 16.
We can debate statementing when we examine the Bill.
There is a genuine difference of opinion between the experts on whether statementing, as it is now applied in sixth-form schools but not in further education colleges, is a desirable tool.
There is no desire on our part to play down the importance of providing for those with special educational needs throughout their school career and thereafter.
I return to the setting out of league tables.
It is no good saying that they will comprise raw data.
They will be data that parents have never been allowed to see before.
In my part of the country — the county which I represent in part is not the only one in this position — Labour-controlled local authorities are still adamantly refusing to release the data to the general public.
They are advising schools not to make them available.
The commitment of the Labour party is set out in’ The Parents' Partnership’, which in my opinion is a pretty pale imitation of the Government's policy.
Mr. Blair
We got our policy out before the Government's.
Mr. Clarke
Yes.
When the Labour party knew that the parents charter was coming, the hon. Gentleman did not half rush out its paper, and he did not draft it very well.
The information in the Labour party's document all comes under the new education standards commission that will take over responsibility for Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools and co-ordinate the work of local inspectors.
The following is then offered to the public:’ Through reports, studies and inspections the Commission will assess educational standards of schools and of local education authorities as a whole and publish detailed information on how to judge a school's performance.’
Does’ detailed information on how to judge a school's performance’mean that the system will be the same as our parents charter, or does it, as it sounds, means that there will be an extra layer of bureaucracy, taking into its embrace Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools and producing not what has been described as raw data, but information that colours it all?
Anyone who is appraising a school will take account of the socio-economic backgrounds of different schools, for example.
Much stress is placed on that.
There will be serious dangers, however, if the information that is set out in performance tables is clouded by footnotes and qualifications, which sometimes are advocated because they are designed to prove that whatever the differences between examination performances there is no such thing as a good school or a bad school.
It is thought that that will be the result if enough factors are taken into account.
I fully accept that it requires a good school to achieve good examination results, especially in an inner-city area rather than in a well-favoured suburb.
A danger arises, however, from the constant emphasis that left-wing commentators put on socio-economic data.
It is not right to assume that those in inner-city areas cannot be expected to achieve good examination results.
The league studies show that there are positive dangers in assuming that in poor areas there will be poor results, and regarding that as an excuse.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Dartford said, there were systems which ensured that that did not happen.
The hon. Member for Blackburn and I passed through education on a route that was remarkably similar to that followed by many hon. Members.
We both went to state primary schools; we both passed the 11-plus; we both had local government scholarships — the hon. Gentleman went to a direct grant school while I went to what was then an independent school.
The hon. Gentleman came not from an especially poor background, but not from an especially advantaged one either.
He was not told that socio-economic circumstances meant that he could expect to get bad examination results.
His talents were demonstrated through a system that gave him opportunities and brought out the best in him.
Too many people in the Labour party kick away the ladder by which they rose through the education system and seek to defend poor performance where there is no economic advantage.
Inspection is very important, as it is the second string of raising the quality of education in our schools.
The hon. Gentleman has changed his wording — at last, he did not accuse us of privatising HMI.
It is a pity that debate on public services is reduced to such a silly level.
He now accepts that we are not privatising HMI.
The Bill will give HMI a new, independent, statutory role, with its own powers and duties separate from those of the Secretary of State.
It will continue to inspect, and an important part of its role will be to advise, to produce reports, and so on.
It will also monitor the new system of inspection which, for the first time, will produce more than 6,000 reports a year.
More importantly, those reports will be produced for the benefit of the parents who read them.
Mr. Straw
Tonight I said nothing different from what I said before.
Will the Secretary of State now admit that he intends to privatise part of the local schools inspectorate?
It will in part become local, privately owned and controlled consultants.
In other words, it will be a privatised inspectorate.
Mr. Clarke
Local authorities can continue to inspect in their areas.
Alongside them will be the new inspectors, from private organisations — I repeat that we are not privatising HMI.
There will still be local government inspectors — we are not privatising them.
However, there will be new inspectors, who will provide an alternative —
Interruption
Mr. Straw rose
Mr. Clarke
No, I am not giving way.
Mr. Straw rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
One hon. Member at a time, please.
Mr. Straw
The new privatised inspectors will be instead of public service inspectors.
Mr. Clarke
We cannot privatise people who were not there before.
Currently, 6,000 inspections are not carried out every year.
The number of reports that will be produced for parents will be not diminished, but greatly increased.
With respect to the hon. Member for Blackburn, the hon. Member for Truro made slightly more careful progress through the arguments.
However, I wanted to ask both hon. Gentlemen what would be the alternative.
We are introducing a new system that will generate 6,000 straightforward reports a year.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Lancaster (Dame E. Kellett-Bowman) said, they will be intelligible to those who read them.
Parents, almost universally, never read Her Majesty's inspectorate reports on their schools.
Indeed, it is unusual for parents even to see such reports.
Some 3,000 to 5,000 inspectors will be required to produce those reports.
Is the Labour party proposing that Her Majesty's inspectorate should suddenly take on 3,000 to 5,000 inspectors in one great national monolithic inspecting organisation?
Perhaps that is the proposal — The hon. Member for Blackburn is not sure whether that is or is not his proposal.
Interruption
I suspect that the Labour party, because of the pressures on it, will be driven to suggesting that all inspectors should be local council inspectors, inspecting the councils' schools.
The Labour party is always huffing and puffing about privatisation and independence, but it believes that every school in the country should be run by local councils and inspected by those councils.
Who should inspect the schools for councils but ex-teachers, because they are deemed to be the only people properly qualified?
Apparently, anyone who is not a teacher or who does not work for the council should not be allowed to undertake an inspection.
That is not standards or objectivity, but giving in to the usual pressures from the National Union of Teachers and NALGO, to which Labour Members always give in.
I do not have time to debate now the Further and Higher Education Bill.
Other than wanting local authority control of further education, Labour has no policy on that matter either.
Our Bills are all of a part with those objectives praised by my hon. Friends the Members for Elmet (Mr. Batiste) and for Saffron Walden (Mr. Haselhurst)— the drive to get better standards back into our education system, to increase yet further the participation of our young people, and to match the quality of education and training provided by our competitors abroad.
It being Ten o'clock, the debate stood adjourned.
Debate to be resumed tomorrow.
BCCI
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Keith Vaz (Leicester, East)
This is only the second time that the House has been given an opportunity to debate the momentous consequences of the closure of the Bank of Credit and Commerce International.
The past three months have seen almost daily developments, and a 15-minute speech and 15-minute reply cannot do justice to the huge amount of information that must be shared and analysed.
Over the past few months, I and members of the campaign team visited depositors and BCCI staff members all over the world.
We visited Abu Dhabi and Dubai, where we met members of the royal family and other officials; Hong Kong; Gibraltar; and other towns and cities in Britain.
We met people who remain stunned and bewildered, like victims after some great natural disaster.
It is impossible to comfort them.
We heard stories of such sadness and desolation that it was difficult not to be moved to tears.
Those are the innocent victims, who knew nothing of the serious fraud.
They put their faith and money in a bank that was being monitored and restructured under the close supervision of the Bank of England.
During the campaign, we met the Governor of the Bank of England, three times; the Chancellor of the Exchequer, twice; the Foreign Secretary; and the Economic Secretary to the Treasury, twice.
We had numerous meetings with the provisional liquidator, Christopher Morris; the majority shareholders' solicitors, Simmonds and Simmonds; and the restructuring advisers, Schroder Wagg.
My right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition and the leader of the Liberal Democrats were by far the most supportive.
People were unfailingly courteous and showed great sympathy — but throughout, all eyes were firmly on Abu Dhabi.
I pay tribute to the tireless efforts of members of the campaign committee.
Associations were formed and meetings held to get people organised and to keep them informed.
Only last night, at a meeting chaired by Ahmed Shazad at Brent town hall, depositors and staff reaffirmed their commitment to the campaign.
Bankers and international business persons are not supposed to be natural campaigners, but they have proved themselves a match for this moment.
The expectations and hopes of those people and of many others, which were given life by the excellent judgment of the Vice-Chancellor of the High Court on 30 July, were cruelly dashed by the decision of the major City shareholders that the bank could not be reconstructed.
That decision, announced on 3 October, was a bitter disappointment.
We were told later that the fraud was so enormous — a total of $10 million — that reconstruction was impossible, and that any money the majority shareholders could put in would soon disappear into a large hole.
We were told that one cannot reconstruct something that is not there.
From being the bank that refused to die, BCCI became the bank that ceased to exist.
It was merely a shell with glittering branches at the best addresses in London.
Pit Closures
Mr. John McAllion (Dundee, East)
Does the Minister understand that his Government's failure to announce the extension of the non-fossil fuel obligation to Scotland signals to Scots that the Government simply are not serious about the development of renewable energies in our country?
As the Conservative party is on the point of becoming the third party in a four-party country at the by-election later this week, is it not time that the Government stopped giving Scotland what it does not want — nuclear waste and nuclear energy — and instead gave Scotland what it wants, which is direct encouragement for renewable energies in a country which the Minister himself described as rich in potential for such developments?
Mr. Moynihan
The hon. Gentleman is obviously unaware of the substantial investment in the research and development programme in Scotland on renewable energies.
The East Kilbride centre, which concentrates on wind power, will be important in the United Kingdom's development of new technologies in highly exposed areas where the meterage per second of wind speed, especially in Scotland, is considerably higher than it is in the east and south-east of England.
The non-fossil fuel obligation is a matter for my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland.
Under the Electricity Act 1989, it is for him to decide on the methodology for developing renewable energy in Scotland.
I have made a clear commitment to the House today that, because of representations from Members on both sides of the House, the renewable energy advisory group will fully assess how best to develop renewable energy from Scotland.
The hon. Gentleman's points, together with those made by other hon. Members, will be taken into account.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I have to have regard to the fact that there is another statement after this one and that there is such pressure on the debate on the Gracious Speech that I shall have to impose a 10-minute limit on speeches.
I shall allow questions to continue until 4.15 pm.
I hope to call most hon. Members if they are brief.
Mr. Nigel Forman (Carshalton and Wallington)
As someone who has championed the cause of renewable energy since the mid-1970s, I give a warm personal welcome to my hon. Friend's statement, which I believe to be in exactly the right direction.
I just wish that we had done more of it sooner.
My hon. Friend mentioned the fossil fuel levy.
Is it expected that that will be the embryo for a carbon tax to pay for more investment in renewable energies?
Mr. Moynihan
The answer to my hon. Friend's second point is no.
On his first point, I pay tribute to him, because I know that he has worked assiduously for developments in renewable energy.
I am glad that he is so supportive of the important and substantial announcement that we have made today.
Mr. Paul Flynn (Newport, West)
I thank the Minister for this modest death bed penance on renewables.
For the past 12 years the Government have behaved like latter day Don Quixotes tilting at windmills and all the other renewables.
Is not the most practical step that he could take to help renewables to allow those people working on tide, wind, coppicing and other renewables in the Atomic Energy Authority a separate organisation free from the foolish need to produce short-term profits, allowing them to invest in the advantages of renewables, which are essentially long-term?
Mr. Moynihan
The hon. Gentleman is right about the siting of the energy technology support unit at the AEA, but he will be aware that the ETSU is a discrete unit working full time on renewable energy.
It is highly effective, highly professional and highly regarded and in no way would its organisational change mean that it was any less committed to or capable of working on the types of renewable energy mentioned by the hon. Gentleman from tidal to wave power.
I am pleased that he mentioned coppicing and wood as a fuel, because there is no doubt that with the increasing amount of agricultural land at our disposal wood as a fuel, including coppicing, could be an important part of our renewable energy strategy in future.
We announced only last week the first farmer co-operative with five farms seeking to develop a market.
Mr. Richard Alexander (Newark)
Is my hon. Friend aware that his statement that 28 landfill sites will be used will be widely welcomed in the country as well as, I hope, by responsible organisations such as Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace?
Is not his statement a significant contribution towards the Government's interest in green policies?
In furtherance of that, may I urge him to bend his considerable energies towards the development of solar and tidal power?
Mr. Moynihan
We are directing much research and development money towards solar and tidal power.
With regard to landfill gas, as my hon. Friend knows, in addition to the schemes that should come on stream as a result of today's announcement, there are some 36 landfill gas utilisation schemes in the United Kingdom, saving 160,000 tonnes of coal equivalent per annum.
I would not want today's announcement to go by without underlining how important the contribution of renewable energy projects is to reducing the emissions that lead to global warming, and we should recognise that as an important environmental benefit.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
The Minister mentioned methane, but is he aware that in many pits there is methane which could be used but usually is not?
Will he draw attention to the National Coal Board's policy of closing pits, because when a pit is closed not only is low-sulphur coal lost in many cases, but the methane is then allowed to find its way to the surface?
In Arkwright in my constituency, more than 200 people faced the prospect of an explosion because the coal board allowed the methane to escape.
Will the Minister tell the coal board to stop that practice and deal with the methane?
Mr. Moynihan
The coal board never misses an opportunity to study carefully the comments made by the hon. Gentleman in the House, and I am sure that today will be no exception.
Mr. Malcolm Moss (Cambridgeshire, North-East)
I congratulate the Minister on his personal involvement in bringing about the increased commitment to renewables.
Does he agree that his announcement today would not have been possible without the privatisation of the electricity supply industry, and could not have been made by a Government in hock to the National Union of Mineworkers?
Mr. Moynihan
That is absolutely correct.
Mr. William O'Brien (Normanton)
Having listened with interest to the Minister's statement on renewable energy and the fact that there has been reference to other sources of power, when shall we have a comprehensive statement on energy policy from the Government?
When shall we see the Tory party bringing forward a comprehensive energy policy which will include electricity, coal — primarily coal — and other energy sources?
What is the Minister doing about a comprehensive fuel policy?
Mr. Moynihan
There is no doubt that, if the hon. Gentleman assiduously continues to attend debates on energy policy, as he has done, he will map together a comprehensive Government energy policy.
Today, he will have benefited greatly from hearing exactly what is the Government's policy on renewable energy.
Mr. Ian Bruce (Dorset, South)
Given that the burning of municipal waste is a major element can my hon. Friend estimate the number of landfill sites that will no longer be needed, and whether an increase in the burning of waste will lessen the problem in places such as Crossways in my constituency, where vast areas are threatened with landfill?
Mr. Moynihan
There will not be the great trade-off that my hon. Friend imagines.
It is important that we introduce recycling initiatives that are environmentally friendly; give, where necessary, a reduction in emissions; and generate electricity where the opportunities arise.
Equally, landfill will continue to be an important part of our strategy, not least because there are more opportunities annually for landfill to be created, as more sand and gravel continues to be extracted and landfill sites filled.
However, they are often further from centres of population and a net result is cost rises that make incineration increasingly more attractive where there is competition between the two methods.
Mr. Chris Butler (Warrington, South)
Do the longer-term contracts that my hon. Friend's statement envisages, which presumably depend on the longer-term view, take the prospects of a Mersey barrage any further?
Mr. Moynihan
I am being lobbied heavily by my right hon. Friend the hon. Member for Wallasey (Mrs. Chalker).
I pay tribute to the Mersey barrage company for approaching the project very professionally.
We provided additional resources for further studies, because it is important that all aspects are carefully examined — not least the project's commercial viability, technical feasibility, and environmental significance.
That work will be completed as soon as possible, not least because, as it is a private-sector, commercially orientated project, its proponents want to ensure that the momentum is sustained — and we will assist them in that.
Mr. Roy Hattersley (Birmingham, Sparkbrook)
A moment ago, the Home Secretary said that every applicant for asylum would have the right of appeal to a tribunal.
I see the Under-Secretary nodding at that.
The right hon. Gentleman made a statement in the House about a fast track procedure under which some applicants would be sifted out immediately and would not have the right of appeal — at least not the right of audience in an appeal or representation in an appeal.
The adjudicator would deal with the papers there and then.
If that is the case, the Home Secretary's statement of a few moments ago is wrong.
Mr. Baker
It is not the case.
I ask the right hon. Gentleman to study the papers that I issued on Friday.
Every refugee applicant will have the right to go to the adjudicator, who will decide.
Mr. Hattersley
A moment ago, the Home Secretary said that every applicant for asylum would have the right to go to an appeal tribunal, and his hon. Friend the Member for Lancaster (Dame E. Kellett-Bowman) rightly picked him up on the point.
If that were the case, the Bill would be very different from the one that is being presented.
The hon. Member for Lancaster rightly said that what the Home Secretary called the fast-track applicant will go not to a tribunal but to an adjudicator with no new evidence.
Mr. Baker
Even today, some claims are manifestly unfounded.
Some applicants arrive from Canada claiming refugee status.
There are a few each month.
Every refugee applicant will have the right to appeal to the adjudicator.
That was set out in our papers last week.
Opinion polls over the weekend showed 80 per cent.
support for the Bill.
The right hon. Gentleman's determination to oppose the Bill shows an abiding contempt for the feelings of ordinary voters, including no doubt many in his constituency.
It is not for me to offer helpful advice to the right hon. Gentleman, but I shall do so: when in a hole, one should stop digging.
Only a week ago, the right hon. Gentleman appeared on BBC Radio's’ The World this Weekend’and dug with the vigour of a navvy.
First, he pooh-poohed the idea that the number of those claiming asylum was continuing to rise.
He said:’ I only admit there will be some few — not very many — but a few, who will apply bogusly.’
If the right hon. Gentleman believes that, he is in the most solitary position in Europe.
His attitude betrays staggering complacency.
I shall give him the figures of refugee applicants for the past three months.
In August, there were 3,300; in September, there were 3,500; and in October, there were 4,400.
The problem is not getting smaller; it is growing.
If the right hon. Gentleman were responsible for the matter, we are assured that today he would be doing exactly nothing about it.
His hallmark on this issue is complacency and indolence.
He needs to stir himself.
Mr. Nicholas Budgen (Wolverhampton, South-West)
My right hon. Friend says that we are to continue our tradition of offering a haven to refugees.
It is important for him to define a refugee.
During the recent troubles in India, many of the people who came to this country and who said that they were refugees from oppression by the Indian Government were proposing various forms of armed or violent protest against that Government.
Are they to be defined as refugees?
That was a real issue during the troubles in the Punjab and had a real effect on Wolverhampton.
Several Hon. Members rose
Madam Deputy Speaker: Order.
In accordance with practice, the Home Secretary is required to reply before giving way again.
Mr. Baker
The definition of refugee is laid down in the United Nations convention.
I do not think that it is possible to change that definition.
A refugee is defined as someone who suffers from a well founded fear of persecution, and the process has to determine whether such a fear is well-founded.
That determination process is carried out by the Home Office and the adjudication tribunal.
Mr. Dicks
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the aim of the Bill is to protect the rights of the British people and make those rights more important than the so-called rights of bogus refugees?
Mr. Baker
The purpose of the Bill is to distinguish between the bogus and the genuine refugee applicant.
The problem affects the whole of western Europe.
I was at a conference in Berlin on Wednesday that was attended by ministers of the interior for the Twelve and for the countries of eastern Europe.
Several parts of Russia and the new countries of Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia were also represented.
They were all very alarmed by the prospect of substantial movements of people.
This year Germany expects to receive applications amounting not to 50,000, which is the rate approached by the United Kingdom, but 250,000 non-German speaking refugees.
The Germans say that they cannot absorb that number, and country after country is saying the same.
Hon. Members will be aware of the unpleasant aspects in political debates in some countries in Europe.
I am taking action which I am sure is responsible and necessary.
Mr. Robert Maclennan (Caithness and Sutherland)
Will the Home Secretary confirm that his adviser on race matters, the Commission For Racial Equality, have made representations to the Government that their proposal to withdraw legal aid from applicants would leave the Government in breach of the provisions of the Race Relations Act 1976?
In order to override that, they intend to introduce a statutory instrument.
Mr. Baker
I do not accept that interpretation.
As I made clear in July and as the Lord Chancellor made clear, the provision of green form legal aid will be withdrawn when other services are available, but not until then.
The House will appreciate that the Government provide funds for green form legal aid and for the United Kingdom Immigrants Advisory Service, a body which represents refugee applicants at the initial process of determination and at the tribunal hearing.
Mr. Corbyn
Will the Home Secretary give way?
Mr. Baker
I shall do so for the last time.
Mr. Corbyn
Will the right hon. Gentleman take this opportunity to condemn the campaign that is being mounted in some sections of the popular press?
That campaign is racist in intent and is against the interests of people who are seeking asylum from situations of great danger.
The Home Secretary is promoting his Bill by saying that people who are fleeing from political or social oppression do not deserve to come here and do not deserve political asylum.
Because of his fast-track methods, such people may well be returned to face even greater danger to themselves and their families in the countries from which they have come.
The proposed legislation undermines the principles of the 1951 Geneva convention.
Mr. Baker
That is absolute rubbish and I expect the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook to condemn it as such.
That is not the purpose of the legislation.
I am not prepared to condemn the various newspapers which have written about this subject in a responsible way.
There is genuine concern about this problem.
The Opposition pooh-pooh the matter and the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook says that it is not really a problem and that the numbers are going down.
He would do nothing about the problem, and that is why he is unsuited to hold the office of Home Secretary.
I have tried to show the real gap between Labour and the Conservative party and Government on matters of law and order.
The right hon. Member for Sparkbrook is happy to describe himself as a socialist on many occasions, although the advice from Mr. Mandelson is to drop the word.
Only last weekend, the right hon. Gentleman said:’ For socialists, constitutional reform is not an end in itself.
It was one of the ways by which a more equal society can be created.’
It is clear to the right hon. Gentleman that for him the banner of rights and freedoms that he would wave represents a very different set of outcomes from those in which Conservatives believe.
For the Opposition, the subjects of this debate are strictly for the realm of rhetoric.
The rhetoric of socialism claims to enhance rights, but the practice of socialism invariably extinguishes and restricts peoples' rights.
The rhetoric of socialism talks of freedom, but the practice of socialism involves the restriction of personal freedom.
People will not give up lightly what they have gained under this Government, and they will not easily embrace a creed that has been rejected by so many nations in recent years.
I am glad that at the next election the choice will be between conservatism and socialism.
Nowhere will the difference be more marked than in the attitudes towards law and order.
The Labour Government neglected and cut resources for law and order, and the right hon. Gentleman sat at the table agreeing to those cuts.
We have shown our commitment to law and order as a major issue.
It is what concerns most people.
I have to tell the right hon. Gentleman that indolence, sloth and complacency are not enough.
Mr. Roy Hattersley (Birmingham, Sparkbrook)
There is only one thing to say about the Home Secretary's speech: I have heard more intellectual contributions from Lord Waddington on the subject, and I never believed that I would make that statement about anyone holding the office of Home Secretary.
Let us return to a serious discussion of the subject before us.
Inevitably, two aspects of the Gracious Speech have focused special attention on the Home Office.
They are the inclusion of the Asylum Bill and the absence of any commitment to action against what we still — inappropriately — refer to, as the Home Secretary did today, as joyriding.
The absence of the joyriding Bill, to use the misnomer adopted by the Home Secretary, is not the only surprising omission.
The legislative programme should have included a criminal justice Bill to prohibit conviction on confession evidence alone, to bring some consistency into a chaotic sentencing policy and to give statutory rights to the victims of crime.
The programme should also have included a Bill to deal with the crisis in our prisons, by implementing at least part of Lord Justice Woolf's report.
Above all, the Gracious Speech should have included a crime prevention Bill.
Today, we debate a legislative programme that could have been proposed only by a Government who have no purpose other than hanging on to office for a few more months.
Extraordinarily, the Queen's Speech does not even include the usual platitudes, promising, in the words of last year's speech; that the Government would’ vigorously pursue their policies in fighting crime.’
This is the first Queen's Speech for 20 years not to make such a general promise.
I can only assume that the words were left out because an assurance’ vigorously’to continue’fighting crime’would have raised only a horse laugh when offered by a Government with a record of this Government on this subject.
They preside over the fastest increasing crime rate in our history.
At the beginning of his speech, the Home Secretary went to some lengths to compare what life on this subject was like under a Labour Government in 1979 with what it is like under a Conservative Government now.
He failed to make only one comparison — that on crime rates.
That is hardly surprising, as the crime rate has doubled in the 12 years since the Conservative party was elected on a promise of law and order.
Rev. Martin Smyth (Belfast, South)
I appreciate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, having been given the opportunity to take part in the debate.
The hon. and learned Member for Burton (Mr. Lawrence) gave us the benefit of his legal experience.
I pay tribute to the Home Office for the way in which it dealt with immigrants who came to Northern Ireland.
According to my understanding and knowledge, those who were sent back were those who had avoided the due process of immigration and had kept others out.
I pay tribute to the fairness of the Home Office in dealing with the cases that have come to my attention.
The right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley), who has left the Chamber, seemed to be aspiring to be the next Home Secretary, but he appears to have forgotten that there is a land frontier between the United Kingdom and another nation.
Some of those who travelled across that frontier were illegal immigrants.
The right hon. Gentleman served as a junior Minister in the Northern Ireland Office, but his knowledge of what goes on in Northern Ireland is rather strange.
He refused to give way to the hon. Member for North Down (Mr. Kilfedder).
I was utterly amazed to discover that the right hon. Gentleman thought that the hon. Member for North Down did not want devolution.
I agree with what was said about joyriding.
We do not have’ joyriding’in Northern Ireland; rather death, destruction and tragedy are the result of young folk indulging in the habit of taking other people's vehicles and running around in them for all sorts of purposes.
I must put on record again in the House the fact that, although the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland has granted the UDR Four the right of appeal, it would appear that the Crown solicitor is still withholding information from the defence.
Apparently, the Crown is not required by law to provide such information.
That is a miscarriage of justice.
Four people, having served their community, have been confined for some seven years and now find that their right of appeal is being hindered by some legal technicality or misinterpretation of the law.
I suspect that tensions concerning rights, freedoms and responsibilities have been with us since the earliest days of humanity.
The Old Testament has enshrined rights and responsibilities.
The apostle Paul in I Corinthians 9 said,’ Have we no rights?’
He was prepared to forgo some of his rights, but I contend that the state is required to defend those rights for the benefit of its citizens.
I welcome the concept of a new charter of rights.
Reference has been made today to the rights of victims.
I should like to think that such rights will be dealt with speedily.
Tragically, from experience, I have discovered that Government Departments have not been speedy in dealing with the rights of victims of terrorism in Northern Ireland.
I suspect that higher amounts of compensation have been paid to those who have been allegedly ill-treated by the state than to the victims of terrorism in the Province.
The idea of patients' rights sounds excellent but, having read the press and listened to what is going on, I suspect that the idea promises much but will deliver little.
There are already signs that the rights are to be so qualified as to become ineffective.
For example, it is said that no one should be on a waiting list for longer than two years.
However, the little word’ normally’is slipped in, so that it can be argued that there are extenuating circumstances.
The’ Yes, Prime Minister’syndrome seems to be working in Government Departments.
Seven years ago, while I was visiting Togo, the chief of Porto Seguro proudly showed me a walking stick presented to his ancestor by Queen Victoria to mark the emancipation of slaves in 1832.
Some think that the abolition of slavery occurred in 1807.
That might have been so in this nation, but it was not the case throughout the empire.
Even in 1832, slavery was abolished only within the old empire.
It was as late as 1970 that Muscat and Oman abolished slavery.
Amidst the challenges of human rights, including hunger in 1991, slavery remains, in the opinion of many, the single biggest human rights issue.
When people in this nation argue against a minimum wage policy, it would be salutary for them to remember that there are hundreds of domestic slaves in this country who are grossly underpaid.
Child prostitution flourishes in the world, involving an estimated 5 million children.
At a recent anti-slavery function, it was revealed that there are some 50 million bonded labourers, many in India and Pakistan.
Such issues should concern the House and its Members when we are talking about rights, responsibilities and freedoms.
We should stress responsibilities.
One person's meat may be another person's poison.
For example, we have been thankful for the improvement in the quality of our air with the development of clean air zones, but we must not be complacent.
Many still claim the right to indulge in smoking, but they have a responsibility to care for those who may suffer from respiratory conditions.
Secondary smoking has become one of the nation's killers.
Now, faced with the curbs on tobacco advertising suggested by the European Commission, the tobacco barons and their advertising colleagues are striking back.
They do so all in the name of freedom.
Life is more precious than profits, and the right to life is the most precious of all rights.
I speak as a representative who came into the House as a result of the murder just 10 years ago of the then Member for Belfast, South.
Thousands have been denied the right to life in Northern Ireland and Great Britain as a result of a body of dedicated terrorists seeking to impose their will upon the nation.
It is long since past the time when Her Majesty's Government should take political and security decisions that would deny success to terrorists.
Mr. David Porter (Waveney)
I am grateful for the opportunity to make a brief contribution to the early stages of what will probably be the longest general election campaign in modern times.
Even so, this is a shortened Session, and as we must wait until next year for the start of a fourth Conservative term in office, we must now get on with the measures contained in the Gracious Speech.
In considering rights, freedoms and responsibilities, we must consider the choice already afforded by Conservative legislation.
It is freedom of choice built on the view that it is individuals — not big brother, bureaucrats, councillors or even Members of Parliament — who know best.
Whether individual voters, parents, taxpayers, travellers or patients, it is the individual who counts.
There is to be an offshore safety Bill.
It is a relatively modest measure which should enjoy a trouble-free passage because it is welcomed by both sides of the offshore industry.
I will not make a Second Reading speech now, but simply say that a safety culture built around individuals and the operating companies' involvement and responsibilities is the only way to ensure the safest possible working environment.
In education, extended parental choice has been a marvellous idea put into practice effectively.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State's tackling of the vested interests in education and the Government's push to put children first — individual children, which means putting parents alongside them — is to be applauded.
Local management of schools, giving parents more information, and the assessing of schools, children and teachers have all been good ideas.
I sound one warning note about individual choice — it works in towns where parents can be given a choice of schools, up to the physical capacity of a school, but in rural areas that choice may be only theoretical.
In many country areas there is no choice of school, doctor or pub.
However, bearing that in mind, freedom of choice is best stimulated by exposing schools to some element of market discipline.
One of the themes of the 1990s that we can identify for ourselves — although what history will make of it we must wait and see — is the concept of government by charter, with the underlying idea that poor public service can be remedied by better management held by force and compensation to higher performance standards.
One journalist in the Evening Standard last week likened the rain of these’ whingeing charters’, as he called the current spate of them, to confetti.
I take the view that the charters go in the right direction.
I suppose that any idea that catches a mood and a time will have many fathers.
I know that my right hon. Friend and the Downing street team, the socialists with their council contracts, and the Liberal Democrats because they know a good bandwagon when they see one — and they must have seen one, because not a single Liberal Democrat is present — all claim to have sired the citizens charter concept.
In fact, the truth can now be told.
It was not Downing street, the Labour party or the Liberal Democrats who sired the citizens charter — it was me, at least in the parliamentary sense.
In May 1989 I first introduced a ten-minute rule Bill — the Public Service Contract Bill — which sought to establish minimum standards of public service with automatic compensation for failure.
Of course, that Bill is now confetti, but it focused on local authorities, the Post Office and British Rail.
Matters have moved on since then and those ideas are now very much on the agenda, and I am delighted by that.
Something that is not on the agenda, and that is disappointing, is a commitment to privatise British Rail quickly.
There is a simple statement of intent in the Gracious Speech, but of itself that is not enough to stimulate a lumbering giant like British Rail into market-style change.
Unless we can achieve that, the travellers charter will, at best, be only half-hearted.
When I think of the misery, the frustration and the anger caused to my constituents on the east Suffolk line, I despair.
When the promised sprinters were not delivered on time, when the fares increased in proportion to the decline in reliability, when children are stranded because trains have broken down, when Conservative-controlled Suffolk county council subsidises the late night train, and when central Government grant for British Rail goes up, yet the service is still like a lottery, I despaired, I despair, and I will continue to despair until we give individuals, travellers, employees and taxpayers a real incentive to make it work — the freedom to succeed in the private sector.
All that leads me to British Rail Bills, and the fact that only now are we talking about ditching the procedures of 150 years ago.
That is symptomatic of our failure sometimes to move on.
The dawn of the railway age brought in that bizarre, cumbersome process of private Bills for new and altered rail lines and other works.
I speak as an hon. Member who has served time on four such Bills during the four years that I have been in the House — the City of London (Various Powers) Bill, the Tees and Hartlepool Port Authority Bill, and the London Underground Bills Nos. 1 and 2.
Therefore, I can speak of the experience when four hon. Members sit in quasi-judicial godliness hearing the arguments for and against.
We are all familiar with that quaint parliamentary phrase,’ It may be for the convenience of Members’, and then some information is imparted that is often for anything but the convenience of hon. Members.
Sitting on a private Bill Committee is in practice, if not in theory, designed for the maximum inconvenience of Members, especially when the learned counsel are paid by the hour — at least, it feels like that — or by the ream of Committee paper.
Of course safeguards are necessary for the environment, for local residents, for local communities and for the right to a decent quality of life, so I warmly welcome the transport and works Bill, which will defend the safeguards but speed up the decision process.
On the proposed council tax, I have just one point to make on the theme of individual freedom.
The basis of the tax — a two-person household — is wrong; it should be one person.
If it must be two, the 25 per cent.
reduction for one is insufficient.
In addition to the single people who choose to be alone, there are many hundreds of thousands of widows, widowers and unmarried people who do not choose to be alone, but are.
They should have a 50 per cent.
reduction if the tax is to be as fair as it needs to be.
Ms. Jo Richardson (Barking)
Today, a number of my hon. Friends have expressed their regret at some of the omissions from the Queen's Speech.
However, I was riveted by the speech of the hon. Member for Taunton (Mr. Nicholson), who welcomed a measure that he thought was in the Queen's Speech.
I am sure that it will highlight his constituents' day when they read the record of the debate and learn that their representative cannot read.
I hope that he will study the Queen's Speech.
I remind the House that we have had a debate on rights, freedoms and responsibilities for many years.
In many respects, we all regret that, because we had all hoped that, one day, the Government would see the light and get the balance right when distributing rights, freedoms and responsibilities.
Sadly, we still have to keep on reminding them.
It is about time that the Government accepted their responsibility for all sorts of things — for example, the rising unemployment levels, the rundown of the health service, the lack of measures to reduce homelessness and the failure of their economic policy to generate growth and investment to end the recession so that we can build a better Britain.
The fundamental difference between Conservative policy and philosophy and our own is at its sharpest when we talk about freedoms.
The Government have eroded our freedoms dramatically.
Power has been concentrated in the Cabinet and in the hands of the Prime Minister, with very few checks and balances.
Public confidence in the judiciary is at an all-time low — hardly surprising, considering recent miscarriages of justice such as the Guildford Four and the Birmingham Six cases.
Now doubts have been cast on the justice meted out to the Tottenham Three, and who knows what other cases will come to light?
I have an interest in the case of Sara Thornton, and I hope that at some stage the Home Office will relent and review that case.
It is grossly unfair that she should have been sentenced to life having been provoked by her partner over a period into killing him.
The Government have been responsible for much of the secrecy surrounding many of their policies.
They attempted, for instance, to suppress the publication and reporting of’ Spycatcher’.
This Government instigated the raid on the BBC to confiscate the Zircon tapes.
They badgered and bullied the broadcasting service to stop the showing of’ Real Lives’and’Death on the Rock’.
This Government removed the right to belong to a trade union from the workers at GCHQ, and they abolished the democratically elected Greater London council.
That is a sorry record of the erosion of civil liberties and the curtailment of freedoms.
As my right hon. Friend the shadow Home Secretary emphasised, a Freedom of Information Act which we would introduce would go a long way to improving all our freedoms.
We should have, and we will have, a right to know.
Devolved government in the form of Scottish and Welsh assemblies and regional government will make for much more open government than we have had in the past 12 years.
The only freedom that the Government appear to understand is the freedom of the market even though it has so patently failed to deliver enough housing, child care or training.
The Opposition understand — Conservative Members appear not to — that there can be no freedom without equality, and equality is underpinned by rights.
The hon. Member for Billericay (Mrs. Gorman) referred to more genuine equality for women.
I hope that the Government will listen to some of what she had to say and enshrine it in law.
Most women are not convinced by the Prime Minister's new role as the champion of women's rights, not least because he was the first Prime Minister in 25 years to fail to appoint a woman to his Cabinet.
He claims that there are women’ poised in the wings’.
If so, why not invite them in?
Why wait until after a general election?
There are women Tory Members on the Back Benches now, so why not appoint them?
That would be a good move — but far be it for me to advise the Prime Minister on that point.
The Prime Minister also says that it is a disgrace that there are not more women on public boards.
Since he became Prime Minister he has had a chance — his predecessor had a chance, too — to increase women's representation on such boards, but between 1985 and 1990 we know that their representation rose by a dismal 0.3 per cent.
What a record!
The Prime Minister has suddenly discovered this problem and intends to put it right —
Mr. Maclennan
Would the hon. Lady have supported the resignation of the Home Secretary over the escapes from Brixton?
That would have enabled space to be cleared.
Ms. Richardson
No, I would not.
Women are not convinced by the Prime Minister's conversion.
It is all very well to discuss with industry the promotion of women to board rooms and senior managerial positions, but in general women see that, if the Government do not tackle low pay and unequal pay and provide some help with child care, women will not in any sense be equal or have any kind of equal rights.
There is no point in merely asking industry to promote equal opportunities policies.
Many such policies have to be enshrined in a legal framework to ensure that employers implement them.
As the hon. Member for Billericay said, the lack of child care is an enormous obstacle to women's participation in the work force.
The Prime Minister believes that employers should provide it or that women should be able to afford it.
That leaves out of account many millions of women in low-paid and under-valued jobs.
Any notion of the Government playing a role in increasing the provision of child care seems to escape the Prime Minister.
I was at the recent launch of Opportunity 2000, an excellent initiative by Business in the Community.
The Prime Minister was quick to claim the credit for abolishing the tax on workplace nurseries.
He failed to shoulder the responsibility, which Government should shoulder, for imposing the tax in the first place.
He also failed to acknowledge that there are other forms of child care which should form a list of options available to women to enable them to combine their home and work responsibilities.
The Prime Minister said that over half the population’ go through life like a hobbled horse in a steeplechase.’
He again failed to acknowledge the part that he could play in reducing the odds which are stacked against women and shackle them in the way that he described.
The Government have pursued policies which have added to and certainly not loosened women's shackles.
Instead of providing a legal framework, the Government have blocked the legislation that is on offer to them.
For example, they have argued against almost every EC directive which would have improved women's poor position in the work force, increased their opportunities and given them increased freedom to work.
They have blocked directives on parental leave, on part-time workers and on maternity rights.
They have removed the right of women who work in small firms to return to work after childbirth and, by changing the law, they have blocked the right of married women on employment training to claim child-care.
They have removed the right of women to have child-care costs taken into account when claiming income support, and they have prevented those women from having the freedom to take up part-time work to improve their incomes.
The Queen's Speech mentions the Government's intention to enhance competitive tendering for local authority services.
If the Government are serious about promoting equal opportunities, I challenge them to reintroduce contract compliance, which they outlawed and which provides genuine incentives and practical advice to firms that wish to follow equal opportunities policies.
Many hon. Members spoke about crime.
I place firmly in the Government's lap the responsibility for failing to tackle crime.
The fear and the reality of crime constrict many people's lives.
The British crime survey shows that many women are afraid to go out alone at night.
A disturbingly high number, particularly of elderly women and women from ethnic minorities, are scared to go out during the day as well.
Effectively, that means that women of all classes, sizes, shapes and backgrounds are prisoners in their own homes.
I am sure that hon. Members have talked to constituents, many of them young women with children, who say bitterly that they feel trapped in their environment and dare not go out at night, even to have a cup of tea with a friend.
That is a serious situation, for which the Government must take some responsibility, because they have not introduced policies to correct it.
They promised a crackdown on crime, but crime has doubled.
With the crumbling of housing estates, ill-lit and hostile city centres and a dirty, rundown transport system that has reduced the numbers of guards, conductors and station staff, the growth of crime has been fostered.
We must not lose sight of the fact that such decay contributes to crime, and that is something that the Government acknowledge.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I remind hon. Members that we have a debate tomorrow on this subject and that there will be a public expenditure debate later.
Therefore, I ask for brief questions, please, to the Chancellor of the Exchequer so that as many hon. Members as possible may be called.
Mr. Terence L. Higgins (Worthing)
Does the Chancellor of the Exchequer recall that, in its report on the Budget, the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee stressed that it was important that the so-called automatic stabilisers should be allowed to operate fully and that there was a case for supplementing them with discretionary increases in public expenditure?
Can my right hon. Friend confirm that what he has said this afternoon is in line with that?
Is it not important, however, to stress, particularly for the benefit of the foreign exchange markets, that some increase in the public sector borrowing requirement at this stage in the cycle is entirely appropriate and in no way reflects any weakening of his determination to win the battle against inflation?
Mr. Lamont
My right hon. Friend is absolutely right.
The increase that I have announced today to some extent reflects weaker trading conditions and the recession.
That causes part of the increase in social security and part of the increase relating to the transport nationalised industries.
Over half the increase in programme spending arises in three areas — social security, transport and the national health service.
We are following precisely the policy that my right hon. Friend suggested.
We felt it right to accept the inevitable costs at this stage in the economic cycle and not to cut back on long-term plans that will strengthen the economy.
This is a prudent and moderate settlement.
Because of shouting by Opposition Members when I made my statement, I was not able to point out that the increase in the ratio of total Government expenditure to gross domestic product, both central and local, is only half a percentage point next year.
That will bring it to 42 per cent., which is way below the peak in previous cycles and way below the proportion of public expenditure to GDP under the last Labour Government in similar conditions.
Mr. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed)
Does the Chancellor recognise that his optimism about 2.25 per cent.
growth is not shared by all commentators and that if he is proved wrong these figures will be shot to pieces?
How can he believe that the fear of unemployment will go away while unemployment has continued to rise?
Does the right hon. Gentleman recognise that the figures that he has announced for training and education will go nowhere near far enough to fill the skills gap?
The figures for railways might sound encouraging, but, when looked at in detail, they fall away sharply in the subsequent two years.
The most eloquent comment was when he talked about his desire, once the election is out of the way, to resume the downward trend.
Having seen the decline in public services over the past decade, I hope that he never has that opportunity.
Is this not a quick election fix rather than a programme of long-term investment to improve our competitiveness?
Mr. Lamont
I explained to the House why I believe that the forecast that I have made is both cautious and realistic.
I explained that it is in line with forecasts being made by the IMF, the OECD and the London business school.
We are expecting that the British economy next year should grow in line with the G7 average.
All we are expecting at this stage is modest growth in this half year.
I see no reason why we should not accelerate again up to the average of the G7 countries.
It has happened before and, with falling inflation, we will achieve the growth again.
We did it before, and we have the same conditions again.
The increase in growth will come from exports, which have done remarkably well by increasing their share of world trade for three successive years.
We are expecting exports to rise by 6 per cent.
again next year.
Also, some of the growth will come from consumer demand.
Mr. Kenneth Hind (Lancashire, West)
Under the hon. Gentleman's proposals, will he maintain the proportion of public expenditure now covered by VAT?
Can we therefore say that there will be no change in VAT rates if his system, as opposed to the council tax, is introduced?
Mr. Gould
If the hon. Gentleman had followed these matters at all closely, he would have known that we said exactly that in the debates on the Budget.
We can test the fairness of the council tax by looking at the bill that the Secretary of State himself will face.
The Secretary of State is a millionaire.
He lives in an expensive house in the heart of London.
His bill will be just £273 — £100 less than the bill for the lowest value property in Langbaurgh.
How can that be fair?
I look forward to hearing the Secretary of State defend that concept of fairness.
For all those reasons — administrative costs will be high, collection levels will be low and average bills will have to compensate for the special help given to the wealthy — the council tax bills will be higher than fair rates bills would have been.
On average, they will be £67 higher.
The Government's figures — let us for the moment assume that they have an accuracy which the Government's abysmal record on predicting poll tax bills certainly does not justify — show that average council tax bills this year in Langbaurgh would have been £470 and in Middlesbrough £447 — £170 and £153 respectively higher than the equivalent fair rates bills.
Those figures — the £170 and the £153 — represent the surcharge that Langbaurgh families will have to pay for the continued life of the Tory Government.
What is true of Langbaurgh is true of the rest of the country.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
Do I take it from what the hon. Gentleman just said that he now has figures for every local authority under his proposals?
I do not believe that we have seen them before.
Will the hon. Gentleman please lay them on the table?
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
The hon. Gentleman uses as an illustration someone working in Eastbourne and someone working in Lewes.
The House is anxious to know whether the collection of tax by employers is relevant to where people work or to where they live.
The young man working in Lewes may live 50 miles away, for all we know, so will the hon. Gentleman deal with the problem of how on earth the local authority will know who works where?
Local authorities do not have that information at the moment.
If the tax is not based on where people live, how will the money eventually end up with the local authority in which they live?
How will a local authority know how many working people live within its area?
The hon. Gentleman's party has not thought about any of those issues.
He says that such a system works in other countries.
His party's spokesman in another place refers to local taxation in Canada and in the United States.
California is the size of this country and some of the Canadian provinces are 10 times that size.
Can the hon. Gentleman relate that to a local income tax in the United Kingdom?
Mr. Bellotti
I am again extremely grateful for that intervention.
I shall not take any more interventions, as I am coming to the end of my speech and many hon. Members wish to speak.
Mr. Andrew MacKay
I enjoyed it.
Mr. Bellotti
I enjoyed it, too.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo) for his intervention.
A local income tax would work according to where a person lives.
The Inland Revenue has the necessary information on its computers, because it has everyone's postal code.
Only this summer, I went to the Inland Revenue offices to check, and the postal codes are on the computer.
Every local authority knows exactly which dwellings are in its area so, by matching the postal code to the authority, all the money would go to the right local authority.
I am grateful for the opportunity to enlighten the hon. Gentleman, and I thank him for his question.
There has been an overestimation of property prices in the Government's thinking.
Since the Government first thought of the council tax, property prices have fallen, so the income generated will be less.
The effect will be that the eventual figure for the poll tax — now the council tax — will be greater.
There will be millions of losers who live in high-price property who enjoyed the poll tax but will now pay much more under the council tax.
Many of them are in the south of England, in seats held by Conservative Members of Parliament.
I should like a response from the Minister about the proposal to privatise the revenue collection service in local government.
Colleagues in local government have been saying for some time that the Government have said that, at some point, the revenue collection services in local authorities would be privatised and would go out to tender.
I seek an assurance that that will not be for at least three or four years after the introduction of the council tax.
If it were introduced before that, it would cause absolute mayhem in town halls.
The Bill refers to the collection costs, which the Government have estimated at 40 per cent.
of the cost of administering the poll tax.
However, the Audit Commission has challenged that figure, and has said that it would be nearer 50 per cent.
The Bill refers to £200 million a year being saved on the cost of collection, but it does not mention whether that £200 million is a saving on the cost of collecting the poll tax or on the cost of collecting the original rates.
The Government introduced the discredited poll tax, which cost an enormous amount to collect, so there is not much joy or credit if the new system still costs more than the original system.
Instead of the council tax and the unclear proposals, it would be far better to introduce a system that will work.
Let the local authorities control, for example, the business rates; let us remove all the capping powers and increase the quality and accountability of locals services by making people locally responsible to those who elected them.
With less Government interference, more local competence will emerge.
In Committee, we shall consider every detail of the Bill and we promise to consider carefully every clause.
We want to ensure that people are not landed with a second taxation system which is as unfair and unjust as the poll tax.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
I call Mr. Allen McKay.
Mr. Andrew MacKay (Berkshire, East)
We have already heard Allen, and he cannot speak twice.
I do not wish to appear uncharacteristically churlish, but I wonder whether I alone raised an eyebrow when the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) questioned whether the Secretary of State should have left the debate after an hour when the hon. Gentleman has been the only member of his party to be here throughout the debate — until the hon. Member for Liverpool, Mossley Hill (Mr. Alton) scuttled in towards the end of his speech.
Wisely, he missed the first half, but sadly, the second half was not a great improvement.
Mr. Martin M. Brandon-Bravo (Nottingham, South)
I was delighted that the Gracious Speech contained provisions for both the major Bills dealing with local authority functions, management and finance.
I hope that I will catch your eye, Madam Deputy Speaker, on Second Reading of at least one of those Bills.
I am delighted that we can refer broadly in this debate to those Bills.
All too frequently, Conservative Members are wrongly accused of being anti-local authorities.
Those accusations are always made by the same people who have all but destroyed public support for the local authority concept because of their blindness to the requirements of good financial management within local authorities.
When it goes wrong, they always seek to blame central Government.
It is never their fault at local level.
It is very much to the credit of my right hon. Friends the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State for the Environment that they have returned to basics and have not looked at finance in isolation.
They are looking at structure and functions at the same time.
We will certainly not again make the mistake that was made in the 1970s and 1980s.
It is true that the Conservative party got it wrong 20 years ago when the belief in the two-tier system for local authorities was fashionable and won the day.
True, it was working in some areas at that time.
No doubt, following the local government commission which will be set up under the new Bill, that system will continue, where appropriate — but only where clearly appropriate.
I am pleased that we recognised our earlier error.
In the 1983 to 1987
Parliament, we removed the metropolitan upper tier.
I am delighted that we will continue that process under my right hon. Friends the Prime Minister and the Secretary of State in the new Parliament which will be formed some time late next spring or in the summer.
It goes without saying that a great urban conurbation such as Nottingham cannot and must not have its affairs meddled in by councillors from Mansfield, Worksop and Retford who, although loyal Nottinghamshire people, have no community of interest in our great city and who, not surprisingly, want their towns to have as much of the county cake as they can get.
Legislation that will take further the right of the public to know just how their council matches up with others must be right.
It must also be right to have proper mechanisms in place to ensure that they get value for money.
Only the committed socialists on the Opposition Benches can oppose such a move, in the belief that only local authority organisations should provide services.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Spelthorne (Mr. Wilshire) pointed out, it does not follow that an identified public need must be met by a public sector bureaucracy.
If services of the right standard giving better value for public money can be provided, the resources saved will be available to meet other public needs.
That surely must make sense.
The main Bill scraps the poll tax and provides local finance through the establishment of a new council tax.
Like many of my colleagues, I plead guilty to the fact that I willingly supported the principle behind the original poll tax Bill.
However, I did argue that certain key protections against abuse were not in that Bill.
Too many local authorities used the changeover to milk people of money that they did not have through bills that they could not have anticipated and therefore provided for.
That naivety will not be repeated in the new Bill.
Given that, at least in the first year of the new council tax, there will still be two-tier authorities in the shires, I hope that the Bill will be as tight as a drum to ensure that the tiered authorities that are not up for election do not use that freedom from the ballot box — as happened in Nottinghamshire with the poll tax — to wreck the council tax in the way that they wrecked the poll tax in its first year.
Even if it can be shown that many authorities will have elections at that time, we must not be naive again.
We must screw the lid on spending as tightly as possible, so that a true and proper comparison can be made between the old rates system, uprated to match current spending, the poll tax charge, and the new council tax.
Unless anyone should mistake my purpose, I say clearly that, provided that local authorities, at the point of change in April 1993, have the power to spend that which they are spending this year, plus inflation, not one meal on wheels, not one old people's home, not one teacher — in fact not one public provision — need be cut.
If that were to happen, let it be clear that that would be typical of the cynical manipulation by Labour councils of the most vulnerable in our society, and nothing to do with the new council tax.
If Labour Members do not think that their party is the most cynical shower alive, I can give them a classic example from my county.
There has been a great deal of national publicity about the plans of the Labour-controlled Nottinghamshire authority to close 12 old peoples' homes.
One, Rivergreen, in my constituency, is a happy, well-run, well-managed, well-staffed home.
It is an integral part of the community of Clifton, which is the second largest estate in England.
Our county council always has enough money for the obscure and the daft, but when it comes to providing for its old people's homes, it does not have money.
Its answer to the problem is either that it is entitled to more money from central Government, regardless of how much its rate support grant for the social services sector has risen, or that it needs the unfettered right to raise further taxes locally.
That brings me back to the earlier part of our debate, from which we now know that the Labour and the Liberal Democrat parties want absolutely no constraints on the ability of a local authority to raise whatever level of tax it decides.
I assure the House that money is not the problem for the old people's homes in my constituency.
It is the will of the controlling Labour group and its inability to manage financial affairs.
Any county council that cannot find elbow room within a £600 million-plus budget to look after its old people's homes should stand aside and let some of my colleagues take over.
Mr. Bellotti
The example cited by the hon. Gentleman from his constituency is well known to hon. Members because it is repeated in other constituencies.
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that in East Sussex, where the Conservatives control the county council, there is exactly the same problem because the Conservatives want to close seven old people's homes?
I am sure that he would agree that the real problem is that local authorities across the country cannot spend the necessary money on our elderly people because of the capping regime imposed by central Government.
Hon. Members
Absolute rubbish.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
As my hon. Friends have said, that is absolute rubbish.
What I have said about Nottingham I would also have said about East Sussex had I had the same information.
I do not have the slightest doubt that in Nottingham the money is available to do whatever is necessary to keep open those old people's homes, and so remove once and for all the worry of hundreds of residents in those homes.
Mr. Illsley
Where would Nottinghamshire county council find the elbow room to which the hon. Gentleman referred?
Is he saying that it has balances that are not accounted for by other services?
If so, the Government should be taking another look at the amount of grant that that council receives.
If that is not the case, from which services would the hon. Gentleman want to take money to spend on the old people's homes?
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
Labour Members always imagine that some service or other would have to be cut to do what is right.
I can tell him that Nottinghamshire county council's balances are more than adequate to deal with those old people's homes, without touching any other departmental budget.
The hon. Gentleman should ask anybody in and around Nottingham whether they approve of the famous leaf stem statue, which costs £38,000, the coloured blobs under one of the car parks, which cost £28,000, or the provision of a day centre for the winos who are driving everybody mad, which cost £160,000.
The list is endless.
The council will always find money for whatever suits it, but when it comes to the elderly — the most vulnerable in our society — they always play ducks and drakes.
They want maximum party-political benefit.
Mr. Wilshire
My hon. Friend said that the county council's not looking after the elderly properly was a reflection of the will of Labour councillors.
Does he agree that it is all about the priorities of Labour councillors?
It appears that in Nottingham they put sculpture above the interests of the elderly.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
My hon. Friend has it in one —
Interruption
If a simple answer will do, there is no need to take a paragraph.
My hon. Friend had it in a nutshell.
I have not yet had time to study the minutiae of the Bill which, as we now know, runs to 163 pages, but I want to touch briefly on certain parts of it.
The great problem with the poll tax was the collection procedures.
I am not slow to sing the praises of the city of Nottingham, and there are good grounds for doing so.
However, in devising its method of collecting poll tax, in the words of that famous song,’ If there was a wrong way to do it, the right way to screw it,’nobody did it like Nottingham.
My constituents have had to pay an additional £44.75 per adult because of that incompetence, and that is a disgrace.
It is made all the more aggravating when people living inside the city know how little it costs the authorities outside the city to do precisely the same job.
I hope that the legislation that will come before us next week will ensure that that will not happen again.
Equally, who is liable and what is meant by’ occupier’must be beyond doubt in the new Bill.
Where, as in many inner-city areas, there is a high turnover of occupancy, I hope that there will be powers to levy the owner in order to ensure that the financial base of local authorities is not undermined.
In order that our desired aim to assist one-person households is not blurred by lack of definition, the phrase in the present legislation’ sole or main residence’must be defined beyond doubt.
I also plead self-interest — if that is the right term — in supporting the view taken on students.
With some 22,000 students moving around within our city, even if one felt that a nominal sum should be paid — here I am looking after the interests of the hon. Member for City of Durham (Mr. Steinberg) whose lovely daughter is now a constituent of mine; I trust that she will be sensible and know where to put her cross — it is clearly administratively impossible to handle and, given the changes in student support, that small relief will be welcome.
I, hope, too, that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State will address the technical problems of billing, particularly carry-over yearly billing, to avoid current confusion with many charge payers, because I regret that separate billing has not increased accountability.
If it is already in the Bill, I apologise, but I hope that we will finally resolve the injustice of the tax on empty properties.
Finally, since all too many non-payers were simply’ won't payers’, sponging on the rest, I hope that we will provide all the powers necessary to ensure that never again are my constituents expected to pay for the law breakers.
Mr. Thomas Graham (Renfrew, West and Inverclyde)
Conservative Members' speeches today show that they have not learnt the lesson of their hatred of local government.
They continue to work against the democratic interests of the nation whose people do support the concept of local government.
The Secretary of State made one of the worst speeches that I have ever heard from a Minister in the House.
I was appalled to hear his jovial, jocular style.
Bob Hope must have written his script.
However, many people are living in abject poverty because of the poll tax.
There are many who cannot pay.
Watching the Secretary of State today was like watching Jesse James leading a bunch of desperadoes governing the country like a bunch of robbers.
The Secretary of State for Scotland, who is now on the Government Front Bench, reminds me of the Sundance Kid and his brigade.
I am appalled that the Government have not learnt the lesson from Scotland.
Scottish Members raised in the House the problems faced by Scotland and clearly indentified the terrible damage that the poll tax was doing to the people of Scotland, but the Government continued to blunder on in their merry way.
Only after a 10 per cent.
drop in their fortunes in the opinion polls did they decide that, with the general election coming up, and the prospect of their being routed, they should do something.
They came up with the council tax.
The Secretary of State's comments today were so shabby and his speech was so shallow that he did not make me laugh.
We have heard some speeches tonight about the poll tax, but I want to read the editorial in the Glasgow Evening Times, so aptly published on 5
November, Guy Fawkes night.
It is no wonder that ordinary men and women throughout the country wish that Guy Fawkes had been successful when they consider the punishment that this House has levelled at ordinary men and women in a state of poverty.
The hon. Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns) shakes his head, but he should come to my constituency and I will introduce him to people who cannot pay the poll tax because they simply do not have the money.
This is not an editorial from a Labour weekly; it is a reputable Scottish newspaper, as I am sure the Under-Secretary of State will agree.
I want to read all of it to make sure that it appears in Hansard.
It is entitled’ Myth of the tax rebels’and it says:’Over the last decade the Government has done a better job of blowing local authorities to smithereens than Guy Fawkes.
That is the real reason Strathclyde finds itself in the midst of the gravest financial crisis in its history — not the can pay, won't pay' Poll Tax rebels.
The truth is the bulk of the £250M shortfall in Poll Tax, a debt mountain that has steadily grown over three years, is owed not by rebels, but by people who haven't a penny to their name.
The middle class revolt has turned to a whimper.
Nearly all the collectable money is now in; only a small number of diehards continue to withhold cash.
That will not stop non-payers being used as convenient scapegoats.
In Tory demonology they will always carry the can.’
We have seen that tonight.
The article goes on:’ The reality is the Poll Tax represents just 14 per cent.
of Strathclyde's budget.
The remaining 86 per cent.
comes in Government grants.
Under the Conservatives those grants have fallen hugely.
Over ten years, Scotland's councils have lost £600 million in grant aid — or £170 for every Poll Tax payer in the land.
Costs Strathclyde, hit proportionately harder, has been like a man living on starvation rations throughout the eighties.
Forced to become more efficient and cost-conscious, it had to devise imaginative measures to keep services going.
And when privatisation of services was introduced many staff lost job security, worked for lower pay and saw their pension rights eroded.
But any fat the Region may once have had is long gone.
The Poll Tax was the last straw.
The Government's refusal to accept needy folk can't pay has left the Region chasing its own tail — trying, at vast cost, to collect money that by and large simply isn't there.
That is why 750 jobs are being shed and a whopping 32 per cent.
rise in the Poll Tax is likely next year.
Poll Tax rebels are only bit-players in this crisis.
The responsibility lies four-square with the Government and its chronic underfunding of councils.’
Alongside that editorial, there is a small paragraph which says:’ Government grants for Scottish local authorities have slumped from 67 per cent.
to 55 per cent.
over the past ten years.’
That is one of the most devastating of editorials.
All Members of Parliament hold surgeries, and many have received complaints about the poll tax from constituents who are viciously angry with the Government.
Some decided that they would not pay the poll tax, but the people about whom I worry are those such as the elderly lady suffering from a form of senile dementia who came to me because she was being harassed about the poll tax.
The Government wanted 20 per cent.
of the amount from that woman.
For months, we in Scotland begged the Government to give 100 per cent.
rebates to people such as that lady.
I received a call from another constituent who was frightened because she had been slapped with not one warrant sale but two, yet she had paid her poll tax.
I remember telling the Secretary of State that the poll tax was cumbersome, burdening and complicated; that it would give a great deal of trouble to local council finance departments; and that it was inevitable that thousands upon thousands of mistakes would be made.
That has proved to be the case.
I remember looking at a graph showing the complications of the financing of the community charge.
It looked as though someone had spilled a can of spaghetti and had to make some sense of it.
The elderly and the unemployed are being hounded by the Government, and there is no end in sight.
The tax is continuing into 1993.
The Government are still after their pound of flesh.
They do not have the sense, decency, or caring to give people a 100 per cent.
rebate now, yet they cannot get blood out of a stone.
Ministers are a bunch of desperadoes, and they are carrying on like a bunch of stoneheads.
The only way that we will get rid of them is by a general election.
The poll tax is an albatross round the Government's neck and the council tax will be another, because the Government will not allow proper debate on it in the House.
Instead, they want to steamroller it through with a guillotine, and will not entertain common-sense discussion.
Is that what democracy has come to in this country, with the democratically elected Government refusing to listen to the democratically elected Opposition — who will be unable to reveal the flaws in the council tax as we did in the case of the poll tax, and which were soon clear for all to see?
The Secretary of State for Scotland smiles.
He knows that the poll tax was a shambles, but he was a diehard and continued to go to the wall with it.
That is not true of many Tory Members of Parliament in Scotland, who are desperate to get rid of the poll tax.
I would welcome anything that would improve the legislation.
I hope that a general election will be declared soon, that it will be fair, and that it will serve to bring back a decent system.
A Labour Government will offer such a system.
It will offer a fair rates policy that gives 100 per cent.
rates relief to people whom the present Government have abandoned.
They have shown by their tasteless and tactless menace tonight that they are still not prepared to take on board the problems of people who cannot pay their poll tax because they do not have sufficient funds.
The Secretary of State could take the necessary steps to give people a 100 per cent.
rebate now and even make it retroactive.
Do not the members of the Government Front Bench think that my remarks are important?
Does not the Secretary of State realise that thousands and thousands of people who still cannot pay the poll tax are facing court action and warrant sales?
Does the Secretary of State think that that is right?
Does he believe that one can get blood out of a stone?
It has never been done.
Interruption
It is time that the Government realised that, took steps to protect people who are suffering as a consequence of their lamentable and disastrous poll tax, and ensured that the council tax reflects more sympathy and caring.
I hope that a general election will be held quickly, so that we can show the Government the door.
Mr. Kenneth Hind (Lancashire, West)
I welcome this opportunity to congratulate the Government on the Gracious Speech and on their proposal to abolish the community charge and to replace it with the council tax.
I take the point made by the hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde (Mr. Graham), that many people are unable to pay the community charge.
I have met many of them at my advice surgery, and I will weep no tears over the demise of a tax that had no progressive element and which sometimes militated against people on low incomes.
So the community charge will go.
Mr. Graham
That is a change of heart.
Mr. Hind
Yes, some of us changed our minds, because we could see the effects of the poll tax.
Many right hon. and hon. Members should remember that we started with a tax of only £175 a head.
We did not reckon on greedy Labour authorities utilising the change to conceal vast increases in public expenditure that they forced on to thousands of unsuspecting electors in our communities, to try to persuade them to change their allegiance from the Conservative party to Labour.
That is what happened, and we now realise that we must take away from such authorities that most unjust tool with which they managed to acquire electoral support that they did not deserve and have unscrupulously used.
I welcome the change to a single bill for each household.
A great difficulty with the community charge, which was a point of grievance among many of my constituents, is that people can move on and avoid paying it, with the inevitable result that the rest of the community is called upon to meet the shortfall.
Fortunately, we have altered the system.
Due to the change in the taxation balance, national Government will pay 85 per cent.
of local government expenditure, with the remaining 15 per cent.
left to be levied through the council tax.
In future, that will mean that the old high rates will no longer be levied on the unsuspecting population, and we will see a continuation of support by central Government of local government.
Fortunately, too, Labour has agreed to continue with that policy should it come to power — so let us hear no more complaints about depriving local government of central Government funds because of cuts in rate support grant, revenue support grant, or whatever it is called today.
In future, large amounts of taxpayers' money will go to support local government.
The banding system is a move towards progressive taxation, which I welcome.
Logically, people live in a particular type of house because it is one that they can afford to purchase or rent and to maintain, so there is a rough and ready relationship between the value of their home and their income.
That will be one of the mainstays and pillars of the council tax.
The council tax will avoid the problems of the past.
The Bill's tough capping measures will ensure that Labour councils will be unable to pursue the profligate spending that they managed in the past, and that they will be controlled.
I was disappointed to hear the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) say that Labour would abandon capping.
I hope that the public realise the implications of that.
If Labour returns to power, we shall have a return to the bad old days: Labour councils will be able to spend, spend, spend.
They will be able to milk local taxpayers as they did with the rates, irrespective of the consequences.
Their line will be,’ Don't worry: we are the money milch cows who will provide the cash for the future.’
That is diabolical.
I hope that the public understand that, in the event of a Labour Government, they can look forward to being milked by Labour councils that will levy high rates of their new tax — as well as being milked by a national Government through increased rates of income tax.
The hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti), who is not in the Chamber now, complained about the amount that people had to pay.
The Bill, however, will not only abolish the current registration arrangements, but introduce an extensive rebate scheme, allowing rebates of up to 100 per cent.
to protect those on low incomes.
Many of us will welcome the end of the 20 per cent.
charge, principally because it hit the worst-off but also because it probably cost more to collect than was gained in revenue.
Students will benefit: those living in digs or halls of residence will no longer have to pay anything.
Student nurses, those on youth training schemes and others will also be helped.
The electorate must realise that, if Labour is successful at the next general election — which is highly unlikely — we shall immediately return to the old rating system.
The Leader of the Opposition has complained that that was an unfair tax, but has now managed to stand on his head and support the current proposal.
Labour Members quote figures in relation to their proposed fair rating scheme, but they give only averages; there are no details, sums or projections.
Their whole scheme is flawed, because it is based on the assumption that a Labour Government will have to raise £6.3 billion.
We all know that this year the Government had to raise £6.8 billion — £500 million more than that.
Obviously, if the calculation is made on the basis of averages, Labour's proposed tax will appear to be less than the community charge this year, or the projections for the council tax.
Labour's system is far too complex.
It would be impossible to operate.
The public will see immediately that Labour has no idea what it is going to do — but perhaps that is Labour's chosen method: perhaps the idea is to introduce a tax that is completely incomprehensible.
It is preposterous for the Opposition to claim that they can introduce such a tax and then complain about the Government's introducing a new tax in 1993.
Opposition Members have said that the council tax is too complex and difficult to be rushed through in time for 1 April 1993.
They say that there will be too many difficulties with the software, and that local government officials will not be able to work it out properly.
Yet, if an election took place next week, in the unlikely event of a Labour victory, Labour would try to introduce its system on 1 April 1992.
That is a joke.
Labour cannot, on the one hand, criticise us for giving our system careful consideration and waiting until 1 April 1993 and, on the other hand, announce that they will bring in a scheme in 1992 with no system to back it up.
Our system is clear, fair and progressive.
The system that we are being offered as an alternative is unclear; it is nonsense; and it will not work.
I have no doubt that, when the time comes and we push our tax through, it will be seen to be fairer than the Labour alternative.
It will provide massive rebates for those who are worse off; and it will be welcomed by the majority of the public, who will realise that it is far fairer than the community charge, that it is progressive and that it will work.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Everyone who lives in Lancashire will be very glad that the council tax will retain capping, which Labour's alternative would not.
That will provide a fallback for the unfortunate citizens of Lancashire, who have a very extravagant Labour council.
Mr. Hind
My hon. Friend has made an important point.
The first community charge bill that dropped through my letter box, and those of thousands of my constituents, was for £376, £346 of which was to be spent by the Labour-controlled county council: that was stated on the bill.
Residents had to wait four years to elect their council after receiving that bill.
That, if anything, reveals the main reasons for the failure of the community charge system.
It was deliberately smashed by people who used it cynically for their own electoral purposes.
I wish that system well.
Goodbye; good night; we shall see nothing like it again.
We must ensure that the new system will not be used as a political tool.
The hon. Member for Clackmannan (Mr. O'Neill) may smile; he is probably one of those who encouraged the cynical use of the community charge and never had a good word to say for it.
I have not often heard him condemn his hon. Friends who did not pay it.
Ours will be a good tax — and, more important, it will work.
Mr. Peter L. Pike (Burnley)
I know that the hon. Member for Lancashire, West (Mr. Hind) will recognise — being, like me, a Lancashire Member — that only one local authority in Lancashire has been consistently Labour-controlled since the local government reorganisation.
I refer to Burnley, whose council I led before I came to the House.
Both last year and this, Burnley's poll tax was the lowest in the country.
Mr. Hind
Look at the subsidies.
Mr. Pike
The point is that, with good continuous Labour control, we have been able to provide good services and good local administration.
The current Parliament was elected in 1987, and it will soon have run its term.
The Government have already scrapped legislation introduced by previous Conservative Governments, but it is extremely unusual, if not unique, for them to provide, in the Queen's Speech, for the abolition of what was claimed to be the flagship of their opening programme.
One or two Conservative Members have admitted today that they now recognise that they got it wrong in 1987-88.
I served on the Committee that dealt with the poll tax legislation.
We spent some 200 hours, in Committee and on the Floor of the House, spelling out the fact that the tax was unfair, unworkable and extremely expensive to administer.
Every failing that we pointed out has since proved to exist: those failings have emerged every year since its implementation.
The Government have spent billions of pounds on trying to make their tax work — and, of course, it was introduced in Scotland the year before the general election.
If a local authority misused the billions of pounds that the Government have misused for that purpose, it would be taken to the district auditors.
Many of its councillors would be surcharged, disqualified and probably made bankrupt.
We could have built many schools, sheltered housing schemes and sports centres with those millions of pounds.
The meals-on-wheels service and many other services would not have had to be cut.
However, that money was squandered.
It is outrageous.
The Government claimed in 1987-88 that they had a mandate for their legislation.
It is strange, therefore, that in this Queen's Speech the Government say that they intend to introduce a new Local Government Finance Bill to abolish what they did in 1987-88.
They claim that they have a mandate for doing that, too, but they cannot have it both ways.
My hon. Friend the Member for City of Durham (Mr. Steinberg) said that the legislation is only a shell and that regulations will be needed to implement it.
He is right.
When this legislation is pushed through, we shall face exactly the same as happened with the poll tax.
The Chamber was packed when there were seven orders before the House, with an hour and a half in which to debate them.
There were about 46 pages dealing with deductions from wages and benefits and with prison sentences.
This Session is time-limited because of the general election, so the Bill will have to be guillotined, thus curtailing debate and proper consideration of the proposals.
Four years ago, the Government said that the poll tax would solve the local government finance problem.
They were wrong, so why should we believe that they have got it right on this occasion?
Eighty per cent.
of my constituents lost out.
They live in what was formerly a low rateable value area.
People who paid rates amounting to only £200 on a house now have to pay £1, 200 in poll tax.
The same applies in Pendle, Rossendale and Darwen and Hyndburn.
The Conservatives will lose those seats at the next election.
Labour Members of Parliament will be elected to represent those constituencies.
Ministers told those people in 1987-88 that the Government had got it right, but now, four years later, they say,’ Sorry, we got it wrong.
You had an awfully raw deal out of it, but now we have got it right.’
Why should people believe them now?
They are just as wrong on this occasion as they were on the previous one.
The Local Government Bill provides for compulsory competitive tendering and creeping privatisation.
Ministers are not prepared to allow local authorities to lay down conditions of employment, sick pay, holiday pay and other pay levels.
It is appalling that in 1991 the only way in which the Government want to save money is by cutting people's pay and working conditions.
It is tragic that they should be doing that to local authority employees.
There is no employee on the buses who enjoys as good conditions of service as applied before the passing of the Transport Act 1985 in the areas affected by that Act.
I do not believe that local authorities should be capped.
I accept that the Government have the right to determine the amount of money that they are prepared to give to local government.
There will always be arguments about whether that amount is sufficient, but the amount provided by this Government has always been insufficient.
Local authorities have the right to provide the services that they were elected to provide.
It is wrong for any local authority not to take into account people's ability to pay.
The poll tax failed completely when it came to people's ability to pay.
The Government have never accepted that there are some people who cannot afford to pay for local government services.
That applies in every constituency.
It is time that the Government accepted that fact and dealt with it.
If they did so — and they could do it easily — we should be willing to co-operate with them.
The matter could be dealt with speedily, by regulations under the existing legislation.
Rebates could be increased.
The 100 per cent.
rebate to be included in the new Bill could be applied now.
The Government could also authorise local authorities to remit payments when they know that people cannot afford to pay.
One case in my constituency highlights the type of thing that happens.
Two of my constituents, Mr. and Mrs. Bellis, were sent to prison because they did not pay the poll tax.
They had a young child, but the court did not take account of who would look after the child while they were in prison.
If magistrates no longer apply the natural principles of justice, it is a bad day for our law.
I wrote to the Lord Chancellor about the case.
He said that it was nothing to do with him; it was a matter for the Department of the Environment.
When I wrote to the Department of the Environment, the reply was that this was the Lord Chancellor's responsibility.
This is the Government's responsibility.
They need to do something about it.
The poll tax must go, and the quicker the better.
Mr. Simon Burns (Chelmsford)
I welcome the general tenor of the Queen's Speech.
It confounds the rumours that have been put about that the Government are running out of steam.
It is an imaginative Queen's Speech.
It contains a programme that will take us well beyond this Session, after our fourth election victory in March, April or May of 1992.
I intend to concentrate on two issues in the Queen's Speech — the commitment to continue to prepare for the privatisation of the British Railways Board and the commitment to introduce a new council tax and to establish a review of local government structure in England.
My constituents are concerned about British Rail's performance.
More than 10,000 people commute from Chelmsford to Liverpool Street each day.
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
I draw the hon. Gentleman's attention to the fact that we are debating an amendment to the motion on the Queen's Speech.
The debate must be confined to the amendment, which relates to the local council tax.
Mr. Burns
I sought guidance earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and was advised that one could speak on anything in the Queen's Speech, but if that is incorrect I shall confine my remarks to the council tax.
I was assured that one could discuss any aspect of the Queen's Speech.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
That is not the advice that has been given to me.
I am advised that the amendment means that the debate today is confined to the terms of the amendment, which relates to the local council tax.
Mr. Burns
Then I shall curtail my comments on British Rail and deal only with local government finance.
It is a truism to say that nobody likes paying anything for any service.
If we could get out of paying for local government, many people would be far happier.
They would prefer not to have to make a financial contribution, regardless of their ability to pay.
However, it is a fact of life that local government has to be financed by individuals within the local community and by businesses and central Government.
What has proved to be a thorny problem, not just during the past four years but for many years before, is the basis for financing all the services provided by local authorities and the level of services that should be provided.
Earlier in the debate, the hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) told us of the Liberal Democrats' proposals for a local income tax.
I would be the first to admit that I was amazed, enlightened and then staggered by some of the intricacies of the local income tax a la the Liberal Democrats.
I had not realised that it was even more complicated than I had been led to believe originally.
The hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) told us in the briefest and skimpiest of ways — that is to be expected from the new model Labour party — of the Labour party's pledge to return to a policy of fair rates.
I was staggered to learn that the Labour party and the Liberal Democrats gave categorical assurances to the House that rate capping or capping of any sort would not be part of their programmes.
If there were to be a Labour Government or the unlikely event of a Liberal Democrat Government, it would be open house for local authorities to spend and spend, just like Viv Nicholson.
There would be an orgy of spending with no restraint, regardless of the damage that it might do to ratepayers, community charge payers or whatever they may be called.
I suspect that, when people up and down the country realise the sheer horror of what is being proposed, they will recoil from such an open-ended commitment for massive local government spending.
The level of service provided by local authorities is crucial.
It is imperative that the services provided are cost efficient and of the highest quality.
If one looks around the country, one becomes seriously concerned about the definition of a high level of service in certain local authorities.
It is interesting that the Labour party proposes to return to what it calls a fair rates policy.
As far as anyone can understand or discover what that cliche means, it seems to be a return to the old, discredited rating system.
Like the old saying that success has many fathers, but failure has none, nobody is prepared to claim parenthood of the old rating system.
Even the Leader of the Opposition is on record as saying that the rating system is the unfairest of taxes, yet we are led to believe that that is what the Labour party proposes.
We have before us a proposal for a council tax to finance local government.
I do not want to disappoint the hon. Member for Eastbourne, but the chances of a local income tax are nil, because his party does not have a cat in hell's chance of ever being returned to government.
One of the most worrying aspects is the danger posed by irresponsible and loony left local authorities.
Opposition Members may wave their hands, but for those living under the regime of a loony left council, the follies of its ways cannot be highlighted enough.
Day after day they have to live with those policies and spending commitments.
Very few people, especially Conservative Members, would dispute the fact that until the change in party control in Brent it probably had the accolade for one of the looniest of loony councils.
It was said of Brent under the Labour council:’ If you have a council that is as monumentally incompetent as Brent's has been in the last few years, it rightly gets a major vote of censure from the public.’
That forthright common sense does not come from the Conservative Newsline; nor is it a quote from my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State or my hon. Friend the Member for Enfield, Southgate (Mr. Portillo).
That common-sense approach to Brent came from the hon. Member for Brent, East (Mr. Livingstone) who, for those who may not remember, was the former leader of the Greater London council.
If that is not enough, a former Member of Parliament and a former councillor in Hackney, Ms. Maureen Colquhoun, said that the only reason for Labour losing seats in Hackney in 1990 was’ the total failure of the Labour Group to deliver services.
The record is shameful.’
If you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, read what that council has got up to over the past four years, you will appreciate fully, just as people in Hackney do, just how shameful the record is.
Equally shameful was an article in The Guardian of 28 February 1991 in which a Councillor Steve French in Lambeth called for victory for Iraq and urged the bombing of Israel.
Up and down the country, there are stories of grotesque mismanagement and waste of money by Labour councils.
Nearer to my home in Chelmsford in Essex — that wonderful county which produces Essex man and Essex woman — the Labour-controlled council in the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Basildon (Mr. Amess) has spent millions of pounds on a huge new civic centre.
Unfortunately, it forgot to plan for the needed new council chamber within that civic centre.
Senior council officials in Birmingham, some earning up to £65,000 a year — that is more than we poor Members of Parliament get — are living in council properties and paying rents as low as one fifth of market levels.
Bradford voted to spend £10,000 to celebrate some obscure strike that took place in the city 100 years before.
Charge-capped Islington considered sending 25 children and five teachers to Senegal to study French.
Islington could have saved its council and charge payers a great deal of money if it had just asked the advice of a local geography teacher and been told that it is better to go to France to learn French.
I understand that in Dudley, Thomas the Tank Engine has crossed swords with the ideologues of the loony Labour left.
Thomas the Tank Engine has been banned from schools and libraries because it is sexist.
When reading stories about Thomas the Tank Engine to my daughter, I never thought it sexist.
Obviously, there is a new interpretation of the word.
Last year in Harlow, the national anthem was forbidden by the local authority at council entertainments.
That is all utter rubbish.
Local authorities should not be interfering and wasting charge payers' money in those ridiculous, trite and stupid ways.
I have always believed — I make no apology for it — that any system of financing local government must contain a way of making the local authorities more accountable to those who live within the local area.
The Government have decided to introduce the council tax.
They listened to the representations that were made and, in their wisdom, decided to make this change as quickly as possible.
I wish the Bill well not only on Second Reading but in Committee.
Hon. Members will have an opportunity to debate the Bill, but, whatever happens, it is far better to have a system that is more accountable to local people and that will, we hope, put an end to some of the ridiculous mismanagement, inefficiency and wasting of money that has gone on for far too long.
Mr. Eric Illsley (Barnsley, Central)
We listen time and again to scare stories about loony left Labour councils, many of which are figments of Conservative Members' imaginations.
I respond with one simple example of wasting money.
NHS trust hospitals in my health authority area are sending people to Toronto, Paris and all over the world to learn how to do catering and cleaning.
The Government should address themselves to such wasting of money and not to fictitious ideas about Thomas the Tank Engine.
Earlier this year, the Government announced the abolition of the poll tax and the introduction of the council tax.
That should have been welcome.
Hon. Members, including some Conservative Members, have said how divisive and unfair the poll tax was, how difficult it was to collect, with the result that 7 million court summonses are outstanding, and how expensive it was to administer.
Hundreds of thousands of pounds were spent on computers and software, only for them to be replaced by new software for the council tax.
The poll tax bore no relation to the ability to pay, offered no accountability because of capping and limits set by the Secretary of State, and imposed a 20 per cent.
universal contribution, despite the fact that many people simply could not afford to pay.
The hon. Member for Lancashire, West (Mr. Hind) rightly said that it costs more to collect that contribution than it yields.
The problems of local authorities were exacerbated by the Prime Minister saying that the poll tax was being abolished because it was uncollectable.
That was welcomed by the organisations that had campaigned for non-payment.
Their problems were further exacerbated by the fact that many people took the Government at their word and simply stopped paying.
Many local authorities are issuing court summonses and spending much time and money trying to persuade them that the poll tax has not been abolished and that it will be with us next year and possibly the year after.
It is no wonder that local government finance officers regard the poll tax as a financial nightmare.
When we explain each local government Bill to them, they frown and put their heads in their hands.
The poll tax is uncollectable and expensive.
Much of that expense is caused by the enforcement procedures.
My local authority spends a lot of money simply issuing court summonses and trying to pursue people for non-payment.
The abolition of the poll tax is widely welcomed until we consider what will replace it — simply more of the same.
Page 2 of the consultation paper refers to the guidelines that the Government considered for the new council tax.
They considered the same principles on which they based the poll tax.
The consultation paper refers to accountability.
How can capping lead to accountability?
A local authority is accountable either to the local electorate for the poll tax that it sets or to the Secretary of State because he decides how much it can spend.
How can any tax that has a universal contribution, regardless of income, be fair?
How can we consider the fairness of the council tax when the eight bands equate house values with the wealth of an individual and his ability to pay?
It is simply nonsense.
The document refers to ease of collection.
One bill will be issued for the council tax, and supposedly there will be no register.
How will a local authority allocate rebates?
How will it, without a list or register, determine whether a household is a single or a two-person household?
How can the council tax be easy to collect if the people who are responsible for collecting it simply do not know how much they must collect from each household?
Of course there will have to be a register: otherwise, the system will be thrown into chaos.
The document mentions equitable distribution.
Once again, the Government considered making everybody pay the council tax but relented and will abolish the 20 per cent .
contribution — not before time.
As that is so expensive to collect, why not abolish it now?
Conservative Members should realise that capping is based on the standard spending assessment.
The cap applies not to what an authority spends but to what the Government believe an authority is entitled to spend.
Many times, Labour Members have pointed out the iniquities of the standard spending assessment, which is based on irrelevant data more than 10 years old.
The standard spending assessments, which will remain, will lead to further capping and difficulties for many authorities.
The council tax is doomed from the start.
It contains not only a personal element but a property element.
The personal element of the poll tax led to huge decreases in census registration and registration for elections.
I understand that about 1 billion people did not register in the recent census.
Council tax bills will be based on a two-person houshold.
Imagine the confusion that there will be among single people who receive a bill based on a two-person household.
Pensioners will believe that they have to pay the full amount unless they query it with their local authority or unless the authority has a list.
Council offices will be inundated with people querying their bills.
An interesting change has been made, because under the poll tax each adult had to pay, which penalised larger families.
As the council tax is based on a two-person household, a household of four or five students or people on income support will pay less.
Many people will not realise that they are entitled to a discount, because, there is no information on how the discount scheme will work.
Where will the list be of people who are entitled to a discount?
How will a local authority find out who is entitled to a discount?
If a person goes to the town hall and says that he qualifies for a discount, the authority will need proof.
It will have to compile a list or a register, so the idea that the council tax will not need a register is a complete fiction.
It is also wide open to fraud, because many people who are not entitled to a discount may try to claim one from their local authority.
The discount for a single-person household will be set at 25 per cent.
Once again, many people will not realise that there is a property element built into that and they will wonder why they do not receive a 50 per cent .
discount on the two-person household bill.
Many people will not realise that there is a property element built in and that they qualify only for the 25 per cent.
discount.
The dual element will be a cause of great confusion, which will be compounded by the proposals for other discounts and rebates for people on low incomes.
How can those rebates and discounts be administered without some form of register or list?
How is a local authority to react to thousands of claims for rebate?
Will it wait to deal with them when the bills drop on the doormats and then try to compile a list of people entitled to a rebate after the council tax has been introduced?
Will local authorities be required to compile a register of people entitled to rebates before the council tax is implemented?
What is the time scale for implementation?
In a brief to me and my colleagues, my local authority wrote:’ In addition, because of its very nature as a combined personal/property tax, movements of individuals within a household will inevitably give rise to changes in liability.
Consequently, some details of individuals within properties will need to be kept.’
Local authorities themselves are saying that a register will be needed.
We have heard that the amount to be paid by each household will depend on the valuation of the property and that properties will be allocated to one of eight bands.
The problems are obvious.
There will be different housing valuations across the country for similar types of property.
Whole areas of property will be lumped into bands with no attempt at individual valuations.
People in the south-east will be allocated to bands E, F, G and H and will pay the top rates.
They will be extremely unhappy that people in the north and the midlands with similar properties will be allocated to lower bands.
We shall also find that people in one band will attempt to switch to another in order to pay a lower rate of council tax.
The unfairness associated with the poll tax remains with us, and the anomalies will remain until a fairer system is introduced with a more distinct and accurate valuation.
The problems of valuation and banding will also be compounded by the Government's proposed method of valuation, which is to give the job to people such as estate agents who have a vested interest in ensuring that the valuations are as high as possible.
The Inland Revenue will merely oversee the process under which thousands of properties will be given over to estate agents to lump into the banding system.
Many estate agents have no expertise in property surveying and many cannot even sell houses, yet they will carry out the banding which will place properties into distinct bands.
The consultation paper states:’ Valuation is not an exact science.
Two different valuers may well come up with two different detailed valuations of the same property — providing fertile ground for appeals and disputes.’
That is only too true.
The same paragraph applies to valuation for banding, especially as properties will be banded in groups of 20,000 or more.
There will be appeals and disputes in relation to the council tax ever after.
It is interesting that appeals are still in progress for the old rating system from years ago.
As I have said, the abolition of the poll tax is to be welcomed, but even more welcome would be the abolition of the system of grants — the standard spending assessment which is responsible for most of the problems relating to capping and high poll tax bills.
Colleagues from neighbouring authorities have drawn attention to the various anomalies in the standard spending assessments and I shall not repeat them.
However, one local authority should not receive double the amount of grant received by another only a few miles away for the provision of exactly the same level of service, which is the case at the moment.
My authority receives half as much in grant as an authority such as Manchester to provide exactly the same level of teaching service.
The council tax will fail.
It needs a register.
It has a personal element, discounts and rebates, all of which will have to be listed by the local authorities.
It is obvious that some form of register will be needed.
The tax is unfair.
The basic banding system is unfair, and will lead to appeals and anomalies.
All in all, we shall have the same problems as we would have had if the poll tax had remained.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
I will support the amendment tabled by the Leader of the Opposition.
However, it will come as no surprise to the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) when I say that my party has its own alternative to the council tax, which is referred to in the amendment tabled by myself and my hon. Friends.
The House well knows that the Scottish National party has been vitriolically opposed to the poll tax.
Our view has always been that any taxation system must be based on the ability to pay.
If a tax is to be fair, if it is to have the support of the people and if it is to be collectable, it must be based on the fundamental principle of ability to pay.
The Government introduced the community charge legislation as a result of total panic about what was happening in Scotland when revaluation came before us again.
There were screams and cries from Scottish Conservative Members, who said that, unless the Government did something, they would lose their seats.
The Government did something.
They introduced the poll tax and, as a result, lost 11 Scottish Conservative Members in 1987.
The introduction of the community charge was a desperate attempt to save the skin of the Conservative party in Scotland, and it failed miserably because of the sense of social justice in the Scottish philosophy.
The Scottish people saw the community charge as the most hated tax that had been implemented within their memory.
Other hon. Members have given specific examples of their constituents.
I could list many individual examples of how the tax has treated the poorest and most vulnerable in society.
I could give examples of how people have been pursued beyond the grave to pull back a few miserly pounds of poll tax payment.
Only this weekend, I had a telephone call from a distressed daughter who pointed out that her mother, who was widowed 18 months ago, had just received a threatening letter saying that, if she did not pay £11 for the 16 days between 1 April and 17 April 1989, during which her husband had been alive, poinding action would be taken against her.
Such a philosophy is wholly unacceptable and shows how stupid the tax was.
Unfortunately, we again have a Government who are panicking about how to fund local government.
They have not thought carefully through how we should deal with the important issue of funding and local authorities.
The Government are deeply concerned that they may lose seats south of the border as a result of the community charge.
It brought about the demise of the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs.
Thatcher) and many people panicked.
As a result, we have another ill-thought-out form of taxation to pay for local authorities.
It is clear that the Government are determined that the Bill will be on the statute book before the general election.
I understand that a timetable motion is to be introduced on Second Reading — a procedure which I have not experienced.
All that is intended to clear the decks because the Government think that the council tax may be the remedy to their problems.
The Bill perpetuates all the anomalies, unfairness, regional variations and bureaucracy that made the poll tax unpopular.
I suspect that those of us who continue our work as Members of Parliament after the next general election will find our surgeries just as busy with people complaining about the council tax and its anomalies as we have during the past year as a result of the poll tax.
The Government should prove that they are a listening Government and should reconsider the legislation because the Bill will have profound effects on local government and on people's sense of justice and fairness.
My party has consistently argued that the real alternative for funding local authorities is a local income tax.
Such a tax operates equitably and effectively elsewhere — in Scandanavia, for example.
In Sweden local income tax raises 99.7 per cent., of total government tax revenues, in Finland 98.9 per cent. , in Denmark 91.6 per cent. , in Norway 89.5 per cent. , in Switzerland 86.5 per cent. , and so on .
Many other European countries operate effectively a local income tax based on the ability to pay.
People there feel that their local authorities are accountable and make decisions in the interests of the community and that the taxation system is based on the ability to pay.
I believe that we in Scotland would like to have a similar facility.
The Government's argument is always based on how much it would cost to implement a local income tax system.
The Secretary of State for Scotland will recall that, when my colleagues and I met him and the Secretary of State for the Environment during the consultation period on local government funding, we argued our case on local income tax and pursued the issue of costing.
After letters to and from Ministers, and having asked parliamentary questions, we estimate that, if Scotland yields 8.3 per cent.
of United Kingdom income tax, the full-year effect of a 1p increase in Scottish income tax levels for 1991-92 would be £161.86 million.
If we place that figure against what is being raised through the community charge, we see that income tax would have to rise by 3.5p.
Most people would be willing to pay such a price to remove the anomalies involving the ability to pay.
I disagree with the idea that someone on my salary should be asked to contribute the same as the person next door, who is probably earning only half as much.
I should pay according to my income and my neighbours according to theirs.
I want that sense of fairness and justice to be written into the local government finance legislation.
I have heard the Secretary of State for Scotland and some of his ministerial team say that local income tax would not benefit certain groups of people — teachers and hospital porters, for example.
We estimate that a teacher earning just over £16,000 a year, with a non-earning spouse, would pay £389 in local income tax, a saving of £175 on the poll tax or £31 on the council tax.
A hospital porter earning just over £8,500 a year, with a non-earning spouse, would pay £124 in local income tax, a saving of £440 on the poll tax or £296 on the council tax.
I could give many other examples which would kill once and for all the idea so often propounded by the opponents of local income tax that such a tax would not benefit people on the lowest incomes.
Our research, and the examples provided by other countries, show clearly that local income tax would be based on justice and fairness.
In all seriousness, I ask the Government not to deride the strong arguments for a local income tax just because they happen to be advanced by what they call minority parties.
The Liberal Democrats and ourselves represent a substantial proportion of public opinion throughout the United Kingdom.
The Government have a responsibility to look more carefully at the positive arguments advanced.
Those arguments are supported by a broad spectrum of opinion, including people working within the taxation system and people involved in local government administration and finance.
They believe that it could work.
The Government are making a major error by dismissing local income tax out of hand.
To replace one bad tax with another solves no problems whatever.
Mr. Donald Dewar (Glasgow, Garscadden)
I am perhaps out of line with some of my hon. Friends in that I quite enjoyed the speech made by the Secretary of State for the Environment, who opened the debate for the Government.
Personally, I have no objection to a little bit of Punch and Judy politics and to some knockabout stuff: it is all good fun.
I have to say, however that, in the end — and this applies particularly to the right hon. Gentleman's peroration — I thought that he was rather ridiculous.
His argument seemed to be based fearlessly on the refusal to recognise what is already public knowledge about our plans.
I confess that I literally gasped with disbelief when I heard him calmly announce his determination to get rid of the poll tax at the first possible opportunity.
He told The Scotsman the other day,’ the only thing that can stop us is the Labour party.’
That certainly qualifies him for a prize for brass neck.
The other prize for the evening's debate undoubtedly went to the hon. Member for Berkshire, East (Mr. MacKay) although that, I think, was a prize for innocence and naivety.
The hon. Gentleman proudly proclaimed that the new council tax was a perfect compromise, although it was not clear what it was a compromise between.
In my experience, perfect compromises are unusual animals, and I fear that the hon. Gentleman is in for a disillusioning experience if the tax is ever brought into practice.
Apart from that, I do not think that I learned a great deal from Conservative Members' contributions to the debate — except, perhaps, that the hon. Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns), who is not noted for his breadth of vision, does not like Labour councillors, which did not seem to me to advance the argument very much.
I want to examine some of the competing attitudes to, and some of the recent experience in, local government finance.
I ought to say straight away that I have some sympathy with some of the Scottish Conservatives.
I can make what is perhaps not a usual boast in Scotland: I can claim that some of my best friends are Conservatives.
Their agony in recent months and years has been terrible to behold.
They have genuinely found it difficult to come to terms with the rout that has taken place — the complete volte-face.
I should explain to the Secretary of State that what has been involved is not so much a loss of dignity as a destruction of credibility.
The right hon. Gentleman knows — there can be no doubt about it — that, until recently, as the foundations of the poll tax crashed around his ears, he was still proclaiming it to be a remarkable success and something which was here to stay.
Now, I am afraid — if rumour is correct — he is reduced to confiding to any journalist who will listen that he was a dissident from day one, bound unwillingly into the whole scheme by a love of collective responsibility.
I am afraid that he is getting very near to the Nuremburg defence of saying that he was only obeying orders.
I would find it all a little more convincing had the right hon. Gentleman not peddled the Government's line so enthusiastically, with militant zeal — I hope that he will not resent the term — for so many months.
All my hon. Friends will remember the reception that was given to Labour's alternative to the poll tax.
Abuse and scorn were heaped upon it with an intensity of attack that I cannot remember experiencing previously in my political career.
That was perfectly understandable, because what we were proposing was so essentially and uniquely horrible.
The House will remember that we had the effrontery to propose that we should have a property-based system founded largely on capital valuation and with legal liability falling on the householder alone.
Clearly, that was unacceptable and intolerable.
We were told in terms that it was a veritable tyranny — Scotland was colonised by vultures and no roof beam in Scotland was free from this plague.
What was unacceptable and intolerable suddenly — just like that — became acceptable and tolerable, as the Conservative party line turned, with a discipline which I found quite remarkable and which was reminiscent of societies that Conservative Members often dismiss contemptuously.
A study of the assault made on our plans at the time reveals a number of points that were put forward as incontrovertible arguments against what we were proposing.
It is perhaps worth taking a minute or two to invite the Secretary of State to answer those arguments in his reply and to explain how they have been overcome in the new council tax system.
That will be particularly interesting to Labour Members, and I look forward to it.
I have here a copy of’ Roof tax v poll tax’, published by the Scottish Conservative party.
Let us start with one or two fundamentals.
The document states:’ Their new local government tax will be based on the value of your home The truth is Labour's proposed Roof Tax' will be, as the rates were, a tax on your right to live in a house.
The family home.
It'll be the family millstone.’
How does the new council tax overcome that essential fault?
The document contains a second charge.
It states:’ council tenants won't laugh when they hear they'll be liable to pay the new tax in addition to their rent.’
I must have missed something in the council tax.
Some subtlety must have eluded me.
I was under the impression that people who rented council houses would have to pay the new council tax in addition to their rents.
Clearly I have misunderstood and I am sure that the Secretary of State for Scotland will correct me shortly.
The document also explains’ why the youngster with a full time job living at home will once again pay nothing towards local Government services.
While the youngster who leaves home and rents a flat will be clobbered.’
It seems that another subtlety has escaped me.
What I have just related will look rather familiar to those who examine the Bill that we will debate next week.
I am sure that the Secretary of State will be able to explain the next point to me, because it is so simple.
What is even more chilling for the people who have bought their council houses at a discounted price is that they will now be taxed at today's full value.
That point was elaborated upon by the then Secretary of State for Scotland, the right hon. and learned Member for Edinburgh, Pentlands (Mr. Rifkind) who now runs — or rather does not run — our railway system.
In a press release dated April 1990, he said:’ A council house in Bearsden is likely to have a much higher market value than a council house in Castlemilk.
But the income of the council house tenant might be exactly the same.
How does Mr. Dewar justify the one having to pay a much higher roof tax than the other?’
He continued:’ The council tenant who buys his house need also beware of Labour's roof tax.
Their liability will not be based on what they have actually paid for their house but what it is deemed to be worth without discount.
They may have bought it for £9,000 with full discount, if it is actually worth £30,000 it will be the latter figure that will be used to work out their roof tax...
Labour will punish them with a vengeance.’
That was a fundamental objection to our plans.
How has the Secretary of State met that point in the council tax?
We never accepted that that was an objection.
I have quoted from the Conservative Cabinet Minister in charge of local government finance.
I want the Secretary of State to explain why he has abandoned the attack.
Did he do that on the basis of arrant hypocrisy or because he is a man of no principle who is now putting his principles in his pocket?
Interruption
The Government have capitulated on the flat rate principle, the property base and on accountability.
All we can hear is the sound of Conservative politicians eating their own words.
However, that has not encouraged humility, as the Secretary of State for the Environment proved when he opened this debate.
The Government have capitulated on principle, but they have made a terrible mess of translating the principle into practice.
In the weeks ahead, we will examine the details of the new council tax.
I am sure that the Secretary of State for Scotland will appreciate that I have corresponded with him about the fact that the Local Government Finance Bill is a United Kingdom Bill.
I did that on the basis that it is very difficult to scrutinise the Bill's Scottish aspects, complicated and far-reaching as they are, as they impact on a very distinct and separate local government tradition and system within the framework of United Kingdom legislation.
I hope that he will use his influence in the usual channels to ensure that there is a decent Scottish input to our debates.
I received a letter from the Secretary of State for Scotland on 30
October in which he confines himself to saying:’ I believe that the Scottish interests will be dealt with appropriately.’
If we are reduced to a handful of Scottish Back Benchers and perhaps only a couple of Opposition Scottish Back Benchers on the Standing Committee, that will be deeply resented.
It will be seen by many people who do not have a partisan political approach to the problems as a blow at the proper parliamentary scrutiny of Scottish legislation.
The right hon. Gentleman must bear that point very much in mind.
I now refer to our objections.
Understandably, I must state that, in broad terms — as the House will recognise, we have a Second Reading debate and a Committee stage to come — the first objection is very important.
The proposed banding system was dealt with at some length by the right hon. Member for Henley (Mr. Heseltine).
It is pinched and restricted.
It is artificially constrained in a way that ensures that the burden is not fairly distributed and those at the top end of the property range, and very likely to be at the top end of the income range, are being given shelter which is not justified.
The right hon. Member for Henley made a powerful point when he said that all we were doing was trying to introduce an envy tax.
He made a strange point, because he said, as though he justified that attack, that, after all, further bands would not raise any more cash.
However, as he is always telling us, he does not want local government to raise more cash.
It is not just a matter of how much is raised: there is another essential principle, and that is how the burden is distributed.
That is the point at issue.
I am surprised that someone as acute and as experienced as the right hon. Gentleman does not appreciate that arguments for fairness and justice also enter into the matter.
Mr. Heseltine
If one does not raise more money from the top bands, one does not actually help the people in the lower bands.
Mr. Dewar
Yes, one does, if one broadens the range.
At the moment it is 3:1.
The richest in the land can pay only three times as much as the person in the most lowly valued, difficult-to-let council house.
If one broadens that range and spreads it more evenly, one gets away from the present situation in which those at the bottom end of the range are paying more than they need to pay because of the way the system has been constructed.
Again I refer to the’ Roof tax v poll tax’document.
On this particular the Government have got it right, and I am proud that they got it right.
The Tories got it absolutely on the nail.
That document states:’ Labour's message clearly is Those on high incomes in high valued properties will make a larger contribution to local services'.’
I plead guilty to that.
That is a principle which the vast majority of people in this country would endorse.
It was the principal objection of many people on very wide and varied incomes to the way in which the poll tax operated.
The arrival of the eighth band, which suggests that the right hon. Gentleman's conscience was at least pricking him, is not enough, and more should be done.
Perhaps we will refer later to the blatant dishonesty — I am sorry, I must watch my language; let us say something bordering on the dishonest — of the suggestion that we can have a banding system which avoids for ever the problem of revaluation.
I read in the ministerial journals — the Secretary of State for the Environment will certainly know about it — that the Minister of State said that, once a person is in a band, his property would be in it probably for perpetuity.
That is the level of the argument.
If we go to any local government official and talk to him about local government finance and how the council tax might work, he will say that it is nonsense and a case of trying to muddle through and paper over the cracks simply to make the package a little more presentable for electoral purposes.
The next main point is about the complexity of the system.
We are, in the practicalities, preserving many of the characteristics of the poll tax that have plagued and complicated our lives over the past two or three years.
We have had a plethora of reduction schemes and concessional allowances — five or six of them — and they will go on.
We have the 25 per cent.
discount.
I recognise why it is attractive.
All of us are aware of the problems of someone who was living alone and struggling to maintain a large house, but I am genuinely surprised at Conservative Members' enthusiasm for a benefit that is clearly not targeted.
In Scotland, there are 580,000 homes consisting of a single adult over 16.
I do not know how they are made up.
Many of them will presumably get the 100 per cent.
rebate anyway without having to call upon the discount system.
Although there is an assumption that most of those people are little old ladies who live in the circumstances that I described earlier, I suspect that we do not really know who the beneficiaries will be, but if the Government do not know, they should tell us.
I have said it before and will say again that I am one such beneficiary, and probably not the sort of beneficiary that was intended when it was decided that a discount would be required.
If fairness is to be the test, the discount is neither an efficient nor effective way of targeting help where it is most needed.
In Committee we shall draw attention to the many anomalies that are already beginning to pile up.
Let us take one random example.
Perhaps the Secretary of State for Scotland will address the logic of the following.
Let us imagine two neighbouring houses.
The householder in the first earns £30,000.
Only one other person lives in the house, his son who is on income support.
As a result of his son's status, that householder automatically gets the 25 per cent.
discount.
The neighbouring householder, however, earns only £15,000 — he lives in exactly the same sortof house, but has only half the income of his neighbour and, again, only one other person lives in the house, his non-working wife who brings in nothing.
That householder would not receive any discount; he would pay the full charge.
That is just one of many anomalies in what will be a long list in Committee.
The discount system has the potential to run us into a substantial amount of trouble and I believe that very few people will be prepared to defend it in a year or two.
Many people have said,’ How wonderful, there will be no register.’
The hon. Member for Eastwood (Mr. Stewart) cheerfully told the nation on radio the other day,’ Of course, there will not be a register, but there will have to be a list.’
The Convention of Scottish Local Authorities has asked me how the discount system, as distinct from the rebate system, will work.
It has said,’ We do not have the power to have a statutory canvass, but without a statutory canvass, we do not know the real position.
Are we supposed to send out bills for 100 per cent.
of the liability to everyone and leave householders to claim the discount if they are entitled to 25 per cent.
off the full cost because they are single householders?
If the bill is to be calculated on a daily rate and someone's auntie comes to stay for a couple of months in the middle of the year, what about all the complications in adjusting for that and how do we account for the period for which someone has lost the discount?
If we calculate bills on that basis, the bills of all the affected people will have to be reissued.’
I am not making pedantic points when I refer to all those complexities and difficulties which are now beginning to bite in a way that I find worrying.
Mr. Ian Bruce (South Dorset)
I have read Labour's document, which is entitled’ Fair Rates’, in which the Labour party did not tackle the question of how it would deal with houses in multiple occupation or refer to salary levels.
How would the hon. Gentleman's party cope with that?
Mr. Dewar
Our view is simple.
We should not have a discount and rebate system.
We should have simply a rebate system in which a flexible, generous and realistically tapered rebate takes account of the incomes of the people in any house.
All the available funds should be targeted in that way to ensure that we achieve the best social return on the available resources — If Conservative Members think that I am making a partisan point, I invite the Secretary of State for the Environment to move beyond the Municipal Journal.
Why not do something daring and take the Local Government Chronicle?
If the right hon. Gentleman had read the Chronicle this month, he would have seen the leader headed,’ To introduce the poll tax is a mistake, to bring in the council tax is a disaster’.
Interruption
I will favour the right hon. Gentleman by quoting one thought that was expressed in that article:’ If the single person discount remains a feature of the tax they will have to create a register — a point Michael Heseltine will eventually have to acknowledge.
The discount — the Achilles heel of the system — would be better abandoned now rather than later.’
Conservative Members would be well advised to heed those words because all the contact that I have had with local government — I am not talking about Labour councillors, but about impartial experts — has shown that those experts believe that the council tax will eventually run into such trouble that it will become unworkable.
I wish to make a simple plea about the 20 per cent.
rule.
We listened to the hon. Member for Lancashire, West (Mr. Hind)— we often must do so — and he defended the council tax with all the conviction with which he defended the poll tax just a few months ago.
To be fair, he echoed his party's line when he said that of course the 20 per cent.
rule has turned out to be a social disaster and an indefensible imposition.
As the Audit Commission said, it will cost considerably more to collect than the net yield to the Treasury.
We cannot in justice defend it and it does not make any financial sense — to use a good accountant's term, it is imprudent.
Why does not that rule go in 1992 instead of limping on until April 1993?
I find that people cannot comprehend why it will not go in the forthcoming legislation.
They do not understand the basis of the argument and they ask me to explain the Government's position.
I am not, perhaps, the best person to do that.
Perhaps I sometimes do that job inadequately, in the view of any Conservative commentator.
But on this case, I cannot give it a try — that is the point.
Having been told that the Government have conceded that the whole thing is nonsense, I cannot begin to understand why we are not getting rid of it now, taking the strain off last year's poll tax, which is becoming intolerable.
I hope that the Secretary of State can help me on that point.
It is necessary to cut through the confusion and to attack the mess of local government finance which is the legacy of the past few years of Conservative rule.
We must find a way of distributing the burden more fairly.
In Scotland, we have a valuation base which is comparatively up to date— perhaps that is an advantage which we have over the rest of the country — but we should build upon that base.
We should kill the poll tax as quickly as we can.
We must then continue with a rolling programme of reform that takes us away from the narrow concept of notional rents.
We must build in the kind of rebate system that the hon. Member for South Dorset (Mr. Bruce) tempted me to describe — a rebate system which concentrates on people's ability to pay and which is not concerned with an artificial concept of status.
If we took the Labour way, it would be fairer, and I can quickly give some reasons.
The broader property base which we would introduce would mean a fairer distribution of the burden.
As I understand it — of course, I am open to correction — the discount system which Conservative Members have praised to the sky will be entirely financed within the system, so others who are not getting the 25 per cent .
discount will pay more than they would otherwise do.
The savings resulting from the administrative efficiency of the new system will largely be dissipated by the effects of the problems to which I referred.
My experience is that a change would bring a sense of relief.
The people in my part of the world, and I believe in the United Kingdom as a whole, are weary of the bitterness and frustration that the poll tax has brought.
They fear that they are now looking at a successor tax which is designed simply to allow the Government to muddle through to the next election.
They want a fair system which is practicable and workable — an acceptable base for genuine local democracy and the delivery of services that are the mark of a civilised society.
That is what the Labour party intends to bring in after the next election.
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
Charm was never the strong suit of the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar)— indeed, I think that he is wearing his only suit.
What a dismal, doleful, baleful lament of a speech we had from him.
Labour knows, and the long faces around the hon. Gentleman confirm, that the council tax is a winner and that we have found in three months the solution that has eluded Labour for three years.
We have worked our way directly to a fair, simple and durable solution while Labour has wandered around the highways and byways throwing up and discarding enough nutty ideas to revive the Monty Python show.
We are indebted to the Opposition for tabling the amendment to the Loyal Address which has enabled this subject to be debated and which enables us to prove that we have the best solution for local government funding.
It is not often that the Opposition play to the Government's strengths, but, as my hon. Friend the Member for Batley and Spen (Mrs. Peacock) said, the council tax is a simple and fair tax, and she was right to welcome its rebate scheme and its transitional relief.
My hon. Friend the Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns) identified the efficiency of administration that the council tax will bring.
My hon. Friend the Member for Berkshire, East (Mr. MacKay) welcomed the discounts for students and others.
My hon. Friend the Member for Lancashire, West (Mr. Hind) welcomed the banding and the single bills for households.
My hon. Friends the Members for Spelthorne (Mr. Wilshire) and for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo), among others, welcomed the capping provisions to protect residents of profligate councils.
The hon. Member for Eastbourne (Mr. Bellotti) raised, in a passing aside, the question of local income tax.
I was most impressed by the effective way in which my hon. Friend the Member for Chelmsford destroyed the hon. Gentleman's case during a short intervention.
The hon. Gentleman was wrong to say that we had failed to consult on our proposals for the council tax.
We invited hon. Members from all Opposition parties to consult and debate with us the best form of taxation to replace the community charge.
Indeed, Liberal Democrat Members took part in those discussions, as did SNP Members.
Only the Opposition, who proclaim in their paper’ Fair Rates’their willingness to discuss their proposals, failed to take part when the invitation to consult was issued.
The hon. Member for Garscadden complained that the provisions for Scotland and for England were included in the same Bill.
Just a few years ago he complained about the exact opposite — that the provisions for the community charge in Scotland were in a separate Bill from those for England and Wales.
I note his comments about the representation of Scottish Labour Members on the Standing Committee, but that is a matter not for me, but for the Committee of Selection, which I am sure will hear his words.
Mr. Nellist rose
Mr. Lang
I give way to the hon. Gentleman, who is an endangered species on the Opposition Benches as he is one of the few who still speak their mind.
Mr. Nellist
As the provisions for Scotland and for England and Wales are contained in the same Bill, can the right hon. Gentleman explain why the schedules relating to imprisonment as an enforcement penalty still apply to England and Wales, whereas the Debtors (Scotland) Act 1987 abolished that penalty for Scotland?
In England and Wales, people may still be imprisoned if they do not pay their council tax.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman has identified differences between Scotland and England which will persist in the new Bill.
That underlines the fact that the one Bill will have the capacity to cater for both Scotland and England.
One of the advantages of the Scottish arrangement is that it does not create martyrs, and the hon. Gentleman should know all about that.
The hon. Member for Garscadden raised the issue of discounts and exemptions.
It is at the core of our proposals that single-person households should pay less than households comprising two or more adults.
It was the failure of domestic rates to take any account of the number of people living in a property which, above all, led to the system being rejected by the public as an acceptable means of raising local government revenue.
In our consultation paper, and now in the Bill, we have recognised further that there will be certain circumstances in which it would be inappropriate for members of a household to add to that household's bill.
Those are the cases which, for convenience, we have termed’ status discounts’.
The Bill therefore provides that students, student nurses, apprentices, youth trainees and other categories, who are currently only partially exempt from the community charge, will not, if they are resident in a dwelling, add to the council tax liability of that dwelling.
Mr. Graham
Will the Secretary of State say now why he will not give a 100 per cent.
rebate to those people who genuinely cannot pay the poll tax?
Why not rescue them from the hell hole created for them by the Government?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman knows that those on income support were given increased income support to enable them to pay their 20 per cent.
liability for the community charge.
Labour Members, locally and nationally, have led those people astray, so that they are now facing financial difficulties and are unable to pay.
Mr. Dewar
Would it be a convenient moment for the right hon. Gentleman to answer one of the questions that I asked?
Will he explain why, given that the theory has been abandoned, and given that the poll tax is ultimately to go, the 20 per cent.
rule cannot be abolished in the council tax Bill with effect from April 1992?
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman can get rid of the 20 per cent.
rule quickly by helping us to abolish the community charge and then the package will disappear altogether.
The Opposition call their proposal’ Fair Rates’, a contradiction in terms if ever there was one.
One might as well speak of even-handed socialism.
But just as they have done throughout the past three years, we find the Opposition spokesmen contradicting each other.
The hon. Member for Derby, South (Mrs. Beckett) now says that there is no question but that Labour will replace the council tax with fair rates.
But the hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett) says that Labour will amend the council tax.
The hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould), the man responsible, as on so many other details, is really not very sure.
Even by Labour standards the pantomime season has come early this year.
But unfair rates is what is on the table, along with the tattered remnants of more than 60 other proposals that went before.
What a retrograde disaster it represents.
After all these years, has the Labour party not learnt that people pay their taxes in sorrow, but they paid their rates in anger?
How does the Labour party's policy stand up to examination by comparison with the council tax?
Fundamental to the stability of a system of taxation is the level at which people are asked to pay, and the switch from local to central taxation achieved by my right hon. Friend the Chancellor in his Budget was widely welcomed because it recognised that the tax burden had become too high for any system to sustain, and that is why he took steps to reduce it.
That has been welcomed everywhere except on the Opposition Benches.
Not for Opposition Members the 14 per cent.
contribution from local residents that we have achieved — the figure in Scotland is even lower — but, on the contrary, a commitment to raise it to 20 per cent.
The general secretary of the Scottish Trades Union Congress even proposed an increase of up to 50 per cent.
But what does that mean for the local residents?
Surely not cuts in income tax by a Labour Government.
One has only to mouth that thought to recognise its absurdity.
What it means is higher bills for local taxpayers.
That is what the Labour party means when it says it wants councils to raise more of the money that they spend.
In the past 12 years, despite the protestations of the hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde (Mr. Graham), the funding of Scottish local authorities by Government has risen in real terms by 10 per cent.
but spending has risen by no less than 26 per cent.
That is the reality of Labour in action in local government.
Labour's policy means giving spendthrift councils the green light to send tax bills soaring even further with devastating results for millions of people.
The Labour party claims that its new fair rates policy is easy to administer.
’ Fair Rates’says that Labour wants to cut unnecessary bureaucracy from local government finance, an admirable objective, but it seems that the Labour party cannot help itself.
It could not even make up its mind.
Faced with four alternative approaches to valuation — whether it should be based on capital values, rental values, maintenance costs or rebuilding costs — its choice was not to go for one of them, or even a mixture of two of them, but to go for all four of them.
Mr. John Home Robertson (East Lothian)
On the subject of making up his mind or the minds of parties in Scotland, can the Secretary of State say whether the Conservative candidate in Kincardine and Deeside supports that aspect of Conservative party policy?
Mr. Lang
My friend the candidate, soon to be my hon. Friend the Member for Kincardine and Deeside, supports me and my hon. Friends on that policy as on so many other policies.
But what the Opposition call a modernised valuation system has more components than a car manufactured in the constituency of the hon. Member for Dagenham, and on top of that we are promised a revaluation every year.
That policy is to simplicity what the Leader of the Opposition is to brevity.
It would not have the confidence of the people, so it would never work.
When we come to banding we find that the Labour party is incapable of making up its mind.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State asked today whether it supported banding but received no answer.
We referred to its’ Fair Rates’document where it argues for it but carefully puts in the word’perhaps’.
The hon. Member for Garscadden says that banding protects the rich and the hon. Member for Dagenham says that the Government are clobbering the rich, and still we do not know.
The Labour party claims that its policies would be fairer, but the council tax brings fairness to single people with discounts.
They are not the rich bachelors or the yuppies that the Labour party fears; two thirds of single people entitled to discounts will be over 60, single pensioners, widows and widowers, and many more are single parents.
Where is the justice for them in a rates policy?
If businesses think that they would escape, protected by a fair and stable business rate, they had better think again.
Labour says that it will reverse every step that the Government have taken to protect businesses, and would leave them to the mercy of Labour's own local councils.
Once again, city centre premises would be boarded up, as business after business moved out of centres, driven away by runaway rates bills.
Mr. Bellotti
The Secretary of State said that those people who were to receive discounts would be separately marked on the lists.
Will he explain to the House the difference between a register and a list?
Mr. Lang
There is all the difference in the world between a register and a list.
A register is a statutory designated body that is a basis for designating liability, and a list is a source of administrative efficiency for the use of the local authority.
If the hon. Gentleman serves on the Committee that is to consider the Bill, he will be able to reassure himself as to the way that works.
Another refinement and contrast between the council tax and Labour's rates policy is the control, or lack of it, that Labour would exercise over excessive spending levels.
According to Labour's policy document, it would abolish capping.
Today, the hon. Member for Dagenham confirmed that, and the hon. Member for Eastbourne joined in on behalf of the Liberal Democrats.
They were too modest, because it was a Labour Government who invented capping — back in the 1970s, when Labour said that the party was over.
In effect, the party had not even started.
It was Labour Ministers who told local authorities that there was to be’ severe restraint in expenditure in the national interest.’
We all know that without capping there would be an explosion in local authority spending and spiralling local tax bills.
What do we find in Labour's new’ Fair Rates’policy?
Where is the smack of firm government?
Labour would throw away all controls, and, according to the hon. Member for Dagenham, would do all it could to encourage councils’ to behave sensibly.’
The only people who would be encouraged by that would be councillors in areas such as Lambeth, Liverpool, and Lothian.
For them, the party would be on again.
It would be spend, spend, spend.
For the rest of us, that can clearly be seen as a policy of catastrophe.
My hon. Friend the Member for Spelthorne suggested that regional variations in house prices should be taken into account in regional banding.
That overlooks the protection that is built in to the dampened banding system.
I suggest to those who talk of regional banding that they look at the protection that the banding system will offer to people living in London and the south-east.
Do we really want a system in which a couple —
Mr. Dewar
Will the Secretary of State explain exactly what is a’ dampened banding system’?
Mr. Lang
Precisely the system that the hon. Gentleman, if I recall his words, said was restricting and constraining.
It narrows the differential, so that those in the top band are not forced to pay more than three times those in the bottom band.
I regard that form of protection as highly desirable and an important part of our proposals.
Limiting the range of bills will give all the protection that London and the south-east needs.
Bills there will be reasonable if local authorities spend sensibly.
That is critical.
It is not the Government who play havoc with people's local tax bills but the Lambeths, Liverpools, and Lothians of this world.
We have not and, I repeat, we will not allow local authorities to spend irresponsibly and profligately — and we mean what we say.
No local authority will be allowed to undermine the principles of sound and prudent public sector management to which my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer and all the other members of the Government are committed.
I repeat that we will maintain firm vigilance over local authority spending.
Where necessary, we will cap, and cap vigorously.
It is nonsense to suppose that local authorities should be let off the financial hook for flagrant mismanagement of their responsibilities.
They can and will be called to account.
It is in the interests of the ordinary citizen that that should be so.
Why should the people of Lambeth be subjected to savage bills because their local authority fails to collect rents, the community charge, and even outstanding rates arrears going back over many years?
Why should the people of Liverpool have to pay for the self-inflicted deficits of their local council, and why should the people of Lothian suffer the same dismal experience?
Let us examine the collection rates for 1990-91.
The five worst councils are Hackney, with 55 per cent.
— Labour; Lambeth, with 67 per cent.
— Labour; Liverpool, with 68 per cent.
— Labour; Islington, with 69 per cent.
— Labour; and Newham, with 71 per cent.
— Labour.
In Scotland, the worst two regions are Strathclyde, with 71 per cent.
— Labour; and Lothian, with 75 per cent.
— Labour.
Government is about responsibility, and local government is about local responsibility.
We in government have a duty to ensure that local responsibility is not abused, and we intend to carry out that duty.
One of the more unedifying spectacles that emerged from the community charge was the flaunting display of the’ can pay, won't pay’brigade.
’ Can pay, won't pay’is shorthand: written out in full, their credo was,’We have the money to make our proper contribution to the cost of essential local services, but, because we wish to indulge in political point-scoring, we will withhold that contribution — knowing full well that by doing so we will force local authorities either to increase charges for the great majority of law-abiding citizens, or to cut services.’
Put in such terms, that is a cheap and tawdry act, and the whole campaign is rightly reviled by most people.
Even the Scottish National party has been forced to acknowledge that it hitched its colours to a vote loser.
Such action becomes particularly distasteful when it is carried out by elected representatives.
In our view, it is entirely unacceptable for them to be allowed to continue to exercise any influence over the amount of local taxation that they require their electorate to pay.
Such a degree of hypocrisy cannot be tolerated; it is morally indefensible, and in defiance of the rule of law.
We are saying to those councillors,’ Won't pay, can't say’; in other words,’If you are not prepared to obey the law and pay your rightful contribution to the cost of the local services which, as locally elected representatives, you have a say in providing, it is unjustifiable for you to have any influence, through your votes, on the amount of local tax that is levied in your area.’
Today — diffidently, quietly and from sedentary positions — Opposition Members agreed with that.
Yes, whispered the hon. Member for Dagenham, they would support us.
We welcome that deathbed repentance, if it lasts through the Committee stage.
But what a pity that, when the heat was on — when the law of the land was being challenged by Labour councillors up and down the country, and by Members of Parliament — the Opposition Front Bench was found wanting, and failed to stand up to the rule of law.
When the Opposition try to throw back at us arguments about increasing accountability, I say this to them.
Yes, we believe in local accountability: we have tried to strengthen it, first through funding mechanisms and now through contemplating single-tier authorities.
But where is the accountability in a policy that abrogates responsibility, or in a Government who do the same?
Where is the accountability in a Government who take all controls off local authorities, and let spending rip; who switch a larger burden of tax-raising to profligate authorities and abandon the interests of oppressed residents?
Where is the accountability in a policy that fails to take account of the number of people living in a house, and leaves businesses without a vote and at the mercy of local authorities?
When asked to hold themselves accountable to their residents, local authorities chose instead to clobber them with a 30 per cent.
increase in this year's burden and inadequate efforts to collect until it was far too late.
There is no sense of accountability in a council such as Edinburgh, which sought last year to tax residents at £584 per head.
The fact is that Labour wants to keep the poll tax so that it can attack us with it.
Labour wants to hide behind it, to disguise the incompetence and extravagance of Labour authorities and their lack of an alternative.
If I am wrong, Labour can prove it by helping the Local Government Finance Bill on to the statute book.
That is the acid test.
How can the nation judge Labour's sincerity if Labour is determined to resist?
The truth is that Labour knows that it has no creditable system with which to replace our proposals.
Our council tax forms part of a major undertaking on which we have embarked to reform the structure, funding and function of local government throughout Britain.
It is fair; it spreads the burden evenly, providing proper discounts and proper control of local authorities.
I urge the House to throw out the amendment.
Question accordingly negatived.
It being after Ten o'clock, the debate stood adjourned.
Debate to be resumed tomorrow.
Mr. Andrew Docherty
Mr. David Hinchliffe (Wakefield)
I am grateful for the opportunity to raise the case of the late Mr. Andrew Docherty.
I have two purposes in raising his case.
The first is to draw attention to what I and others believe to be clear injustices in the way in which he was treated before his death and the second is to expose the fact that the injustices faced by Mr. Docherty affect many others in similar circumstances, and are a direct consequence of Government policy.
I do not intend to point an accusing finger at individual officials in either the Department of Employment or the Department of Social Security at local level whose actions may have a bearing on Mr. Docherty's case.
I am satisfied that in their dealings with Mr. Docherty, which I will describe, they were following to the letter the procedures required of them by present Government policy.
As the Minister knows, my criticism and concern are directed at Government policies which had a major bearing on the difficult circumstances faced by this man in the period immediately before his death.
I first met Mr. Docherty, a 32-year-old man who originates from the Hemsworth area, while canvassing in a local government by-election in my constituency during March this year.
He raised with me certain personal problems that he was facing and I asked him to come to my regular constituency surgery to discuss matters in more detail.
Mr. Docherty came to see me in April, desperately concerned because he was homeless and had insufficient money with which to feed himself.
He told me that he had recently been sacked from his job as a long-distance lorry driver for refusing to drive a defective and dangerous vehicle.
He told the police that the vehicle concerned had a virtually bald front nearside tyre and a gash in one of the rear tyres, and that its tachograph was not working.
Two days later, he was dismissed and as a consequence of his dismissal, his unemployment benefit was stopped and he received reduced rate income support of, I understand, £23.79 a week.
As he previously spent most of his time living in his cab or in bed-and-breakfast accommodation while he was working, his dismissal meant that he had nowhere to live.
His mother and stepfather, who was in poor health, had a two-bedroom house and another relative also resided there.
I subsequently established from Mr. Docherty's mother that the other factor preventing him from living at home was the fact that his presence would have had an impact on the family's eligibility for housing benefit and would have resulted in additional poll tax liability which the family simply could not meet.
To my knowledge, such considerations have had a major influence on the circumstances of many other homeless people in West Yorkshire and elsewhere.
Mr. Docherty told me that he was sleeping rough either in his car or in a small tent.
He expressed concern that he was not getting sufficient sleep to carry out work as a driver, to which he hoped to return shortly.
Following his interview, I wrote an urgent letter about his circumstances to the local housing department, although I recognised that it could be some time before he received any offers of accommodation.
My office is inundated with referrals concerning housing needs and the official figure for homelessness shows an almost 40 per cent.
increase over the past two years within Wakefield district.
The latest annual report from the Wakefield metropolitan district council housing department states that in terms of homelessness,’ the major problem we face is that 30 per cent.
of all referrals are from single people and there is simply not enough suitable housing for this client group’.
The local authority in Wakefield has a good record on housing.
Its voids are less than 1 per cent.
and the average property turnround time is within the lowest Audit Commission quartile.
Our housing problems stem directly from the fact that the Government have actively prevented replacement of the 9,500 council houses lost through the right to buy.
With the exception of the war years, last year was the first since the Labour Government of the 1920s in which no new starts were made on council dwellings in Wakefield.
The consequences of that are only too apparent in cases such as that of Andrew Docherty.
After seeing Mr. Docherty I wrote to the manager of the local unemployment benefit office for her comments on the circumstances leading to the suspension of his benefit.
She replied promptly on 26 April stating:’ When Mr. Docherty claimed benefit he wrote, got sack' on his claim form.
Our instructions state that we must suspend benefit pending further inquiries to his last employer.
We did this.
On receipt of the reply from the employer it was stated that Mr. Docherty had been dismissed for misconduct.
In these cases we are instructed to refer to the Adjudication Officer for a decision on whether the claim to benefit should be allowed or disallowed.
The claim is currently being considered by the Adjudication Officer who is awaiting a reply from the employer regarding Mr. Docherty's response to their claim that he was dismissed for misconduct.
If no reply is received from the employer by 1 May then the Adjudication Officer will make a decision.
If Mr. Docherty's claim for benefit is allowed he will receive the benefit to which he is entitled.
If it is disallowed then he will, presumably, continue to receive reduced Income Support for the period of disallowance.’
My office was subsequently informed by telephone on 10 May and by a letter dated 13 May from the deputy manager of the unemployment benefit office that Mr. Docherty's case had been allowed by the adjudication officer, and that he was therefore entitled to arrears of benefit.
I wrote back to advise them that, unfortunately, Mr. Docherty had committed suicide by inhaling exhaust fumes in his car on the Monkton industrial estate in Wakefield, in my constituency on Saturday 4 May.
I gave the office details of Mr. Docherty's next of kin — his mother in Hemsworth — and said that presumably any outstanding benefit should be paid to her.
Given the circumstances of the case, I was surprised and angered to receive a further letter dated 29 May from the deputy benefits manager stating:’ Unfortunately it is not the policy of the Department to inform next of kin of any outstanding benefits, the onus is on the individuals concerned to instigate the action.’
The Minister is aware that when I received that letter I immediately tabled a question on the matter, and had subsequent correspondence with her fellow Under-Secretary of State, who has been most helpful and concerned.
I know that he had hoped to take part in this debate but had to be elsewhere; I pay tribute to the fact that he has shown a personal interest in the case.
That is appreciated by me and also, I am sure, by Mr. Docherty's family.
The Minister may wish to refer to our correspondence when she replies to the debate.
As she knows, I was far more concerned about the circumstances leading to the suspension of benefit and the effect that that had on Mr. Docherty immediately before his death.
I could substantiate the information that Mr. Docherty gave me through contact with the West Yorkshire metropolitan police.
The divisional commander for the Wakefield area informed me in a letter dated 6 September that he could confirm that Mr. Docherty sought the advice of a PC Lingard during March 1991.
The letter continued:’ According to the officer, Mr. Docherty had been directed to use unroadworthy vehicles belonging to his employers, RT Transport.
He was advised that if he did use the vehicle he and his employers may be liable to prosecution.
The officer also reports that Mr. Docherty appeared to be aware that if he was dismissed from his employment due to refusing to drive the vehicle, he may have problems regarding his DSS benefits.
The officer agreed to confirm the conversation with the Department of Social Security if he was contacted.’
Mr. George Foulkes (Carrick, Cummock and Doon Valley)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Is it within your power to draw the Prime Minister's attention to the fact that his first responsibility is to the House of Commons, that there is a Prime Minister's Question Time every Tuesday and Thursday and that we have a Foreign Secretary and a Secretary of State for Defence who are quite able to deal with international and defence commitments overseas?
The Prime Minister should be here at Prime Minister's Question Time — or is he afraid of the Leader of the Opposition?
Mr. Speaker
That is patently not a point of order for me.
Mr. Foulkes
But it is.
Mr. Speaker
Of course the House of Commons is important, but the interests of the nation are equally important.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
It is right to say to the House and to the nation that the Prime Minister is presently with the President of the United States and the Heads of State of most European Governments and others.
They are discussing important matters which affect the future defence not only of this country but of the western world.
I think that the vast majority of the nation would expect my right hon. Friend to be there with the other leaders.
Statutory Instruments, & c .
Mr. Speaker
With permission, I will put together the Questions on the statutory instruments.
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 101(3) (Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
That the draft Building Societies Act 1986 (Modifications)(No. 2)
Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the draft Disability Living Allowance and Disability Working Allowance (Northern Ireland Consequential Amendments) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the draft Merchant Shipping (Prevention of Oil Pollution)(Amendment) Order 1991 be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the Students' Allowances (Scotland) Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 1522) be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the Bathing Waters (Classification)(Scotland) Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 1609) be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the Testing in Primary Schools (Scotland) Amendment Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 1682) be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the Child Minding and Day Care (Registration and Inspection Fees) Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 2076) be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the Immigration (Carriers' Liability Prescribed Sum) Order 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 1497) be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, & c .
That the Family Credit (General) Amendment Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 1520) be referred to a Standing Committee on Statutory Instruments, &c. — Mr. Neil Hamilton.]
Question agreed to.
The Economy
Mr. Speaker
I have selected the amendment in the name of the Leader of the Opposition and also, for a Division only, the amendment in the name of the leader of the Liberal Democrat party.
In view of the pressure of time, I shall have to limit speeches to 10 minutes between 7 o'clock and 9 o'clock.
I hope that the hon. Members who are fortunate enough to be called before will bear in mind that limit in fairness to their colleagues.
Mr. John Smith (Monklands, East)
I beg to move, at the end of the Question, to add:
But humbly regret that the Gracious Speech seeks to continue economic policies which have caused a deep and damaging recession, falling output and investment, rising unemployment and record levels of business failures and house repossessions; and call upon the Government to adopt a programme for recovery which will encourage investment and rising levels of employment by the promotion of sustained investment in the manufacturing sector, by encouraging industrial innovation through the application of science and technology and by fully exploiting the potential of the neglected regions through vigorous regional policies, and by providing new opportunities in education and training which are crucial to Britain's economic recovery and future prosperity.
Once again, in his autumn statement yesterday, the Chancellor of the Exchequer was forecasting an economic upturn.
There is, of course, nothing new in that.
Month after month, as the British economy has languished in a deep and damaging recession, the only reaction from a puzzled and beleaguered Government is the claim that it is not as bad as it seems and that good times are round the corner.
Right from the beginning, it was even denied that there was a recession at all.
At the time of last year's autumn statement, both the Prime Minister and the Chancellor of the Exchequer were deeply involved in just such an exercise.
When it could no longer be denied that there was a recession, the Chancellor retreated to his second line of defence.
He told the Treasury and Civil Service Select Committee that the recession would be’ shallow and short-lived’.
As we know, however, from the evidence contained in yesterday's autumn statement, the recession has been deeply damaging to Britain's economy.
Mr. A. J. Beith (Berwick-upon-Tweed)
There could hardly be more of a contrast between this year's debate on the Loyal Address and our debate last year.
Hon. Members may have forgotten in the interval what happened.
Last year's debate was marked by a speech by the right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe), who was in the Chamber a moment ago, rather like Banquo's ghost, but has disappeared, in rather the same way.
That speech was probably one of the most dramatic and remarkable, although it was quiet in delivery, that many of us have heard in the whole of our time in this House, because it was the undoing of a Prime Minister.
The speech pointed to the impossibility of papering together deep divisions over Europe by the use of sophisticated language.
It blew open those divisions, but did not stop the present Prime Minister saying, when he spoke as Chancellor in that debate:’ I believe that they will vote for the consistency, courage and conviction with which my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister has led this country so successfully for so long.’
Conservative Members did not wait to find out whether people would vote for that courage and conviction, but bundled out the then Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) pretty quickly once they had had the encouragement of a Liberal Democrat by-election win and the exposure of the divisions by the right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East.
In the same debate, the then Chancellor forecast the same growth that has been forecast today — a growth that did not happen.
It was the beginning of the protracted end of the Government.
The next stage in that process has been a Gracious Speech full of apologies.
The apologies may be veiled and may take the form of a reversal of previous policies, but they nevertheless constitute the admission of how wrong the Government have been.
The council tax Bill exists because the poll tax was the disaster that so many hon. Members said it would be.
That view was expressed by everyone on the Opposition Benches and a few Conservative Members, but was ignored as the Government arrogantly used the power of an artificial majority to force the poll tax through.
Similarly, the Gracious Speech is an apology for the privatisation process that has taken place, because it has led to the wholesale transfer of monopolies from the public to the private sector without serious competition, or adequate regulation to replace competition where it could not exist.
That is why the Queen's Speech contains a commitment to introduce legislation to reinforce the regulation of privatised utilities.
It concerns privatisations that have taken place in the past few years under processes and with measures of regulation which the Government said were more than adequate, dismissing all our criticisms.
The Government's admission that they must return to that issue is another apology, but return they must, as anyone who considers what is happening in British Telecom — the bills paid by the customers or the salary received by the Chairman of that company — will be quick to point out.
Another apology has been made in all the charter proposals for public services.
It is an apology for the steady decline in public services during the decade or more in which the Government have been in power.
That decline will not be arrested by charters of citizens' rights in those services, desirable though some aspects of those may be.
Yet again, it is an apology for failure.
The apology that is missing from the Queen's Speech is for the recession.
Nowhere do the Government admit that they have produced a recession which they regret, or that they have magnified the extent of that recession by past policies.
Rather, they tell us what they told us last year — that they will maintain conditions for sustained growth.
Are those the conditions that provided the recession or are they something different?
Sustained growth sounds unconvincing in the mouth of the Government because, in the past few years, Britain has grown at a rate well below trend growth and below the OECD average, managing a paltry 0.75 per cent.
in 1990 and with a projected fall of 2 per cent.
during 1991.
The Government cannot maintain conditions for sustained growth if they do not introduce such conditions.
That must include long-term investment in key areas of training, education, research and development, and transport.
Governments should concentrate on such matters.
They are no good at running industries, and probably not much good at picking winners and deciding where in the economy investment can best be directed.
They must ensure that the matters for which Governments must be relied on are properly provided.
Education and training are at the heart of that list, as is an adequate transport system.
The conditions for sustained growth outlined in the autumn statement appear to be based on the idea of a revival in consumer spending rather than an investment-led recovery.
It is hard to envisage how that will happen.
Much of the consumer spending boom of the 1980s was based on rising house prices and the enormous withdrawal of equity from housing that fuelled the inflation of that period.
That will not happen now.
House prices will not rise in the same way and consumers who have been through that experience have been hard bitten by it.
In many cases, the victims of that period cannot engage in much consumer spending now.
If they can, they are much more cautious as a result of the experience of the past few years than they have ever been.
The autumn statement contains something that I have never seen in an autumn statement before — a chart designed to show not figures showing what might happen in the economy but estimates of consumer confidence based on Gallup poll evidence.
The Treasury Select Committee will have fun discussing the precise significance of that measure, which is another attempt to talk up the economy and persuade consumers that it is all right to spend now.
People will not be kidded that easily.
They have seen what it is like to be unable to meet their mortgage repayments and be faced with redundancy and unemployment.
The Gracious Speech also refers to’ policies designed to reduce inflation further’.
I am in favour of such policies, but a little confused about the Government's current attitude.
Only recently, the Prime Minister said that the Government had inflation’ licked’.
I am sure that he is honest and believes that that is so.
He must believe, then, that 3 or 4 per cent.
inflation is a reasonable long-term rate for the United Kingdom economy.
That view is not shared by many pensioners.
Many hon. Members will have had the experience of constituents who say,’ I don't understand how inflation can be coming down when prices are still going up.’
That may be expressed in simple terms, but it is the reality.
As long as inflation exists, prices go up.
Lower inflation may please economists and be an index of an improving trend, but it is not what most people want.
They want price stability.
We need an economy that is dedicated to price stability.
The most effective proven mechanism to achieve price stability is an independent central bank dedicated to that objective.
I still wonder what happened to the paper produced by the right hon. Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson), which the former Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley, threw into her waste paper basket with what oaths and cries we shall never know.
The right hon. Member for Blaby may not like the idea of a European central bank, but he is clearly on record as saying that he believes that in this country's economy an independent central bank would be a guarantee against inflation.
Indeed, it would have done some good to have one when he was Chancellor of the Exchequer, as it would have made a significant difference to some of the measures that he took, which stoked the fires of inflation.
I am not yet convinced that the Government have the policies to counter inflation.
They are in danger of becoming complacent now that we have reached welcome lower levels of inflation, and are lulling themselves into believing that the problem has been’ licked’.
The Government make commitments in the Gracious Speech in which there is no substance.
The commitments have been abandoned before they have been voted on.
It is unusual to have an autumn statement in the middle of a debate on the Queen's Speech, but it has at least given us an opportunity to test the veracity of the promises that have been made.
One of the promises is that the Government will promote enterprise and training.
Before we have had the opportunity to vote on that policy, the autumn statement has informed us that the Government will not promote training or fill the training gap that has developed in recent years.
It says that the money which it was prepared to commit to training will not meet the pleas of the training and enterprise councils, which are struggling to deliver the training guarantees which the Government have committed them to providing, and which cannot go beyond the delivery of that guarantee to extend training opportunities in a serious or significant way.
The £470 million announced yesterday will be taken up in large part by programmes that have already been announced, such as the employment action programme, by money for job clubs and by funds for departmental redundancy payment schemes.
The money left over is unlikely even to provide for the current training budget to keep pace with inflation.
The Government say that they will promote enterprise.
Why, then, do they not do more for small business and look again at legislation on the late payment of debt?
Even the chairman of the National Westminster bank has conceded that they should look at that issue.
It is a matter of deep concern to many small businesses — it is killing some of the most enterprising small firms — that they are not able to obtain proper payment of debt, often from larger and better-funded institutions than themselves.
Another commitment in the Gracious Speech to which, I suspect, there is little substance is the commitment to introduce legislation to reinforce the regulation of privatised utilities.
We shall look with interest to see what that legislation will be.
We would support any moves to increase the powers of the regulators to give them stronger teeth.
That is particularly necessary in the water industry, where there is no prospect of competition.
The idea put about by Ministers at the time that there would be competition in the water industry — because people would compare one region of the country with another — is unrealistic.
That is not how competition works.
Competition works if one can buy an alternative product at a better price from somebody else.
That cannot happen in the water industry, so there must be much more effective regulation than has existed in the past.
We must look also at other areas of privatised industry.
The recent profit figures of British Telecom tell their own story.
We must examine the Office of Fair Trading's recent comments on British Gas.
We argued from this Bench that the regulatory machinery for British Gas was totally inadequate and that the basis of the privatisation was wrong.
We shall also have to look at the electricity industry, where the Government produced two large generation companies solely to try to privatise nuclear power.
They had to abandon the privatisation of nuclear power, leaving themselves with a highly monopolistic structure.
I do not believe that, deep down, the Government are committed effectively to fighting monopoly and promoting competition.
Some Conservative members may have a desire to do so, but there is no real strength of commitment to the promotion of competition and, for example, to the toughening up of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and the greater detachment of that body from the powers of the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, who seems more interested in the argument about French nationalised industries than in the promotion of competition in our domestic economy.
There are significant and eloquent omissions from the Gracious Speech.
For example, there is not a mention of the words’ single currency’, despite the fact that it is one of the most fundamental issues facing the country today.
That is recognised by its supporters and opponents alike.
Although it is the subject of a crucial conference which is about to take place, the Government do not have a real policy on it.
Indeed, their policy is not to have a policy.
Their policy is to try to avoid making a decision this side of the general election.
That is precisely what the right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East described a year ago.
It is an attempt to find a form of words around which people of different views can unite.
The Labour party has had similar problems and has gone a step further.
Labour Front-Bench Members seem to have committed themselves to a single currency despite the fact that some of their Back-Bench supporters continue strongly to oppose it, although they are having difficulty with the question whether a European central bank would be independent.
Their recent policy statement will cause some heart searching on the part of the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) and some of his hon. Friends.
Mr. Skinner
My position is quite clear.
Mr. Beith
The Government are still trying to get away with having no policy.
Imagine what would happen if Britain sought to remain outside a single currency and European monetary union.
That is ultimately the issue facing Britain.
Mr. Skinner
It would be a good day's work.
Mr. Beith
I appreciate that the hon. Member for Bolsover and the right hon. Members for Bethnal Green and Stepney (Mr. Shore) and for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) believe that that would be a good day's work.
Neither of their respective leaderships agree with them.
I do not think the Prime Minister imagines that this country's future would be secure if we remained outside.
A single currency and European monetary union are coming: there is no question about that.
The issue is whether Britain is in or out.
If we are outside, we shall not enjoy the advantages of a single currency or have the investment in this country of those companies — our own and overseas firms — which want to invest in the core of Europe and enjoy full access to all that goes on in Europe.
We shall not be able to influence events that control our destiny.
Anyone who imagines that a British Chancellor of the Exchequer could, wholly independently, determine interest rates here without considering what was going on in a Europe with a single currency, with all the other member countries belonging to it, is totally wrong.
Mr. John Butcher (Coventry, South-West)
Is the hon. Gentleman aware that one estimate of the costs saved by industry by our joining EMU is 0.05 per cent., while other estimates show that there would be an unnecessarily high increase in unemployment from being locked into EMU under current trading conditions?
Has his party analysed those comparative costs?
Mr. Beith
The hon. Gentleman is talking about transaction costs.
I believe that the saving in those costs would be higher.
But that is only a small part of the single currency argument.
The most crucial aspect is whether we want our currency to be locked into a stable currency in Europe or whether we want to be able to devalue our currency in the hope of averting unemployment.
What we almost certainly would do by such a devaluation process — from which the Labour Front Bench is now trying to distance itself — is to postpone decisions which industry would have to take in the end, anyway.
The benefit to competitiveness would be short-term, while the damage to our credibility as an economy would be massive.
Mr. Denzil Davies (Llanelli)
The trouble with the right hon. Member for Guildford (Mr. Howell)— I say this without malice — is that when he says that he is being cheerful, he still sounds gloomy.
He was right to be gloomy, and he should have remained gloomy to the end.
There is probably more gloom about the British economy than about several of the economies that he mentioned in the gloomy passage at the beginning of his speech.
This debate is unusual because it comes against the background of the autumn statement, which is often debated separately, and the meeting in Maastricht at the end of the year, which may decide on economic and monetary union.
No doubt we will have another debate before then on economic and monetary union.
However, while the views of my right hon. Friend the Member for Ashton-under-Lyne (Mr. Sheldon) on Europe have not always been similar to mine, I was pleased to hear him say that he could not see how it was possible for 12 Finance Ministers in ECOFIN — about which we hear a great deal these days — to control a European central bank established on the model set out in the present draft treaty prepared by the Dutch Government.
If we sign that treaty or accept its principle, that European central bank will be totally independent.
It will be more independent than the Bundesbank, because no Government will be able to control it.
If we pursue that path, we must realise that we will be transferring basic fundamental power over our economy to a supranational body of unelected, well-heeled bankers who will be able to take economic decisions that affect the livelihoods of millions of people.
We should not allow that, because that would be a contempt of democracy.
The spirit of the age, and of Europe in particular, is for more, better and wider democracy.
However, some people want to entrench canons and principles of economics into an absolute treaty.
Devaluation, monetary control and inflation are important issues, but some people believe that they are absolute rights which should be enshrined in a treaty.
I hope that we will debate those matters again.
Over the past six or 12 months, public discussion about the British economy has been more sterile than usual.
The only questions that seem to have excited the commentators are: is the recession over?
When will it end?
Why is it not over?
So far as I can see, unless there are fundamental changes in the British economy, the recession ain't going to be over for a considerable time because the economy is in such a state.
I disagree with the right hon. Member for Guildford.
He does not like to talk about manufacturing.
All right, let us talk about the production of goods that people buy in shops and the production of machine tools that industry wants to buy.
Unless we can raise our production of goods, unless we can become more efficient and unless our manufacturing sector can become larger, there will be fundamental defects in the British economy and we will never get out of the recession.
Mr. David Howell
I am sure that that is a very good definition.
However, the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) asserted that we were at the bottom of the league.
The CBI report on manufacturing, even in its narrow understated way, shows that we are not at the bottom.
Some countries are above us and some below.
In terms of manufacturing value added, we are doing reasonably well.
It is not the miserable story that the right hon. Gentleman and his colleagues keep recounting.
Mr. Davies
The problem is that our manufacturing sector is shrinking.
Perhaps certain parts of it are more efficient than they were 10 or 15 years ago, but the sector is shrinking.
It now accounts for only 20 to 25 per cent.
of the total gross domestic product of Britain.
If we are to come out of the recession without increasing inflation, we need to sell more goods abroad and at home in competition with imports, but we will not be able to do that.
One has only to look at the economic forecasts.
The forecast for next year is for a £9.5 billion balance of payments deficit.
That is described in the Treasury's paper as a modest increase.
It is an increase from about £6 billion to about £9 billion.
On my mathematics, that is a 50 per cent.
increase, against a background of, probably, rising unemployment, growth not exceeding 2 per cent., and, if not a recession, certainly no expansion in the economy.
Our problem is that, however efficient it might be, our manufacturing sector is just too small to enable us to rely upon it.
Its expansion could take us out of the recession without further inflation and increasing unemployment.
Sadly, whether we like it or not, Britain is now a service economy.
Large sections of Britain, especially in the south of England, have opted out of the production of goods.
In many parts of the south of England, only about 7 or 8 per cent.
of the total employed population are employed in production — in making goods that can be sold and bought.
Our service sector is now so large that it is an obstacle.
It is concentrated in one part of the country, and it is an obstacle to economic growth and to our coming out of the recession without increasing inflation.
The service sector does not help the balance of payments.
Only about 20 per cent.
of what is produced in the service sector can be traded internationally.
Everything else is consumed within the national economy.
If the economy were boosted, most of the extra revenue and income would go into the service sector, money would be spent on our imports, and the balance of payments would get worse.
Also, the service sector is inflationary.
In most countries, a service sector is inflationary.
For instance, Japan's service sector is very inflationary, but Japan is able to keep down its general rate of inflation because its manufacturing sector is so large and efficient.
That is not the case in Britain.
Until last October, the RPI showed that the service sector component in terms of inflation was 9 per cent.
The ability to be more productive is more limited in the service sector.
By its nature, the service sector of any economy is bound to be an inflationary part of that economy.
Of course, unless we have a large efficient manufacturing sector, inflation will always be higher than it otherwise should be.
During the debate on the exchange rate mechanism, we were told that entry of the ERM would exert discipline and that inflation would come down as a result.
That will happen in respect of manufacturing industry, but entry into the ERM has very little effect upon the service sector.
The service sector is not affected by the ERM, because the services are not internationally competitive.
A large service sector and a small manufacturing sector inhibit growth in the economy.
Ironically, we have a problem with unemployment in the service sector in the south of England.
One reason for that is that most of the thousands of people who travel on those wretched trains to come to London to work are either unskilled or semi-skilled, to use the terms of the manufacturing industry.
They work in shops, offices, building societies and banks.
They sit in front of little screens and press little buttons, but no skill is involved.
It is no condemnation of those people, but that is semi-skilled or unskilled work.
When there is a contraction in the economy, when the money supply has to be cut, there are no other jobs for them, because they have no skills.
When the people who buy and sell shares in the City lose their jobs, they have nowhere to go, either, because they have no skills.
Indeed, in many parts of the south of England, there are no other jobs to go to because the manufacturing sector — the productive sector — has been almost wiped out.
Another irony is that the service sector needs inflation.
The Government seem to think,’ If we can keep inflation down, everything will be fine and we will be electorally popular.’
Not at all.
There will be inflation, an increase in the money supply and, especially, house price inflation.
I was going to ask the Chancellor whether his views about defeating inflation apply to house price inflation.
I am not sure whether they do.
Of course, with house prices stagnant or falling, there are not many votes for the Government — certainly not in the south of England.
The service sector — the financial sector which produces nothing — needs inflation.
It needs an increase in the money supply and high house prices to fuel conveyancers, estate agents, building societies and lending institutions.
The Government wanted to create a property-owning democracy, and they did so, but that property-owning democracy needs inflation to maintain itself.
If we are to move to an era of low or nil inflation and to the European way of doing things, whereby house prices will not increase, I do not know what will happen to the economy of the south of England or to unemployment.
Perhaps the Government have not considered those matters.
The size of the service sector is an impediment to economic growth because it depends upon inflation to a considerable extent.
Another way of getting out of the recession is by increasing public expenditure.
The Chancellor did his best in the autumn statement.
His statement implies that we are not yet out of the recession, so let us borrow some more, increase the PSBR, and do the Keynesian thing which, a few years ago, we did not think we should do, and perhaps that will get us out of the recession by the time of the election.
That will not work.
Interest rates will go up.
The PSBR is also back.
The PSBR was supposed to disappear — that terrible thing that Labour Governments had.
Under the sound money party, it is back with a vengeance — £20 billion next year.
If we take privatisation receipts out of the fiddle which is contained in the heart of the forecast, the figure will be £20 billion or £25 billion.
Of course interest rates will go up.
I do not believe that the PSBR can be financed.
The Government are hoping that the election will have come and gone and that interest rates will go up to try to finance that PSBR.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Bethnal Green and Stepney (Mr. Shore) said that, if the PSBR exceeds 3.5 per cent.
or whatever, the ghost of Jacques Delors will descend upon Great George street.
He will be there all the time.
When the IMF people came to us, they stayed in Brown's hotel for about two months and then they went.
They filled in their forms and off they went.
But Jacques Delors's ghost will be here all the time.
He will not move.
He will watch the PSBR every year.
The right hon. Member for Worthing (Mr. Higgins) seemed to think that somehow — I take issue with him, despite his great knowledge — it is because of a common currency that we need controls over public sector borrowing.
If we transfer monetary authority and control of our interest rates to a European central bank and still retain 12 national Governments, there must be control over the amount of money that those 12 national Governments borrow, because that borrowing will affect the interest rates which the central bank will lay down.
Mr. Kenneth Warren (Hastings and Rye)
It is an honour to follow the right hon. Member for Bethnal Green and Stepney (Mr. Shore).
I may not agree with many parts of his speech, but it was in the finest traditions of the House.
The Conservative party is lucky that he is not displaying his intellect on Labour's Front Bench.
The Labour party needs him badly, even if we do not agree with him.
I hope to be able to deal with some of his comments because, as Chairman of the Select Committee on Trade and Industry, I share his grave concern about the future of manufacturing and trade in this country.
My business interests are declared, but, contrary to some popular media suppositions, I am not connected with the Lonrho organisation.
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
I join the hon. Member for Copeland (Dr. Cunningham) in paying tribute to my right hon. Friend the Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker) and my hon. Friend the Member for Thanet, South (Mr. Aitken), who proposed and seconded the Loyal Address.
I also join him in paying tribute to Alick Buchanan-Smith who was a personal friend of mine, as he was of so many, and who was an outstanding parliamentarian and Minister, and to the courage of George Buckley.
We were all sorry to hear of the death of Richard Holt, who made a big mark in this House and put Langbaurgh on the map.
I reject absolutely any charges of racism on the part of anyone in the Tory party in the Langbaurgh campaign.
We have been drawing attention to the defects of the Labour party campaign, and I shall give just one example.
The Labour candidate, quite fairly and reasonably, bought shares in British Telecom.
The Leader of the Opposition defended his freedom to do so.
The point that we were making in drawing attention to it was that, if the Labour party had been in power, he would not have had the freedom to buy shares in BT.
That is a perfectly fair point to make.
I begin, as I did last time, with brief but important references to one of the matters that comes within my sphere of responsibility — parliamentary reform.
The Government are committed to sustaining the momentum of parliamentary reform.
We place the emphasis on practical reforms that deliver real improvements in the management of the House, conditions for Members and working practices.
This Session will see the new House management committees introduced, and, following the report by Sir Robin Ibbs, in operation for the first time.
We are now at phase one of the new parliamentary buildings — the first stage of a long-overdue improvement in accommodation facilities for Members.
Much more needs to be done, but I shall always endeavour to turn a sympathetic ear to changes that will enable us to serve our constituents more effectively.
The pace of reforms to working practices is also hotting up.
The Government's emphasis is on practical measures, on changes that will work to improve the hours that we sit and the effectiveness of parliamentary procedure.
I expect to be able to report to the House soon the results of the review of the first year of the new European Standing Committees after the Select Committee on Procedure has reported.
However, it is already clear that they are a real success, with enhanced scrutiny, better debate and, perhaps most noticeable, a reduction in the number of late-night debates on the Floor of the House.
We have had seven in 1991, compared with 27 in 1990 and 37 in 1989.
The Transport and Works Bill will be a major step forward in the reform of antiquated, obscure private Bill procedures and should reduce by about half the number of private Bills that come before the House, while improving procedures in the area that deal with them.
The Select Committee on the Hours of Sitting, chaired by my right hon. Friend the Member for Westmorland and Lonsdale (Mr. Jopling), is carrying forward its work with vigour and enthusiasm.
I have a great deal to say.
I gave evidence to that Committee this week, and we all await conclusions with interest.
I still believe that reforms in working practices and hours of sitting are essential to improve our ability to serve our constituents and our effectiveness as a legislature.
I promise the House a full opportunity to debate the report from the Committee.
I also promise that the Government will look seriously at all proposals for sensible reform.
Mr. Rhodri Morgan (Cardiff, West) rose
Mr. MacGregor
Like the hon. Member for Copeland, I have reduced my time considerably, so I will not give way.
I wish at the outset to concentrate on three astonishing features of the debate, the first being the speech of the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith).
The right hon. Member for Lagan Valley (Mr. Molyneaux) and my right hon. Friend the Member for Guildford (Mr. Howell) got it absolutely right.
The right hon. Member for Lagan Valley said that he was not clear whether the right hon. and learned Gentleman had finished or was still giving way, and my right hon. Friend referred to what looked like only the first half of his speech.
It was clear that the right hon. and learned Gentleman had astonishingly little to say, and nothing at all to say about Labour policies.
Indeed, he failed totally to answer the two questions that were asked of him, and I know why.
He does not want to be probed on questions of public expenditure relating to the Labour party and its tax proposals.
That has been a big feature of today's debate, so I want to take the matter a bit further.
Mr. Morgan rose
Mr. MacGregor
No, I will not give way.
I will deal with VAT.
It was not necessary to spell it out, because the existing public expenditure plans are based on existing tax rates, with the allowances and excise duties indexed in the normal way.
That is spelled out clearly.
Interruption
Mr. Morgan rose
Mr. MacGregor
I am not giving way.
I understand why the right hon. and learned Gentleman could not wait to resume his seat — in case he was asked again about expenditure.
So let us try again.
We know that the Labour party is committed to an increase in child benefit and pensions, covered by its eight new or increased taxes, a point that has featured in the debate.
We have heard throughout the past year from one Labour Member after another about how their areas of spending have a high priority.
The Leader of the Opposition said:’ Top place will go to the health services.’
The hon. Member for Copeland promises:’ Education is our first priority.’
We had none of those commitments from the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East, although he said that education and training would be key priorities.
In one policy document, the Labour party says:’ A hugely increased programme encouraging energy conservation and efficiency is given priority.’
In another, Labour says:’ First priority will be substantial extra investment in London on extra buses, tubes and trains.’
In yet another, Labour says:’ Returning water to the public sector is a priority.’
That would not be cheap.
For the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould), thousands of millions of extra pounds spent on housing would be an immediate solution to the homeless problem.
He has also said that the Labour party was already committed to’ the rapid development of regional development agencies.’
The hon. Member for Cynon Valley (Mrs. Clywd) said’ Reaching the United Nation's aid target is a top priority.’
I have left out the biggest spender of the lot, the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher), who, every time he gets to his feet in the House, commits the Labour party to further increased spending on the social services.
Mr. Jeff Rooker (Birmingham, Perry Barr)
Nothing of the kind.
Mr. MacGregor
It is all very well for the hon. Gentleman to say that.
He should read what his hon. Friend has said.
The Leader of the Opposition said the other day, talking about education:’ We will continue with the scale of commitment at least at the level of 1979.
That means, year on year, sustaining the commitment instead of letting it be eroded.’
We know that that would cost an extra £2.6 billion.
The right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East immediately tried to suppress that, and that is indicative of the battle that is going on in the Labour party — It was said by the Leader of the Opposition himself.
Interruption
Mr. Morgan rose
Mr. MacGregor
I will not give way.
That is why we have costed the Labour party programme in the document which I have with me.
It amounts to an extra £35 billion.
They are all spending pledges given by Labour Members.
They are all listed, and not one of them has been denied.
Nor can the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East claim that it would come from growth, because growth is already assumed in our plans.
He knows that it would be a real-terms increase on top of inflation.
That is why, on the costing basis, we are right to say that it represents another 10p in the pound on basic income tax.
I want to hear from the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East, because the Opposition must now come clean.
Interruption
Which is it — massive increases in normal basic income tax, or does the Labour party intend to reject all the spending plans with which it has conned the electorate by saying that it will engage in them?
It is a massive con trick — Or will Labour go back to very large Government borrowing, on the scale that occurred in one year under the last Labour Government, of 9.5 per cent.
of GDP and a PSBR of £55 billion?
Interruption
Yesterday, we heard another commitment from the Labour party.
We heard that it does not intend to cap any local authority.
That was a clear commitment.
So, in addition to the high increases in taxation that the Labour party would impose if it was ever given a chance, the community charge payer, or the council tax payer, would be ripped apart by high-spending Labour authorities, because there would be no capping.
The Labour party has failed to answer those questions.
Clearly their measures would be hugely inflationary.
Another astonishing feature of the debate was pointed out by my hon. Friend the Member for Stamford and Spalding (Mr. Davies).
None of the speeches of Opposition Front-Bench spokesmen has mentioned the importance of achieving, as we have done, and sustaining, as we are determined to do, a low rate of inflation.
I am not surprised.
Labour's record in office and its current policies would be hugely inflationary.
On Europe, the Leader of the Opposition gave a long answer during the Queen's Speech debate on 31 October.
It was not as long as his previous answer on economic and monetary union, but it was close.
In that answer, he said absolutely nothing until my right hon. Friend the Chancellor pinned him down and asked what positive extra policies the Labour party would commit itself to.
He said:’ When I say that the Government are not positive, that is because they have sought no undertakings on regional policy, growth policy or employment policy.’
By talking about those three areas, the right hon. Gentleman clearly underlines the fact that the Labour party has nothing to say about economic and monetary union.
Surprisingly, the Labour party document on Europe says:’ The completion of the single market contains the potential for great opportunities.’
However, in November 1986, the Leader of the Opposition said that the single market would be’ a political failure of such magnitude that it may well endanger the future development and cohesion of the Community.’
That shows his understanding of European matters.
He was wrong then, he is wrong now, and he will be wrong in the future.
The only clearly distinctive point that the Opposition have made about convergence is:’ Labour's supply-side policies are the policies necessary for real convergence.’
It was the Labour party's supply-side policies, including its industrial relations policies — all of which we had to reverse — which did such damage in the 1970s.
Our supply-side policies achieved the growth of the 1980s.
On employment, the Labour party would sign up for a massive extension of Community competence and majority voting in the name of the social charter.
Those ill thought out policies would add massively to the burden on employers and reduce profitability and employment.
On growth, the Labour party ignores the evidence of independent forecasters that, on top of the substantial growth rates that we have achieved in the 1980s, our growth rate will be just as good as the G7 average and faster than Germany's in the second half of next year.
That is not just our forecast; it is the IMF's forecast.
The third element of European policy that the Leader of the Opposition accused us of ignoring was regional policy.
As one of my hon. Friends pointed out today, it is typical that, when finally pushed into a corner and forced to be specific, the Leader of the Opposition picked for unqualified Labour party support the one area of European Community policy that would cost this country.
An increase in regional aid would benefit other countries far more than us and would drive up our net contribution to the budget.
In other words, we would be paying for it.
That is why, although the Labour party is changing its stance on Europe and is still deeply divided, it still has nothing constructive to say about the future of economic and monetary union.
The right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East talked about our record.
He used some statistics about what has been happening to jobs and businesses recently.
I remind the House and the country that, over our 12 years of office, every day 800 more households have become home owners, nearly 100 extra new businesses have been established — they are all net increases — and nearly 200 new jobs have been created.
Our policies will extend that fine record throughout the 1990s.
The shadow Chancellor criticised the investment performance of British industry.
Again, he was wrong.
Despite the recession, which my right hon. Friend the Chancellor made clear is coming to an end, our national wealth is 23 per cent.
up on 1979, and business investment is up 27 per cent.
As my right hon. Friend the Chancellor said, there was a massive increase in business investment in the three years up to 1989.
Currently, business investment accounts for a higher proportion of GDP than at any time in the 1970s and early 1980s.
Business investment remains high, and the latest CBI survey reported a sharp improvement in manufacturers' investment intentions.
United Kingdom manufacturing output is 25 per cent.
higher than it was 10 years ago.
United Kingdom manufactured exports have been increasing faster than world trade.
After decades of decline, the United Kingdom's share of manufactured exports of developed nations has increased from 7.5 per cent.
to almost 9 per cent.
in the past five years.
Those are the facts about the state of manufacturing industry, and industrial disputes are at the lowest for half a century.
To answer the shadow Chancellor, this summer, the director general of the CBI said:’ Virtually everything associated with our manufacturing base is better than it was in the era of Government interference, lost orders, strikes and roaring inflation.’
No prizes for guessing when that was.
It was when the industrial policies of the Labour party were being pursued, to our damage, in the 1970s.
Government spending of more than £2.6 billion in 1992-93 on enterprise and vocational education is two and a half times more in real terms than in 1978-79.
Companies are spending record sums of some £20 billion on training per year, and the CBI survey shows an increase in the year ahead, with more than 80 per cent.
of manufacturers expecting to spend as much or more on training in the next 12 months.
That is what the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East means by cuts.
Almost 1 million people will be helped back to work in the coming year by employment and training programmes.
We need to take no lectures from Labour Members.
I remind them that we are spending two and a half times as much on training and enterprise as they did.
When they left office, they were training 6,000 young people.
This year, we shall train more than 250,000.
If the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East were concerned about employment and training, he would be prepared to condemn the TUC boycott of the employment action, youth training and TEC programmes.
He has been asked before: will he now do so?
It is no wonder that the right hon. and learned Member for Monklands, East does not want to hear the facts about Government spending on science and technology.
The autumn statement shows that spending on science and technology in 1992-93 will be almost £6 billion.
That is substantial investment in science and technology.
I shall take no lessons from the right hon. and learned Gentleman on education, because the Government's record has been extremely good.
In the past 12 years, there has been a record increase in spending per pupil — up 42 per cent.
in schools.
His comparisons with the city technology colleges did not bear water.
More young people are staying on after 16 than ever before.
More and more are getting good grades in GCSE and A-levels.
Above all, our record on the numbers entering higher education, universities and polytechnics is outstandingly good — one out of eight of the relevant age group in 1979, one out of four now.
Not only are numbers increasing every year but most students qualify in universities and polytechnics, whereas in other countries that have similar numbers entering higher education there is a much higher wastage rate.
The results of our education reforms and improvements in the 1980s are being shown by the way in which our young people are leaving higher education with qualifications.
One in four is very much better than before.
The Opposition cannot add up.
They make promises that they have no way of sustaining.
They have no commitment to the control of inflation.
Their approach to European matters involves policies that are not at all in the interests of British industry.
The Government's record is outstandingly good.
The Queen's Speech will carry it forward and, when the time comes, I am certain that the electorate will choose our policies.
Question put, That the amendment be made:
The House divided: Ayes 193, Noes 323.
Points of Order
Mrs. Wise
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
You will be aware of the special report from the Select Committee on Health which I believe will be automatically referred to the Privileges Committee but which, at the moment, is the property of this House.
I am sure that the House, with its customary generosity, would be prepared to listen to a personal statement from the hon. Member for Esher (Mr. Taylor) if he cares to explain how he came to keep quiet about his possession at a crucial time of a confidential Committee paper.
I would like —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let me make the position absolutely clear to the House.
Following a decision of the House in 1986, whenever a Select Committee makes a special report to the effect that its work has been substantially interfered with as a result of premature disclosure of its proceedings, that report automatically stands referred, as the hon. Member for Preston (Mrs. Wise) has said, to the Privileges Committee.
The special report from the Select Committee on Health is now therefore in the hands of the Privileges Committee, and it cannot be discussed.
Mrs. Wise
Further to the point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
No points of order arise from that.
That is a ruling.
Mrs. Wise
With respect, Mr. Speaker, and on a point of order.
I was not asking for a debate and I want to make that quite clear.
I am asking —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We cannot discuss it, because the matter is in the hands of the Privileges Committee.
We must not prejudice in any way what that Committee is going to do about this matter.
Depending on the Privileges Committee's decision, there may well be a debate, and that will be the moment to discuss it.
Thames Flood Alleviation Scheme
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Tim Smith (Beaconsfield) rose
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We are now on the Adjournment debate.
I cannot take any points of order on the previous matter.
I have ruled upon it.
Mr. Smith
I am grateful to have the opportunity to raise the subject of the Maidenhead, Windsor and Eton flood alleviation scheme.
I am particularly pleased to see present my hon. Friend the Member for Windsor and Maidenhead (Sir A. Glyn), who obviously has a major interest in this matter.
The National Rivers Authority has applied for planning permission to build a seven-mile flood alleviation channel to the east of the River Thames.
The channel would start just upstream from Bolter's Lock at Maidenhead.
It would run through Taplow, crossing the main A4 road between Slough and Maidenhead and the main London to Bristol railway line, through Dorney, crossing the M4 motorway to Eaton Wick.
It would run to the north of Eton Wick and the south of Chalvey along the south side of the M4, crossing the main A355 Slough to Windsor road.
It would rejoin the River Thames some distance downstream from Eton and Windsor.
According to the planning application, which is dated January 1991, the estimated overall cost of the scheme is £51 million.
I understand that that estimate has now risen to £58 million.
I am sure that you will agree, Mr. Speaker, that, by any yardstick, that is a very large amount of taxpayers' money.
The NRA should be required to justify that expenditure in a public forum where its arguments can be fully considered and its proponents cross examined.
I have great faith in locally-elected planning committees, but I do not believe that they are in a position to scrutinise the NRA's proposals in the comprehensive way that that proposed expenditure clearly warrants.
That is why I am today requesting the Secretary of State to call in that planning application so that there can be a full public inquiry at which all the issues can be properly considered.
According to the NRA, the net present value of the damage that would be caused by flooding, and hence the benefit accruing, has been calculated using a number of variables, and generally lies between £41 million and £69 million.
A comparison of the benefit with the cost produces an average benefit-cost ratio of 1.2: 1.
That figure is recognised as satisfactory by the NRA and is within the limits required by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
The ratio is produced by comparing the implementation costs of £45 million with the average benefit figure of £55 million.
A public inquiry would be able to examine those figures in detail.
Questions could be asked about the failure of the NRA to include in its cost estimate the sum of £6 million of taxpayers' money that it has already spent promoting the scheme, or it could consider any of the indirect costs arising from the construction of the channel.
Neither cost element has been included in the estimate.
The NRA simply says that it is not the practice in the industry to assign to any scheme the costs of economic disruption during its construction.
There will, however, be substantial costs of that kind.
All the affected roads which are already very busy at peak times are to be diverted.
It is inconceivable that those diversions will not cause traffic delays.
Then there are the environmental costs.
According to the director of planning services of South Buckinghamshire district council, the environmental impact could be severe.
He has expressed extreme concern about the nuisance which would be caused during the construction of the bridges to take the channel under the A4, the M4 and the London to Bristol railway line.
By the NRA's own admission, noise levels around those areas would be in excess of 75 dB(A).
Although the NRA has not included indirect costs whether economic or environmental, it has included indirect benefits in its estimate of the total benefits of the scheme.
That apparent lack of symmetry could also be challenged at a public inquiry.
Questions could be asked about the so-called Maidenhead factor, which relates to the apparently higher level of affluence of the population that is likely to be affected by a flood than elsewhere in the United Kingdom.
The Maidenhead factor was exemplified by claims that were made after the flood in February 1990.
At one property, an indoor swimming pool collapsed because its floor level was below the flood level.
The cost was £12,000.
At another property, the ground floor swimming pool and a jacuzzi were badly damaged.
The cost was £14,000.
The residential damages have been multipled by a suitable factor in recognition of the so-called Maidenhead factor.
The question for a public inquiry is whether that is a sensible way of calculating the direct benefit.
Indirect benefit includes matters such as the loss of trading profit incurred by businesses in the area and the effects of traffic disruption and diversions.
The cost of traffic delays on the M4 and major roads has been estimated at £1.3 million.
More controversially, the NRA claims that the channel will be an environmental asset and will have value in terms of recreation and amenity.
A value of £3 million has been used for that purpose.
The latest figures presented to the regional flood defence committee on 26 July show a total scheme cost of £58 million and a total net present value of benefits of £56 million, producing a benefit-cost ratio of 0.97.
However, the first benefits from the scheme are not attainable for sometime after the start of expenditure.
When this phasing is taken into consideration, the benefit-cost ratio falls further to 0.85.
The National Rivers Authority is, in theory, accountable to Parliament through the Secretary of State for the Environment, but the financial accountability for a scheme such as this falls elsewhere.
First, there is the Ministry of Agriculture.
If the scheme is to qualify for grant aid, the benefit-cost assessment must show that the present value of all the benefits derived from the scheme exceed the present value of all the costs.
This procedure is fine as far as it goes, but it precludes the consideration of alternative schemes which may be more cost-effective and cannot, by definition, provide a public forum in which the cost and benefit figures can be challenged.
Secondly, there is the regional flood defence committee, whose members will be expected to come up with the lion's share of the cash.
That committee has already rubber-stamped the scheme but, to be fair, it is in no position to challenge it.
Buckinghamshire county council has to stump up 3.8 per cent.
of the cash, but jointly appoints a representative to the committee with Bedfordshire and Essex.
So Buckinghamshire is in no position to challenge the mighty NRA.
Who is?
That is the question.
I know that the National Audit Office has been carrying out a value-for-money study of NRA coast protection schemes.
In that connection, it has employed independent consultants to assess the NRA's work, but there has been no independent assessment of this scheme.
The NAO did, however, look at it at my request.
It concluded:’ The scheme will probably be marginal on the basis of tangible costs and benefits’and’Intangible benefits will be critical to the justification of the scheme.’
The NAO also said:’ The assessment of intangibles is an inexact science and we are sure the Ministry will look closely at these aspects.’
Mr. Peter Bowles was navigation inspector in charge of No. 3 district — Marlow bridge to Staines bridge — from March 1960 to November 1984.
He says that there is an alternative to the flood relief scheme, and that is to improve the drainage capacity of the Thames itself by removing obstructions and restrictions to flow which tend to increase river levels, especially when the watercourse is bank full and the weirs fully open.
Then there is a channel called the’ York stream’, which runs through Maidenhead.
I have some pictures of it here, which I want to show to my hon. Friend.
He will see that there is no flow.
The York stream is either stagnant or it has dried up completely.
Why?
If the obstructions and restrictions to flow had been removed and if the York stream had been flowing, I doubt whether any part of Maidenhead would have been flooded in 1990.
Yet it is on that flood and the damage to swimming pools and jacuzzis caused by it that the NRA relies so heavily to demonstrate the existence of a so-called Maidenhead factor.
All these — and many more — are questions for a public inquiry.
The planning sub-committee of Buckinghamshire county council, which meets on Monday to consider the scheme, must inevitably confine itself to the planning application before it, and the planning issues arising from it.
I should, however, make it clear that the matters to which I have referred are more than sufficient on their own to justify outright rejection.
That is also the view of the Dorney and Taplow parish councils and the South Buckinghamshire district council.
The district council objects to the proposed channel because it involves development in the green belt and within a local landscape area.
It would affect the character of the green belt.
Its construction would be likely to result in excessive noise emissions, vibrations and generation of dust to the detriment of amenity, and the winning and working of minerals in this location would be contrary to the Buckinghamshire replacement minerals local plan.
The Dorney and Taplow parish councils naturally share those concerns.
In addition, the Dorney council agrees with me that the fundamental question is whether the channel is needed.
The council observes that the estimated total cost, including preliminary expenses, has now risen to in excess of £63 million, and that that does not include the costs of disruption during the construction period.
The council has also noted the lack of water in the York stream in Maidenhead and questions the adequacy of flow in the flood relief channel.
On the NRA's own admission, there will be an inadequate flow in one in three years, and no flow at all in one in 10.
The Taplow council has expressed particular concern about the disruption of the A4 Slough to Maidenhead road that construction of the channel will cause.
It points out that, while the planning application lays great emphasis on the disruptive effects of a flood, it attaches less importance to the disruptive effects of building a new river.
The parishes of Taplow, Dorney and Burnham, which will also be affected, form a green lung between the suburban sprawl of Slough and Maidenhead.
This is fragile landscape to which the threat is one of continuous urban development between the two towns.
On Monday the scheme will be considered by the planning sub-committee of Buckinghamshire county council.
A panel appointed to consider the scheme will recommend to that committee that the planning application should be referred to the Secretary of State.
According to the panel, a key piece of information sought is the need for the project.
The panel is minded to agree that the application is for a project of immense scale and impact and should be determined only after a far-reaching public inquiry.
The panel could support such a project contrary to the county structure plan and the south Buckinghamshire local plan only if satisfied on three counts: first, that the need is abundantly clear; secondly, that the way of tackling the flooding problem as set out in the application is undoubtedly the best of all possible alternatives; and thirdly, that a wide variety of outstanding issues are each resolved in the best possible way.
These would include access, environmental disturbance and noise, water levels and assured flow for water sweetening and so on.
In summary, this is a massive infrastructure project on which it is proposed to spend £58 million of taxpayers' money.
While there is clearly a potential flooding problem which needs to be addressed, the case for this relief channel has not been made.
It is doubtful whether the claimed benefits justify the substantial costs.
These are matters which can be determined only by a public inquiry and I hope, therefore, that the Secretary of State will agree to call the planning application in.
Sir Alan Glyn (Windsor and Maidenhead)
I agree that all the facts which my hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith) has said are contained in the 1991 paper are true.
However, he and I differ in a fundamental way.
In 1947, 1954, 1959, 1974 and 1990 — particularly in 1947 — the flooding in Maidenhead was extensive.
We had to have waders and tractors to go through the streets.
The damage done was considerable.
We must look for a scheme that will ensure that that does not happen again.
I agree with my hon. Friend that, if the Berkshire and Buckinghamshire county councils disagreed, the Minister could call the application in if he wished.
If the councils did not disagree, he could call it in anyway.
I agree with my hon. Friend to this extent — a public inquiry may be necessary.
It is a large sum of money and it is especially favourable to Maidenhead and not to his constituents, I will give him that.
My hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield has already enlarged upon the facts in the fine document which was produced in 1991 and I can only assume that they are correct.
The crux of the matter is, how do we prevent a 1947 or 1990 flood occurring again?
It is a question of which side of the river you take — the Maidenhead or the Buckinghamshire side.
On the Maidenhead side, it would mean considerable expense and demolition of properties — it would be much more expensive.
Again I agree with my hon. Friend, if that money is to be expended it might be a good thing if there were a public inquiry.
I humbly suggest that the two counties should get together.
If they cannot agree, there will have to be a public inquiry.
If they agree and the Minister thinks that matters should be re-examined, I think that he has the power — correct me if I am wrong — to call them in.
I suggest that we proceed along those lines and look for the most economic way to alleviate my constituents' problems while not doing too much damage to my hon. Friend's constituents.
Unfortunately, Maidenhead has suffered greater damage than Buckinghamshire, and obviously we take the matter much more seriously.
If we can proceed along a sensible line and if Buckinghamshire and Berkshire county councils lock their heads together and produce a worthwhile scheme, that is fine.
If they cannot agree it will have to go to a public inquiry.
In any case it is always up to the Minister.
As my hon. Friend says, the scheme is expensive.
It costs £59 million — it is not tuppence — but I think that it is worthwhile.
If the Minister does not consider it worth while, all he has to do is call it in and either have a public inquiry or decide for himself whether it is a good scheme.
A public inquiry might be more beneficial because, as my hon. Friend said, it would bring out the details of the scheme.
We have suffered grave and terrible damage.
I can remember going about in waders, with tractors trying to get houses dry.
I can remember the damage to furniture and carpets, which was immense in 1974.
In 1947, it was even worse.
It will happen again, whatever anybody says.
It happens roughly every ten years.
Are we entitled to spend such a sum of money or not?
The right thing is for the two counties to get together and to make a joint decision and, if necessary, to have a public inquiry or to leave it to the Minister to call the scheme in if he is not satisfied.
I realise that there are several faults in it, which affect my hon. Friend, but on balance it is a good scheme and should be adopted.
Mr. Nigel Spearing (Newham, South)
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith) for allowing me to intervene briefly in this debate.
I am a vice-president of the River Thames Society, which is the administrative society for the whole river.
Such a scheme would not only affect the constituents of the hon. Member for Beaconsfield and the hon. Member for Windsor and Maidenhead (Sir A. Glyn).
If the planning application is persisted with, I support the plea for calling it in, for the reasons given by the hon. Member for Beaconsfield.
I also declare another non-commercial interest as one of the members of the Thames Traditional Boat Society, which is concerned with the maintenance, preservation and use of the traditional hand-propelled craft of the Thames — dinghies, skiffs, canoes and punts.
Both hon. Gentlemen explained the balance of public consideration to be taken into account.
Two other matters weigh in the direction of a public inquiry.
The scheme is one for an imaginatively landscaped, artificial but natural-looking, additional channel to parallel the Thames.
That brings in the matter of recreational use — angling or, perhaps, boating.
The present scheme excludes boats propelled by oar, pole and paddle.
There is the matter of future planning and the effect on structural plans for the area.
Most important, although hitherto unmentioned, are the possible effects of flooding or otherwise downstream of the flood relief area.
If water is moved more quickly from one area, what are the effects downstream?
Those are wide-ranging and sometimes technical matters.
Even if the two counties agree, this should be a matter for a call-in.
Therefore, I am pleased to support this plea.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Tim Yeo)
I pay tribute to my hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith), who is always an eloquent champion of his constituents' interests.
He is also a noted expert on financial matters, and tonight he has given the House a clear explanation of complex proposals.
I have no doubt that his opinion will carry great weight.
We have also heard from my hon. Friend the Member for Windsor and Maidenhead (Sir A. Glyn), who has unparalleled knowledge of the history of the area and the occasions when floods have affected it.
I am grateful, too, for the comments of the hon. Member for Newham, South (Mr. Spearing).
The Maidenhead, Windsor and Eton areas have been subject to flooding from the River Thames for generations.
The floods of 1947 were the worst on record, when 2,000 homes were flooded.
Since then, considerable development has taken place, and a similar flood today would affect no fewer than 5,500 houses.
The scheme proposed by the National Rivers Authority is designed to prevent flooding caused by a repeat of the 1947 event.
A flood on that scale is probable once every 56 years.
If it happened again today, 5,500 properties would be affected, of which 260 are in Buckinghamshire, in the parishes of Dorney and Taplow.
There are also about 180 properties in the flood plain in Buckinghamshire, and others in Berkshire with either floor levels above the flood level or even on dry land islands that would be completely surrounded by flood water.
It is also likely that power and water supplies would be disrupted.
A repeat of the 1947 flood across a wide area on the River Thames would cause chaos to those properties and to all communications.
Roads in and out of Buckinghamshire would be flooded and telephone lines severely disrupted.
The National Rivers Authority has been preparing proposals to deal with this for six years.
The solution involves the construction of a flood relief channel seven miles in length between Taplow and Eton on the border between Buckinghamshire and Berkshire.
The NRA is paying particular attention to the environmental aspects.
It has made an environment assessment, and its proposals are designed to enhance the environmental interest of the area.
The width of the channel to be provided would normally be 30 m, but in places would exceed 100 m.
The construction of that channel will require the excavation of a very large quantity of sand and gravel.
It will take about four years to complete, and is expected to coincide closely with the widening of the M4 and M25 motorways.
It is clear that there will be considerable disruption locally during construction.
The planning applications were initially made to the three district councils directly affected.
Because of the scale of the proposals, and because they would result in the excavation of large quantities of gravel, it has been agreed that the application would be dealt with by the two county councils.
They are supported by a very detailed environmental assessment.
In preparing the scheme, the NRA consulted extensively with the local authorities and other bodies, local residents and landowners.
About 25 requests for a public inquiry have been received, and Buckinghamshire county council has received about 200 letters objecting to it.
Consultations on the scheme have been carried out by Berkshire county council.
South Buckinghamshire district council has objected on a number of grounds.
The proposals for constructing the channel have also been found to conflict with proposals being prepared for widening the M4.
Discussions are taking place among the Department of Transport, the NRA and the two county councils to reconcile the two proposals.
In the meantime, the two county councils have deferred consideration of the proposals, and the Department of Transport has lodged a formal objection to the National Rivers Authority's compulsory purchase order.
The compulsory purchase order falls to MAFF to confirm under section 151 of the Water Act 1989.
There have been 43 objections to the compulsory purchase order and although a number have been resolved, a substantial number are still outstanding.
If the NRA cannot resolve them, it will be for MAFF to hold an inquiry under section 13 of the Acquisition of Land Act 1981.
However, any final decision on holding an inquiry for the compulsory purchase order can be made only if planning consent for the scheme is given.
This is initially a matter for the two county councils.
At present, they are not in accord over whether the proposals are a departure from the development plan, and I understand that Buckinghamshire expects to refer the application to the Secretary of State.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield pointed out, the scheme is a major one, expected to cost about £60 million and to take four years to construct.
The options for it are limited by the geography of the Thames valley, where the flood risk occurs, and existing development.
Most of the problem being addressed is in Berkshire, but a large part of the solution is proposed in Buckinghamshire, in my hon. Friend's constituency.
There would undoubtedly be major disruption for people living in that area during the construction period.
My hon. Friend is right to raise those issues and to seek to be satisfied that the proposals are properly examined and fully justified.
It is open to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment to call in these applications for his own decision.
He has not yet come to a conclusion on that.
My hon. Friend will appreciate that, as the proposals could come before my right hon. Friend either through the exercise of that power or, should the county councils refuse the application the National Rivers Authority, it would not be appropriate to comment on the merits of the proposals.
In coming to a conclusion on whether these proposals should be called in for his determination, my right hon. Friend will consider the proposals in terms of whether they raise issues of national or regional significance or give rise to substantial controversy.
He will need to decide whether the planning issues raised by the proposals are of a sufficient scale to warrant the cost and delays which a public inquiry would entail.
The county councils are concerned with whether the proposals are consistent with their structure plans, which provide the framework for development in the area.
They must also take into account any other material considerations.
A very large amount of gravel would be excavated to form the channel.
They need to be assured that the options for flood relief have been fully explored and that this is the most effective means and produces the minimum amount of damage to the environment.
It is not the task of the county councils to assess the cost benefit of the scheme in detail.
The National Rivers Authority is accountable to my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food in respect of its flood relief functions.
The costs and benefits of the scheme are being looked at closely by the regional flood defence committee and the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
My hon. Friend will know that the National Audit Office has in its programme for the current financial year an examination of flood and coast protection programmes.
There can be no more thorough scrutiny than that of the National Audit Office, save of course that of the Public Accounts Committee, of which my hon. Friend is a distinguished member.
I understand that 15 per cent.
of the cost of the scheme may be eligible for grant by my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
The remainder would be found by the NRA.
The cost of the flood defence activity of the Thames region of the NRA is funded by a levy on the county councils and London boroughs in the whole of that region.
The cost of flood defence in the current financial year works out at just over £5 per community charge payer in the Thames region.
Out of a total levy income of £43 million for flood defence, the levy on Buckinghamshire comes to £1.67 million — about 4 per cent.
of the total.
Buckinghamshire would be expected to contribute a similar proportion to the relevant costs of the scheme.
The benefits would accrue to everyone who would suffer the effects of flooding.
There are those whose properties would be directly affected, others who might be isolated by the floods, and others who could be affected indirectly through disruption to transport and communications.
Most of the benefits would go to people and properties in Berkshire.
The local residents of Buckinghamshire would suffer disruption from construction for about four years.
I appreciate the point of view of those who argue that the development in Berkshire, which has exacerbated the scale of the problem, should not have been allowed.
It is open to the local planning authorities to include in their development plans such policies as they consider appropriate.
I understand that both county structure plans and the local plans for Slough borough council, the royal borough of Windsor and Maidenhead and South Bucks district all contain policies that restrict or presume against development in areas liable to flooding.
These are very large proposals, addressing a difficult problem.
The issues that they raise are complex, and procedurally they affect the responsibilities of a large number of bodies, both in Government and outside it.
I assure my hon. Friend that we are looking carefully at how best to take this forward.
It could be that the best way forward, taking into account all the interests, including those of the residents, would be a joint public inquiry.
We need to be satisfied that the cost and delays that would be involved in such a course are justified both to resolve this matter and to provide the assurance that all the issues have been fully examined.
We expect to come to a conclusion on that in the next few weeks.
In the interim, as an earnest of the importance that we attach to this matter, my Department has today issued article 14 directions to prevent the county councils from granting permission for the applications for the time being.
I will let my hon. Friend know the decision when we have made it.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at one minute to Eleven o'clock.
House of Commons Friday 8 November 1991
The House met at half-past Nine o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
BILL PRESENTED
Competition and Service (Utilities)
Mr. Secretary Lilley, supported by the Prime Minister, Mr. Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Secretary Heseltine, Mr. Secretary Wakeham, Mr. Secretary Brooke, Mr. Secretary Hunt, Mr. Secretary Lang, Mr. John Redwood and Mr. Edward Leigh, presented a Bill to make provision with respect to standards of performance and service to customers in relation to the telecommunications, gas supply, electricity supply, water supply and sewerage service industries; to make provision with respect to complaints by, and disputes with, customers in those industries; to make provision with respect to the powers of the regulators of those industries and with respect to related matters; to make provision with respect to the payment of deposits by customers of certain telecommunications operators; to make further provision for facilitating effective competition in certain of those industries; to make provision with respect to mergers of water or sewerage undertakers; to make provision with respect to compliance orders against public gas suppliers; and for connected purposes: And the same was read the First time; and ordered to be read a Second time on Monday next and to be printed.
[Bill 8.]
The Environment
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
The Minister for the Environment and Countryside (Mr. David Trippier)
I am very pleased to have another opportunity to set ou to the House the Government's environmental record.
Our last major debate on the environment took place on 12 July.
That we are again debating environmental policy reflects the priority that we as a Government, this House and the nation as a whole attach to this most central of issues.
I very much hope that, unlike last time, the Opposition will have the grace to allow the Government to respond to the points made in the debate.
This debate is centred on the White Paper anniversary report, published on the exact anniversary day of the original White Paper launch — 25 September.
The anniversary report is acknowledged as a tremendous achievement.
It is as unique in its way as was the original White Paper.
The original White Paper was the first comprehensive policy statement on the environment by any British Government.
The anniversary report is the first time that a British Government have subjected their own implementation of its policies to such public scrutiny.
I hope that right hon. and hon. Members who wish to participate in this debate will have now had an opportunity to read the anniversary report in detail.
Those who have read it must agree that it is an exercise in open government.
Every one of the original White Paper commitments is accounted for, every action taken to date is described, and the plans for every aspect of concern are set out.
Every commitment is attributed to a specific department.
The targets that we have set ourselves are clearly summarised; so, too, is the substantial additional expenditure that we have given to the environment over the past year.
In all, of the 350 commitments in the original White Paper, more than 200 have already been fulfilled in this first year alone and significant progress has been made with the remainder.
Well over 400 individual environmental measures have been taken over the past 12 months to deliver our commitments, ranging from telephone helplines for those concerned about air quality to major international agreements on new standards for cars and water.
There are 400 commitments to take forward in the next year — from proposals for new standards for indoor air quality to work on the major international agreements which we hope will be signed at the earth summit in Brazil in June 1992.
Accountability and openness are not the only unique features of the report.
Over the past year, the Government have put in place unparalleled mechanisms to keep the environment at the heart of policy making.
Every Department now has a Minister charged with environmental responsibilities — no Government have ever taken such a cross-departmental approach to an issue.
We have published guidance which every Department must use in assessing the environmental impact of its policies and programmes.
Again, that is a first.
We have given advice to Departments on drawing up environmental housekeeping strategies for themselves — another first which every Department must complete by the end of 1992.
We have made public the existence of two standing committees of Ministers, one chaired by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and one by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister — again an unprecedented step.
One of the Government's White Paper commitments was to establish a dialogue with the business community on environmental issues.
The Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Trade and Industry appointed the Advisory Committee on Business and the Environment in May.
Since then the 25 business men and women on the committee have been working to an ambitious programme.
Earlier this week, they published their first report containing 35 action recommendations, principally on global warming and recycling.
Of those recommendations, about half are addressed to the Government; the other half are addressed to industry itself.
They call for the setting of tough targets for improving energy efficiency and recycling materials, as well as other specific action.
It is a measure of how seriously the Government take the committee's work that we have responded to its recommendations within a month of their being submitted to us.
Apart from those recommendations relating to fiscal measures, which are a matter for my right hon. Friend the Chancellor of the Exchequer, we have set targets for action on every one of the recommendations — and we shall report again on progress in six months.
What the members of the committee have shown is that, when it comes to the environment, Britain's business community is able to provide clear, vigorous and effective leadership.
That is a vital component of the nation's action on the environment, because only business can actually deliver environmental improvements.
When we published the original White Paper more than a year ago, the overall reaction was,’ Good ideas, let's wait to see how they are delivered.’
If I may be allowed a topical rugby metaphor, we had, so to speak lined up the ball for a conversion.
The question was, would we convert it?
My answer is an emphatic yes.
The House does not have to take my word for it, because the action taken to deliver our commitments is there for all to see in the report.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
The evidence is not there in the Bolsover area.
The Minister will know that, contrary to the Government's views about linking business with the environment — we all agree that coal can successfully be converted to coke — for some reason the Coalite works in Bolsover seems to be polluting the whole environment.
Certainly that is the suggestion now that the incinerator is to be replaced at the end of November.
We have farms with dioxin-contaminated milk which must be transferred to the west midlands, where it is not being destroyed at the proper temperature, so dioxin is being spread in the west midlands.
We now have evidence of a cluster of breast cancers in and around Bolsover — 50 per cent.
more than in other parts of north Derbyshire.
The River Doe Lea is much more polluted than all other rivers in the area.
It is high time that the Minister went to see Anglo-United and told it to get its act together and stop polluting the environment.
Mr. Trippier
I sympathise with what the hon. Gentleman has said.
I am not going to suggest to him or to the House that I am not prepared to pay such a visit.
As the hon. Gentleman knows very well, the Under-Secretary of State for the Environment, my hon. Friend the Member for Banbury (Mr. Baldry), dealt with that very point at Question Time on Wednesday.
Of course what is going on in the Bolsover area is a matter of great concern to the hon. Gentleman, as it is to me and to the whole House.
An investigation is being carried out at the moment, not only by Her Majesty's inspectorate of pollution but by the National Rivers Authority.
The most comforting assurance that I can give the hon. Gentleman, which I am sure that he will welcome, is that the results of the study will be made public.
Mr. Alan W. Williams (Carmarthen)
I am glad that HMIP is now becoming involved in Bolsover.
However, the British people must be asking where it has been all these years.
Dioxin is already in the environment.
It is in the people, it is causing breast cancer, it is in the milk of cows, and it is in the rivers at 1,000 times background levels.
Where has HMIP been all these years to allow dioxin to escape into the environment?
Mr. Trippier
The hon. Gentleman is on to a weak point.
I should remind him and the House that the Government set up Her Majesty's inspectorate of pollution, for which we got no credit whatsoever from Her Majesty's Opposition.
The hon. Gentleman heard me say on numerous occasions when the Environmental Protection Bill was being considered in Committee that it was under strength.
It is no longer under strength.
I shall make an announcement later, indicating how I hope to increase the inspectorate.
Of course, we have not done everthing in just a year, nor have we taken things forward in every aspect as much as we would have wished.
But our readiness to act is clear, and our willingness to deliver is illustrated by our early success with our half of the original commitments.
We have made many new commitments.
We are not sitting back in self-congratulation and the pace will not be slackened.
Yet no sooner is the ball winging towards the uprights than we find that the goal posts are being moved.
This year, I am being told that the test was not whether we could deliver our unprecedented number of detailed commitments, as I had thought, but whether we would do a lot more than we said we would do just a year ago.
I and my right hon. Friend would be the first to admit that the White Paper process is the beginning of a long road.
We said that it was a first step, not the last word.
But I think that everyone concerned needs to realise that this is not a process without cost, nor one that can magically happen overnight.
I believe that there is a balance to be struck between environmental enhancement and economic development.
I believe that this Government have got that balance right.
To make sure that we keep that balance, we have created new forums to discuss environmental issues with business, with local government and with the voluntary sector, because the environment needs every one of us to work together.
There are Opposition Members who take some perverse delight in running down Britain's environmental record and who are all too often to be found, both at home and abroad, adding their voices to those who accuse Britain of being the dirty man of Europe.
Being deliberately deceitful about the Government's policies has become something of a habit for the Labour party.
It is just another deceit.
However, that is not an accusation that I could level at the Leader of the Opposition, as he has not found time to say anything at all about the environment — true or false.
Mr. Terry Dicks (Hayes and Harlington)
Bearing in mind that Labour Members have made many promises without costing them, will my hon. Friend tell us whether they have made promises about the environment in which they claim to be interested?
If so, have they costed them, or is it something else that they say that they may do in future if economic growth comes their way?
Mr. Trippier
That is a good point on which I can give my hon. Friend not only a specific example, but an assurance.
Let us have the assurance first.
If the Opposition do not cost their proposals, we do.
The renationalisation of the water industry would cost £3.8 billion — and that is to say absolutely nothing of the £28 billion programme which is currently in place and which will run for the rest of the decade.
As I shall illustrate later, that cost could not be met, and I do not think that Labour would do it.
Mr. Nigel Spearing (Newham, South)
Do not actions speak louder than words?
Does the Minister recall the vandalism of the former Secretary of State for the Environment, his right hon. Friend the Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley), who, at the very time that the White Paper was issued, turned down the inspectors' recommendation for a tunnel under Oxleas wood?
Does not that presage terrible problems for the Thames corridor plans of the present Secretary of State for the Environment?
I refer to the decision in respect of roads and the environment and to the prospective legislation that will put railways into the same category, especially in relation to the channel link.
Surely that threatens the environment, and surely the Government's proposals for removing the power of the House to make the final decision on railways means that the Government are not to be trusted with the environment.
That is proved by their actions.
Mr. Trippier
I understand and have previously heard the views that the hon. Gentleman has just expressed.
As he knows, as that matter is quasi-judicial, under planning law it has been left to my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
The hon. Gentleman was wrong about the timetable.
The White Paper was launched in September 1990 when the Secretary of State for the Environment was my right hon. Friend the Member for Bath (Mr. Patten).
Mr. Jonathan Sayeed (Bristol, East)
Will my hon. Friend confirm that the green belt, which enables us all to have a degree of green and open space and fresh air, has been doubled under this Conservative Government?
Mr. Trippier
I try regularly to remind everyone of that point, and I am extremely grateful to my hon. Friend for reminding the House of it.
That is something of which the Government are enormously proud.
It featured hugely in the White Paper and was mentioned again in the anniversary document.
I remind the House that Britain is now taking the environmental lead in Europe.
I offer some key examples.
Our own system of integrated pollution control, introduced in the Environmental Protection Act 1990, is to be adopted across Europe in the coming years.
So that was a first.
We have led on proposals for environmental labelling of products, for environmental reporting by companies, for public access to information, and on directives as diverse as the nitrates directive and forthcoming tighter controls over emissions from cars and heavy diesels.
For those who still feel that we are lagging, let me say that Britain is one of only a handful of countries to have set a target for reductions in carbon dioxide.
We are now developing a programme of measures to implement this target.
The number of countries that have produced full comprehensive environmental strategies like our own can be numbered on the fingers of one hand.
In the Montreal protocol which controls ozone-depleting substances, United Nations negotiations on climate change, in biodiversity and on forestry Britain is among the leading nations.
Mr. Simon Hughes (Southwark and Bermondsey)
I have no doubt about the Minister's commitment, but I seriously doubt that of the Government.
Despite what the hon. Gentleman has said, from which I do not dissent, the fact is that only 15 minutes of the time that the Prime Minister chaired the summit of the Group of Seven countries was spent on the environment.
Not one word on the environment passed the Prime Minister's lips when he welcomed the Queen's Speech at the start of this Session.
Neither the Chancellor's speech on the Queen's Speech nor his autumn statement, which is meant to be central to Government thinking, contained one word on the environment.
The Government's commitment to the environment can have no credibility — I stress that I am talking about the Government, not the Minister — if the Prime Minister and the Chancellor do not think that the environment is important, even if lesser Ministers do.
Mr. Tom Cox (Tooting)
It is a pleasure to follow the hon. Member for Cardiff, North (Mr. Jones), because he has mentioned issues to which I intend to refer, including the burning of hospital waste.
I agree with all that he said — the same problems exist in my constituency and I am sure that many hon. Members will join me in supporting the action for which he has called.
This has been — and, I am sure, will continue to be — an interesting debate.
It is an important one, because every aspect of the environment in which we live is of interest to us as individuals and is certainly of interest to the people whom we seek to represent.
The issues involved in a healthy environment grow year by year.
I represent a constituency very near Westminster and I bring to the House many groups of youngsters from schools.
They are full of enthusiasm and questions, and the environment — our environment and the world environment — is top of the list of their questions.
That is good for the country, as, I hope, is the legislation.
I welcome the increase in European Community legislation.
I am a member of Parliament's delegation to the Council of Europe.
The Minister for the Environment and Countryside is no longer here — I make no criticism of him for that — but I listened to his opening remarks, and I know that he will speak to colleagues in Brussels.
I have never seen him at the Council of Europe and I serve on the social, health and family affairs committee, which he has never attended.
Perhaps a colleague will convey my remarks to him.
The Council of Europe and the social, health and family affairs committee comprise delegates from many countries and of various political persuasions.
If the Minister attended and attempted to make the type of speech that he made here he would be laughed at.
The Council of Europe covers a much wider area with a much greater population than that covered by the European Economic Community.
Many of the countries in central and eastern Europe now enjoy guest status in the Council.
Sadly, under the old systems in those countries, protection of the environment did not figure highly.
It is evident from the work in our committees that the environment is now of great importance to those countries.
However, it is also evident that much greater co-operation is required between western European countries, which for a long time have been concerned about the environment, and the countries of eastern and central Europe.
We need an exchange of ideas and those countries need help to improve and protect the environment.
The Minister of State did not touch on that.
What is the Government's policy about helping emerging democracies in central and eastern Europe on this crucial issue?
As my hon. Friend the Member for Dewsbury (Mrs. Taylor) said, the environment knows no frontiers.
The nuclear accident at Chernobyl affected this country even though we are hundreds of miles from the reactor.
Pollution in rivers travels long distances.
Therefore, we cannot say that the environment elsewhere does not concern us.
I am concerned about the Government's attitude to many things European, and certainly to the whole area of environmental protection.
My hon. Friend the Member for Dewsbury challenged the Minister to say where he stood on the criticism by the Environment Commissioner, Carlo Ripa di Meana.
The current edition of the European Parliament — EP News contains a major article headed’ Environment Commissioner defends action’.
The article states that the Commissioner’ came before the House to defend his action of insisting on proper respect for EC environmental impact assessment legislation.
He rejected the charge that he had acted with bias against the UK.
This he described as offensive and unjust'.
Adding that he would not allow himself to be intimidated, he pointed out’— as did my hon. Friend the Member for Dewsbury —’ that legal proceedings were pending against ten of the twelve EC countries for failure to respect EC rules on the assessment of large-scale works.’
The European Environment Commissioner is not singling out the British, even though the Minister and other senior Ministers seek to attack this honourable Commissioner.
Mr. Peter Bottomley (Eltham)
One of the proposals affected is the road through Oxleas Wood.
The major constitutional issues are whether British law complies with the directive and whether the transitional arrangements are adequate.
May I plead with the Commissioner to reply to letters?
I have not had a reply to a series of letters that I have sent, nor has the prospective Labour candidate in my constituency.
Better communication might clear up some of the problems.
Mr. Cox
I have a great deal of sympathy for the hon. Gentleman, because I am sure that all hon. Members are annoyed when they do not receive replies to letters.
If he wishes me to try to speed up replies, I shall certainly do so.
The hon. Gentleman has been a Minister and is conversant with the systems that operate here.
He has a local European Member of Parliament and I am sure that he is aware of ways by which he can speed up replies.
I can cite many examples of Government attacks on EC reports of the Government's actions.
Some time ago, there were reports about pollution on British beaches.
The Government complained about the cost and said that it was not a matter for them or that matters were not that bad.
They also complained about unfairness, but there was no willingness to look at the charges or to have proper consultation with local authorities to see how they and the Government could work together to improve the general standards of our beaches.
Lord Stanley Clinton-Davis is a former European Commissioner and for many years he was in the House.
I have read his highly critical speeches in the other place about the difficulties that he repeatedly encountered when trying to pursue European legislation and the obstruction that emanated from senior Ministers.
A current example, the social charter, gives a clear indication of the Government's continuing hostility to anything European.
The charter covers not only salaries, a minimum wage and maternity benefit but deals with many issues.
The minutes of the Council of Europe, which were published in October, refer to the fourth environmental action programme of the European Economic Community and the Council of Europe.
Under the heading’ Protecting the Environment, the Worker and the Public’, the minutes state:’The Single European Act and the Fourth Environmental Action Programme make clear that the environment is an integral part of the Community's economic, social, industrial, agricultural and other policies.
The Action Programme declares the Commissioner's intention of making maximum use of contributions made by the Foundation whose work programmes have already included issues such as hazardous wastes, contaminated land, and voluntary initiatives in the environment.’
That shows that, despite what we are told by Conservatives, the social charter is not solely about salaries and general working conditions on the shop floor but also plays a major role in the environment.
The document also states that the charter intends to broaden work on the urban environment, industry, local communities and general safety at work.
It refers to urban decline and work on rural and coastal areas.
The social charter has an enormous role to play and we should concern ourselves with that, because it is relevant to us all, wherever we live and whatever part of the country we represent.
Perhaps the Minister will tell us how much of that programme, which the EC and the Council of Europe support, is supported by the Government.
We are full members of both bodies.
When I attend meetings in Paris or Strasbourg at which such issues arise, I find it frustrating to hear the continuing opposition from Conservative Members, especially in the Council of Europe.
It would be interesting to hear just how much of the programme that I have outlined the Government support, those aspects of it that they do not, and why.
I represent an inner-city area of London.
As we all know, not only in London but in many of our big cities, there are areas of great depression — neglected areas where there are thousands of people out of work — and those areas have existed for a long time.
We have had troubles in various parts of the country in recent months, and I realise that there may be many reasons for that, but I am convinced that one of them is the depressing effect that such areas have on those who live in them.
When one asks people what they think of their area and why they do not show more interest in it, their response is likely to be,’ Why bother?
What concern is it of ours?
Who shows any interest in us?’
The environment is crucial in this respect, and that is why the Council of Europe and its social, health and family affairs committee show continuing interest and involvement in these matters.
I have expressed the view held by the whole of the committee, which represents countries with Governments of various political colours and is made up of members belonging to various political parties.
There is complete agreement on the commitment of the Council of Europe to dealing with the issue, and I repeat that it would be interesting to hear just where the Government stand.
I agree with the hon. Member for Cardiff, North that, although we must be involved in protecting the environment nationally and internationally, in the end, it is a local issue, crucial to those whom we represent.
I shall refer briefly to one of the matters touched on by the hon. Gentleman, although I shall not speak on it for as long as I had intended, because the hon. Gentleman made wide-ranging reference to it himself, I congratulate him on that.
The burning of hospital waste is certainly relevant in my area because, for years St. George's hospital, Tooting has been burning enormous quantities of such waste — often for days on end.
The soot deposits from its chimneys fall in the residential area in which it is sited, settling on washing, paintwork and parked cars and on the plants in people's gardens — all of which suffer.
I am sure that the House can imagine the feelings of someone who hangs out the washing one sunny morning only to find, on going to collect it three or four hours later, that it is full of holes caused by the soot deposits coming out of the hospital chimney.
People have brought their cars to my advice surgery to show me burnt paintwork caused by soot deposits.
No doubt the hon. Member for Cardiff, North shares a problem that I have, which is that, unfortunately, it is the most difficult thing imaginable to try to get any recompense in respect of property damaged in this way.
An elderly constituent of mine came to me and said,’ I have had my car for 12 years; it is my life.
I have always looked after it because I know that I cannot afford another one.’
The chap in question went to his car one day and found burn marks all over the bodywork.
When he came to see me, I said that I would write to the chairlady of the health authority, who replied that she was very sorry that this had happened but asked whether the gentleman could prove that the burn marks had been caused by the deposit from the hospital chimney.
Most of our constituents — and possibly we ourselves — would be likely to respond,’ Where else would it have come from?’
Perhaps the hon. Member for Cardiff, North agrees with me that, although one knows what the problem is and the damage that it is causing, it is very difficult to get anything done about it.
I wrote to the Secretary of State for the Environment and was told that it was really a matter for the chief environmental officer of the local authority, but when I took the matter up with the local environmental officer, his response — and it is to his credit that he responded — was,’ Well, it may be bad, but it is not really so bad that I must take any action.’
When one passes such messages back to one's constituents, they say,’ Who will do something to stop this nuisance, which is causing enormous problems not only to me but to the whole area?’
Sadly, in these cases, one gets nowhere.
I agree with the hon. Member for Cardiff, North that we must consider the question of responsibility and tighten up the legislation.
A nuisance is also caused by the siting of petrol stations in residential areas.
A planning application has been made for the building of a petrol station in the midst of a residential area in my constituency.
Hon. Members may say that petrol stations are to be found in residential areas everywhere in the country and I do not dispute that, but in the area in question there is no shortage of petrol stations and the local people say that they do not want another one damaging their environment and that there is no need for it.
The parents of youngsters who go to play at the two local nurseries are very worried about the effects that the petrol station will have on their children.
People are also worried about the general effect of the new station on their community.
But what happens when one tries to get it stopped?
We are told that there are procedures — and I accept the need for them — but when the matter goes to the local council's planning department, it is argued that there are strong grounds for allowing the application.
When one asks what they are, one is told,’ Oh, well, the petrol company wants to build it.’
One can only ask,’ But what about the local community, which does not want it?’
I know that the Minister may not be in a position to respond in detail to the comments made on this subject by the hon. Member for Cardiff, North and me, but I hope that he will take them on board and I ask him to write to us on these important local issues.
I hope that the remarks of those who speak in this debate — critical or otherwise — will be acted upon, because the environment is crucial to all those whom we seek to represent.
Mrs. Teresa Gorman (Billericay)
No one can possibly be against a cleaner environment and the conservation of rare and irreplaceable species such as elephants, whales and orchids.
Similarly, no one can possibly be against the concept of better quality air and drinking water.
Nevertheless, it is very important that, before we start legislating on the scale that the Opposition advocate, we make very sure that we are doing so on a sound factual basis.
I should like to point out to the House just how ignorant we are about many of the matters on which we legislate.
We legislate because we are put under great pressure by a new group of what I call eco-terrorists, who seek to press their opinions on politicians.
Many of them are ex-socialists and their green wellies have red linings.
They want more rules and regulations and more Government interference.
They put all environmental problems down to the wicked industrialists, notwithstanding the fact that much of the pollution comes from eastern Europe.
Presumably, it is the wicked socialists who are responsible for that, but we never hear them mentioned.
The motor car is now the big demon of the left because, supposedly, it pollutes our atmosphere, but the fact is that it is the most treasured possession of many people — including working people — because it allows them to get around independently.
That does not seem to enter into the reckoning, however, and the socialists want use of the motor car to be controlled.
Before we start slapping all sorts of controls and restrictions on cars, we ought to find out a little more about the effect that they are really having on the environment.
I want this morning to consider the effect of some of those issues on our planet and particularly on our atmosphere, and I begin by considering the ozone layer.
We have been told that it develops holes which allow radiation through and that causes all sorts of curious and devastating effects.
The big villain substances are the chlorofluorocarbon gases — or CFCs, for short.
Those substances are basic to many industrial processes.
People have argued that hairsprays, hamburger packaging and refrigerator gases are causing holes in the ozone layer.
However, we do not compare the effect of those things with natural elements in the environment.
Mount St. Augustine is one of the great volcanoes on earth.
In 1976 it exploded and gave out 290 billion kg of hydrochloric acid into the upper atmosphere and into the ozone layer.
That was the equivalent of 570 times the world's industrial production of CFC gases.
That must have a profound effect on the ozone layer.
Mr. Alan W. Williams
Will the hon. Lady give way?
Mrs. Gorman
I will give way later.
Observations about the ozone layer are being made in MacMurdo sound in the Antarctic which is just 15 miles upwind from another great volcano called Mount Erebus.
That volcano erupts constantly.
For the past 100 years it has ejected more than 1,000 tonnes of chlorine into the atmosphere every day.
Compared to those massive events, the quantity of CFCs produced by industrial complexes is absolutely negligible.
It is potty and ridiculous to suggest that stopping people spraying their armpits with deodorants will have an effect on issues of that scale.
People who make such assertions do so not so much on a scientific basis, but because they have another axe to grind.
They want to condemn industrial output.
I am not saying that we should allow industry to pollute, and I entirely support the Government's claim that the polluter should pay.
For example, it is possible to monitor pollution from incinerator chimneys in hospitals and in that regard I sympathise with the hon. Member for Tooting (Mr. Cox) and the problems that he has in his constituency.
There should be codes of practice and we should prosecute people who carelessly ignore the interests of their surroundings.
I am in favour of that, but that is different from setting up international agencies whose legislation and ideas may have devastating effects on industries in western countries while leaving eastern countries to carry on processes over which the rest of us have no control.
We should discover the facts before we peddle such half-baked and unscientific ideas.
The greenhouse effect is something else that is supposedly happening on our planet.
The theory is that carbon dioxide and other related gases accumulate in the atmosphere, raise the temperature, melt the icecaps and flood countries.
We are going to boil or drown: that is the basic, crude, but nevertheless simplistic theory upon which we are supposed to legislate.
Mr. Win Griffiths
I entirely agree with the hon. Gentleman about the sensitivity of rail routes through urban areas.
Does he agree that in choosing the alternative route the Secretary of State for Transport was second guessing and ignoring the possibility that an environmental assessment would conclude that the general route that he has selected was as inappropriate as the one from which the hon. Gentleman thinks his constituents would suffer?
Mr. Bowden
I understand the hon. Gentleman's point.
I hope that I can approach the issue as a fighter for my constituents' interests while at the same time recognising the broader issues.
I shall later develop that point.
The alternative route was chosen on three criteria: that it should be environmentally acceptable, operationally effective and financially viable.
The British Rail route failed on all three.
The alternative route proposed by Ove Arup, which the Secretary of State has sensibly accepted, was acknowledged in all its aspects to be environmentally acceptable.
Of course in one or two places difficulties will arise, but the route will pass through areas which will benefit environmentally.
For example, industrial waste-land which needs an uplift will benefit from a freight and passenger route passing through it.
British Rail is now a large residential landowner in Warwick gardens and will wish to offload on the market the expensively obtained properties that it has acquired.
That will have a disastrous effect upon the locality equal to that which arose from the threat of the route.
A glut of properties could cause a slump in the housing market.
It will take time and sensitive marketing to ensure that the housing market recovers progressively rather than being artificially injected with activity.
In order to ensure confidence in the Warwick gardens area, British Rail should be told to ensure that the properties are offered for sale in a positive and constructive way that will benefit the community and the quality of life in the area.
We must also consider the question of compensation.
To some extent, the environment must be planned and allowed to grow organically.
However, when planning we need to make sure that people are compensated for disruption in a way that does not put them at a disadvantage.
It is a matter of planning, management and marketing to ensure that what is good in the locality is preserved and conserved.
It is also a matter of money, but I would argue that money plays a lesser part than the necessary will and the understanding of those other factors.
The channel tunnel rail link has been at the centre of my thoughts about my own urban concerns.
It offers an opportunity to improve the environment of the United Kingdom generally, by taking traffic off the roads and by diverting some of the airline traffic which causes such congestion because the link will probably provide an equally fast alternative route to the continent.
What causes me some disquiet, however, is that British Rail's thoughts seem to be entirely devoted to the passenger opportunities that the link affords.
I agree that they are important, but I am concerned that so little is made of freight.
The current culture at British Rail seems to be — and I have heard this said by the chief executive — that freight is not time-sensitive.
The chief executive and British Rail generally reportedly say that they do not see themselves as being in the business of transporting goods that need to be moved fast.
They are looking only at aggregates and pig iron and other goods which can be trundled around the railways for many weeks and do not need to reach their destination at any particular time.
That attitude will create a knock-on problem.
If British Rail feels that the first stage of the channel tunnel rail link to Stratford and King's Cross does not offer immediate opportunities for a freight route, there is something seriously amiss in its thinking.
The implication of such a decision is that freight will continue to be carried, as at present, on existing lines, with the intensified use of those lines possibly throughout the night.
By and large, we are talking about commuter lines designed to bring people from the south-east to central London in the morning and to take them home in the evening.
There is little traffic on them during the dark hours at present, but if the lines are to be used by freight trains — some of them a mile long trundling through the night and causing heavy vibration and noise, there will be a dramatic effect on the environment and quality of life of those who live in proximity to them.
That brings me back to my earlier point about the importance of considering giving compensation in such circumstances and perhaps introducing a new code of compensation.
If one buys a house near a railway line, one expects some disturbance from it, and that is a factor which will no doubt be reflected in the price.
I would argue, however, that there is a difference between what one might consider to be reasonable use by passenger traffic during the day, and the disturbances that might arise from that, and the use of the line at night by heavy goods traffic.
That represents not merely an intensification of the use of the line but a change in its character.
To my mind, it represents a change of use so significant that compensation should be given to those who suffer injury as a result.
If we are to ensure that we preserve and protect the quality of life in the urban environment, we must recognise the need for a change in the code of compensation and the circumstances and amount in which it is given.
It should be more generously calculated than at present and should not merely be the bare minimum market value, as seems to be the case at present.
When the bare minimum market value is offered to compensate for disturbance or injury, disputes inevitably ensue, with professional advisers saying,’ This is too little’and the proposer saying,’It is about right’with the inevitable delay that results.
By increasing compensation in those circumstances to a more generous level of 10 or 15 per cent.
— and in some countries it is 25 per cent.
above market value — we would not only right an injustice or injury, but speed up the process.
People would believe that it was unnecessary to dispute the matter and that they had received an additional benefit for the injury that had been forced upon them.
In the long run, that would be a cheaper and more effective way of dealing with the issue.
As a lawyer and a chartered surveyor, I recognise that the professional opportunities in the area of compensation would be limited if people did not dispute the compensation that they were offered.
Elsewhere in Europe, freight is being taken off the roads.
There are refrigerated freight vans and trucks travelling on the railways throughout Europe.
Why are there no plans in this country to ensure that we have a fully compatible freight arrangement that could take re-frigerated herrings from Aberdeen to Milan on refrigerated rail trucks instead of having traffic trundling along our motorways and on channel ferries?
We have an opportunity to improve the environment of our towns and cities by ensuring that freight is taken off our roads.
The decision on the channel tunnel rail link was environmentally sound.
It has provided an opportunity to develop many aspects.
I beg that those who are responsible for making it work will now take full advantage of the opportunities.
I trust that the issue will be considered not simply as a transport or environmental matter, but as a trade and industry matter as well.
Mr. Rhodri Morgan (Cardiff, West)
I am grateful for the opportunity to make a few points about the environment.
Initially, I want to consider environmental impact assessments from a slightly different perspective from that which has been referred to so far.
There have been disputes between hon. Members over whether Carlo Ripa di Meana, the European Community Environment Commissioner, was within his rights or was interfering in every nook and cranny of British daily life — as our Foreign Secretary put it in rather colourful language — when he commanded that work on construction projects in this country should cease because environmental impact assessments had not been prepared although they should have been.
I do not want to enter that dispute.
I want to consider whether the way in which environmental impact assessments are drawn up at the moment is satisfactory.
Are they objective?
If they are not, can we introduce improvements to the current environmental impact statement — EIS — procedure to make them objective?
It is timely to consider that, because since the beginning of this Session it has become compulsory for us to comply with European EIS legislation.
We have modernised the procedures of this place to make it compulsory for all private and hybrid Bills to incorporate environmental impact assessment statements.
The Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill, which affects my constituency and is returning to the House for the third time, now has an EIS which has been published and is freely available to the hon. Members in the Vote Office.
It is a large document which is one inch thick.
There is also the compulsory brief, non-technical summary which, although it tends to fall apart when one tries to read it, due to unsatisfactory stapling, is nevertheless an easy, quick 10-minute read.
The wider question is not whether the summary falls apart because the staples are not strong enough, but whether it falls apart because it is not sufficiently objective simply because it has been commissioned, paid for and its contents finally determined by the promoter of the original Bill, now working in co-operation with the Government.
That aspect is the essentially corrupt relationship between promoters of private legislation or Government Departments, when using the hybrid Bill procedure, and the consultants who are asked to draw up environmental impact assessments.
For a further improvement in our environmental legislation, in future, when consultants are hired — there are some very good environmental consultants — to produce environmental impact assessments to comply with European directives and with our new private and hybrid Bill procedures, the last word on exactly what is contained within the environmental impact assessment should not be left exclusively with the Bill's promoters.
Some further strengthening of the environmental obligation that we and the European Commission's directives are now laying on the promoters of private Bills should be introduced by not giving a promoter the last word.
I hope that other hon. Members on green Benches — we can see mostly green Benches today — will join me in trying to find out how we can avoid the consultant-promoter corrupt relationship.
Perhaps’ corrupt’is too strong, because we do not know who has actually taken out key words or added sections at the last minute because they are worried about the public impact of certain phrases.
We do not know what the consultants originally said when they first produced a draft for the promoter, and what they were then asked to add afterwards to make it a little more toothsome for the promoters, to make it a safer version of the environmental impact assessment.
When compulsory environmental impact statements are produced for Parliament for a private or hybrid Bill, the promoter obviously has to pay for the environmental impact assessment.
There can be no question about that.
It is not an obligation on the taxpayer, because the promoter wants to build a harbour, bridge or whatever it might be that requires parliamentary procedures.
The trouble is that the promoter can then bowdlerise or doctor the final version that appears before the House, and it is presented as though it is objective, but is it really objective?
Once a Bill or a proposed measure requiring parliamentary approval enters the lists and it is realised that an environmental impact assessment must be produced, and once it is decided to commission an environmental impact assessment it becomes public property.
My idea — I admit that I came up with it only this morning — is that the entire transaction involving the definition of the terms of reference for the study for the consultants should then become public property and not an enclosed relationship with the promoters.
Reference should then be made to the Environment Select Committee, and its staff, jointly with the promoters of the Bill, could settle the terms of reference and observe the final version of the EIS.
The report that hon. Members receive and that the public pick up outside would have been looked at from the point of view of the client, the promoter and the public interest.
The Environment Committee and its staff would ensure that the promoters could not interfere with the consultants' conclusions and that the consultants, during the preparation of the report, had consulted local authorities and environmental agencies such as HMIP or the NRA, or other agencies.
I am concerned about the contents of, lack of objectivity of and lack of thoroughness in the study that was carried out by the Environmental Advisory Unit of Liverpool University Ltd. for the Government and the promoters of the Bill, Cardiff Bay development corporation, when there was still a private Bill, in preparation for the Government's hybrid Bill, which was laid before the House on Tuesday.
I should like to give some examples of my concern about the report's thoroughness and/or objectivity.
I say’ or’simply because I am not aware — and at the moment there is no way of finding out — whether the consultants who wished to involve the NRA or Cardiff city council's environmental health department were told not to do so by the Cardiff Bay development corporation or whether, off their own bat, they simply chose not to do so, in which case, if there is a design fault, it lies with them.
At the moment, we have no way of knowing and, although the report is now public property, its contents during preparation and its final contents are determined entirely by those paying the bill — and they are the promoters who have every interest in avoiding drawing attention to anything that could be used against them when the Bill is debated publicly or scrutinised in the House on Second Reading, Report or in the Special Select Committee or the Standing Committee.
At those stages, people from outside the House who oppose the legislation as petitioners or hon. Members who might also be opposed to it can seek to improve the Bill and can point out the problems that the proposal might cause.
Although the promoters are faced with an environmental impact statement compulsion, at the moment there is no way of ensuring that the work is carried out objectively.
One of the issues covered in the non-technical summary and then, in detail, in the full-length version of the statement, is flooding.
The statement tries to come to a view on whether the proposed barrage would be good, bad or indifferent in terms of the flooding problem in the low-lying areas of Cardiff.
The problem is that flood control is the responsibility of the National Rivers Authority.
The statement says that the barrage will improve the position as regards flooding, but we are not sure how that statement was arrived at.
Was the NRA consulted?
It has the statutory obligation.
Are the promoters giving their view after consulting the NRA, or are they giving the NRA's view?
I spoke to the NRA this morning and asked what consultations it had with the Environmental Advisory Unit of Liverpool University Ltd. before the unit produced its chapter of the full-length study on the Cardiff bay barrage proposal.
The message that I received from the NRA was:’ The answer to your question is no.
Liverpool University has not approached us regarding flood defence assessment.’
Why not?
Was that the consultants' own decision or were they prevented from consulting the NRA by the Cardiff Bay development corporation which originally proposed the Bill in close co-operation with the Welsh Office?
Can we rely on the document?
Can people who read it believe it to be objective and thorough when those who prepared it did not consult the agency that has the statutory responsibility for preparing flood prevention plans and for carrying out works to prevent flooding?
After the expenditure of a large sum — about £150 million or so — on improving the environment and creating an impounded lake behind the barrage, one of the attractions is supposed to be the facility for water sports.
Paragraph 4.15 of the non-technical summary rightly states:’ there will be restrictions on the type of watersports that can be carried out in the Bay.
Whereas angling, pleasure cruising, canoe touring, rowing and bankside activities will be possible, water sports which inevitably lead to immersion, such as bathing, diving, rafting and waterskiing, will not be permitted.
There is some dispute as to whether dinghy sailing and windsurfing are classified as immersion sports and whether or not they will be permitted.
Regular monitoring will be taking place to see whether the water is of suitable quality for immersion sports.’
I ask myself whether that is a fair summary which is based on the views of the body that will have the job of monitoring water sports and the safety of the water in which the water sports will take place.
That body is the environmental health department of Cardiff city council.
FINANCE AND SERVICES COMMITTEE
Ordered, That Standing Order No. 125A (Finance and Services Committee), agreed to on 18th July in the last Session of Parliament, be amended, in paragraph (2), by leaving out the words eight Members' and inserting the words nine Members'.
Channel Tunnel Rail Link
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Brian Sedgemore (Hackney, South and Shoreditch)
This debate follows naturally on from the one that we have just had.
Today, in east London, the public are cheering the Environment Commissioner of the European Community, Carlo Ripa di Meana, for issuing a directive that no work should be undertaken on the channel tunnel rail link because the Government have not carried out an environmental assessment.
Carlo believes, and rightly so, that the British Government should have carried out an environmental study before the route was chosen, not afterwards.
He has exposed our Prime Minister as the leader of a Government of environmental law breakers whose leading environmental criminals are to be found at the Department of Transport and the Department of the Environment.
The first misunderstanding that I should like to clear up is the assertion that the Government have chosen King's Cross as the terminal for the channel tunnel link and that Stratford will be merely a station along the route.
That is far from the truth.
Effectively, the Government have said that there will be two channel tunnel terminals — one at King's Cross for passengers using public transport, and the other at Stratford for those using cars.
It is clear that Stratford will be a motorail terminal and a park-and-ride terminal.
The likelihood must be that half the trains will terminate at Stratford.
British Rail has produced four excellent internal documents.
I shall refer to each.
They conclude that the easterly route does not give value for money and cannot be justified on any conceivable cost benefit analysis, or on any opportunity cost analysis, or on any orthodox accounting analysis.
The environmental report prepared for British Rail — I have a copy here — shows that the Ove Arup route chosen will cross and ruin more land than any other scheme in areas of special significance for agriculture, a designation identifying the most valued high grade agricultural land in Kent.
In particular, millions of pounds of market garden produce will be destroyed by dust during the construction period.
For a time it will be as though the locusts had invaded parts of the heart of the garden of England.
The route chosen will cross a number of highly-prized marsh areas of high ecological value, some of which have been designated by the Nature Conservancy Council as sites of special scientific interest.
It will destroy sites with a wide variety of habitats.
The gault clay woodlands in mid-Kent are of particular concern.
The chosen route will pass through more high-risk contaminated land sites than any other scheme and it will pass through more areas currently in business or industrial use, including the Ford works at Dagenham.
Amazingly, no one has yet worked out what the effect of that will be on Ford's operation.
Newham council says that its residents are in favour of the scheme, but will they still support it when they learn that 1,000 homes in Stratford will be at risk from settlement when the railway line goes into a shallow tunnel because of the geological conditions in the area?
Although it should be possible to repair the external and internal cracks in these 1,000 homes, they are bound to be blighted once they have been identified.
Newham council has kept strangely silent about that.
We are told by the Government that we must be prepared to tolerate environmental devastation and a senseless waste of more than £1,000 million worth of extra public money because the Ove Arup route is necessary if prosperity is to come from the regeneration of east London and the east Thames corridor.
Alas, British Rail's reports demolish this central plank of the Government's argument.
The British Railways Board concludes:’ Regeneration of the East Thames Corridor may be better promoted by other measures, eg provision of domestic rail services, improved road access, site preparation at public cost.’
The report of Planning, Industrial and Economic Development Advisers, which was prepared for British Rail, goes into more detail on that critical point:’ Stratford is not strongly placed to attract high quality uses, such as corporate headquarters or European Community institutions.
The draw of central London is still very considerable, and it is doubtful that the pull of an international rail terminal itself is sufficient to significantly alter patterns of business location The Rail Link would not be sufficient to achieve this change in the image of and prospects for the Lea Valley implied by the Gateways scenario: it may not even be necessary.
It is certainly less important than central government commitment to investing in road and related infra-structure and dealing with the problems of land contamination and improving the environment.’
If the Government disagree with the conclusions of the PIEDA analysis, will they tell us what reports they have carried out to suggest that British Rail and PIEDA are wrong, or are they preparing to spend £4.5 billion, not on the basis of sensible planning, but by hunch, guess and God?
The Government's problems have been compounded by the crazy suggestion of the Secretary of State for the Environment that the Ove Arup route via Stratford will act as a springboard for the creation of a new linear city from Stratford to Southend.
This proposal is sheer fantasy and the product of a feverish mind.
Already it is being dubbed by planners as’ Tarzan's folly’.
No one who is serious about urban planning believes that a linear city stretching for mile after mile on both sides of the Thames will ever be built.
It is more likely that the Secretary of State for the Environment is preparing us for what used to be called ribbon development and pock-marked urban sprawl stretching from Stratford to Southend, with unfettered market forces destroying the flora and fauna and every living thing that gets in its way.
I understand that the Secretary of State for the Environment is to develop the concept of’ Tarzan's folly’at a London Weekend Television seminar in a few weeks' time, but the right place to develop the concept is on the Floor of the House.
Perhaps I could tempt the Minister to upstage his boss today and tell us exactly what the Secretary of State for the Environment has in mind.
Nor does British Rail enthuse over job prospects.
Speaking of the maximum number of jobs of 21,000 that could be associated with the Ove Arup proposal, British Rail says that these jobs would largely represent a redistribution of economic activity in Kent and London rather than the creation of new economic activity.
When Newham's councillors talk of 40,000 jobs coming to east London, they are conning not only their own people but the rest of us, including, I regret to say, the people of Hackney.
There will not be many jobs for the people of Hackney in any of these proposals.
We should take note of reports that the Ove Arup route chosen by the Government will wreck a £1 billion scheme for 7,000 jobs and 6, 500 new homes, which apparently have already been approved in principle by the Department of the Environment, in the Barking reach area of the Thames.
Worries about the rape of Hackney led the London borough of Hackney to oppose the idea of the easterly route and a terminal at Stratford.
First, the use of Stratford as a motorail and park-and-ride terminal will necessitate increased road capacity from the west.
This probably means a motorway or fast-track dual carriageway to Stratford, running through the heart of Hackney from Highbury corner to the Lea interchange.
That would mean the resumption of the heroic and successful anti-motorway battles of the past two decades.
Secondly, traffic levels in east Hackney, with more juggernauts and heavy goods vehicles, would rise considerably, bringing noise, fumes, dirt, accidents and nightmarish living conditions to a wide area.
Thirdly, the accompanying redevelopment of Stratford town centre could draw trade and investment away from Hackney and sap the vitality of our existing shopping centres in Mare street and Kingsland road.
Fourthly, a successful terminal at Stratford would inevitably and inexorably encroach on the Lea Valley regional park and reduce leisure facilities.
I live on the banks of the Lea and I cannot properly tell the House what an amazing joy it is to wake up every morning and look over the marshes.
The Lea valley is probably Hackney's most precious environmental assets, and there is a paramount need to keep it away from development-mad Newham at all costs.
As someone who once worked full time for two years in one of the most high-powered urban planning teams ever assembled in this country, I see those four points as virtually certain consequences of the Government's proposals.
But I am a modest man and I would welcome a second opinion from the Minister: does he agree or does he disagree?
In particular, can he tell us whether the continental gauge will finish at Stratford rather than King's Cross, and will there be a freight depot at Temple Mills in Stratford?
There are other problematic possibilities.
Is the 8.5 mile tunnel from Barking to Stratford and then to King's Cross feasible?
People in the City to whom I have spoken say that private enterprise will never finance it.
If the line were to go overground from Stratford — presumably along the north London line — that line might have to be upgraded from two to four tracks, with a loss of hundreds of homes in Hackney.
Can the Minister give us a categorical assurance that that will not happen?
In the past, too many tunnel schemes have ended up on the surface because of the cost implications.
Are we about to witness that again?
Mr. Bryan Gould (Dagenham)
I propose to introduce a novel element into the debate by speaking about the Bill.
When the Secretary of State could bring himself to talk about his own legislation, we heard from him in effect an admission that the Government who brought us the poll tax are now bringing us a new poll tax.
Just when we thought it was safe to dip a toe into the poll tax water, we are faced with a poll tax mark II.
No wonder the right hon. Gentleman did not want to talk about the Bill.
All the familiar features, the problems and the objectionable unfairnesses of the poll tax are there, but this time combined with the further complications of a totally new and untried property tax.
In other words, it is the poll tax crossed with a capital value tax — a roof tax crossed with a head tax — a cross-bred monster which gives us the worst of all worlds.
The Secretary of State seems to think that we should be so grateful that the Government have promised that the poll tax will go that we should not look too closely at what will replace it.
The reverse is true.
The poll tax disaster should surely put us on our guard.
We must ensure that that terrible mistake is not repeated.
The British people will not forgive a Government or a Parliament that make another comparable mistake.
As the Local Government Chronicle put it in its leading article of 1 November:’ To introduce poll tax is a mistake, to bring in council tax is a disaster.’
The omens are far from promising.
The new tax is bred out of panic coupled with cowardice.
All its problems arise directly from the political situation from which it springs, from the urgent need felt by the Government to distance themselves from the poll tax and the equal need to placate those internal supporters of the poll tax who will choke over any support for a property tax.
The first motivating factor was the overriding need to be seen to get rid of the poll tax before the next general election.
No matter that the poll tax bills will still arrive, bigger and nastier than ever next year and probably the year afterwards.
All that matters to the Secretary of State and the Prime Minister is that they should be able to face the electorate with the commitment to replace the poll tax enshrined in legislation.
The nature of the replacement and whether it would work hardly matter.
As so often with the Government, the illusion and not the reality is what really counts.
That is why haste is everything.
The Prime Minister may have complained that under former management the poll tax was bounced through, but he will gladly ram through the new poll tax.
The years taken to prepare the poll tax look like a model of wise and thoughtful government by comparison with the pretence at consultation and the shockingly truncated parliamentary timetable with which we are now confronted.
The unseemly haste is dictated not merely by the Government's electoral timetable, but by the fear that if the measure is given proper time for debate there will also be time for the real, but as yet nascent, concerns of Tory Back Benchers and their constituents to grow and mature.
A Government seeking to minimise awkward questions will try to railroad the the Bill through, hoping that by the time that Back Benchers have woken up to what is happening and their constituents have understood the dangers it will again be too late.
Mr. Patrick Cormack (Staffordshire, South)
How does the hon. Gentleman reconcile this carefully rehearsed diatribe with his oft-stated desire to abolish the poll tax as quickly as possible?
Mr. Gould
Because our course for abolishing the poll tax provides a guarantee that it can be done, because we shall pick up an existing system that we know will work.
Mr. Robin Squire (Hornchurch)
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Gould
I shall make some progress first and give way again in a moment.
As the hon. Gentleman knows, I usually do.
It is not merely we parliamentarians who are the victims of that haste; local government is again caught up in a hopeless struggle against the odds.
The poll tax has been a nightmare which shows no sign of ending.
Non-collection will total £1.5 billion by the end of this year and 7.5 million summonses will have been issued.
The courts and the police will be unable to cope.
Against that background, local authorities are now required to prepare for a totally new tax — requiring a new valuation, a new banding system, new discounts and new registers.
As Mr. Ron Lord, Wakefield's assistant chief financial officer, points out in the Municipal Journal, they could at least introduce the poll tax’ against a background of a stable rating system which managers were able to put on automatic pilot while diverting their attention to the multitude of practical problems that were to arise with the new system.
There is no such luxury available with the implementation of council tax.’
Mr. Squire
As I expected, the hon. Gentleman responded to the last intervention by saying that a Labour Government would simply reintroduce rates.
He knows that that would not only cause a major upheaval in local government but would be followed shortly afterwards by other proposals.
The hon. Gentleman must recognise that the Labour proposal would cause a double upheaval and a return to a system which the Opposition Front Bench has criticised many times.
Mr. Gould
I am disappointed in the hon. Gentleman, who usually follows these matters quite closely.
He will know that we propose for the sake of speed and practicality to use an existing valuation register, which everyone agrees exists and can be used.
To the great relief of local government, we would then abolish the 20 per cent.
contribution rule and extend the rebate system to help those special groups which might otherwise be disadvantaged.
We would then be able to do what Conservatives should have done from the outset — pick up and operate a tried and trusted system and concentrate on dealing over time and in proper order with imperfections that had developed.
That is what we propose to do, and in his heart of hearts the hon. Gentleman and many other Conservative Members know that that is the right course.
No wonder that independent experts and local authority treasurers are in despair about the timetable that is being forced upon them.
As Mr. Lord warns, there is no room for mistakes or changes.
It will have to be right first time.
Most experts agree that it cannot be done and that the poll tax will live on until 1994.
Sir Peter Emery
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Gould
No.
The hon. Gentleman is having a good try.
I shall give way when I am ready.
I appeal to the Secretary of State, his Ministers and the House not to inflict chaos yet again on local government.
Please do not posture and pretend that these problems do not exist.
We have been warned in the most solemn terms, and a Government who were responsible for the poll tax should surely this time show some humility, some willingness to listen and learn.
Of course the Government could have avoided these difficulties.
They could have done what we suggested.
They could have accepted our offer of co-operation on a short Bill to return to the rating system as a first step towards a more general reform.
But, again, the politics got in the way.
No doubt it was hard enough to accept the volte face involved in embracing an element of property tax.
A return to the reviled rates would presumably have been too much to take.
All the denunciations of a property tax could just about be accommodated, but how were the Government to overcome the whole rationale of the ill-fated poll tax experiment, the supposed unacceptability of the rates?
The country is asked to pay the price of the Government's overriding concern that they should not lose face.
Sir Peter Emery
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Gould
No.
I shall continue with my speech and will allow the hon. Gentleman to intervene later if he wishes to do so.
That overriding concern is why we have to have not just a property tax but a new and different property tax that is fraught with novel and unpredictable difficulties.
That is why we have to have a new basis for valuation, a capital values tax.
How is a totally new, totally comprehensive valuation of capital values — something that has never before been done in England and Wales — to be carried out within the dangerously tight timetable dictated by the Government's electoral concerns?
Mr. James Wallace (Orkney and Shetland)
I shall deal in due course with the points raised by the hon. Member for Teignbridge (Mr. Nicholls) in the latter part of his speech.
I note in passing, however, that, when it comes to squandering the nation's money, I cannot think of a better example than the enormous amounts squandered by the Government in setting up the machinery for the administration of the poll tax, which is now to be totally unwound.
I am sure that, if those on the Treasury Bench had been in local government, they would soon be facing surcharges for the abuse of public funds.
The Second Reading of a Bill usually deals with the principles that underlie it.
The hon. Member for Hornchurch (Mr. Squire) and the Secretary of State made it perfectly clear that the Government believe that the fairest and best means of raising local government finance is through a property tax.
That principle is also supported by the official Opposition, and that explains the difficulty that the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) experienced in the debate.
We may have had from him an attempt at Opposition fury, but, on occasion, he experienced pretty heavy weather in trying to make distinctions between his party and the Government on an issue on which, in essence, they agree.
Both parties accept the central principle — no matter how it is dressed up — that local government finance should be based on a property tax.
A review of debates over the past two or three years reveals another unusual aspect.
Not only are the two major parties united in favouring a property tax; in the past, they were united in fiercely opposing such a tax.
It is to their obvious embarrassment that they are again together.
Many hon. Members on both sides of the House must be embarrassed about some of the comments that they have made in the past.
The right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) once described the rates as’ an irrational, inefficient, highly resented form of taxation.
If a thing does not make sense — and the rating system makes no sense whatever — the right thing to do is to abolish it.’
I shall not dwell on the comments made by the Leader of the Opposition in 1980, as they have also been referred to.
In 1990, however, the hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett) said:’ What isn't right is the disparity between someone living alone, living next to three or four earners.’
That disparity lies at the heart of our opposition to a property tax.
The disparity is acknowledged in the Bill with an attempt at a discount scheme, but that disparity has not been overcome.
Although the Labour party opposes the discount scheme, it does not attempt to address the unfairness inherent in a property tax.
The poll tax was introduced because rates as a property tax were seen to be becoming increasingly unfair and undefendable.
Not unnaturally, Ministers have savaged the workings of a property tax ever since rates were abolished.
In March 1990, the Secretary of State for Wales vehemently denounced rates and said:’ If there is one thing which unites Conservatives everywhere it is our deep and abiding abhorrence of the rating system.
It is no wonder we hate it so.
It is at the heart such a socialist system.
How much more abominable than a tax on widows?
But that is what the rating system is.’
I submit that that is what the council tax is as well, 25 per cent.
discount notwithstanding.
Everything the Labour party said about the unfairness of rates was right and everything that the Conservative party said about the unfairness of rates is right.
Property taxes cannot be fair because property cannot be an absolute guide to people's income or wealth.
The hon. Member for Lancaster (Dame E.
Kellett-Bowman) made that point eloquently when she intervened during the Secretary of State's speech.
People acquire their homes at different times and in different circumstances.
A family home in an up-and-coming area like the south-east or London can rise rapidly in value.
My hon. Friend the Member for Southwark and Bermondsey (Mr. Hughes) has already said that people in central London on relatively low incomes may live in high-value houses.
The income of inhabitants does not change in the same proportion if they start off in equal housing.
The housing may rise in value, but people's relative incomes may not necessarily rise by the same amount.
Many people have exercised their right to buy homes that they previously tenanted from local authorities.
They bought them at a substantial discount.
Under the council tax they will be charged according to the full capital value of those homes.
An identical range of people might live on a newly built Barratt estate.
Those people may have roughly the same income and circumstances and they may all be able to bear the same burden.
However, there are few communities like that.
In many streets, although the houses may appear similar to the estate agent who drives along valuing them, they are often far from uniform.
Some may have been divided into flats while others may have been newly modernised or renovated.
Some may need modernising.
Some may be long-standing family homes, while others may be just a step on the housing ladder.
They are all vulnerable to property prices and the need for valuation regardless of individual circumstances.
However, all the inhabitants will be expected to pay roughly the same regardless of their income.
The Government acknowledge that a property tax is essentially unfair and not linked to income and that is why the Bill includes banding and discounts and why student halls of residents are rightly excluded.
However, those exemptions and discounts merely reinforce the fundamental flaw at the centre of the council tax.
A property tax is essentially unfair unless so many qualifications are built into it that it becomes complicated and expensive to administer.
We have already heard the hon. Member for Staffordshire, South (Mr. Cormack) suggest that there should be a further element which would take into account the length of time that someone has lived in a house.
That only underlines how complicated property taxes can be in an effort to make them fair.
In his reference to the poll tax, the hon. Member for Teignbridge referred to the many things that had to be built on to it and the many anomalies that had to be addressed.
Many of those anomalies were identified by my colleagues at the very outset of the poll tax escapade.
Experience has shown that anomalies arose and had to be addressed and that caused massive administrative complications.
Mr. Nicholls
I actually said that there were relatively few anomalies and that if they had been addressed the tax would have found favour.
However, is the hon. Gentleman suggesting that a system of local income tax would not create economic ghettos and areas in which the Chancellor of the Exchequer and the local Labour authority would have carte blanche without capping — something which he will not allow and which will have to be dealt with through exemptions?
Mr. Wallace
The hon. Gentleman is not suggesting that a system of local government finance would be without a method of equalisation.
Every system of local government finance has possessed such a system.
We believe that the council tax is already hovering between being unfair and being unworkable.
The concession on students and the way in which the Secretary of State for the Environment struggled to answer my question underline that point.
Institutions do not provide enough student accommodation.
Some students have no choice but to live out.
Some students will be completely exempt from the tax and some will qualify for discounts.
Others will have to pay a proportion of the tax, and in London and Aberdeen that proportion could well be high.
If it has been conceded that students should not pay the tax, the Government should accept the logic and exempt students altogether.
Dr. Hampson
It seems that virtually all students will be exempt.
The only category in which that will not apply is when a student is living with or married to someone who is not a student.
In that case, there will be a bill for the property and the non-student will have to pay while the other person contributes 25 per cent.
Mr. Wallace
The hon. Gentleman accepts my point that there will be a distinction between students.
I can think of another example.
A student who is forced to live out may be lodging with the old lady who seems to feature regularly in local government finance debates.
In that case, the discount provision will apply, but the student will still have to pay some proportion when other students pay nothing.
It would be welcome to hear that all students are to be exempt.
The Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. David Hunt)
I had hoped that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment had dealt with that point very effectively.
The student living in lodgings is invisible in terms of qualifying for the council tax and does not add one jot to the amount that the widow or anyone else would have to pay.
They are disregarded.
Mr. Wallace
If that means that all students are exempt, it would have been better if the Department of the Environment press releases had stated that expressly.
I suspect that that is not so, and we can probe it in more detail in Standing Committee.
The 25 per cent.
discount is another concession that exposes flaws in the tax.
It is an attempt to meet what the Secretary of State for Wales described as the widow factor.
However, it does not go far enough.
A widow in a modest terrace house on a low income, with — for the sake of argument — a council tax of £200, will be liable for £150.
In a modernised house next door, a two-earning couple will be liable to only £100 each.
A single merchant banker in the next house might qualify for his discount on a salary that could be far higher than any other salary in the street.
We cannot support the Bill because it bears no relation to people's income.
It will penalise people on low incomes who do not qualify for discounts, and through the banding system it tends to benefit the rich.
If we listen on the one hand to the Secretary of State for the Environment and on the other hand to the Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities, it seems that the DOE has something like Dr. Doolittle's’ Push-me — pull-you.’
The Secretary of State is anxious to concentrate on rebates to do something for those who will by hit be the property tax, but the Minister has scorned property taxes and is determined to weight the tax in favour of the better-off.
That internal contradiction means that the council tax will not survive.
As a result, the Bill will not be the last word on local government finance.
It will be an interim attempt to be seen to be doing something to replace the discredited poll tax.
The real tragedy is that there is an alternative which, unlike the poll tax or any property tax, has been tried and tested in many countries in Europe and in America.
It is fair and easy to administer.
We have supported that alternative — a local income tax — since our submission to the Layfield inquiry into local government finance in 1976.
That inquiry, the most authoritative ever carried out, favoured a local income tax.
The details of our proposals have been well documented.
We accepted the Secretary of State's invitation to engage in the consultation process which he initiated.
Not only can we point to the success of such a tax abroad, but at no stage in recent negotiations or since have we been told that a local income tax would not work.
It is important that that point is understood.
It would appear that the objection to local income tax is political rather than practical.
Having listened to Government spokesmen, it appears that their political objections are twofold.
First, they wish to be seen to be reducing personal taxation.
It does not matter whether the overall burden of tax increases, as long as they are seen to be reducing personal taxation.
Secondly, and perhaps most important, they have claimed that they do not want to hand over control of an income tax to what they perceive to be extremist Labour local authorities.
The lack of accountability was the reason which drove the Government to introduce the poll tax.
The poll tax has wasted £14 billion of taxpayers' money, led to cuts in services and jobs, caused great hardship for thousands of people, and has led to a general breakdown in law and order.
It is now being replaced by a highly complicated tax that will take two years to value and will be a burden to those on low incomes in high-cost areas.
That is happening because the Government will not make local councils representative of and accountable to their electorates.
A fair voting system, which we would also like to see in local government, would mean that it would be unlikely that there would ever be extremist Labour councils.
There would be no reason to have introduced the poll tax and no reason for another arbitrary and unfair property tax.
Capping would be done by the electorate, which, in a democracy, is where power should lie.
The electorate would determine whether the local authority was getting out of hand and penalise accordingly.
Mr. Robert G. Hughes
The hon. Gentleman has told the House that, if we had proportional representation for councils, we would not have extreme Labour councils and that, somehow, the more widespread distribution of seats would stop that happening.
If that is the case, when Brent council was at its most extreme, when it was spending enormous sums of ratepayers' money and destroying services, why, at every turn, did the hon. Gentleman's party support the Labour party through thick and thin?
It would not have made any difference in that borough.
We would still have had an extremist council — not Labour, but Labour and Liberal combined.
Mr. Wallace
If one had properly representative councils — for example, in Liverpool, where the minority within the Labour group managed to take control and impose extremist policies — that would not be possible.
In any event, the views of the electorate would be much more fairly represented at the next local elections.
I have no detail of what individual Liberal Democrat councillors in Brent did, but, if it was perceived by the electorate to have been wrong, they would have undoubtedly paid the political consequences at the following election.
That is where the real power of capping should be — with people in the electorate, not with the heavy hand of central Government.
We could then allow local communities to decide more of their own priorities and allow councils to justify to the electorate the cost of the various policies that they put into practice.
We should put the concept of community back into local government.
Fair votes, a reformed structure and a local income tax will provide representative and accountable councils with sufficient finance, raised fairly and efficiently, to meet the community's needs.
We are faced with a Government who are determined to get the Bill on to the statute book before an election.
I do not believe that the tax will ever be implemented.
Nevertheless, in Committee we will consider the Bill seriously to try to highlight anomalies and alleviate some of the flaws in the detail.
The Government are making a mistake unduly to curtail debate.
If they had faith in their own proposals, they would be happy to see them discussed in detail.
During consideration of the Local Government Finance Bill, 218
Government amendments were tabled in Committee and 135 were tabled on Report.
In the House of Lords, 196 Government amendments were tabled in Committee, and 286 were tabled on Report.
It was clear that the Government were not able to get their legislation right at the first attempt.
That will be the case in respect of this legislation, and a host of anomalies will come to light.
Guillotining the Bill at this early stage shows that Ministers are frightened to come to grips with the legislation and face scrutiny of the details of their own Bill.
We all want the poll tax to be abolished as soon as possible.
A large number of people seem to share the Prime Minister's belief that the poll tax is already abolished.
Collection, particularly in areas such as Strathclyde, is becoming ever more difficult.
Cuts in services and jobs will follow.
The anger of those who pay the poll tax will mount as they find out the additional amount that they must pay because their local authorities are unable to collect outstanding poll tax.
A member of one local authority in England — I will not name it for obvious reasons — told me that the police in that area have said that following up poll tax debts and warrants is not a high priority.
When that matter was put to the Home Office and the Department of the Environment, we were told that it was for the local authority to sort out the matter with the local police force.
Local Government is in a state of low morale and near collapse because of the poll tax.
Thousands are still facing the burden of a 20 per cent.
contribution, even though it is costing up to two and a half times more to collect than the revenue raised.
Dr. Keith Hampson (Leeds, North-West)
When I tried to raise some of the education issues with the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould), he refused to let me intervene.
I wished to make the simple point that the Labour party's’ Fair Rates’document makes no reference to students, and to add that, in my view, our proposals offer students the best deal that they have been offered by any system of local finance.
It does not embarrass me at all to say that I did not approve of the principle of the community charge.
I opposed it from the very beginning.
My opposition goes back to 1979 and to the work done in the Department of the Environment when I was in it on the production of the 1981 Green Paper.
It stated clearly that a flat rate charge could not cope with the scale of local authority expenditure and that it could not do so fairly.
Experience has proved that to be the case.
When we considered the impact that such a system would have on my city of Leeds, when it was thought that it would be about £187 per head, we realised that that in itself would be disastrous.
On that basis, about 80 per cent.
of my constituents would have been worse off.
However, the Leeds charge came out at about double that figure.
It was therefore a disaster for towns in the north, particularly those that contained a high proportion of terraced property built around the turn of the century.
I do not weep over its loss.
Although one can say good riddance to it, I do not wish there to be a return to the past, as the Opposition propose.
The community charge system became more and more discredited.
Some of my colleagues have accepted that it became discredited, but they are still trying to a certain degree to defend it.
The reason that it became discredited on the scale and at the speed that it did was due to the efforts of the gentleman who introduced it, the right hon. Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley).
Due to the way in which he handled its introduction, it did not have a cat in hell's chance of succeeding.
Not only was there no capping of the excessive expenditure that Labour councils were bound to indulge in, but my right hon. Friend insisted that it should be introduced not as a phased tax but all in one year.
Above all, he insisted on reducing the revenue support grant rather than increasing it, which is what all of us said was necessary to soften the blow.
The effect of those actions devastated the tax and meant that in no circumstances could the level be low enough to make it justifiable and acceptable.
What happened reflects upon the competence and judgment of my right hon. Friend, as has been demonstrated again recently.
The Labour party document states that there should be a return to the old system and to the valuation of properties that was carried out in 1973.
How can the Labour party believe that it is fair to value properties on the basis of the 1973 valuation?
Do not the Opposition remember what happened in Scotland when properties there were revalued?
Do they not realise what would happen to a young couple who bought a terraced cottage that had a traditionally low rateable value?
Under the Labour party's proposal, that property would be revalued, which would have a devastating effect on the finances of that young couple.
There would be the same backlash and bitterness as happened in Scotland.
If the people of Leeds want a Labour Government to be returned to power, they can be sure that property in Leeds, particularly that sought by young people, will have devastatingly raised valuations.
Their bills will be higher than this year's community charge bills.
Under our scheme, the bill for the average property in my constituency will be approximately halved compared with what people are expected to pay under the community charge.
The headline bill — in Leeds about £400 per person will instead be about £400 per house.
The Opposition have totally failed to grasp the banding concept.
It is possible to have a relatively speedy valuation because no attempt will be made to place a specific value on every house.
However, that is what the Labour party would do.
After having introduced the outdated 1973 valuations, at some stage it would have a nationwide revaluation.
A specific value would be placed on every house.
There would be a return to all the anomalies that the old rating system caused.
It would take a very long time to implement and would be very costly.
Moreover, the Labour party's system is guaranteed to penalise property improvement.
If changes were made to a house that increased its value, the valuation would be increased; hence, one would pay more tax.
It would be a major disincentive to property improvement.
The value of banding is that it can be done speedily and quickly.
It might even be possible for Members of Parliament to walk down the street and assess the approximate value of property in one street compared with property in another.
Moreover, if the bands are sufficiently wide, they will cope with any alterations and improvements to property.
My only hesitation is whether the two middle bands are wide enough.
I argued passionately for a top higher band.
But if a new kitchen were needed in an older property, it would cost about £10,000.
The difference between the two bands in the middle is about £10,000.
A slight extension of those bands could ease the extra cost that might be brought about by improvements.
The hon. Member for Neath (Mr. Hain) said that there will be chaos when everyone appeals.
I do not believe that that will happen.
The difference between the sums of money in the different bands that people will have to pay is relatively small.
It is probably not worth appealing about a difference of approximately £40.
It is also conceivable that if one strays across a band because a property has been improved to the tune of approximately £10,000, one will not have to pay much extra.
Mrs. Fyfe
The hon. Gentleman believes that because there will be broad bands whole streets will be assessed in one go, not individually.
If, however, an estate agent in England says,’ I think that this street of properties is worth £35,000, or £45,000 or £58,000’and it is just on the borderline between bands, who will get the benefit of the doubt?
Will it be the council, on the ground that the upper band would provide it with more money, or will it be the householder?
Dr. Hampson
I do not believe that there would be any complication.
People will be told that their property comes within a certain band which ranges, say, from £52,000 to £68,000.
They will not complain if they believe that their property is worth more than the band in which it has been allocated.
If, however, they want to say that their property should be in the band below, it will be a simple matter of testing it on appeal.
There will be a great deal of evidence, from the valuation office and market prices in the area, upon which to test it.
Opposition Members are desperately struggling to find every conceivable thing to carp at, because they know that the scheme will be relatively speedy to introduce and that it will work effectively.
Compared with anything that they have dreamed up, it is a clear-cut, simple scheme.
Their solution is to return to an outdated system and then to try to improve it.
The consequent revaluations would cause mayhem, chaos and huge bills for those on the receiving end.
The Opposition have not found a way round that problem.
The Labour party's document makes no reference to students.
It preaches the virtues of helping all hardship cases, but the old rating system to which the Opposition wish to return would impose considerable costs on students, as it did before.
University halls of residence had to pay for students.
If students were in digs, they had to pay their share of the rates.
Under this measure, universities will not be charged for halls of residence and students will not be liable to a council tax charge in the rent that they pay.
The only problem relates to those students who are married to someone who is not a student, in which case there is a 25 per cent.
discount.
Furthermore, we have not dealt clearly enough with the position of those students who may be living in the same property as their landlord.
Landlords will have a 25 per cent.
discount because they take in students, but will they pass on the full tax to the students?
We must make it clear to students that they can appeal against their rent to a tribunal so that the tribunal can decide whether the landlord is overcharging them on the council tax element.
We must make our argument clear.
Only today I received a document from the Committee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals that shows that it does not understand.
It fears that universities will have to pick up the tab, and it draws a sharp distinction between those who will be non-payers and those who will get 25 per cent.
I should like to believe — we must make this clear — that only a very small proportion of students will contribute.
The concept of the poll tax was that the more people there were in a property the more they paid, whereas under the council tax students will not add to but will deduct from the bill.
Of the 42.5 million adults in this country, only about 3 million are from households with more than two people.
I never understood why we got in the tangled bureaucratic mess of the community charge to pick up the tiny amount of 3 million out of 42.5 million people.
The council tax is related to the number of people in a house, but it offers more generous treatment for people such as students, who will not add to the household bill.
Have Ministers considered taxing people who accommodate students as a business the universal business rate rather than the property rate, and whether that might be a way of avoiding any burden falling on students?
I raise that as an off-the-cuff thought.
We must also make it crystal clear how much shopkeepers, who gave us so much flak when we introduced the business rate and the community charge, will now be paying.
They will still pay the universal business rate, but what will they contribute to the new council tax?
The council bill must clearly show not only the precept for each level of local government but itemise what they are paying for street cleaning, for dustbin collection, for the police and for the various local government services.
The Labour party attacks us for not operating a fair system, yet the old rating system offered relief in the form of rebates.
Labour now realises that that system of relief was not adequate.
It therefore proposes a register of those who are eligible for relief.
Its document says that it is against rebates.’
for which application has to be made.’
Therefore, it proposes that as a result of computerisation at the Inland Revenue a local authority register will be established so that authorities are aware of the pensioners, those with disabilities and those on low incomes.
Relief will then be offered to such people.
That is a register-based system.
Our system is not register based but claimant based.
The Labour party cannot have it both ways: it attacks the system either because it expects people to claim or because it requires a register.
Of course it is a claimant-based system — no one has ever hidden that fact.
People who can be eligible for up to 100 per cent.
will claim for it, and then, as under the old system that worked simply and cheaply, it will be on the records.
That is the system, with extensions, that we are now returning to.
The single person discount will not apply equally to the rich millionaire and to the poor elderly widow.
The male millionaire will not get any rebates, whereas the single older widow will be eligible for substantial rebates, and a single unmarried mother with several children who is on income support will pay nothing.
The reality that the Opposition overlook is that the combination of the single person discount and rebates of up to 100 per cent.
make the council tax far fairer than the old rates, certainly fairer than the poll tax, and much fairer than the Labour party's proposals.
For the elderly, and especially for students, it is a better deal than was offered by any previous alternative system of local government finance, and it is much fairer and is a better deal than what would be imposed by the Labour party.
Mr. Dick Douglas (Dunfermline, West)
Although we have gone over ground that we have gone over many times in the House, the debate has been extremely interesting.
I make no apology for going over some of the ground again.
I recall the reform of local government — not local government finance — in the 1970s.
By trying to reform finance without simultaneously considering local government's powers, boundaries and responsibilities we are making the same mistake as we made then.
We have two Bills — one for England and Wales and one for Scotland.
Separate Bills were introduced for the poll tax.
A Scottish Bill was introduced in 1986-87 because the Government panicked about local authority finance for Scotland.
We have heard much in the past weekend, if not before, about the concept of the mandate.
Labour Members from Scotland — some of them at least— have raised that concept.
The Liberal Democrats, particularly their leader, have suggested that the Government have no moral authority in Scotland.
It is strange that that point is being made because of a shift of about 1,000 votes in a constituency.
But the Government had no moral authority in Scotland in 1987.
The Scottish people overwhelmingly rejected their policy.
We must consider the mandate not in party terms but in personal terms.
I sought a mandate from my constituents to oppose the poll tax and made it plain exactly what I would do.
Mr. McCartney
Seek a fresh one.
Mr. Douglas
I shall give way to the hon. Gentleman, for whom I have some affection, or to any other Labour Member who can tell me what part of that mandate I have reneged on.
Mr. McCartney
I shall contribute later.
The point is clear: if the hon. Gentleman feels that he is totally committed to his mandate and that he has not changed his opinion, he should ask the electors of Dunfermline, not me.
Mr. Douglas
I meet the electors of Dunfermline regularly, not just once a month.
They can come to me at any time.
What part of the 1987 manifesto is still in place?
The commitment to Trident, which is particularly important to us in Scotland, is not.
It is evident that the hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) does not rest his case on opposition to the poll tax.
At the next election, he will seek to enhance the so-called sovereignty of Parliament.
I reject the sovereignty of Parliament.
We have the poll tax because there is no such thing as the sovereignty of Parliament.
There is the sovereignty of the majority party and its Whips.
We all know that the poll tax does not have a friend in 1991, so why did that tax have so many friends in 1987 and afterwards?
Conservative Members — with a few honourable exceptions — were dragooned through the Division Lobby by the Government Whips.
They did not consider what was happening.
We have had the example of Scotland, where we have suffered from the poll tax for a year longer than people in England and Wales, and much grief and sorrow have resulted.
People say to me,’ You did not pay the poll tax and could afford to pay it.’
I did not pay the poll tax.
Before I took that stand, I made it plain what I was going to do.
I still feel justified in taking that stance, especially as the people of Scotland, aided by the Scottish National party, were partly instrumental in ensuring the downfall of that tax.
We have all talked about finding a fair local government taxation system.
Front Benchers and Back Benchers have been going through the hoops, trying to devise a system that is fair and is always related to ability to pay.
That was suggested by the Labour party in’ Fair Rates’and by the Conservative party in their so-called council tax — somehow, mysteriously, the system has to be related to ability to pay.
I cannot envisage a system related to ability to pay that does not approximate to income flows.
I repeat what I have said many times: I do not know of any person who pays taxes out of anything other than income.
That is why we and the Scottish National party have suggested a local income tax.
Mr. Harry Cohen (Leyton)
That was an eloquent and honest speech by the hon. Member for Aldridge-Brownhills (Mr. Shepherd) and he is right to draw attention to the savagery of the guillotine on this measure.
This tax is being imposed on our constituents without proper parliamentary consideration.
There will be an enormous number of flaws and unfairness in it.
Like the poll tax, the consequences will be a scandal.
The Secretary of State for the Environment's speeches today and during the Queen's Speech were full of jokes and banter, but many of my constituents do not view the costly shambles of the poll tax as much of a laughing matter.
The Secretary of State has pretensions as a political heavyweight, but his performances have been more of a light banterweight.
During the five minutes that he spoke about the Bill in his 52-minute speech he was floored by his own seconds — Conservative Back Benchers — when they expressed their concern.
That is why he spent as much time as he possibly could outside the ring, talking about anything but the council tax.
The poll tax could have been abolished from April next year, but it will linger on for at least another year under the Government.
At the end of 1990-91, £1 billion of the poll tax remains uncollected in England alone and about 7.5 million summonses will have been issued by the end of the year.
That is the largest debt collection exercise in history.
Many people think that the poll tax has already been abolished, which will make it even harder to collect.
The non-collection element will be loaded on to the bills of those who pay, which is an inherent feature of the poll tax system.
The Government must get the blame when bills go through people's doors, and I for one intend to make clear that that is their fault.
Mr. James Paice (Cambridgeshire, South-East)
How can the hon. Gentleman say that it is the Government's fault when someone does not pay taxes?
He is right to point out that arrears caused by people who have not paid are a burden on the vast majority of law-abiding people who pay up, whether they agree with the basis of the taxation or not.
However, as some of the non-payers are members of the Labour party and are his colleagues on the Opposition Benches, how can he blame the Government for the fact that people have decided of their own free will not to pay a tax?
Mr. Cohen
It is the Government's fault, because their legislation took no account of ability to pay.
There will always be vast numbers of people who cannot afford to pay.
I tabled a question asking how much the Government had set aside for bad debts, and the answer showed that not one penny had been set aside.
There should be immediate abolition of the minimum 20 per cent.
payment.
That should happen this year, or at least in 1992-93.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Environment (Mr. Robert Key)
Why
Mr. Cohen
Because it affects the poorest people.
Mr. Key
The hon. Gentleman is on an important point.
The 20 percenters, as they are colloquially known, receive benefits which more than compensate this year for their 20 per cent.
payment of the community charge.
Mr. Cohen
That is not the case in London where the 20 per cent.
bill is higher than elsewhere in relation to DSS payments.
Secondly, as my hon. Friend the Member for Neath (Mr. Hain) reminded the House, the Audit Commission has said that it costs £15 to collect £8.
Thirdly, there is a housing benefit crisis in local government.
Low-income families are put at grave risk and local authorities are unable to administer the housing benefit system efficiently because they are tied to the 20 per cent.
element.
If it were abolished, administration of the poll tax system would be easier.
The Government have accepted 100 per cent.
rebates for the new tax.
Why should abolition not apply to the poll tax during what are allegedly its last two years?
The Government have been most mean in not getting rid of the 20 per cent.
payments.
On BBC news on 23 November last year the Prime Minister said’ One of the difficulties we got into with the community charge was being bounced into decisions before they were fully thought through and before we knew precisely how they would affect people.’
As the hon. Member for Aldridge-Brownhills so eloquently pointed out, we are seeing exactly the same thing with this tax.
Mr. McCartney
In today's truncated debate hon. Members have questioned in great detail the precise nature of the rebate system for students and others who are eligible.
The Government have been woolly about the exact meaning of their proposals.
Because of the guillotine, amendments to ensure that the rebate system is simple and reaches people who require it may not be properly discussed.
Mr. Cohen
My hon. Friend makes a good point.
We will not know whether an ability-to-pay element will apply in relation to the rebates.
One of the major problems for local authorities is the computer software that is essential for the efficient billing and collecting of the tax.
For the poll tax the Government gave councils 18 months to get their computer software in order, but the councils were unable to do so because they did not have the resources and the rules and complexities kept changing.
It is now less than 17 months to April 1993 when the council tax will be introduced.
Much of the information and secondary legislation which are vital to work out what will be in the computer programmes are not yet available.
The Government are leading us to a shambles.
Mr. Key
I am delighted to reassure the hon. Gentleman on the subject of computer software for local authorities.
My Department is working closely with local authority associations on the matter.
Only last week we had yet another meeting with them on the subject of computer software.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has already made it plain that, unlike some other Bills, we hope that for this one not only will most of the regulations be in place before Royal Assent, but that draft regulations will be composed parallel to the legislation.
Many of the draft regulations will be complete by Christmas.
There is no point in engaging in scaremongering about a matter that is well in hand.
Mr. Cohen
Experience shows that there will not be enough time and that on the Government's reckoning there will not be enough resources.
Is the Minister saying that by Christmas every dot and comma of what local authorities need for their computers will be in place?
The Government keep changing the rules of the game, which creates enormous problems for local authorities.
Mr. McCartney
The Minister is disingenuous, because he did not mention the twin-track approach that local authorities have been asked to operate — not only the introduction of the new tax, but the maintenance of the poll tax.
There will not be the same winding down that occurred with the old rating system.
In addition, because of poll tax capping, local authorities have to deliver their budgets within a matter of weeks of the Government's decision on standard spending assessments.
There could well be a major collapse in the administration of local government funding.
I make not a party-political point, but one which shows the reality of not having proper consultations on the time scale for implementing such a major piece of legislation.
Mr. Cohen
My hon. Friend is right.
Local authorities will have to administer the dying poll tax and deal with all the problems associated with that, while trying to get the new council tax system into play.
The Government have not provided sufficient time or resources to ensure that the system works properly.
Three major elements run through the council tax.
One is its complexity, both for the authorities to administer and for ordinary people to understand.
Secondly, a register will be required.
As I said earlier, I do not think that a register is necessarily bad.
We had a register of property under the old rating system.
However, the new register will include personal details, especially in relation to the benefit and discount systems.
That invasion of privacy will be a problem.
Thirdly, many of the unfairnesses of the old poll tax will persist in the new council tax system.
I want to run through the discount system.
It is not targeted at those in greatest need, because ability to pay will not be a factor.
Indeed, two discounts will be available to the owner of a second home —
Mr. Tony Banks
Not in Wales.
Mr. Cohen
Why should that be so in Wales, but not in England?
The administration of the new tax will be complex.
Local authorities will have to check the applications of those claiming discounts.
They will have to police the discounts, both for someone's initial eligibility for the discount, and for any change in circumstances that might take away that eligibility.
That is an enormous and difficult task for local authorities.
The vital secondary legislation on the benefits system has not yet been published.
My understanding was that it was likely to be published in the spring.
Although I welcome the Minister's assurance that it will be earlier than that, we shall have to wait and see.
Local authorities can do little preparatory work before the regulations are published.
Mr. Tony Banks
My hon. Friend makes a good point about the complexities of the system, especially with regard to benefits.
In my local authority it is estimated that only 9 per cent.
of overall income will be raised by the council tax.
Despite all the effort, the local authority will get only 9 per cent.
of its income from the tax, even if it manages to achieve 100 per cent.
collection — and the very idea of that is a nonsense.
Does my hon. Friend know the estimated figure for his local authority?
Mr. Cohen
Local authorities in London are estimating the figure to be about 15 per cent.
The business rate has been taken away from local authorities, and in London that accounted for about £2 billion of income.
That has implications for the gearing of the system.
The proposed method of operation for the benefits system will cause enormous problems for families.
If a liable person wants to claim benefit, he must tell his local council that a second person in the household has a low income.
That implies that that person already knows the financial details of the second person, and if he does not that could create some problems.
There is absolutely no incentive for the second person on a low income to sign the application form because he is not liable to pay the tax.
He will not be the one receiving the bill.
Who is supposed to tell the council of any changes in circumstances?
It may be in the interest of neither of those two persons to do so.
If there is a fraudulent claim for benefits, who will be prosecuted?
That is not clear from the way that the Bill is worded.
The benefit structure is not workable, and it will be a software nightmare until it is made clear.
Mr. Key
If one is talking about second adult rebates, of course it is true that we need to try to simplify the proposals, to overcome the administrative difficulties brought to our attention by local authority associations.
It is true also that the regulations will be a matter for discussion at a later stage.
Those aspects will have to be the subject of regulations that the House will have to consider later.
Mr. Cohen
The Minister was not particularly forthright.
Is he saying that they will be completed by Christmas?
Mr. Key indicated dissent.
Mr. Cohen
The Minister is shaking his head, so they will not be completed by Christmas.
Local authorities had their fingers burnt before when they tried to get the software up and running and then found that the Government were changing the rules.
It looks as though exactly the same will happen again in respect of the benefits system.
Another feature that will survive from the poll tax is joint and several liability.
Under that unfair system, many women were caught for bills payable by their husbands, and vice versa.
Under the council tax, that hierarchy will be extended to two tenants, who, if they are at the same level in that hierarchy, could become responsible for each other 's council tax jointly and severally.
A tenant could be held responsible for an absentee landlord, in the same way that a married couple and partners living together as husband and wife will be responsible for each other.
Not only is that unfair, but it will require checks by local authorities, and snooping to see how couples are living together to decide whether they are liable for each other 's bill.
Londoners will be particularly disadvantaged by the valuation banding.
Most London homes will find themselves at the top levels.
The Department of the Environment's own statistics give a Greater London average council tax for two adults of £478.
From past experience, that figure could be out by as much as 100 per cent.
In any event, it is 20 per cent.
higher than for the rest of England and Wales.
The Government must look to be fairer to London, with equalisation at least in the grants system — perhaps on the basis of incomes, or by taking the regional banding approach.
They could at least give the business rate — or an element of it — back to London so that the bills can be kept down there.
There is no local accountability in the new system.
That was discarded as the justification for the poll tax.
In its place we shall have the serious problem of gearing for London.
As I said, something like 15 per cent.
of a local authority's revenue will come from the council tax, and my hon. Friend the Member for Newham, North-West (Mr. Banks) said that in some local authorities the percentage will be even lower.
That will have serious consequences, because where there is a small increase in spending by a local authority, high gearing will result in a large increase in the council tax that it has to levy.
In Tower Hamlets, for example, a 1 per cent .
spending increase will mean an 11 per cent.
rise in council tax.
In Newham, the figure is 9 per cent.
; in Hackney, it is 8 per cent.
; in Waltham Forest, my borough, it is about 7 per cent.
That is unfair, and it certainly does not represent local accountability.
Mr. Tony Banks
As my hon. Friend clearly knows far more about the Bill than does the Secretary of State, I am far more likely to get sensible answers out of him.
What will this mean for my borough?
Mr. Cohen
Every 1 per cent.
over the figure set by the Government will mean at least a 9 per cent.
increase in Newham's tax.
Moreover, the Government's original standard spending assessment may or may not be realistic.
The Secretary of State also controls the criteria for capping.
If he considers an authority's budget excessive — or, indeed, considers it an excessive increase on the previous year's budget — that is sufficient reason for him to cap that authority.
Although the authority may appeal, the Secretary of State controls the appeal process as well.
That, too, directly negates the principle of local accountability.
Mr. McCartney
A recent survey showed that my local authority, Wigan metropolitan council, was one of Britain's top 10 councils in terms of giving value for money.
According to its standard spending assessment, Manchester needs 69 per cent.
more money to provide the same level of service.
Why is my borough — which is also in the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis)— to be capped?
It is being penalised for providing a cost-effective service.
Mr. Cohen
That is an example of the arbitrary nature of the capping arrangement, and shows the extent to which it is controlled by the Secretary of State.
Local accountability has gone out of the window; Ministers no longer even talk about it, because they know that it is not a reality.
Mr. Lewis
Will my hon. Friend give way?
Mr. Cohen
No, I will not; I have only a few minutes left.
The Government may call the proposed tax a council tax, but the bills will be their bills.
That message will become increasingly clear.
Mr. Lewis rose
Mr. Cohen
Because my hon. Friend looks so disconsolate, I will give way to him after all.
Mr. Lewis
I did not take it personally, but I thank my hon. Friend none the less.
I have just had an exchange with the Secretary of State for Wales across the Floor of the House.
The irony of the position described by my hon. Friend the Member for Makerfield (Mr. McCartney) is that, if Wigan had received the same amount in grant as was received by Wandsworth and Westminster in the year in which it was capped, it would not have had to levy a tax at all; indeed, it might have been able to give money back from the previous year's levy.
Mr. Cohen
My hon. Friend has made his point very well.
The Bill gives the Secretary of State wide-ranging new powers, relating not only to capping but to the vast number of orders and regulations that he will be able to issue, and even to the grants that will be given to London's voluntary organisations.
If a London voluntary body cannot agree a budget, as happened this year, the Secretary of State will set one, but will make no allowance for inflation.
It would have been far better if majority voting had applied in that instance.
The worst aspect of all, however, is the way in which poll tax penalties have been carried forward and retained in this council tax Bill.
The National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux commented on two features of the problem: imprisonment, and the position of bailiffs.
In regard to bailiffs, the association said:’ We believe that the law and practice concerning the bailiffs should be urgently reviewed and amended.
CABs would wish to see enforcement by private bailiffs abolished.
All cases against individuals involving less than a specified amount (£25,000, for example) should be enforced through the County Court.
It is much more straightforward to have warrants set aside and negotiations entered into in the County Court whereas Magistrates Courts are usually unwilling to reconsider until a warrant has been returned to the court.
In addition, County Court bailiffs are employees of the court and usually better trained and more aware of the legal responsibilities and duties.
On the other hand, private bailiffs are subject to far less control and scrutiny.
Disturbing cases of abuse of power and criminal activity have been reported concerning private bailiffs.
Monitoring of private bailiffs is needed as a matter of urgency.’
On imprisonment the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux says:’ Imprisonment of people for arrears of community charge should cease immediately.’
It is not a left-wing Labour council or Member of Parliament who says that.
It is the NACAB, which continues:’ It is financially highly inefficient and imprisoning people because of their financial vulnerability should be anathema to a humane society.’
The council tax is better than the poll tax, but only just.
It is still appallingly ill thought out and it will be grossly unfair.
It is a mess.
We need an election and a Labour Government to clear up the mess.
Mr. Barry Jones (Alyn and Deeside)
I am glad to follow my hon. Friend the Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen).
The hon. Member for Salisbury (Mr. Key) made a number of unscheduled statements in the debate.
I listened to them with great interest.
At the beginning of the Secretary of State for the Environment's speech there was a fusillade of Government interventions.
The tenor of those interventions was worry and apprehension.
There were interventions from the right hon. Member for Brent, North (Sir R.
Boyson), and the hon. Members for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall), for Lancaster (Dame E. Kellett-Bowman), for Rochford (Dr. Clark), for Leeds, North-West (Dr. Hampson), for Warrington, South (Mr. Butler), for Gravesham (Mr. Arnold) and for Honiton (Sir P. Emery).
The hon. Member for Norfolk, North (Mr. Howell) sought a 2.5 per cent.
increase in value added tax — but he is standing down at the general election.
I heard the hon. Member for Staffordshire, South (Mr. Cormack) say of the poll tax that it was the most misconceived legislation ever.
He was intensely critical of the capping proposals in the Bill.
He said that capping is’ crude and unsatisfactory.’
I understand that the hon. Member for Aldridge-Brownhills (Mr. Shepherd) strongly criticised the Bill.
The hon. Member for Leeds, North-West — a Conservative — said that the poll tax was a disaster.
He severely criticised his right hon. Friend the former Secretary of State for the Environment, the right hon. Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley), for the manner in which he had introduced the poll tax.
The hon. Member for Teignbridge (Mr. Nicholls)— a Conservative — said that the Government had got the poll tax wrong.
The hon. Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace) said that the Government had wasted vast sums of money and that the council tax would not survive.
My hon. Friend the Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis) made a robust speech.
He called the council tax the poll tax mark II and said that the new tax was to be bulldozed through the House.
My hon. Friend the Member for Newham, North-West (Mr. Banks) said that Her Majesty's Government did not know how to organise local government.
In his vigorous speech, he produced examples of the statements he has made.
My hon. Friend the Member for Makerfield (Mr. McCartney) expressed his anger at Conservative Back Benchers who had supported the poll tax measures and who are now trooping forth to support this Bill.
My hon. Friend the Member for Leyton made a passionate case for getting rid of the 20 per cent.
minimum payment.
My hon. Friend the Member for Neath (Mr. Hain) called the council tax a schizophrenic tax.
He must be right.
He spoke for the people of Neath and west Glamorgan, as he always does.
We on these Benches agree with his wish that the money thrown at the poll tax had been invested in schools, hospitals and job creation.
We understand why he had come to the House today to denounce freeloading for the rich.
He, too, sought the end of the 20 per cent.
payment.
My hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow, Maryhill (Mrs. Fyfe) spoke eloquently for social justice and said how the Prime Minister had been bounced into supporting the poll tax.
We all drew the appropriate conclusions from her remarks on that.
I hope that the Secretary of State for Wales will tell us whether the rumours are correct that this week — perhaps tomorrow — the Government will make statements on local government finance for 1992-93.
Less than four years ago, the House debated the Second Reading of the poll tax bill.
The poll tax has been a social, political and economic disaster of historic proportions.
It has brought financial and administrative chaos to councils throughout Wales.
It has caused collection problems on a hitherto unprecedented scale, and more than £100 million worth of taxpayers' money has been squandered on administering the wretched tax in Wales alone.
The people of Wales deserve an apology from Ministers The poll tax was conceived in Finchley, tested on Scotland, and imposed on Wales via the Wirral.
The people of Wales have had the misfortune of having a concentration of poll tax fanatics representing them in Whitehall.
I shall be generous because I shall exclude the right hon. Member for Conwy (Sir W. Roberts), who is not here.
He is well liked and sticks to his brief come what may — a tactic that has rightly earned him the nickname of the’ Bardic steamroller’.
The hon. Member for Pembroke (Mr. Bennett) is of a different vein.
He told the House:’ The community charge is a fair tax and a reasonable charge to make on people, so we should support it.’
We know that he was the archetypal loyal Thatcherite Back Bencher in the Second Reading debate four years ago.
He told the House:’ The system of charging on the basis of property is absurd.’
He was a member of the No Turning Back group, and he has not changed.
To placate the hon. Member for Pembroke and his kind, the Government introduced the council tax — a property-poll tax hybrid that makes but fleeting reference to ability to pay.
The poll tax has been an outstanding success for the right hon. Member for Wirral, West (Mr. Hunt)— it has got him into the Cabinet.
When his appointment as Secretary of State for Wales was announced, he told the House:’ I look forward to explaining in Wales, as I have in England the way in which the community charge is a much fairer and simpler system’.
He told the Conservative local government conference:’ In time I believe the community charge will come to be accepted for what it is; simple, straightforward, and, above all fair.’
What came next?
It was a priceless gem:’ But it will also do local government a power of good.’
It did, like a dose of strychnine.
That is how the right hon. Member for Wirral, West got into the Cabinet.
I found one other instructive quote from the right hon. Gentleman — a delphic utterance worthy of William Wordsworth at his best.
In March 1990, the right hon. Gentleman said:’ I have an instinctive suspicion of calm.
Calm comes before a storm.
But equally so, a storm precedes calm.
So too, I believe, it will be with the community charge.’
Can we believe anything that Conservative Ministers say?
Dare we believe anything that the Secretary of State for Wales will say?
Did these Welsh Office Ministers experience a Pauline-like conversion on the road from the Welsh Office to the House?
No.
Poll tax panic prompted this change — a change borne out of short-term electoral desperation.
It is not repentance; it is simply that they are scared for their skins and wish to save parliamentary seats in the general election.
With the council tax, the Government are set to repeat the mistakes of the poll tax.
Like the poll tax, this property tax is deeply flawed.
We believe that it is not fair, it is not practical, and it will not stand the test of time.
The undoing of the poll tax was its unfairness.
The people of Wales — not the local authority associations, not even Her Majesty's splendid Opposition — killed the poll tax.
The people of Wales saw that it was unfair and they will not be fooled by this council tax.
The council tax will retain the most objectionable parts of the poll tax — the head count tax on the individual.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Worsley said, the council tax will simply put a new kind of poll tax on the statute book.
Just like the poll tax, as my hon. Friend the Member for Neath said, the council tax is designed to protect the very rich.
It will protect, at the expense of the rest, those people in Wales who live in the most expensive properties.
People in the top band in Wales will pay only three times the council tax of those at the bottom, although the value of their property is more than eight times greater.
The importance of the head count element in the property poll tax is most clearly shown in the proposals for the discounts.
There is no relationship to ability to pay.
One could say that a bank manager living alone will receive the same discount as a dustman.
The poll tax has been a bureaucratic nightmare.
It has thrown Welsh councils into administrative chaos and has proved difficult and expensive to collect.
In Wales alone, it has cost more than £100 million to set up and administer.
Mr. Blunkett
In Wales alone.
Mr. Jones
In Wales alone, as my hon. Friend says.
The poll tax has succeeded in making ordinary citizens suspicious and resentful of local taxation.
Some now pay late and with ill feeling.
That is the achievement of Conservative Members.
Resentment of the council tax will grow.
That is certain as people begin to understand that the valuation given to their property is not necessarily the actual property value.
That is soon to dawn on the people of Wales, and on people throughout Britain.
That resentment will grow further when people realise that the Welsh Office has got its sums wrong and that the bills that they pay will be much higher than Welsh Office estimates.
I hope that the Secretary of State will address this question: does he accept that council tax bills are likely to be much higher than the Welsh Office predicted?
Does he agree with the Nationwide Anglia building society, which said that house prices in Wales are below those used by the Welsh Office for its council tax calculations?
The right hon. Gentleman already had to allocate more than £10 million to offset part of the cost of implementing the council tax in Wales.
As with the poll tax, our local authorities believe that the cost will far exceed that predicted by Welsh Office Ministers and their officials.
Indeed, Welsh councils are also unhappy about the fact that the Government have invented a new tax but that the councils are expected to foot part of the bill for its implementation from their existing resources.
We believe that the principle of accountability in local democracy has gone out of the window under this Government.
First under the poll tax and now under the council tax, central control has replaced local democracy in determining spending.
Mr. McCartney
An old Soviet system.
Mr. Jones
An old Soviet system, as my hon. Friend says.
Local authorities are to be held accountable for the effects of a financial system over which they will have even less control than the councils in England and Scotland.
In Wales, for every 1 per cent.
increase in local spending, the council tax will rise by an average of 12 per cent.
That is a severe gearing.
Greater accountability could be achieved if the Government accepted Labour's proposal to return control of the business rate to local authorities.
I emphasise that the Assembly of Welsh Counties, the Council of Welsh Districts and the Audit Commission back the restoration of local control over the business rate.
In this case, only the Secretary of State stands in the way of a move to decentralise control over local spending and to return it to local communities.
The Bill contains no provision for the widely supported proposal to strengthen local accountability.
I refer briefly to the question of second homes in Wales.
Some hon. Members referred to the issue, but in the time available I say only that we all accept that second homes present a threat in parts of Wales.
We also know that the poll tax arrangements for empty premises can be very unfair, for example, to elderly people in hospital or old people's homes.
The Government's proposals for second homes in Wales are wrong.
The discount principle is costly to administer.
It will require a register, and a proper rebate system would do the job much better.
In Committee we shall probe deeply into that issue.
The Government are bringing the council tax to Wales out of the utmost panic.
The Conservatives are offering a property poll tax in a desperate effort to avoid what we know to be their imminent electoral slaughter, as we would call it.
The people of Wales observe the Government's panic-stricken measures with contempt.
They do not support them.
They recollect that the Secretary of State for Wales perfected the poll tax and boasted of its merits.
Indeed, he was promoted to the Cabinet for his total commitment to that hated and unjust tax in Wales.
The people of Wales do not believe the right hon. Gentleman's protestations about the so-called council tax.
We know that it still has a poll tax element, that it will still need a register, and that it still does not relate to the ability to pay.
It will still create administrative chaos.
It is still unfair and costly.
It still keeps the uniform business rate.
It still celebrates central Government control.
All of us who represent Welsh constituencies know that in the general election the Conservatives will lose their seats there.
The people of Wales now regard this tired Government with the utmost contempt.
They await the general election with enthusiasm because they want this wretched Government out of office.
They know that the next Queen's Speech will be the product of a Labour Government.
They want a fair deal and, under the Administration of my right hon. Friend the Member for Islywn (Mr. Kinnock), justice and fair play is what they will get.
The Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. David Hunt)
I have listened carefully to 19 speeches, each of which has, in its own way, added to the lustre of this occasion.
Before dealing with the many points raised by right hon. and hon. Members, I propose to say something about Wales but, before doing that, I should point out that I have never in my life before spoken from one doughnut to another.
Given their present configuration, Opposition Front-Bench Members might better be described as a hot dog.
I do not know where all the Labour Back-Bench Members, supposedly so angry about the Bill, can have gone.
It appears that only five or six Labour Back Benchers have come here to protest about local government finance.
Hon. Members
—’ What about your lot?’
Although the hot dog is making so much noise, I shall endeavour to say something about the structure in Wales.
My predecessors and I have enjoyed a close and fruitful working relationship with local authorities in Wales over many years and I believe that that has contributed significantly to the efficient and effective conduct of business between central and local government which is the key to the debate.
I have previously paid tribute to the high level of dedication and professionalism exhibited by the staff of all Welsh councils in introducing and managing changes in local government finance.
It is commendable that they have once again quickly seized the opportunity to involve themselves fully with my Department in working towards the successful implementation of the council tax in 1993.
In that respect, close contact has been established with leaders of the Council of Welsh Districts and the Assembly of Welsh Counties, and local government officers and my officials are paying detailed attention to the practical aspects of implementing the new council tax, including — as the hon. Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) said — the information technology requirement.
It is nonsense to claim — as one or two Opposition Members have — that councils will not be ready to implement the tax in 1993.
The Government have introduced the Bill at the earliest possible moment in the Session, and we shall ensure that secondary legislation is made as quickly as possible.
Combined with the preparatory work now being undertaken, that will give councils the maximum time to prepare themselves before April 1993.
I welcome the positive approach — perhaps I should qualify that by saying’ part positive’— adopted by the hon. Member for Makerfield (Mr. McCartney) towards the Committee stage.
I hope that the Committee will examine the Bill carefully.
I know that my hon. Friend the Member for Aldridge-Brownhills (Mr. Shepherd) has a longstanding opposition to guillotines, but he will recall that many hon. Members on both sides of the House have proposed that we should adopt a procedure under which there is an automatic timetable motion in respect of all Bills.
He should consider that.
However, my hon. Friend is right to point out that there must be sufficient time to consider the Bill.
We must be satisfied that there is an appropriate amount of time.
My hon. Friend made his point very effectively.
We believe that the council tax is straight forward and fair.
It is based on the market value of properties, as my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment explained.
I agree with my hon. Friend the Member for Hornchurch (Mr. Squire) that regional banding would produce many more anomalies.
The tax takes account of the number of people in households.
My hon. Friend the Member for Thurrock (Mr. Janman) asked us to review the 25 per cent.
discount.
However, 90 per cent.
of adults are counted if one counts, as we do, one or two in the household.
There are generous rebates for those on low incomes.
In that context, we commend the new council tax.
Mr. McCartney
Before I accept the Secretary of State's olive branch and damn my political career in front of my colleagues on the Opposition Front Bench, will he clarify at an early stage in the Standing Committee the position about nurses in Wales, England, Scotland and Northern Ireland who take courses and then return to their own districts?
Irrespective of how nurses enter a training scheme, will all nurses undertaking training be treated in the same way?
Mr. Hunt
I withdraw the commendation that I gave the hon. Gentleman, but only because that is damaging his political career.
My hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, North-West (Dr. Hampson) and the hon. Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace) asked about students and student nurses.
I want to make the Government's proposals absolutely clear.
Students, student nurses, apprentices and YT trainees will receive a 25 per cent.
personal discount.
That means that such people cannot increase the bill for any household.
As I have said before, they are invisible with regard to the council tax.
Student nurses, other than those on Project 2000, with apprentices and YT trainees, will be able to claim council tax benefit if they are on low incomes.
However, because most students and student nurses on Project 2000 cannot obtain social security benefits, we have made special arrangements for them.
Property occupied only by students will be exempt.
Student halls of residence and hostels will be exempt, as will be houses and flats where all the residents are students.
Students living alone will not therefore have to pay.
Mr. Wallace
The Secretary of State for Wales is trying to be helpful and to clarify the matter.
However, if a landlord or landlady has a resident student, is there any guarantee that the student will not be asked to contribute towards the council tax?
Mr. Hunt
I obviously cannot give that guarantee.
Where students choose to share accommodation with non-students, the point that the hon. Gentleman described arises.
They will have to decide between them how the council tax bill is shared.
However, their presence will not add to the bill.
If a number of people share a house, it is unlikely that any student in it would be worse off than under the community charge.
Several hon. Members have said that there must be a register.
The Government have made it absolutely clear that a statutory register of council taxpayers is not required.
There is no provision for one in the Bill.
It will be up to councils to decide how to keep — Of course it will.
It will be up to councils to decide how to keep —
Interruption
Mr. Douglas rose
Mr. Hunt
May I finish my sentence?
It will be up to councils to decide how to keep information about people who are liable to pay the council tax.
Some councils may choose to canvass residents, but there will be no requirement, and there is no requirement in the Bill, to respond to such a canvass.
Mr. Douglas
Will the Secretary of State canvass how this matter is being approached from the point of view of data protection?
What advice would he give local authorities which might want to keep not a register but a list?
What is the difference between a register and a list in relation to data protection?
Mr. Hunt
I could say that the hon. Gentleman should ask one of his former hon. Friends because he has given a definition.
I am talking about a statutory register.
There is no provision in the Bill for a statutory register.
I make that absolutely clear.
We have answered that point — there is no statutory register.
The hon. Member for Dunfermline, West (Mr. Douglas), who I believe is a prospective candidate in Garscadden, need have no worries about a statutory register in respect of the council tax.
Mr. Paul Flynn (Newport, West)
Will the Secretary of State give way?
Mr. Hunt
I have many points to answer, rather than respond to hon. Members who have not been present for the full debate.
I shall give way in a few moments.
Interruption
One of the points that the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside (Mr. Jones) failed to make is what he proposes to introduce in Wales.
I can disclose tonight that there is a five-point plan of pain for the Welsh people.
I will tell the hon. Gentleman what it is.
The first point was given by the hon. Gentleman's hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) on 26 March in an interview on the’ Today’programme.
He said that the Labour party intends to increase the burden of council spending met locally to 20 per cent.
Mr. Gould
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Hunt
Let me finish the quotation.
I want the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside to respond, because, although that is an increase of 40 per cent.
in England, it is two and a half times what is raised presently in Wales.
Mr. Gould rose
Mr. Hunt
I want the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside to respond.
He does not want to respond.
Mr. Gould rose
Mr. Hunt
I want the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside to respond.
I say to the hon. Member for Dagenham what the hon. Member for Orkney and Shetland (Mr. Wallace) said about his speech, which is that he made very heavy weather.
As soon as he finished his speech, he fled from the Chamber like a fly-by-night quack doctor, disappearing before his patent medicine is tasted.
He might well brief the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside.
Mr. Gould rose
Mr. Hunt
In Wales, the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside —
Mr. Blunkett
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
There is a convention in the House that if an hon. Member is attacked by a Front-Bench Member, he is allowed the opportunity to reply.
Mr. Hunt
I was merely quoting what the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside said and I have said that I am willing to give way to him.
The second point is that we have been told that we in Wales would return to the rates.
At present, Wales has rates that are structured on rateable values that were worked out in 1973.
Like my hon. Friends the Members for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) and for Leeds, North-West, I must now advise the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside that a revaluation would be bad news for Wales.
I do not believe that the rates are a fair system.
The words of the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock), speaking in Gwent in 1980, have been quoted against us many times today.
The Opposition replied,’ That was 10 years ago’, to which my hon. Friend the Member for Teignbridge (Mr. Nicholls), whom I commend for this observation, said, that 10 years was a very long time for the Leader of the Opposition and 10 minutes was about the average length of every policy that he had put forward.
The right hon. Gentleman said that the rates were the most unjust form of local taxation, yet under Labour we would have a revaluation that would be carried out on an arbitrary basis such as the market price; the rebuilding cost; the maintenance and repair cost; the private rent value; the number of windows, the size of the roof, or the view from the property.
What on earth is the modernised valuation system?
It is bad news for Wales.
Under Labour, there would be unlimited spending.
As my hon. Friends the Members for Wyre (Mr. Mans) and for Thurrock have said, people expected to be protected by central Government, but we have been told by the Labour party that there will be no limit whatsoever on spending.
If we look at the rates proposals — I shall give way to the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside — He does not want to intervene because what I am saying is right.
I advise him that with unlimited spending, with arbitrary revaluations, with a rates proposal that goes back to 1973 —
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Gould rose
Mr. Hunt
No, I have said that I will give way to the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside.
With a rates system that no longer preserves the Welsh grant advantage, it is all bad news for Wales.
Labour's rates proposals are to fairness what Henry VIII was to marital stability and what Basil Fawlty is to the art of hospital and hotel management.
Labour's faulty fairness is something — Hon. Members should see what Basil Fawlty has done to hospitals as well as to hotels.
Interruption
It is about time that Opposition Members reconsidered this matter.
I made an offer to the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside that he may well recall.
I said that I was willing to see him and his colleagues to consult on how best and how quickly to abolish the poll tax and on how best and how quickly to introduce a new and fairer system.
The Liberal Democrats, Plaid Cymru and Conservative Members came in to see me, but the Labour party did not.
Mr. Lewis
Will the Secretary of State tell us how many ideas from the Liberals and others he has included in the Bill?
Mr. Hunt
I am not sure what the hon. Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis) is trying to say, but although I made an offer to his hon. Friend the Member for Alyn and Deeside, the hon. Gentleman did not come to see me.
The hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside is brandishing a document that he sent to me, but he refused my offer to come to see me.
I understand that the hon. Member for Dagenham also refused a similar offer from my right hon. Friend the Member for Henley (Mr. Heseltine).
It does not sit easily with that denial of consultation for the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside now to criticise my right hon. Friends and myself for introducing fair and straightforward proposals for a council tax.
Many of the points which have been raised this evening will be considered in Committee.
Not only did the hon. Member for Neath (Mr. Hain) get his facts wrong, but the key point —
Mr. Barry Jones
The Secretary of State has consistently misrepresented the position of my hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) and all the statements that the Labour party has made about the matter.
The people of Wales are tired of observing him whingeing and whining his way around Wales.
The people of Wales do not take kindly —
Mr. Hunt rose
Mr. Jones
— to being lectured by the right hon. Gentleman, who is the man who perfected the poll tax.
He should be ashamed of himself.
It being Ten o'clock, the debate stood adjourned.
Debate to be resumed tomorrow.
Derbyshire Police Force
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mrs. Edwina Currie (Derbyshire, South)
It is without any pleasure that I seek once more to call the attention of the House to the problems faced by Derbyshire police force.
I am pleased to see so many of my colleagues here, including my hon. Friends the Members for Amber Valley (Mr. Oppenheim), for Derby, North (Mr. Knight) and for Derbyshire, West (Mr. McLoughlin) and several other colleagues.
I know that they share my views and worries.
The House will recall my Adjournment debate of 22 January 1991 following the publication in December 1990 for the first time of the annual report by Her Majesty's inspector of constabulary, Mr. Geoffrey Dear.
Mr. Dear painted a picture of a poorly funded, undermanned force under great pressure, and a chief constable with his hands tied behind his back by council rules and bureaucracy such that decisions on spending even minute amounts have to be referred to a committee, including items as minute as the installation of a telephone line.
The fingerprint bureau was on the point of collapse.
Specialised services on drugs and undercover activity were severely curtailed.
The police computer was overloaded.
Police stations were falling apart and in a disgusting state.
The net result was rising crime and falling detection rates — an astonishing pattern in our sensible and law-abiding community.
In all, Mr. Dear threatened to withhold the certificate of efficiency if matters did not improve.
Mr. Dear has now returned to Derbyshire and has produced another interim report.
It makes even worse reading and it distresses me to have to bring it to the attention of the House.
In paragraph 2.2 he reminds everybody that in his first report’ the state of policing in Derbyshire was described as mixed but all too often one of deterioration in infrastructure and morale.'
The position almost 12 months later is now worse.’
He reports, for example, exactly what the committee has done since the first report was published.
The report was discussed with the police authority back in October 1990 and with the chairman of the police authority in October 1990.
It was published in December 1990 and almost immediately debated by the police committee.
What did the committee do?
Did it pass resolutions to spend more money and get itself organised to ensure that the police could run themselves properly?
No.
The only thing that it did was to clarify the legality of its position.
So it sought the opinion of legal counsel.
It instructed him in February 1991.
It received his opinion in March 1991.
The report went back to legal counsel with suggested amendments.
It was debated again on 4 June 1991.
Mr. Dear says that almost no action that could be registered and measured by Her Majesty's inspector has yet been taken by the police committee.
He commented rather wryly:’ Whether or not the delay of almost 6 months was procrastination must remain a matter of opinion.’
The committee was still discussing its response to crucial aspects of the first inspection when the next inspection process commenced in May this year.
Where are we now?
Let us take staffing.
The authorised establishment of Derbyshire police force is 1,820 officers.
That is effectively the official Home Office ceiling.
It has been increased twice in recent months.
It has been increased by 27 posts.
But the actual number of police officers employed at 15
October 1991 was 1,713, not 1,820.
That is a reduction of 38 officers in a year.
The council's main reaction to Mr. Dear's complaints of undermanning has been to cut the force even further.
All recruitment stopped in mid-1990 and we are now more than 100 officers below strength.
Moreover, there are now 66 fewer officers in post than there were 10 years ago.
That has been the result of 10 years of Labour control in Derbyshire county council.
Yet, according to the chief constable, in the same period calls for service have increased by 85 per cent.
In 1990 a total of 220,000 calls for service — a record — were received.
The sensible response would have been to increase the number of officers, not to cut them.
The shortfall was made worse by the high level of civilian staff, which is traditional in Derbyshire.
However, the county is not recruiting them either, and they are 100 posts below establishment.
That means that we have even fewer uniformed officers on our streets because they have to do civilian tasks such as manning telephones.
There are virtually no traffic wardens, school patrols are entirely haphazard activities, and in many parts of the county rural policing has disappeared — it is non-existent in many parts, especially in the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Derbyshire, West and in my own constituency.
This is not fantasy — I am not making it up.
In paragraph 2.16 of his report, the inspector says:’ The effect on the public of Derbyshire must now be very serious.
It was apparent throughout the Inspection that substantial areas of the County are no longer patrolled by the Police.
The Chief Constable has recently stated that community policing is now a myth and foot patrols a rarity.’
The results should be fairly obvious.
The crime rate in the first quarter of 1991 rose by 26 per cent.
over previous years in Derbyshire.
In the same period, burglary in dwellings was up by 65 per cent., compared to a 15 per cent .
increase nationally.
The detection rate is well down and has fallen steadily in the past four years — the detection rate for burglary in dwellings is now less than 20 per cent.
Officers are working huge amounts of overtime and they are not being paid for it.
The sickness rate is well up and is a matter of considerable concern.
Because no spare officers are available to give assistance, attacks on the police have increased and are 50 per cent.
higher than in similar forces.
The situation is deeply worrying.
Let me quote again from the report so that people realise that I am not making this up.
For example, in paragraph 2.19 it states’ HMI was concerned to hear, repeatedly, from police officers that they were having to concede more and more ground to the hooligans in the street, as no police back-up could be expected when scanty resources were deployed to incidents.’
Those of my constituents who are members of the police force — both uniformed and civilian — and those in the constituencies of my hon. Friends are absolute saints to continue to work in such circumstances with bravery, courage, commitment and cheerfulness.
The fact that they do so and produce any results at all in such circumstances says a great deal about the men and women who serve us all in Derbyshire.
It is a heartbreaking business.
Why is it happening?
Money has a lot to do with it, as it has with every problem in Derbyshire.
It is interesting to reflect on that.
The Labour party won control of Derbyshire with a substantial majority in 1981 and the inspector of constabulary says that there have been at least eight years of progressive underfunding by the police committee — 1.8 per cent.
per annum less than the average for English non-metropolitan forces.
The cumulative effect in the past decade means that the force has more than14 per cent.
less funding than it would have been expected to have.
The inspector adds that he thinks that’ the Force was in a parlous state in 1990.’
This year he says:’ a further £2.116 million has been cut from the budget.
Effectively the police budget only grew by 5.4 in 1991-92 over the previous year, in the face of inflation and pay awards running at 9.5.’
That results in an absolutely ridiculous state of affairs.
The way in which the cuts and budgetary controls are applied makes Derbyshire the laughing stock of the country.
I shall give the House a few examples.
Throughout the country, mileage restrictions on operational vehicles and on essential users include the following:’ in the north west of the County, an area 20 miles across, was patrolled by an Area car with a 40 miles allocation for an 8 hour tour of duty; in the conurbation the panda vehicles were restricted to 28 miles for each 8 hour shift’.
One of them recently ran out of petrol and had to do a 45-mile round trip for fuel when its total allocation for the whole shift was only 28 miles.
’ supervisory officers were virtually confined to their office or foot after midnight on the night shift when they had used up their allocation.
Some detectives were restricted to 18 miles per day with their main custody suite located some 12 miles away from their base.’
That of course means that the police pay for petrol out of their own pockets and that is an absolute disgrace.
There was a row over a kettle in the communications room at Alfreton in Amber Valley, to which my hon. Friend the Member for Amber Valley drew attention.
The electric kettle broke down and will not work unless somebody stands beside it holding in the knob.
They sensibly asked for a new kettle but were told that they could not have one because cuts meant that no new equipment or furniture of any kind was available.
The office staff even have to share staples.
Depriving our police force of a cup of tea is astronomically vindictive and silly.
However, Derbyshire county council is not short of money.
The standard spending assessment for all services in Derbyshire was set at 17 per cent.
over the 1990-91 figure.
By anybody's calculations that is much more than inflation and allows a tremendous amount of growth — and growth there has been.
The fire service, which has an SSA of £15 million, had a budget of £15.7 million.
It spent more than its SSA, but perhaps that has something to do with the marginally left-wing nature of the fire services union in our area.
However, the fire service, especially in south Derbyshire, does a very good job.
The SSA for the social services is £68 million but the total spend is £86 million.
That is not a misprint.
The social services spend £18 million more than SSA partly because everybody in Derbyshire gets free home helps whether they are in financial need or not.
Education has an SSA of £311 million, but its actual budget this year is £350 million, almost £40 million more than its SSA.
My hon. Friends know where the money is spent.
I shall return to that.
The police SSA is £32.3 million and that is the amount that the county budgets to spend on them.
It is the only budget in which the SSA is exactly matched by what is spent.
The largest chunk of the increase over SSA is spent on funding school meals in Derbyshire because the price has not been increased for more than 10 years.
My constituents face the most extraordinary problems.
They cannot police the place for themselves or teach for themselves, yet 400 teachers face redundancy this year.
My constituents cannot run the library service for themselves, but some libraries in my constituency have been closed.
The one thing at which my constituents are jolly good is feeding their children and they do not need to be subsidised to the tune of £14 million a year to do it.
That is where some of the money goes.
Some of it also goes on several splendid, wonderful, much-admired council newspapers.
The official cost of this rubbish is nearly £200,000 a year.
There is one for the work force and something called’ Green Watch’on which I have had correspondence with the county director and which costs about £60,000 a year.
They all go in the bin because we have abandoned the process that we adopted some years ago of posting them back to the county officials and the councillors because that was not having any effect.
If the official cost of that little lot is well over £250,000, I suspect, and I know that my hon. Friend the Member for Amber Valley will agree, that the actual cost is much more.
Our football clubs have free policing.
Mr. Justice Taylor's report following his inquiry into the Hillsborough stadium disaster commented on the cost of policing and stated:’ The temptation to the clubs to leave it all to the police is stronger if they are not required to make a realistic payment for police services.’
He commented with amazement that the charge was supposed to be entirely arbitrary and that at one ground it was said to be nil.
Just one ground in the entire country does not pay for its police service, and of course that has to be Derby County football club, yet it is the Derbyshire police force that so desperately needs the money.
The council spent £600,000 on a legal department.
It has sued most hon. Members in the Chamber tonight
Points of Order
Mr. Tom Clarke (Monklands, West)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I have not raised this matter before.
I have no wish to question your ruling.
I am a member of the Select Committee on Health and, as you know, the House has referred to the Select Committee on Privileges the important issue of the leaked report.
In view of doubts that have been raised in the House and elsewhere, may I ask for clarification on whether the Privileges Committee is free to consider the role of the Secretary of State for Health and senior officials in his Department and, most important, the role of the parliamentary private secretary to the Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Esher (Mr. Taylor)?
Can you make it clear that these matters will be dealt with urgently and, in view of the credibility of all Select Committees, will you ensure that a firm conclusion is reached?
Mr. Speaker
I confirm that the Committee is free to look into all those matters.
Mr. Phillip Oppenheim (Amber Valley)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Is not it extraordinary that Opposition Members are sanctimoniously concerned about leaks when their Front-Bench spokesmen live off leaks from Departments?
Mr. Speaker
That is not a matter for me.
Mr. Gerald Howarth (Cannock and Burntwood)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I seek your guidance about a matter on today's Order Paper that is causing some confusion.
Early-day motion 117 commends the Bolshevik communist revolution.
Hon. Members
Hear, hear.
Mr. Gerald Howarth (Cannock and Burntwood)
Some Opposition Members say’ Hear, hear’.
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the new model Labour party has been assiduously trying to distance itself from its Bolshevik friends.
However, a Labour Whip has signed this motion.
Can you clarify Labour party policy by saying whether Labour is in favour of Bolshevism or against it?
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Gentleman and the House know that early-day motions are expressions of opinion.
The motion was in order when it was put down and it is open to any hon. Member to support it — or amend it — if he or she wishes.
Mr. Ian Bruce (Dorset, South)
Further to the previous point of order, Mr. Speaker.
On Thursday, a correct point of order was raised with Mr. Deputy Speaker about what one should do with matters arising from the first report of the Select Committee on Health.
It was ruled clearly that as this was being automatically sent to the Select Committee on Privileges, it could not be discussed on the Floor of the House.
However, just before the point of order was raised, a group of Labour Members came in and raised, on spurious points of order, allegations against the Secretary of State for Health arising from matters that did not appear in the report.
They implied that these allegations were in the report.
How can we refer this matter?
Is it for you, or is it a matter for the Select Committee on Privileges?
There was a conspiracy among Labour Members to put on the record points that do not arise from the report.
Mr. Speaker
Did I hear the hon. Gentleman say that this happened on Thursday when I was in the Chair?
This is Tuesday and it would have been appropriate for him to have raised this matter then.
We can go no further on this point today.
Local Government Finance Bill
Order read for resuming adjourned debate on Question, That the Bill be now read a Second time
Question again proposed.
Mr. Speaker
I must announce to the House that I have not selected either of the amendments on the Order Paper, but they may be referred to during the debate.
The Secretary of State for Scotland (Mr. Ian Lang)
At the height of the first day's debate on the Second Reading of the Local Government Finance Bill, there were six Labour Back-Bench Members present.
There are now about 24, but that count is falling fast.
I am sure that the House will start to fill rapidly as I address it at the start of the second day of debate on the Bill.
After all, the Scottish clauses comprise a substantial proportion of its contents.
The House will be aware that, for the most part, these are closely equivalent to the clauses which relate to the introduction and operation of the council tax in England and Wales which my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment described yesterday.
It is important that we have this opportunity to concentrate on the Bill as it affects Scotland.
We have already done some of the groundwork for the new tax.
It was necessary, if we were to meet the target of 1 April 1993 for introduction of the tax, to ensure that the first step towards the levying of the tax — the valuation of properties — was begun as soon as possible.
Therefore, we enacted, before the summer recess, the Local Government Finance and Valuation Act 1991.
That enabled a considerable amount of groundwork for the valuation exercise to be undertaken over the summer.
In Scotland, the assessors, in discussions with the Inland Revenue valuation office in Scotland, have been preparing for the actual task of valuation, which will get under way shortly.
Therefore, we are very much on course for the introduction of the new tax in 1993.
Clauses 84 to 92 carry over and develop the arrangements for valuation set out in the 1991 Act and provide for changes to be made in lists to take account, for example, of new properties and appeals against taxation.
The hon. Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) described our valuation arrangements for Scotland as a recipe for disaster.
I am sure that he did not intend to insult thereby the professionals involved — the assessors — who will be responsible for the valuation and the Commissioners of Inland Revenue, who are responsible for ensuring consistency in the way in which the valuation is undertaken throughout the country.
I am glad to reassure him that all is on course and going smoothly.
Our decision to give the assessors that responsibility reflects the views put to us during the consultation which persuaded us that they were best placed to undertake the work and to do the job well within the timetable allowed.
Our decision to give the Commissioners of Inland Revenue responsibility for overseeing the work reflected our understanding of the demand in Scotland for consistency in the way in which taxes operate throughout Great Britain.
The arrangements are working well and I have every confidence that the job will be completed satisfactorily on time.
Clauses 70 to 73 provide for the introduction of the council tax set separately by the regional, islands and district councils in respect of dwellings in their areas.
Clause 74 provides for the valuation bands into which dwellings are to be placed and which have already been described in the Domestic Property (Valuation)(Scotland) Regulations 1991.
It also provides for the range of tax payable for the bands.
I think that it would be helpful now if I described in some detail what the effect of the banding arrangements will be, as there has been considerable misunderstanding of the provisions.
The hon. Member for Garscadden said last week that he finds it incomprehensible that many properties may stay in the same band in perpetuity.
But why should they not?
A dwelling in Scotland that is placed in band D will have been assigned that band because its value at 1 April 1991 is over £45,000 but does not exceed £58,000.
That value is around the Scottish average.
Of course, the Bill includes provisions to allow the assigned band to be changed if the value of the property changes sufficiently to take it into another band.
If the band is higher, however, the change can be made only on change of ownership of the dwelling.
If there is no such change, the banding decision will remain unchanged.
The banding system irons out much of the effect of relative changes in property values within an area which, under the rating system, brought regular pressure for revaluation.
The need for general revaluations is therefore much reduced.
If, however, such a revaluation were required, say, 20 years hence, the same house in band D would probably remain a band D house, provided that its relative position within the range of property values had not changed so much as to take it outwith the new parameters for that band.
Clause 74 places an upper limit on the amount of tax that any person can be liable to pay.
This aspect of the arrangements — inevitably, I suppose — has produced the standard response that the rich are being protected.
That neatly ignores the imperfect correlation between people's circumstances and the value of their home.
It demonstrates only the Labour party's vindictive desire to extract the maximum revenue from high-value properties regardless of the circumstances of their occupants, or any relationship between the tax burden and the services that are provided.
Sir Nicholas Fairbairn (Perth and Kinross)
Will my right hon. Friend explain to a simple fellow like me why it is considered sensible to return to a system of socialist taxation based on the capital value of an asset that produces no income and that is unrelated to the services for which the occupant is paying and to the income of the occupant, this asset being normally called a home?
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend gives an admirable description of the so-called fair rates proposals of the Labour party, to which we do not intend to return.
Clause 75 defines liability to pay as an individual liability that is dependent on the relationship that persons have with dwellings.
This liability would fall in the first instance on the resident owner, then the resident tenant and so on.
Clause 79 provides for discount where there is only one or no resident in the property.
These arrangements will be fair and simple to administer.
During our debate on the Gracious Speech last Wednesday, we heard a different story from Opposition Members and especially from the hon. Member for Garscadden.
The hon. Gentleman is determined, as ever, to see administrative nightmares where none exists.
His contacts in local government have told him, presumably before even seeing the Bill, that discounts will be difficult to administer, and uncritically he believes them.
When it comes to the hon. Gentleman's examples of why the system will be difficult to administer, what do we find?
There is a complete misunderstanding on his part of how the discount proposals will work in practice.
As the mouthpiece of the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, he asks whether authorities are supposed to send out bills for 100 per cent.
of the liability to everyone and leave discounts to be claimed by householders.
The answer is to be found in paragraph 4 to schedule 2.
Local authorities are required to take reasonable steps to ascertain entitlement to discount, but in the absence of firm information they can send out an undiscounted bill.
In other words, as a matter of sensible administrative practice, authorities should make efforts to ascertain discount households before sending out bills.
Hon. Members
How?
Mr. Lang
By referring to existing information.
Mr. Allen McKay (Barnsley, West and Penistone)
Can the Secretary of State tell me how local authorities will do what he describes?
Mr. Lang
They can make reasonable efforts by examining existing information or by carrying out a canvass.
There are local authority housing tenancy lists.
Authorities will be able to examine electoral rolls.
They could even study community charge registers.
They are most definitely not required to know the composition of every household in their areas before billing.
There is no question, therefore, of a register being required.
We come now to what might be called COSLA's auntie problem.
The hon. Member for Garscadden quoted COSLA as being concerned about what would happen if someone's aunt came to stay for a couple of months.
Again, the answer is in the Bill — in clause 79 for Scotland.
Discounts are calculated according to who is resident in a dwelling, and’ resident’means having one's sole or main residence there — a concept not unfamiliar to Labour Members.
In the case described in our earlier debate by the hon. Gentleman, the local authority would make its decision to withdraw or not to withdraw discount on the basis of whether it thought that the dwelling in question was the auntie's sole or main residence.
In fact, if she were there for two months, it would be unlikely that it would regard her as a resident.
However, there will be a right of appeal against any decision.
Clauses 81 and 83 make provision for the appeal arrangements that will apply in Scotland.
As the House will be aware, appeals under the community charge are, for the most part, made initially to the community charge registration officer and thereafter to the sheriff under summary procedure.
That system has, by and large, worked well.
However, we are aware of the concerns that have been expressed about the system as compared with the arrangements in England and Wales, where appeals are made to valuation and community charge tribunals.
We have taken note of those concerns in formulating the arrangements for the council tax.
Appeal on questions of valuation liability and levying of the tax will therefore lie with valuation appeal committees, with further appeal on points of law to the Court of Session.
Clause 94 and schedule 7 make provision for capping.
They re-enact the arrangements already provided in the Local Government Finance and Valuation Act 1991, which is to be repealed and replaced by the Bill and do not, therefore, make any changes to the present arrangements.
The House will be aware that I announced last month the principles that I am minded to adopt next year in considering whether planned expenditure is excessive or has increased excessively.
At this point, it might be appropriate to spend a few moments on a specifically Scottish aspect of the Bill.
Mr. David Nicholson (Taunton)
Before my right hon. Friend passes on to a specifically Scottish aspect, I wish to raise a general point.
I am glad that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment and my hon. Friend the Minister are on the Front Bench.
I agree with my right hon. Friend that the intervention of my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Perth and Kinross (Sir N.
Fairbairn) aptly summed up the Labour party's position.
My right hon. Friend will be aware that most Conservative Members accept that, while some taxes may fall on income and others on spending, there is scope for a modest tax to fall on what we might describe as the amenity of property.
One lesson that we learnt from the transition from domestic rates to the community charge was the injustice of the former rates system to the single-person household.
My right hon. Friend is probably aware that there is considerable pressure from single-person households for an increase in the 25 per cent.
discount.
Will he and our right hon. and hon. Friends, over the next few weeks, consider whether there is scope for increasing that discount to something more related to the ability to pay of the single person?
Mr. Lang
My hon. Friend made a point that obviously concerns him, and he did so lucidly.
I and my right hon. Friend are grateful for his support for the underlying principle of the Bill.
I am sure that he will wish to develop that issue in Committee, if he is fortunate enough to be a member.
We gave close consideration to the appropriate discount level and I am sure that my hon. Friend will agree that there is a certain symmetry and element of justice readily apparent in the concept of a 25 per cent.
discount for a one-person residence and a 50 per cent.
discount for a house that has no resident occupant.
Mr. Frank Haynes (Ashfield)
What will the Scottish electorate think when they discover what the millionaire Secretary of State for the Environment, who is sitting on the right hon. Gentleman's left, has to pay?
Will they think that he is getting a massive discount, as he will have to pay only a small amount?
No doubt the Scottish electorate will think that he drafted the Bill to suit himself.
Mr. Lang
If my right hon. Friend were fortunate enough to be resident in Scotland, he would find that about 89 per cent.
of the cost of local government services was funded by central taxation.
If my right hon. Friend is fortunate enough to be in the circumstances described by the hon. Gentleman, he is making a far larger contribution as an individual to income tax and other central Government taxation than would otherwise be the case.
As to the Scottish electorate, I reassure the hon. Gentleman that they were at the forefront in seeking the abolition of domestic rates and they will be at the forefront in resisting their reintroduction by the Opposition.
I want now to discuss an important aspect of the Bill which affects Scotland — the council water charge set out in schedule 11.
Mrs. Ray Michie (Argyll and Bute)
Can the Secretary of State tell us something about the effect of the council tax on the agricultural community?
I have already had queries about what will happen.
Many farmers and tenant farmers live in big old rambling houses.
Crofters lost their 50 per cent.
derating with the introduction of the poll tax and, given the present state of agriculture, there is considerable concern about what will happen under the council tax.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Lady will know that the market value of such houses will reflect the present state of agriculture and the demand for such houses.
Therefore, they are likely to be put in a lower band and so attract a relatively lower tax than under the community charge.
If they are tied houses of the sort that the hon. Lady described, that would be reflected in the market value.
Therefore, no particular difficulty arises.
Let me press on to the important subject of the council water charge which is set out in schedule 11.
Hon. Members will be aware that at the same time as we consulted about our council tax proposals, we issued a consultation paper in Scotland about water and sewerage charges.
Among other things, that paper proposed that sewerage charges should be separated out from the new council tax in the same way as water charges are at present separately levied.
However, it became apparent during the consultation that separate charges would have borne most heavily on those about whom the hon. Lady is concerned — people in rural areas.
It would also have meant higher administrative costs which would have had to have been borne by charge payers.
Therefore, we have decided that it would not be appropriate to introduce separate charges for sewerage and the provisions in the Bill for water and sewerage charges in Scotland will essentially maintain the existing system whereby regional and island councils set the appropriate levels.
Mr. Donald Dewar (Glasgow, Garscadden) indicated assent.
Mr. Lang
I am grateful for the hon. Gentleman's support.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce (Gordon)
Many will welcome that sensible proposal, but can the right hon. Gentleman underline it with a categorical assurance that the Government have no intention of privatising water in Scotland either this side of an election or afterwards?
Mr. Lang
I can reassure the hon. Gentleman that, to use the time-honoured phrase, we have no present plans to undertake such an exercise.
Water will continue to be charged via either the council tax, linked to property value bands, or the non-domestic water rate, linked to the rateable value of premises, or by direct metered charges.
Sewerage will continue to be charged via the council tax or the non-domestic sewerage rate.
All the discounts that will apply to the council tax itself will also apply to the water and sewerage charges.
No fundamental changes are, therefore, proposed in the Bill, but we have taken the opportunity to make two improvements in the way in which the charges are levied.
One is that the Bill will extend to all consumers in Scotland the option of being able to pay for water by metered charges if they wish, having the amount that they use recorded and being charged direct.
That is a useful extension of consumer choice.
It offers an option to Scottish consumers which is available in England and Wales and which I am sure will be welcomed.
Some small businesses may also benefit from that option since the Bill abolished the minimum threshold of rateable value which a business previously had to meet to be eligible for a metered supply.
We have also taken the opportunity in the Bill to provide for water to be supplied free of charge for fire training purposes and for other emergency purposes as well as fire fighting.
Mr. Dewar
There will be a widespread welcome for the Secretary of State's announcement about sewerage, if only because up to now, if I remember rightly, the water charge has not been included in the rebate scheme.
Are there any plans to bring it within the rebate scheme?
Mr. Lang
I have no announcement to make about that at present, but, as the hon. Gentleman will have heard, I made it clear that the discounts would apply to water and sewerage.
The claim has been repeatedly made by Opposition Members, and most recently by the hon. Member for Renfrew, West and Inverclyde (Mr. Graham), who is not in his place today, that we are starving local government of resources.
That is simply not true and I shall outline the facts.
Starting with financial support, Government grants to Scottish authorities — rate support grant or revenue support grant and specific grants — have increased in real terms from £2,562 million in 1979-80 to £2,809 million in 1991-92.
Therefore, far from Government support having been reduced during the period that the Government have been in office, there has been an increase in real terms of 9.6 per cent.
Then there is the alleged deterioration in local authority services; again, the facts are different.
In education, since 1979 the percentage of pupils staying on until the fifth year has increased from 35 per cent.
to 54 per cent.
and the percentage staying on until the sixth year from 14 per cent.
to 25 per cent.
The percentage entering higher education has increased from 16.8 per cent.
in 1978-79 to 24 per cent.
and is still rising fast.
Expenditure per pupil has increased in real terms by 49 per cent.
—
Interruption
Mr. Sam Galbraith (Strathkelvin and Bearsden)
The Secretary of State is yawning at his own speech it is so boring.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman is supposed to be in the medical profession, so he will know that that was not a yawn; I was choking.
The number of field social workers has also increased from 2,985 to 4,700, an increase of 47 per cent.
There has been a 26 per cent.
increase in all social work staff and a 13 per cent.
increase in home care staff.
The number of places in local authority day care centres is up by 152 per cent.
for the elderly, 59 per cent.
for the mentally handicapped and 49 per cent.
for the physically handicapped.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
The Secretary of State has just referred to the number of social workers.
What decision has he reached about funding social workers involved in the Orkney inquiry?
Mr. Lang
It would not be appropriate to answer such a question in a debate on the Local Government Finance Bill.
Any answer will be given in the appropriate way at the appropriate time.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
I am grateful to the Secretary of State.
He has been most generous in giving way.
All the increases that he has just quoted — in the number of pupils staying on to the fifth and sixth years and in the number of social workers — are down to the fact that all the regional authorities in Scotland are controlled by the Labour party and they see as their spending priorities the need to create educational opportunities for young people and to provide home helps for old people.
Now the Secretary of State is telling them that he will cut their budgets next year to stop them increasing the number of educational opportunities and social workers.
The Secretary of State cannot have it both ways.
Mr. Lang
The hon. Gentleman is seeking to disguise the fact that under the Government in which he served the quality of service under the headings that I have just listed was vastly inferior to the quality of service provided under this Government.
Local authority expenditure during the 12 years since we took office has risen by 26 per cent.
in real terms.
It is an astonishing 30 per cent.
higher in Scotland than in England and Wales, a fact for which COSLA has been unable to give any credible explanation.
To help sustain that substantial expansion of local government expenditure, the Government have shifted the burden so that central Government now bear up to 89 per cent.
in Scotland with only 11 per cent.
borne at local level.
But now we are told that the Labour party plans to increase the local contribution to no less than 20 per cent.
Mr. Bryan Gould (Dagenham)
Before the Secretary of State repeats that totally misleading canard, will he kindly check with his right hon. Friend the Secretary of State the percentage that he quoted?
I think that 22 per cent.
was the claim that the right hon. Gentleman made on behalf of his Government in exactly the same week that, in response to a question, I used the figure of 20 per cent.’
Mr. Jimmy Wray (Glasgow, Provan)
It must be made clear that the Labour party is not to blame for the poll tax which the Government introduced.
The nation should be told about the chaos, poverty and hardship that the Government have created in deprived areas throughout the country.
I am not too worried about the new council tax because I doubt whether it will see the light of day.
Will the nation vote the Government back in?
They will be voted out and it will be a long time before we have a Conservative Government in Britain again.
Let us consider democracy in local government and the three Secretaries of State for the Environment who have had a go at local government taxation.
The right hon. Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley), the right hon. Member for Bath (Mr. Patten) and now the right hon. Member for Henley (Mr. Heseltine) have all been unsuccessful and got it wrong.
Who would have thought that, as we enter the 21st century, 7.5 million people would have been served with warrants?
Yesterday, the Secretary of State for Scotland made a statement condemning local councils for overspending.
The poll tax collection rate throughout Britain varies from 33 per cent.
to 93 per cent.
Non-collection is not confined to Strathclyde and Glasgow but applies also to the shires, which collected only 82 per cent.
and inner London, which collected only 66 per cent.
Scotland is owed some £437 million in unpaid poll tax.
Local authorities should be given some money to get them out of the mess.
Although the Secretary of State for Scotland condemned district and regional authorities such as Lambeth, Hackney and Strathclyde, no one could say that they have not tried to collect that money.
Strathclyde regional council even decided to hold an auction because the ruthless Government have allowed it to deteriorate.
It is nearing bankruptcy and has had to make 720 employees redundant, which is a sorry state of affairs.
Mr. William McKelvey (Kilmarnock and Loudoun)
There are difficulties in collecting the charge.
Strathclyde authority undertakes the task diligently, but still faces problems.
I received a letter this morning from the social security office stating that it cannot take anything off the income support of one woman who is being pursued for arrears because she is too poor.
However, the Government refuse to abandon their policy of making everyone pay 20 per cent.
although they know that it costs twice as much to try to collect it as the amount that they actually collect.
They penalise poor people such as my constituent.
Mr. Wray
I sympathise with my hon. Friend the Member for Kilmarnock and Loudoun (Mr. McKelvey) but surely he has been a Membeer long enough to know that the Government do not care.
Conservative Members are not interested in the poor, but are interested only in their own shares and in the rich.
During the Government's term of office they have cut £600 million from the Strathclyde budget for services, so that council has to increase its bills this year by 32 per cent.
The Government are guilty of mismanagement, gross neglect and maladministration, and should be turned out tomorrow because they are not fit to govern.
It annoys me when I hear the criticisms that come from the Secretary of State for the Environment.
He talked about what my hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) said.
I shall quote a couple of paragraphs to see if anyone knows who said them:’ Once implemented and through transition, I believe the new system will prove enduring and a vast improvement on the status quo.’
It was said at the annual conference of the Association of District Councils on 1 July 1988.
Hon. Members
Who was it?
Mr. Wray
Maybe hon. Members will know who it was when they hear the next part.
Three years later the same person said:’ I'll tell you about the poll tax.
We were bounced into it quickly because there was such a fuss about rates in Scotland and we were bounced without thinking because of the political fuss.’
That was said by the Prime Minister.
It was easy to see that he was running for his job then.
Why do we have to wait until 1993 before the poll tax is abolished?
We know what the position is.
In Strathclyde alone, 1.25 million warrants have been issued; many others have been issued in various constituencies.
The position is so bad that the sheriff officers are afraid to go into homes.
The saddest story I heard was of a sheriff officer going to a door to collect items that were to be sold at auction.
He said that the woman in the house had only a table and television, and had spent the night before polishing the table so that it would bring in a wee bit extra to clear her debt.
Is that the sort of Government we have?
Yes, they do not care.
Why will not the Government abolish the 20 per cent.
rule?
Why are they allowing the ratepayers and taxpayers of this country to go on throwing money down the drain?
It costs the Government 19 per cent.
of what they collect if they collect 6 per cent.
of the charges.
Why do not the Government abolish the whole damn lot and give the people a free run for Christmas?
They should do so if they have any compassion.
Mr. George Howarth (Knowsley, North)
They are stony-hearted.
Mr. Wray
Yes, they are stony-hearted.
I have taken a long look at local government finance.
The Government collect only about 14 per cent.
of the charge and the rest comes from central Government — is it worth collecting it?
Some £4.25 billion has been thrown away on trying to get the people out of the mess into which the Government have placed them and £5,795 million has been poured in to try to save the Government from embarrassment.
But the people of Scotland and Britain will never forget the sad 13 years in which people have been brought to their knees.
The most deprived regions are still suffering from cuts in social services, the police force and education.
The Government are hoping to carry on and according to the Secretary of State for the Environment the people will have to put up with the tax until 1993.
Mr. John Marshall (Hendon, South)
I knew the new hon. Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) as a Member of the European Parliament, where he was hard-working, conscientious and a man of principle.
I welcome his election to the House.
He provides one of the vagaries of political life, in that in 1984 he was deselected as a European candidate because he believed in the European Community, whereas he was imposed as the Labour party's candidate a few weeks ago —
Mr. Harry Ewing
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
Is it in order that a new Member of Parliament who has not yet made his maiden speech should be attacked in this way by the hon. Member for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall)?
A Member who has not yet made his maiden speech should not even be mentioned, far less attacked in the way that the hon. Gentleman is cynically going about it.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
It is not unusual for a new Member to be welcomed, despite the fact that he may not yet have contributed to our proceedings.
Mr. Marshall
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those words of wisdom.
If to tax and to please, no more than to love and be wise, is not given to man, may I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment on seeking to do the impossible.
When I tell people that I spent 10 years in the European Parliament, they tell me that I was a hedonist.
When I tell them that I spent 17 years in local government, they tell me that I was a masochist.
I suspect that I was a masochist twice over.
There is no doubt that the old rating system was based on the nebulous concept of a fair market rent.
There has been no free market in residential property since the early years of this century.
It was decreed that the old rating system should seek to produce a value based on a free market in property, but the House destroyed that free market in property during the first world war.
That is why valuation, under the old rating system, was a most inexact science.
That is why it had to be abolished.
Capital values at least have the benefit of being related to a market, although I am sure that many owners will seek to convince their bank managers that their property should be in band H while they seek to convince the rating authorities that their property should really be in band F.
During my 17 years in local government I served as the chairman of the finance committee in Ealing.
We were able to boast of having set the lowest rates in west London and of providing sufficiently good services to attract the Leader of the Opposition to Conservative-controlled Ealing from Liberal-controlled Richmond.
As a man who spent 17 years in local government I have a sense of shame that yet again there has to be another attempt to reform local government finance, due to the incompetence, extravagance and doctrinaire opposition to competitive tendering of Labour councils.
If Labour councils had listened to the advice of the Audit Commission, if historically they had collected rents, rates and the community charge, we should not be faced with our present difficulties over local government finance.
Labour councils, throughout the length and breadth of the country, have delighted in presenting high bills to ratepayers and charge payers and in providing poor services.
They are renowned for planning delays, empty council homes and poor education results.
All too often Labour councillors dream of monuments to municipal munificence — which, incidentally, bear the name of the councillor who had that dream.
I congratulate the Government on accepting the case for regional banding as between Scotland, Wales and England.
My hon. Friend the Minister of State represents an outer London borough and he would be surprised if I did not at least briefly mention the position in the London borough of Barnet.
Under the Government's proposals, taxpayers in Barnet will pay a lower tax than they paid under the discredited rating system which the Government abolished and they will pay less than they would under the Labour party's proposals.
I ask my right hon. and hon. Friends on the Treasury Bench to study closely the problems that affect house owners in the south-east and in London.
There are great regional variations in house prices, illustrated by the fact that in the London borough of Barnet 1 per cent.
of properties will be in bands A and B, 6 per cent.
in the three lowest bands and 46 per cent.
in the top two bands.
Some people in the Labour party believe that high house prices mean high living standards and affluence.
However, the net monthly mortgage repayment in London is £539; it is £478 in the south-east, £263 in Yorkshire and Humberside and £255 in the Northern region.
Monthly mortgage payments in London and the south are twice those in Yorkshire, Humberside and the north.
I hope that if my right hon. and hon. Friends cannot accept the case for regional banding for London and the south, they will reconsider the problems that the revenue support grant can produce for London.
I am one of those who believe that the revenue support grant makes the Schleswig-Holstein question a model of clarity.
There is an undoubted risk that the high bandings that apply in London and the south-east could lead to an outflow of grant.
That is terribly important because under the council tax 85 per cent.
of local expenditure will be met centrally.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes) pointed out yesterday, it is important that we get the grant for London and the south-east correct.
I hope that my hon. Friend the Minister will be able to give some commitment to that this evening.
We look forward to a generous settlement in a few weeks' time when he might deal with the London Regional Transport anomaly which is afflicting us as Members representing outer London.
It is important to remember that there is a tight timetable for the introduction of the new tax.
The difficulties associated with the introduction of the community charge were not caused by the time taken for the Bill to pass through the House, but by the fact that a large number of regulations relating to the charge were passed close to its introduction.
Will my hon. Friend the Minister give us some assurance that regulations relating to the council tax will be in place by the end of this year?
Local authorities will need a substantial amount of time to ensure that their information technology is correct and is in place to deal with the council tax.
It was not in place to deal with the community charge.
Mr. Battle
If that is to be the case, both systems will have to run parallel, which will be an extra burden on local authorities.
So far the Government have not even given a commitment to reimburse the full cost of that.
Mr. Marshall
Of course, there will be the process of introducing the council tax as there would be if we listened to the Labour party and introduced its tax.
The trouble with the Labour system is that it would spend many more years trying to introduce it before it could get rid of the poll tax.
I welcome the fact that the Government are committed to capping a large number of local authorities as part of the introduction of the council tax.
Every change in local government finance, whether by revaluation or the introduction of the community charge, has been accompanied by a large element of extravagance by many local authorities.
Mr. Allen McKay
There are about 400 local authorities.
How many is the hon. Gentleman talking about?
Mr. Marshall
It would be fair to say that a substantial number would be included.
In my estimation, the number of extravagant local authorities —
Mr. McKay
How many?
Mr. Marshall
I am answering the question.
Mr. McKay
The hon. Gentleman does not know the answer.
Mr. Marshall
The number of extravagant local authorities would be more than 100.
There are many benefits of compulsory competitive tendering in London, but many local authorities resisted it.
The Minister told me the other week that compulsory competitive tendering can produce savings of 8 per cent.
in street cleaning in London.
Why did not local authorities do that a long time ago?
All the authorities that refused to indulge were extravagant.
They were putting the jobs of members of the National Union of Public Employees before the good of charge payers and of the local authority.
Those authorities that indulged in competitive tendering and got the jobs done more quickly were able to expand the level of services and reduce the cost to the charge payer.
Mr. William O'Brien (Normanton)
What about the quality of service?
Mr. Marshall
One need not assume that the quality of service is lower —
Mr. O'Brien
What happened?
Mr. Marshall
I am telling the hon. Gentleman what happened.
Yesterday my hon. Friend the Under-Secretary of State for the Environment presented an award to the best street cleaner in London.
He came from an authority which put the service out to compulsory competitive tender some time ago.
The best street cleaner in London does not work in a direct labour department in Hackney, Lambeth or Lewisham.
He was working for Westminster council, an authority which went out to tender some time ago.
Whose streets are cleaner — Westminster's or Camden's?
The answer is Westminster's.
Compulsory competitive tendering provides better services at lower cost to the charge payer in London.
Therefore, many local authorities which, as a matter of principle, refused to go out to competitive tender were extravagant high-cost local authorities, unconcerned about the good of their citizens and of the charge payer.
Mr. McKay
My authority went out to tender to test prices long before the House thought about it.
Mr. Marshall
I must congratulate that authority on doing what so many other Labour authorities refused to do.
All too often Labour councils were reluctant to go out to competitive tender.
I once sat on a Labour-controlled council which went out to tender and would not accept the lowest tender because it did not come from a direct labour department.
Mr. Phillip Oppenheim (Amber Valley)
What does my hon. Friend think of the actions of Derbyshire county council, which refused one low-cost tender because it came in the wrong coloured envelope and ended up accepting a higher tender from its own work force at an enormous extra cost to charge payers?
Mr. Marshall
Am I allowed to use swear words in the House?
I suspect not.
All that I can say is that the actions of Councillor Bookbinder are so incredible as to defy belief.
My hon. Friend the Member for Amber Valley (Mr. Oppenheim) is a lucky man.
Councillor Bookbinder was his opponent at the last election, if I am not mistaken, and I am sure that he at least doubled my hon. Friend's majority.
Mr. Oppenheim
He trebled it.
Mr. Marshall
The level of arrears of community charge is a side issue connected to the introduction of the new tax.
I hope that my hon. Friend the Minister will be able to tell the House that there will be no amnesty for poll tax dodgers and that however high and mighty — be they Members of the House, Labour councillors or whoever — no one will receive an amnesty for refusing to pay the community charge.
As for old-age pensioners, one such Member of the House was slow to pay her community charge bill to the London borough of Barnet, but then a friend paid it for her.
Some of my hon. Friends and the hon. Member for Glasgow, Provan (Mr. Wray) have suggested that central Government should pay more of the cost of local authority expenditure than the Bill provides for.
Although superficially attractive, that would present a huge constitutional problem.
If central Government are to pay even more of the cost, there must be greater control over the activities of every local authority.
It would be a question, not of capping a minority, but of central Government determining how much should be spent by each local authority and how it should be spent.
I do not want central Government to say how many teachers should be at a school in Barnet or how much should be spent on books in Barnet.
I much prefer the system of devolved power to individual schools either by their becoming grant-maintained schools or through the local management of schools.
If 100 per cent.
of local authority expenditure were financed centrally, it would be disastrous for the future of local government and for the linkage of powers between central Government and local authorities.
Later this evening we shall debate a guillotine motion on the Bill, which will provide a chance for a constructive, positive Committee stage.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State has always shown himself to be a listening Minister.
Earlier in the debate we were told how he listened to my hon. Friend the Member for Tayside, North (Mr. Walker), who is no longer here.
I hope that in Committee he will listen to the pleas of Members representing Greater London and the south of England because they are dear to my heart and may to some extent be dear to his.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
I have listened with great interest, if some difficulty, to the hon. Member for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall).
First he supported the legislation and then we heard his special pleading for his constituency.
That is precisely what is wrong with the legislation.
There are so many anomalies that of the 650 Members who make up this House of Commons, including Mr. Speaker himself, each one of us could present the Government with a list of the anomalies in the Bill the length of our arm.
We are discussing a Bill that will never be implemented.
There are two reasons for that.
The principal reason is that the Government will be defeated in four or five months' time and be replaced by a Labour Government who will take the Bill off the statute book as soon as they come to power.
Even if that does not happen — I am realistic enough to know the vagaries of elections — the legislation will not be implemented in the form in which the House is discussing it tonight.
That is my forecast, although I will not be here to see it unfold.
The evidence on which I base it is that, within three weeks of the White Paper being introduced in the middle of this year, there were 15 announcements of changes to the proposals now in the legislation.
Mr. David Lambie (Cunninghame, South)
I wish to make only one or two points in the short time available to me.
I am disappointed with the attendance in the Chamber today, as I was with yesterday's attendance.
This Bill is the flagship of the Government's legislative programme, and Labour Members are opposing it hook, line and sinker.
Mr. John Marshall
All six of them.
Mr. Lambie
It is a six-line Whip.
The general public and those who watch our proceedings on television must wonder whether we are really fighting.
We should have had a general election last Thursday, rather than three by-elections.
We have only to look around the Chamber to know that this Parliament is finished; it is dead.
A general election last Thursday would have settled once and for all the political policies that the country will follow for the next few years.
The hon. Member for Tayside, North (Mr. Walker) said that he was glad that there was only one Bill covering England, Wales and Scotland.
That will not go down well in Scotland.
Scotland has its own system of local government that is quite different from that in England and Wales.
We have district councils and regional councils.
We have a different system of valuation.
In Scotland, it is carried out by assessors who are employed by the regional councils.
In England and Wales, it is carried out by a branch of the Inland Revenue.
I do not understand why we should be dealing with local government finance in Scotland in a Bill that covers the United Kingdom.
The only reason is that after the by-election in Kincardine and Deeside only nine Conservative Members representing Scottish constituencies are left in the House, and the majority of those sit on the Government Front Bench.
There would be no Scottish Tory Members to man a Standing Committee on a separate Scottish Bill.
That is a disgrace both to this Parliament and to the Tory party in Scotland.
If the Government cannot man a Committee, they should draft in English Members.
The Scottish people would then realise that it is the Labour party, not the Conservative party, that represents Scotland.
Scotland was the first area to have poll tax imposed on it.
Why?
I made many speeches during the passage of that legislation.
I blame both local councillors in Scotland and Scottish Members of Parliament, from both sides of the House, who were stupid enough to allow revaluation in Scotland to continue after the English stopped it in 1973.
The Inland Revenue said that it did not have enough workers to carry out the revaluation in England and Wales, so from that date there were no revaluations of property.
In Scotland, Members of Parliament from both sides of the House and local government employees and councillors stupidly said that they would continue with the revaluation, and so we had five-year revaluations until 1985.
The way that the assessors in Scotland attacked the valuation of domestic property led to a revolt among Scottish Conservative voters living in the big houses of Scotland.
As the Member of Parliament for my former constituency, I represented the town of Troon, a very Tory town that had more millionaires per head of population than any other area in the United Kingdom.
That was the area that was attacked by the Tory Government in their valuations and that is why we had the revolt.
That is why the people of Scotland rose up against the rating system.
It was not because the rating system was bad, but because of the way in which the rating system was being carried out, attacking certain areas of domestic property, and, because the English had not carried out a revaluation since 1973, Scotland got out of line.
Unfairly, the Scottish domestic ratepayer was badly hit and, in the area near to the constituency of the then Secretary of State for Scotland, the right hon. Member for Ayr (Mr. Younger), the majority were Conservative voters.
We had to change and the poll tax was introduced in Scotland a year before it was introduced in England and Wales.
Stupidly, the English followed us and made the same mistake.
At present local taxation accounts for only 14 per cent.
of local government expenditure in England and Wales and only 11 per cent.
in Scotland.
This is a point that I have made often in the House and on which I think that I have the support of the Adam Smith Institute which I hope will also be supported by many Conservative Members.
Instead of local taxation in Scotland accounting for only 11 per cent.
of total local government expenditure, why do not the Government pay 100 per cent.?
Why do not we set an example in Scotland, as we did for the poll tax?
Why do not the Government abolish local rates in Scotland and pay a 100 per cent.
grant to the Scottish local authorities, basing local accountability on the principle that local councillors will determine how that money should be spent?
If we did that, we would do away with all these debates about local taxation, whether we should have the rating system or another system such as the poll tax or the council tax, and we would have a system which, at the end of the day, would give the local people the opportunity to determine priorities.
This is one case where, again, I make the point that I am proud to stand here and support the policies of the Adam Smith Institute which every Tory Member should also support, but unfortunately they are afraid to do so because they are facing a general election, knowing that they will be out of power within six months.
Mr. David Blunkett (Sheffield, Brightside)
During the past two days we have heard a vast number of contributions and I pay tribute to the common sense and foresight of Labour Members who have not only pointed out the inequalities of the system that is still in being but the pitfalls that we see ahead of us.
To begin with, I pay tribute to an intervention made by the hon. Member for Wolverhampton, South-West (Mr. Budgen) who, earlier today, rightly pointed out that in a democracy Parliament should be expected to debate a measure such as this in a sane and sensible fashion.
The guillotine motion after 10 o'clock tonight will attempt to preclude sensible contributions, attempt to preclude people from dealing with the difficulties and technicalities in the Bill, and pose a real problem for those of us who believe that local government is not a political football to be kicked about at whim, but an essential part of our democracy for the provision of essential services.
The hon. Gentleman was brave to say what he did.
The hon. Gentleman was far more brave than the hon. Member for Torridge and Devon, West (Miss Nicholson) who has adopted the role of reading out central office briefs in the House to apologise for the Conservative party.
She invented a new phrase tonight about the council tax being a light touch on people's wallets.
I believe that Dickens used that phrase in’ Oliver Twist’.
It will have a similar connotation when people discover what drops through their letter boxes if they are foolish enough to vote Conservative at the next general election.
We have also heard some honest interventions, however, The hon. and learned Member for Perth and Kinross (Sir N. Fairbairn) staggered to his feet to tell us that he did not believe a word of what Ministers were saying.
He did not believe in the new property tax; he believed that it would constitute theft from the old ladies living down the road, who would consequently vote against the Tories.
The right hon. Member for Shoreham (Sir R. Luce) thinks that we should change the standard spending assessments.
The hon. Member for Gravesham (Mr. Arnold) said the same yesterday, but Ministers were unable to enlighten him about the method that might be used.
The previous Secretary of State — the right hon. Member for Bath (Mr. Patten), now chairman of the Conservative party — had promised two years ago that he would have a look at SSAs; that promise, however, came to nothing, as has every other Government promise relating to local administration.
Yesterday, we heard 10 interventions from the Tory Benches on the Secretary of State's speech.
They came from the right hon. Member for Brent, North (Sir R. Boyson); from the hon. Member for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall); from the hon. Member for Lancaster (Dame E.
Kellett-Bowman), who wanted to retain the poll tax — I do not think that anyone has told her yet that the Conservatives propose to do away with it.
The hon. Member for Rochford (Dr. Clark) had some worries.
The hon. Member for Norfolk, North (Mr. Howell) said that VAT should be increased: I suspect that he was giving away a secret Tory agenda.
We heard from the hon. Member for Leeds, North-West (Dr. Hampson), and from the hon. Member for Warrington, South (Mr. Butler).
The hon. Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery) spoke of abolishing the poll tax by April 1992.
We could not agree more with that; we proposed it on 13
December last year, when the Government were introducing the Community Charges (Substitute Settings) Bill.
A bigger waste of time has never been seen, for that legislation will be overturned by this Bill.
We offered the Government time, saying,’ Let us not waste each other 's time: let us abolish the poll tax now, and get rid of it by April 1992.’
Would the Government agree?
Of course not; at that stage, they were still clinging to the poll tax.
The hon. Member for Birmingham, Hall Green (Mr. Hargreaves) also intervened in the Secretary of State's speech yesterday, expressing anxiety about the new tax.
The hon. Member for Amber Valley (Mr. Oppenheim) mentioned Derbyshire county council; I remind the hon. Gentleman that Labour took Amber Valley in the local elections in May.
Hon. Members seem to think that the council tax is the best thing since sliced bread, but we know that the sliced bread is extremely stale.
This is the same sort of tripe that Conservative Members came out with when they were defending the poll tax; the poll tax was indefensible, and the council tax is going the same way.
As my hon. Friend the Member for East Lothian (Mr. Home Robertson) rightly pointed out, surely it is time for a little contrition.
Surely it is time for the present Home Secretary — who started all this in Cabinet, along with the right hon. Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley)— to apologise.
The present Secretary of State for Employment saw the poll tax legislation through its Committee stage; perhaps he too will apologise.
Perhaps the current Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food, and the current Secretary of State for Wales — both of whom were responsible for the implementation of that legislation — will do the same.
All those Ministers were promoted as a result of their work in that regard.
The present Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities was still defending the poll tax at the time of the fated Ribble Valley by-election, only a few months ago.
I shall not go into details about his speeches; that was done at great length on 12 June, and people can read the speeches at their leisure.
The Minister declared, however, that any form of property tax would constitute a betrayal of what was then seen as the Thatcherite mantle, of middle England — Conservative England — and of those who had scrimped and saved to secure their homes.
But times change.
People stand on their heads and wiggle their feet in the air.
Some cannot tell whether people are standing on their heads or their feet, because the same kind of rubbish comes out.
That is why we should be receiving apologies tonight from Conservative Members.
Some bare their souls on their feet and some bare their souls in the bars.
Behind the scenes, many who sit on the Conservative Benches are betraying their concern even before the Bill has received its Second Reading.
They are as worried as we are about the implications for the people of this country.
Those Conservative Members and the electorate know that we are not to blame for the mess that we are in.
The Conservatives introduced the poll tax and made a mess of implementing it.
The British people will hold them to account at the election.
Local government faces nothing short of a catastrophe.
Debt stands at unprecedented levels.
The debt in England alone amounts to £1.5 billion.
Two thirds of the Scottish population have warrants out against them.
We expect 7.5 million orders to be issued against people in England.
The law is in disrepute.
Collection of the tax is in a shambles.
Conservative Members, however, have the cheek to suggest that that is the fault of local government, not theirs.
My hon. Friend the Member for Leyton (Mr. Cohen) yesterday asked the Under-Secretary of State for the Environment, the hon. Member for Salisbury (Mr. Key), whether he would consider the abolition of the minimum 20 per cent.
contribution.
That is to be found at column 860 of Hansard.
My hon. Friend said that it should be abolished this year, or at least in 1992-93.
The hon. Member for Salisbury got to his feet and made the most amazing pronouncement in the two-day debate.
It was one word.
He asked’ Why?’
Why?
Because it costs two and a half times as much to collect as the money that is received.
The Audit Commission pointed out that 4 million people would be lifted out of the penury of having to pay it and that it would be possible to concentrate on those who can genuinely afford to pay but who do not.
The administrative burden would be lifted from local government; it would then be able to concentrate on the job in hand.
The Minister, however, does not give a damn about what is happening to people on the lowest incomes; he does not even understand what is happening to local government.
It is no wonder that Ministers do not understand the problems local government faces in having to prepare for the final year of poll tax, in having to work out how to collect the current year's poll tax, in having to prepare the software for collection of the council tax.
Local government is on the verge of collapse, but who gives a damn on the Conservative Benches about that and what it means for local government services?
Instead of contrition, instead of apology, constant and unmitigated attacks are made on Labour councils that are struggling, in the most difficult areas of the country, to provide services.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman (Lancaster)
What about rents?
Mr. Blunkett
Does the hon. Lady wish to intervene?
I see that she does, so I shall certainly give way to her.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
It is not only a question of many Labour-controlled councils not bothering to collect the community charge.
Many of them do not even bother to collect rents.
Not even the hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett) can defend their policy not to collect rents.
Mr. Allen McKay
The hon. Lady does not know what she is talking about.
Dame Elaine Kellett-Bowman
Rubbish.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
Order.
Come along now — the hon. Lady has had her say.
Mr. Blunkett
My hon. Friend the Member for Barnsley, West and Penistone (Mr. McKay) could not have put it better.
The hon. Lady's response admirably sums up, in one word, what the council tax is all about — absolute and unmitigated rubbish.
Councils throughout the country are doing their utmost, including court cases that the police will not assist with and that the Home Office will not instruct the police to assist with, to collect the poll tax and, of course, any outstanding rates bills.
We have a system of local government finance which has concentrated its attention on the poll tax payer, bringing in gearing which has resulted in enormous increases in bills, without any material increase in spending or improvements in services.
We have witnessed the abolition of the local domestic business rate, the introduction of the non-domestic business rate and the way in which that has concentrated the power of decision-making still further in the hands of Ministers.
It is a shambles, which has resulted in local government being undermined and the role of the local community being seen as a threat rather than as a partner trying to rebuild broken economies, help the unemployed and do something about essential services.
Every time that Labour local authorities spend more money on education or social services Ministers claim credit for the increase in spending.
Every time that it comes to capping regulations, those same authorities are blamed and pilloried for the spending for which Ministers have happily claimed the credit.
Instead we need a sensible system with decent values, not a tax which assaults families.
The present proposal, in all its glory, with the present valuation and discount system is an attack on the family.
I do not know whether Conservative Members have given any thought to what the present discount system is likely to do — it is more likely to accelerate the disintegration of the family than to bring people together.
It is the Norah Batty syndrome, if I may be sexist, where far from losing a million people off the register as happened during the last census because of the poll tax, in the next census men will be sent to the shed at the bottom of the garden to keep out of the way.
We will have a nation of single widows, with men escaping from the tax and their spouses claiming the 25 per cent.
discount.
In the past two days we have heard a lot about students.
My hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) rightly pointed out some of the anomalies that the Minister says he will reply to, such as the marrried student with two children who will receive a 25 per cent.
discount but who will be exempt from the tax if he leaves his wife and family and moves in with his student friends down the road.
That is the nonsense.
Students in halls of residence will allegedly be exempt from the tax.
However, many halls of residence will have to pay business rate because many of them undertake business activities in the recesses.
Those who know anything about the way in which universities and polytechnics work know that they are businesses and not merely halls of residence.
Are we presuming that those students will not be expected to pay anything in the charge that they pay for staying in the halls of residence?
If not, will halls of residence pay a business rate only during the recesses?
Will it be assessed on a daily basis as the amount of council tax will be?
Those are the types of question that need answers before we know what sort of chaos we are going to face with the council tax.
Mr. Oppenheim
As the hon. Gentleman is clearly so hostile to the concept of a single person household discount, will he state clearly and unequivocally whether any future Labour Government would abolish it?
Mr. Blunkett
Our fair rates proposals make the situation unequivocally clear.
We say that we will protect single retired people, we will ensure that the rebate system is improved not only to help those people, but to target help on all those who need it and we will ensure that what people pay is based on their ability to pay and not on their status.
We are not in the business of giving handouts to the Duke of Westminster because he happens to move out of the present matrimonial home and into a single person's flat.
We are not in the business of expecting other people who can ill afford it to pick up the cost of a single person's discount for the rich.
We are not in the business of putting on the backs of the poor the cost of the 50 per cent.
discount that second homes will be accorded.
That, too, is in the Bill.
Every time the Government bring in something to protect the rich, the burden is passed to the rest of us.
The poor will pay for the protection accorded to the better-off.
That is what the proposed valuation and banding are all about.
That is why we are so opposed to the system that charges the richest person in Westminster only £273 a year but the poorest person in Wigan £339 a year.
That is why we are opposed to the poorest person in Westminster paying only £3 a week less in council tax than the richest, including some Tory Members.
The banding system and property valuations are devised deliberately to protect the rich at the expense of the rest.
That is why we know that people will not only feel that it is unfair and understand that it is unfair, but will at the general election bring home to roost the chickens that many Tory Members will be voting on at 10 pm tonight.
The same applies to much else that languishes in this tax as an alternative to the ill-fated poll tax.
Not for Tory Members the speed, simplicty and certainty of the broad-based tax that we should have.
Not for them the buoyancy, cost-effectiveness, fairness and progressiveness that’ Fair Rates’offers to the British people.
Not for them the comprehensibility or even the logic spelt out by the Prime Minister shortly after his election as leader of the Conservative party when he rightly said that there was something wrong with a tax that resulted in 50 per cent.
of the population having to receive a rebate or discount on the amount that they paid.
Yet that is exactly what the council tax will involve.
With the intricacies, unfairness and technicalities, it is no wonder that the Secretary of State for the Environment has declined to serve in Committee.
No wonder he will not join us three days a week from now until Christmas.
Instead, he will have a fortnightly visit to Brian Walden on Walden's weekly interview.
My hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) corrects me: it is rather that Brian Walden will visit the Secretary of State for lunch and take the cameras with him.
No wonder the Secretary of State has been given a roving brief across Europe.
He fails to understand even the one that he has.
Interruption
Mr. Oppenheim
Get on with it.
Mr. Blunkett
A Tory Member shouts,’ Get on with it’.
That is not surprising because it is difficult to protect the Secretary of State from his own inadequacies.
As my hon. Friend the Member for, Garscadden said earlier this afternoon, the Secretary of State has to rely on his Minister — the AA man, as he was described in the Financial Times.
Although the Secretary of State knows nothing about the Bill, he knows the man who does, and that man does a good job.
In the 40 minutes that we shall have to debate each clause it will be difficult to point out to Tory Members the Bill's inadequacies.
It will take us until clause 100 before the poll tax is abolished.
It will take more than the three weeks to reveal the confusion that abounds, but we shall do our best.
We know that if, in the introduction of the council tax, the Government inflict on the British people what they did with the poll tax — the £10 billion that it has cost us, the increase in VAT to manipulate it and the innumerable changes to make it more acceptable — local government and the British people will face the same sort of inadequacies and misery.
We have heard Conservative Members talk about the necessity of capping.
We were told that capping would be necessary until the poll tax was introduced as that would bring accountability.
We were then told that only a handful of high-spending authorities would be capped.
Then we were told that when the poll tax really bit, capping would not be necessary.
Now we are told that universal capping is necessary because the Secretary of State and his colleagues are frightened of trusting local people to make local decisions under the new banded system.
No wonder they are frightened, because the way in which the council tax will be implemented will confuse people to the point where they will be unclear about who is paying what and who is making the decisions.
The gearing procedure will result in a 1 per cent.
increase in spending, incurring an average increase of between 7 and 8 per cent.
in the local tax.
The proposed national business rate will ensure that the narrowness of the domestic base under the council tax will inflict misery on local people.
That is why our’ Fair Rates’proposals offer a different solution.
The 20 per cent.
contribution will be abolished, the rebate system will be improved and single retired people will be protected.
All that will ensure that the tax is fair and progressive.
It will also ensure that it has a broad base and that the business rate is decentralised.
We will introduce rebates for small businesses to protect those who are setting up in business or struggling to stay in business.
The Labour party believes in fairness and justice.
In the weeks ahead it is therefore beholden upon us to get across the message that, once again, the Government have got it wrong.
We are witnessing the third change in three years, a change that will produce further misery and confusion.
My colleagues and I do not believe that the British people will be fooled a second time — one can take a horse to water but one cannot make it drink.
The general election will be the opportunity for which we have waited.
That opportunity has been delayed too long.
That general election will be fought not simply on fair rates, but on a fair Government.
The people of Britain will understand clearly that to achieve that they must vote Labour.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
We have reached the end of the third full day's debate o the council tax.
We had one day on the Queen's Speech, and now we have had two full days on Second Reading.
I am bound to say that I do not believe that this debate has reached the level of fizz that one might have associated with a Bill that was to be fought doggedly tooth and nail by the Opposition.
At the climax to the debate a few minutes ago the hon. Member for Cunninghame, South (Mr. Lambie) was addressing a single Labour Back Bencher.
During much of the debate we have had no representation from the Liberals or the Scottish Nationalists.
Indeed, when the wind-up began this evening there were no Liberals or Scottish Nationalists present.
It has been an exhausting three days for the Labour Whips as they trawled the corridors of the Palace to try to find people who they could wheel in to speak in this debate.
None the less, fortunately there have been fine contributions to the debate from the Conservative Benches.
We have had such contributions from my hon. Friends the Members for Torridge and Devon, West (Miss Nicholson) and for Tayside, North (Mr. Walker).
My hon. Friend the Member for Hendon, South (Mr. Marshall) included in his speech one of the pithiest denunciations of the rates that I have ever heard.
We also heard fine contributions from my hon. Friends the Members for Amber Valley (Mr. Oppenheim) and for Battersea (Mr. Bowis), who has a quarry of good stories from the London borough of Wandsworth.
My hon. Friend the Member for Portsmouth, South (Mr. Martin) provided us with a model of how much can be put into a brief speech.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Shoreham (Sir R. Luce) asked me to consider the standard spending assessments.
I assure him that we look at them every year, but he is aware, as he said during his speech, that there are two different objectives: one is to make the assessments as simple as possible; the other is to make them as fair as possible.
The two objectives do not necessarily lie in the same direction.
The Opposition raised the canard that some sort of register is required under the council tax.
We have denied that categorically.
It can only be obtuseness or a refusal to believe that can still lead the Opposition to make that claim.
The basis of the council tax is, first, a property element.
In that respect it is like the rates.
We want to give discounts to single people — the Labour party does not — and single people will have every incentive to make themselves known.
It is not like a council tax register with people not wishing to make themselves known.
Single people have every reason to come forward and declare that they are entitled to a discount.
But if they do not come forward, there is no penalty.
There is no statutory requirement to hold a register of such people.
There is all the difference in the world between finding out who the single people are and having a statutory register as we have under the community charge.
There is no difference in principle between what we propose for finding out about single people and what is proposed in the so-called Bill put forward by the hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett), in which he would need to identify pensioners, pensioner couples and people on low incomes.
There is no difference, either, between what we have under the community charge and under the rates in respect of identifying people who are entitled to help through social security benefit, if they are on low incomes.
There has been a misunderstanding of the Government's plans from the point of view of social security benefits.
Just as with the rates, when people in receipt of social security benefit had living with them someone who was not in receipt of benefit, there was a system known as non-dependent deductions — the hon. Member for Brightside will be well aware of that system — so, too, under the council tax it will be possible for the claimant — the person liable to the tax — simply to let us know, through a single declaration, about the other people in the household who may not be eligible for income support and who may be eligible to make a contribution to the council tax bill.
There has been some confusion — I do not know why there should have been because it was made clear last night by the Secretary of State for Wales — about the position of students.
There are two issues.
First, students should not be counted as adults when we are deciding whether the single person discount should be given to a household.
Students, including all student nurses, YTS trainees and apprentices, will be invisible.
In other words, they will not count as though they were adults in a household.
They will not stop a single person who is not in one of those categories from being able to qualify for the single person household discount.
The second issue is that, if a household is composed entirely of students, it should be exempt.
It is easy to do with halls of residence, but it is also easy to do where students are living in digs or even when they are the owners of properties.
Where they are all students, they will be exempt and no payment will have to be made.
In this case we include student nurses on Project 2000 because they are, like other college students, not eligible for social security benefit.
In this second category we do not include other student nurses, YTS trainees and apprentices because all those people are entitled to social security benefits.
If their incomes are low — if, for example, a student nurse has a low income — there will be no difficulty; she will be able to claim social security benefit, so there is no reason why she should be entitled to the exemption available to other students.
I hope that that puts the matter beyond doubt, and I believe that my hon. Friends will greatly welcome that important development in the new council tax.
The Government have chosen to have regional banding for Scotland, Wales and England.
The council tax is composed 50 per cent.
of a property tax.
I sometimes think that some of my hon. Friends who would like to see the tax in some way equalised between one place and another are hankering after a tax which this tax is not.
With a tax based on property, it follows as night follows day that the amount people pay will vary according to where they live and the properties in which they live.
Those who would like the tax to be the same for everyone, no matter where they live and no matter what property they live in, will be disappointed by the council tax because, frankly, it is not that sort of tax.
Being a property tax — there is not now any contention between the two main parties about that — we can either tax the kind of house and say, for example, that all three-bedroom properties shall be taxed the same, in which case my hon. Friends should be aware that we would soon have tremendous anomalies as the same tax is placed on a Mayfair flat as is put on a flat in a mining village, or we can have regional banding, and then there must be boundaries between regions.
There are no natural boundaries between property price regions, so let us assume that one would use the standard regions — the south-east, the east midlands, the west midlands and so on.
There would then be extraordinary anomalies.
For instance, taking a semi-detached house worth £60,000 in Milton Keynes and a semi-detached house also worth £60,000 in Northampton, the household in Northampton would pay £88 more in tax simply because it happened to be across the regional boundary.
Hon. Members should try to explain that to people in Northampton and Milton Keynes.
Alternatively, people in an average house in Southampton would pay £89 less than people in Salisbury.
I doubt whether my hon. Friend the Member for Salisbury (Mr. Key) would be amused by that.
People living in a semi-detached house in Cambridge would pay £89 more than people in a similar house in Oxford simply because they were in East Anglia rather than the south-east, even though the semi-detached house in Oxford had cost much more.
Therefore, the only basis on which we could have a property tax and valuation would be on a national banding system because that would be understandable and objective.
I agree that such a tax system based on the capital value of houses, on a national banding system, would be unfair unless we had taken care to provide for compressed rates of taxation.
We do not say that if a house is worth eight times as much as another the tax bill should be eight times as much.
That has been the position of Labour speaker after Labour speaker, but we could not tolerate such an unfair system.
For people living in the same area, those in the most expensive properties should pay not more than three times as much — the maximum variation — as those in the least expensive properties.
However, that is only part of the answer.
The other part is what has already been done — the massive and permanent shift in funding from local to central taxation.
In future, 15 per cent.
of local spending will be raised in local taxation only in England and 11 per cent.
of spending will be raised in local tax only in Scotland.
My hon. Friends may fear that in some parts of the country we shall return to the oppressive and unfair bills which people received under the rates system.
That is certainly not the Government's intention, and the Bill does not provide for that.
For example, in Barnet, the borough of my hon. Friend the Member for Hendon, South, the rates bill on a four-bedroomed detached house used to be £986.
We now propose a council tax that would have produced a bill this year of £617.
Last year, two of my hon. Friend's constituents in such a house paid £676 in community charge, so this year's council tax would have been cheaper for them —
Interruption
My right hon. Friend the Member for Brent, North (Sir R. Boyson) takes the prize, because the rates bill in Brent on a four-bedroomed house was £1,826.
The council tax bill would have been £706, making the bill £1,120 less under the council tax.
We heard yesterday from my hon. Friend the Member for Harrow, West (Mr. Hughes).
A four-bedroomed house in Harrow, West was charged £1,137 in rates.
The council tax would have been £588, a reduction for his constituents of £549.
My hon. Friend the Member for Rochford (Dr. Clark), whose rates bill on a four-bedroomed house was £1,280, would have received a council tax bill of £510 — a reduction of £770.
Mr. Gould
The Minister is giving extremely persuasive and interesting figures.
Given the huge disparities which are of such enormous benefit to those at the top of the scale, who will pick up the bill?
Who will bear responsibility for paying every penny of savings gained by top people?
Mr. Portillo
I have already explained that the most important change that we have made is to shift the balance between what is paid centrally and what is paid locally, so I can answer the hon. Gentleman's question.
If he fears that in some houses lurk people on high incomes, those people will pay vast sums in income tax, VAT and corporation tax to provide the grants for local government.
Mr. Gould
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Portillo
This is my speech, not the hon. Gentleman's, and I warn him that if I give way now it will be for the last time.
Mr. Gould
In what the Minister has just said, I detect exactly the same argument that he and many others used to justify the flat rate principle of the poll tax.
Is he not conceding and making clear something that was always true: the 2.5 per cent.
VAT required from everyone who buys anything, which is paid to local government taxpayers, is entirely for the benefit of those who are most wealthy and best able to meet the bills?
Mr. Portillo
As the hon. Gentleman knows, the people who spend most on VAT are those who spend most on goods that attract VAT; they are not the poorest in society.
Children's clothes, food, transport and fuel are all zero-rated under the VAT system.
Is the hon. Gentleman saying that, if he were in power, he would repeal the increase in VAT?
He spent much time today and yesterday denying that he would increase from 14 to 20 per cent.
the proportion paid by local taxpayers.
He now appears to be saing that he would repeal the increase in VAT.
If he is not saying that he would repeal the increase in VAT, he is simply speaking out of both sides of his mouth at the same time.
Mr. Gould
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Portillo
No.
Mr. Gould rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I think that I heard the Minister of State say that he would not give way.
Mr. Portillo
We have just heard from the hon. Gentleman that all our proposals for discounts for single people and alleviation of the top rates of the tax are anathema to the Labour party, which wants to return to the full rigours of the rates.
Under Labour, people in a house worth £200,000 must pay five times as much as people living in a £40,000 house, regardless of regional disparities or anything else.
Wherever the Labour party detects that there might be someone who could pay more under the rates, it wants every last penny out of that person.
That is what we mean when we say that the Labour party is advocating an envy tax.
We have just heard the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) dismiss the argument that people pay more income tax and VAT if they are on high incomes.
What about the discounts?
We have heard many Labour arguments against them.
The Labour party fears that somewhere there might be a single person who is also a millionaire who could benefit from a single person's discount, so it is absolutely against the proposal.
Under a Labour Government, there would be no relief to widows, single mothers or young people starting out in life who live on their own.
According to the hon. Member for Brightside, under Labour's proposals there is to be a discount for single retired people, even if they are billionaires.
There have been 70 changes of Labour party policy.
I do not include in that 70 the number of occasions when the hon. Members for Brightside and for Dagenham have said contradictory things.
I have always assumed that Brightside had it right and Dagenham was merely contributing a series of Gouldisms to the discussion.
Among the many popular items in this Bill is the provision that councillors who will not pay their community charge or their council tax will not in future be entitled to vote on setting a budget for their local authorities —
Mr. Blunkett
Come on.
Mr. Portillo
The hon. Gentleman says that because there is a lingering interest among Labour Members in people who have avoided the community charge.
We heard it yesterday from the hon. Member for Dagenham, who referred to the community charge register as a threat to civil rights.
He talked of the hundreds of thousands who traded away their votes so as not to register for the community charge.
The Labour party cloaks under expressions such as’ attack on civil rights’the fact that such people have not registered for the tax and have been indulging in tax avoidance, a practice for which the Labour party still shows some sympathy.
The Government are accused of changing their mind over local authority finance.
I am accused of that; I am even accused of changing my hairstyle because of my attitude to local authority finance.
Certainly I defended the community charge, which gave Labour councils in many areas the fright of their lives.
I am asked whether I am sorry.
I am sorry that we did not manage to pin the overspending of Labour authorities on those authorities and that we did not have a chance to repeat across the country the electoral triumphs that we enjoyed in Trafford, Southend, Brent, Hillingdon, Ealing, Wandsworth and Westminster.
So I am happy to say that the Government have changed their mind on local authority finance, but the world still goes round and the Conservative party is still a Conservative party.
Has the Labour party ever changed its mind?
Has it changed its mind on unilateral nuclear disarmament, or on the Common Market, or on nationalisation, or on trade unions, or on the free market?
Has the Labour party changed its mind on capitalism, or on the Soviet Union?
Is there anything on which the Labour party has not changed its mind?
Hon. Members
Yes: the poll tax.
Mr. Portillo
One principle has been rescued form the wreckage of socialism — the principle that local authorities should not be capped and should be allowed to spend and spend as though there were no tomorrow.
For the Labour party, there is no tomorrow.
Is there one honest man left in the Labour party?
Perhaps it is the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot), who fought an election on an honest programme and was defeated.
Then there is the hon. Member for Coventry, South-East (Mr. Nellist), who is willing to go to prison for his views.
Perhaps it is the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner), who is willing to continue to enunciate the principle that there is no such thing as a free lunch.
And what is the uniting feature of all these people?
I have discovered a dress code among Labour party members.
If an hon. Member's jacket and trousers do not match and his clothing in general does not reach the heights of elegance, we know that he is an honest man.
The dark suits of the Labour Front-Bench spokesmen betray those who have turned their coats.
The council tax is based on a new distribution of local and central finance.
It consists of a property element and a personal element.
It is fair and will be accepted as fair by the people.
We shall take it through the House, despite the Labour party's opposition.
Question put, That the Bill be now read a Second time:
Mr. Bob Dunn (Dartford)(seated and covered)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I understand that there is a bomb scare, and that hon. Members are finding it difficult to get access to the Lobbies.
Will you advise us as to what can be done?
Mr. Speaker
I am aware that there is some difficulty in getting into the building.
I am having the matter looked into, and I shall make a statement about it in a few minutes.
Later
Mr. Peter L. Pike (Burnley)(seated and covered)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
The time has elapsed when the doors should be locked.
We all know that there is some disturbance outside — you have already said that you will make a statement on that — but it is unusual for the doors not to be locked by this stage in a Division.
Mr. Speaker
There is a slight problem.
There is some difficulty in Members getting to the House because a street has been closed.
I propose to allow a further 10 minutes before the doors are locked.
The House having divided: Ayes 334, Noes 245.
BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE
Ordered, That, at this day's sitting, the Ways and Means Motion and the Motion relating to Local Government Finance Bill (Allocation of Time) may be proceeded with, though opposed, until any hour.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett (Denton and Reddish)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
The whole House will feel that what happened between 10 o'clock and 10.20 pm was unsatisfactory.
I appreciate that it was extremely difficult for you to decide what to do in the circumstances of some hon. Members being unable to get into the House.
The information that you had extended the Division time by 10 minutes was available to those of us in the House, but not to those outside it.
As I understand it, some hon. Members could not get into the House before the Division was completed.
Could you give some thought to what happened?
We hope that it will never occur again, but if it does, may we have clear guidance so that those outside the House will know that if the police warn that it is unsafe to come into the House the Division either will or will not be extended?
The present situation is unsatisfactory.
I hope that clear guidance can be given in case this happens again.
Mr. Peter L. Pike (Burnley)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I raised a point of order earlier.
I recognise the difficulty of your position and the difficulty that arose.
May I ask you to consider what happened in case it should recur, which we all hope it will not?
Surely a Division should be brought to a conclusion only when hon. Members have unimpeded access to the House in accordance with the Sessional Orders.
If there is any question about that, the extended time limit tends to be arbitrary, so I ask that consideration be given to the matter.
Mr. Speaker
I shall reflect carefully on the matter.
I had to exercise my discretion and I decided in the light of the report from the Serjeant at Arms that 10 minutes was an adequate period.
I hope that this will not happen again.
If I had decided to call the Division again, up on the screen would have gone the sign’ Division Off’and Members would have drifted away.
I have to exercise discretion.
If hon. Members know that there is to be a Division at 10 o'clock, they should get here well on time.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE BILL [MONEY]
Queen's Recommendation having been signified
Resolved, That, for the purposes of any Act resulting from the Local Government Finance Bill (’ the Act’), it is expedient to authorise the payment out of money provided by Parliament of —
a) the remuneration of, and any expenses incurred by, listing officers in carrying out their functions under the Act (including the remuneration and expenses of persons, whether or not in the service of the Crown, to assist them);
b) any sums required to enable valuations to be carried out in accordance with the Act;
c) any expenses of the Secretary of State incurred in consequence of the Act; and
d) any increase attributable to the Act in the sums payable out of money so provided under any other enactment.
WAYS AND MEANS
Local Government Finance Bill —
Resolved, That, for the purposes of any Act resulting from the Local Government Finance Bill (’ the Act’), it is expedient to authorise the payment into the Consolidated Fund of —
a) any sums received by the Secretary of State in consequence of the Act; and
b) any increase attributable to the Act in the sums payable into that Fund under any other enactment.
Local Government Finance Bill (Allocation of Time)
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
I beg to move That the following provisions shall apply to the remaining proceedings on the Bill —
1.
Committee —
(1) The Standing Committee to which the Bill is allocated shall report the Bill to the House on or before 5th December 1991.
(2) Proceedings on the Bill at a sitting of the Standing Committee on the said 5th December may continue until Eight o'clock, whether or not the House is adjourned before that time, and if the House is adjourned before those proceedings have been brought to a conclusion the Standing Committee shall report the Bill to the House on 6th December.
2. —
(1) The Standing Committee to which the Bill is allocated —
a) shall meet on Tuesdays, Wednesdays and Thursdays at half-past Ten o'clock and half-past Four o'clock; and
b) shall allot 18 sittings to the consideration of the Bill.
(2) The proceedings to be taken on each of those sittings shall be as shown in the second column, and shall be brought to a conclusion at the time specified in the third column, of the following Table —
3.
Report and Third Reading
(1) The proceedings on consideration and Third Reading of the Bill shall be completed in two allotted days.
(2) The proceedings to be taken on each of those days shall be as shown in the second column, and shall be brought to a conclusion at the time specified in the third column, of the following Table —
4.
Procedure in Standing Committee —
(1) At a sitting of the Standing Committee at which any proceedings on the Bill are to be brought to a conclusion under this Order the Chairman shall not adjourn the Committee under any Order relating to the sittings of the Committee until the proceedings have been brought to a conclusion.
(2) No Motion shall be made in the Standing Committee relating to the sitting of the Committee except by a member of the Government, and the Chairman shall permit a brief explanatory statement from the Member who moves, and from a Member who opposes, the Motion, and shall then put the Question thereon.
5.
No Motion shall be made to alter the order in which Clauses, Schedules, new Clauses and new Schedules are taken in the Standing Committee.
6.
Conclusion of proceedings in Committee.
On the conclusion of the proceedings in any Committee on the Bill the Chairman shall report the Bill to the House without putting any Question.
7.
Dilatory Motions.
No dilatory Motion with respect to, or in the course of, proceedings on the Bill shall be moved in the Standing Committee or on an allotted day except by a member of the Government, and the Question on any such Motion shall be put forthwith.
8.
Extra time on allotted days.
If an allotted day is one to which a Motion for the adjournment of the House under Standing Order No. 20 (Adjournment on specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration) stands over from an earlier day, paragraph (1) of Standing Order No. 14 (Exempted business) shall apply to the proceedings on the Bill for a period of time equal to the duration of the proceedings on that Motion.
9.
Private business.
Any private business which has been set down for consideration at Seven o'clock on an allotted day shall, instead of being considered as provided by Standing Orders, be considered at the conclusion of the proceedings on the Bil on that day, and paragraph (1) of Standing Order No. 14 (Exempted business) shall apply to the private business for a period of three hours from the conclusion of the proceedings on the Bill or, if those proceedings are concluded before Ten o'clock, for a period equal to the time between Seven o'clock and the conclusion of those proceedings.
10.
Conclusion of proceedings
(1) For the purpose of bringing to a conclusion any proceedings which are to be brought to a conclusion at a time appointed by this Order and which have not previously been brought to a conclusion, the Chairman or Mr. Speaker shall forthwith put the following Questions (but no others)—
a) any Question already proposed from the Chair;
b) any Question necessary to bring to a decision a Question so proposed (including, in the case of a new Clause or new Schedule which has been read a second time, the Question that the Clause or Schedule be added to the Bill);
c) the Question on any amendment or Motion standing on the Order Paper in the name of any Member, if that amendment is moved or that Motion is made by a member of the Government;
d) any other Question necessary for the disposal of the business to be concluded; and on a Motion so made for a new Clause or a new Schedule, the Chairman or Mr. Speaker shall put only the Question that the Clause or Schedule be added to the Bill.
(2) Proceedings under sub-paragraph (1) above shall not be interrupted under any Standing Order relating to the sittings of the House.
(3) If an allotted day is one on which a Motion for the adjournment of the House under Standing Order No. 20 (Adjournment on specific and important matter that should have urgent consideration) would, apart from this Order, stand over to Seven o'clock —
a) that Motion shall stand over until the conclusion of any proceedings on the Bill which, under this Order, are to be brought to a conclusion at or before that time;
b) the bringing to a conclusion of any proceedings on the Bill which, under this Order, are to be brought to a conclusion after that time shall be postponed for a period equal to the duration of the proceedings on that Motion.
(4) If an allotted day is one to which a Motion for the adjournment of the House under Standing Order No. 20 stands over from an earlier day, the bringing to a conclusion of any proceedings on the Bill which under this Order are to be brought to a conclusion on that day shall be postponed for a period equal to the duration of the proceedings on that Motion.
11.
Supplemental orders
—(1) The proceedings on any Motion made in the House by a member of the Government for varying or supplementing the provisions of this Order shall, if not previously concluded, be brought to a conclusion one hour after they have been commenced, and paragraph (1) of Standing Order No. 14 (Exempted business) shall apply to the proceedings.
(2) If on an allotted day on which any proceedings on the Bill are to be brought to a conclusion at a time appointed by this Order the House is adjourned, or the sitting is suspended, before that time no notice shall be required of a Motion made at the next sitting by a member of the Government for varying or supplementing the provisions of this Order.
12.
Saving Nothing in this Order shall —
(a) prevent any proceedings to which this Order applies from being taken or completed earlier than is required by this Order; or
b) prevent any business (whether on the Bill or not) from being proceeded with on any day after the completion of all such proceedings on the Bill as are to be taken on that day.
Recommittal 13. —
(1) References in this Order to proceedings on consideration or proceedings on Third Reading include references to proceedings at those stages respectively, for, on or in consequence of, recommittal.
(2) On an allotted day no debate shall be permitted on any Motion to recommit the Bill (whether as a whole or otherwise), and Mr. Speaker shall put forthwith any Question necessary to dispose of the Motion, including the Question on any amendment moved to the Question.
14.
Interpretation etc.
(1) In this Order —’ allotted day’means any day (other than a Friday) on which the Bill is put down as first Government Order of the day, provided that a Motion for allotting time to the proceedings on the Bill to be taken on that day either has been agreed on a previous day, or is set down for consideration on that day;’the Bill’means the Local Government Finance Bill.
(2) Standing Order No. 80 (Business Committee) and Standing Order No. 103 (Business sub-committees) shall not apply to this Order.
The House has already had three days of debate on the Bill, so hon. Members will understand why it is so important.
Let me now spell out why the timetable motion is necessary.
As my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment and my hon. Friend the Minister have made clear, the community charge is to be replaced at the earliest opportunity.
The council tax is a fair, balanced and carefully thought-out approach to local government finance which builds constructively on previous attempts at reform and takes full account of the consultations that my right hon. Friend initiated a year ago.
Following a full day of debate on the Loyal Address and two days on the Second Reading of the Bill, the country is none the wiser about what the Labour party proposes on local government finance, save in one crucial respect: we now know that it is committed to ending all control on local authority expenditure.
Its one positive policy is to allow high-spending Labour local authorities to impose a crippling burden of local taxation on those areas where they operate, on top of the crippling burden on national taxation.
Mr. John Biffen (Shropshire, North)
I do not believe that the House, confronted by a Bill of this complexity and contentiousness, can be altogether happy about the arrangements for its consideration in Committee.
However, I know that my right hon. Friend the Leader of the House is operating under constraints and that he feels that those arrangements represent the best way to proceed.
My hon. Friend the Member for Hampstead and Highgate (Sir G.
Finsberg) demonstrated characteristic generosity in trying to elevate the nature of the debate into a consideration of timetabling generally.
We know that procedural reform is now in vogue and that my right hon. Friend the Leader of the House has a strong disposition towards general and automatic timetabling.
It is a disposition with which I wholly agree.
On this occasion the House is entitled, given the nature of the automatic timetable, to stop for a moment and to put a question mark against whether the organisation of automatic timetabling should be within the gift of the Whips' Office — the usual channels, that immaculate organisation whose skill and credibility is admired by all — or whether the House, perhaps in a mood of self-survival —
Dr. Godman
Generosity.
Mr. Biffen
It depends on how one judges such things.
Would the House seek to be the authority for such automatic timetabling?
This evening the usual channels, through my right hon. Friend, are the authors of the automatic timetable.
I accept that, but the House would be well advised to suspend judgment on whether that authority should lie with the usual channels or, more generally, with the House.
The hon. Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Mr. Flannery) mentioned what was said on this subject in the excellent report produced by my hon. Friend the Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery) and his colleagues.
The words of Hansard speak little, but the Division lists say it all: they are padded with payroll.
The House may well wonder why.
Were all the Parliamentary Under-Secretaries of State turned into constitutional enthusiasts?
I suggest that the usual channels have a strong interest in seeing that they control this important piece of procedure.
That may be what the House will accept, but let the House be fully aware of the nature of the decision.
Mr. Michael Foot (Blaenau Gwent)
I am glad to have the chance to follow the right hon. Member for Shropshire, North (Mr. Biffen), whom I certainly regard as far and away the most successful Leader of the House in all my time here.
It was following the right hon. Gentleman's removal from that high post that the Government fell apart.
I accept that it has taken a few years for the process to be completed, but everyone who studies the history books will be able to trace the downfall of the Thatcher Government — as some may still call it — to the time when she was foolish enough to remove the right hon. Gentleman from the duties that he was carrying out so successfully.
Because I have such regard for the right hon. Gentleman, it makes me all the more discontented to disagree with him about the proposition of permanent or automatic timetables.
Of course, if such a procedure were adopted by the House it would be better to have it subject to agreement between the usual channels than merely on the diktat of the Government.
That would be an improvement.
Even so, there is a great deal to be said against timetable motions.
I have attended more debates on these matters than any other hon. Member and I vividly recall many of them.
But on none of those occasions did I put the case in the way that the Leader of the House put his case tonight, making it all the more necessary for us to oppose him now.
I never put the case for a timetable motion on the ground that we should make it a permanent feature of our parliamentary procedures.
I took that view for many good reasons, partly because I always believed that it would play far too much into the hands of the Government.
All Governments like to have the opportunity of introducing guillotines at certain times, but that desire should be resisted for the good reasons put forward by the hon. Member for Wolverhampton, South-West (Mr. Budgen).
That is why we should be cautious about proceeding in the way proposed by the Leader of the House.
Although I listened with interest to the case adduced by the hon. Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery), the Chairman of the Procedure Committee which has made the recommendations, I still believe that the House would be making a great mistake to accept the motion, for it would add to the automatic nature, as it were, of debates and would play into the hands of the Government of the day, thereby strengthening their position over that of the House.
Let us not forget the experience of the past 10 years, during which time we have had more experience of guillotine motions than in the whole of the previous history of Parliament.
The hon. Member for Wolverhampton, South-West contrasted that with what was done by the great reforming Government of 1945, who put through the House a huge weight of measures.
That Government were able to carry through virtually all that legislation with hardly any resort to guillotine motions.
It was, of course, more difficult in the 1970s, when Governments did not have majorities of that nature.
Such circumstances add to the temptation on Government, and sometimes the temptation must be accepted.
But progressively more guillotines have been introduced.
They have also been introduced earlier on measures and Ministers have come forward, as though it is a matter of no significance, to recommend new guillotine procedures, some in novel circumstances.
That poses a great danger to the House.
The right hon. Gentleman made the weakest speech in favour of a guillotine motion that I have ever heard from a Leader of the House and that is saying something.
He really had no case —
Interruption
I repeat a proposition that I made to a previous Leader of the House.
If hon. Members would like to debate the five guillotine motions that I introduced, I should be happy, if the Leader of the House was prepared to give us time, to debate those matters.
Hon. Members would then see what good measures I introduced and with what democratic reticence I did it, which is more than the Leader of the House can claim for the way he adduced his case tonight.
At the time when those measures were being skilfully and carefully introduced, we were also carrying through a whole range of highly necessary reforming legislation.
Had the right hon. Gentleman followed that example, he might have put forward a better case tonight.
Mr. Douglas
Will the right hon. Gentleman reconsider the generosity he bestowed on the former Leader of the House, the right hon. Member for Shropshire, North (Mr. Biffen), who moved the guillotine motion on the original poll tax measure applying to Scotland?
Some of the strictures of the right hon. Member for Shropshire, North should, perhaps, be considered again.
Mr. Foot
I did not know that the right hon. Gentleman had that black mark on his past, and I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for pointing it out.
It shows that none of us is perfect, not even the right hon. Gentleman.
I hope that it will be a lesson to him in future.
It is a reason not for more guillotines, but for fewer.
The truth of the matter was expressed by the hon. Member for Aldridge-Brownhills (Mr. Shepherd), who has spoken so well on such questions in recent years and protested each time the Government resorted to fresh guillotine motions.
He said that, together with the Bill, the Government had presented’ the most extraordinary guillotine that has ever been introduced into the House’
That is a perfectly good description, especially as this is not just a procedural matter.
How the House conducts its affairs, particularly on questions affecting taxation of our constituents, is of great importance.
The Minister for Local Government and Inner Cities (Mr. Michael Portillo)
During the debate, the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot) referred, not unkindly, to my junior position in the Government.
I hope that I approach the debate with due humility, given that my right hon. Friend the Leader of the House and two former Leaders of the House have contributed to it.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Shropshire, North (Mr. Biffen) led us into consideration of questions such as whether Bills should be timetabled from the outset; and, if so, whether such decisions should be in the hands of the Government or of a Select Committee.
He was right to raise those weighty issues, although they are not issues on which I wish to give an opinion now.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, South-West (Mr. Budgen) reminded us more than once that we should speak to the motion.
The House was privileged to hear from the’ Big Daddy’of the guillotine motion, the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent.
No debate on such a motion is complete without him.
Like the Flying Dutchman, condemned for ever to roam the world's oceans, the right hon. Gentleman is condemned for ever to attend debates on guillotine motions in an attempt to expiate his past sins in that area.
I listened with great attention to the right hon. Gentleman and agree with my hon. Friend the Member for Honiton (Sir P. Emery) that it was a most disappointing experience.
His reasons for using the guillotine in the past, which were appropriate at the time but are inappropriate now, were apparently that Labour legislation was very good and his guillotine motions showed the requisite democratic reticence.
The House found that an unconvincing explanation.
We have spent three days debating the council tax.
The hon. Member for Copeland (Dr. Cunningham) made a shaky start by saying that the first of those days, during the debate on the Gracious Speech, was before the Bill was published.
That is wrong because the Bill and the Local Government Bill were published before that.
During those three days the Labour party engaged in a great struggle to get people to fill the Opposition Benches and to speak.
It has been an exhausting experience for the Opposition, who, although they imposed a three-line Whip, have not been able to keep the House on their side.
Many Opposition Members who will obey the three-line Whip and vote against the motion will do so with a heavy heart.
That is because they believe that the correct way for the House to organise its procedures is to have a timetable motion from the beginning.
Mr. Blunkett
That is a different matter.
Mr. Portillo
The hon. Gentleman's intervention gives away the identity of at least one hon. Member who agrees with that view.
Mr. Budgen
Surely that is a proper attitude for a Labour politician.
Labour believes in legislation, in plenty of state intervention in everybody's affairs.
Generally speaking, that is not the attitude of Tories.
Mr. Portillo
I was asked to concentrate on the motion and the Bill and that is what I intend to do.
I want the Bill to be properly debated.
It was breathtaking to be told by the hon. Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) that we should have approached the Opposition to see whether we could negotiate a deal.
I did that and was told straight away that no deal was possible.
I would not normally reveal such matters, and do so only because the hon. Member for Dagenham, who was not present at the discussions, was nevertheless involved in putting out a press release after the discussions.
No deal was available and we are proceeding with the guillotine.
Dr Cunningham
I am reluctant to intervene, but I cannot allow the Minister to get away with that.
He is misleading the House.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
Order.
I am sure that even at this late hour the hon. Gentleman will wish to withdraw that.
Dr Cunningham
I withdraw my comment about misleading the House.
The Minister is not being candid with the House.
Neither the Minister nor the Leader of the House made any attempt, nor was an attempt made through the usual channels, to hold any serious discussions about the passage of the Bill.
Mr. Portillo
The hon. Gentleman is not being candid.
My version of events is that the Labour party said from the outset that it would be unable to negotiate a deal.
The hon. Member for Dagenham was not there, so he cannot comment on it.
I do not blame the Labour party for not being able to reach a deal with us on that.
However, the hon. Member for Dagenham should not say that there was no effort to do a deal.
There was an offer of a deal, but I understand why the hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett) could not accept it.
Mr. Blunkett
It is important that we get the facts on the record.
I have a simple question for the Minister: is it true that the Government said that, whatever the deal might be, they intended to get the Bill through the House by Christmas?
Mr. Portillo
Yes, and that is our absolute intention.
We have been addressing two audiences throughout the debate — the outside audience, whom the Opposition want to convince that this is a shock horror experience, and the audience in the House.
It is known in the House that the reality is a choice between many hours in Committee characterised by filibuster and slow progress, and a number of hours in Committee in which we make reasonable progress.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, South-West said that there were three guillotines between 1945 and 1951 and 13 in 1988.
That tells me much more about the behaviour of Oppositions than about the behaviour of Governments.
It would not have been possible for the Government of 1945-51 to get through the legislation if they had faced the delaying tactics that have characterised the progress of Bills in the past 11 to 12 years.
For example, in 1988, the Local Government Finance Bill was going through its stages in the House.
After 61 hours in Committee, only 16 clauses had been considered.
Consequently, the other 115 clauses had to be handled in 62 hours.
After 58 hours in Committee, only nine clauses of the Water Bill had been considered.
Consequently, the other 171 clauses had to be considered in 61 hours.
Only five clauses of the Football Spectators Bill had been considered before the guillotine was introduced.
Although I am sure that he did not intend it, it sounded as though my hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, South-West was saying,’ Never mind the quality, feel the width.’
What matters is not how long we spend in Committee, so that we can report those hours to people outside, but what we achieve in that time.
Mr. Jeff Rooker (Birmingham, Perry Barr)
I was struck by the Minister's litany of the hours kept by the Committee considering the Local Government Finance Bill because I served on the Committee.
Before the guillotine motion, the longest speech in those proceedings was by the then Minister of State.
Dr. Cunningham
Two hours.
Mr. Portillo
If the Minister spoke for two hours, that means that in the other 59 hours the Committee considered 16 clauses, so the hon. Gentleman's intervention does not alter my point.
The timetable has been organised in such a way that the divisions in the debate — knives as we call them — fall in places that allow the most time in debate to be given to the most contentious issues.
Furthermore, the divisions will allow the Scottish points to be taken with their English equivalent so that we can have a single debate on common issues.
Mr. Maxton
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Portillo
Let me finish my point.
One of the great advantages of this method of proceeding is that we can guarantee a debate about Scottish questions.
We do not risk, as we would have done if we had handled the Bill in any other way, leaving those matters which come at the end of the Bill — as the Scottish provisions do — not to be debated fully.
As a result of the way in which the knives fall, all the Scottish provisions can be thoroughly debated, although they will not be debated separately.
Mr. Maxton
Will the Minister allow me?
Mr. Portillo
Three weeks is not a long time to debate a Bill, but the number of hours that we can devote to the Bill during that period will be perfectly adequate.
Mr. Maxton
On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Is it in order for a Minister to lay down to the House how the Chairman of the Committee that has been established will decide how the debates in Committee will take place?
That is what the Minister has told us.
Madam Deputy Speaker: Barracking the Minister is not benefiting the debate.
The House should listen to what the Minister has to say in the last few minutes of the debate.
Mr. Portillo
I am convinced that we shall have adequate time to discuss the Bill and that because we have organised the time and allocated it we shall have a higher quality of debate.
More issues will be debated fully and the Bill will be better scrutinised than many of the measures that have been cited as precedents.
I believe that the public want us to get on with abolishing the community charge and replacing it with the council tax.
We owe them that and I think that the House should approve the guillotine motion.
Benefits (Student Entitlement)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. John McAllion (Dundee, East)
This debate is taking place in the early hours of the morning, but the presence of so many of my hon. Friends underlines the importance which the Opposition attach to it, which contrasts starkly with the importance that the Government attach to it.
The debate is officially designated’ the subject of loss of student entitlement to housing benefit and income support’.
I do not think that there can be any quarrel with those terms.
I suspect that not only would the Under-Secretary of State for Social Security concede that students have lost their entitlement to housing benefit and income support; she would probably boast that it is the Government's official policy that students should lose such entitlement.
On 23 August 1991 the Minister wrote to me setting out clearly the Government's attitude.
She reiterated the Governments view’ first expressed by us in 1985 that the majority of full-time students should not have access to benefits as a means of supporting themselves whilst studying.’
That view — first expressed six years ago — has now been given effect, and it is universally accepted that students are denied housing benefit and, in the majority of cases, housing support.
The disagreement between the two sides of the House arises in regard to the effect that that has on students.
The Government would have us believe that students have never had it so good.
In a letter to my hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow, Central (Mr. Watson), the Prime Minister said that the Government's introduction of student loans had given students more money to cover their living costs — 25 per cent.
more in 1990-91 than in the previous year.
He described that as a substantial real-terms increase and a generous package of support.
The Prime Minister is not alone in making such claims.
They are made by all Ministers who are confronted with allegations of student poverty and hardship.
In a’ Dear Colleague’letter circulated to all Members of Parliament, the Secretary of State for Education and Science warned us earlier in the year to beware of students who came to us during the recess pleading poverty.
He went on to repeat the Prime Minister's bland assurance that, far from experiencing poverty, most students were better off than they had ever been before.
The Secretary of State acknowledged that some students might be genuinely worried about their finances.
He asked students,’ Are you really trying hard enough to get jobs during the vacation?
Don't just look for a job in jobcentres’— after all, the Government have closed down most of them —’ but get out and actively look for temporary work elsewhere.’
Mr. Huw Edwards (Monmouth)
’ On your bike’.
Mr. McAllion
As my hon. Friend says, it was a variation on the advice offered to the unemployed by a former Tory Minister.
Such advice is becoming as offensive, ignorant and out of touch as it was when first uttered by the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) many years ago.
The Government's claim that students are better off as a result of student loans simply is not true; nor is it true that loans make up for the loss of income support and housing benefit.
Let us look more closely at the Government's argument.
In his’ Dear Colleague’letter, the Secretary of State referred to the benefit that students could previously have claimed.
He lumped together housing benefit, income support and unemployment benefit, arriving at an average benefit entitlement over the summer recess of £327.
He did not explain how he arrived at that figure, but it turns out — conveniently — to be £93 less than the £420 student loan that the Government are now making available.
The Secretary of State concluded that students were now being more than compensated for the loss of their benefit entitlement.
But how does he arrive at that figure of £327?
Others have arrived at very different sums.
Using the Government's own figures, the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux has calculated that an unemployed claimant aged between 18 and 24 — as most students are — would have received £31.15 a week income support during the 12-week vacation: a total of £373.80.
That is a much higher figure than the one given by the Secretary of State.
The association also calculated that, over and above income support, the same claimant would have received £360 in housing benefit, on a typical rent of £30 a week.
It calculated that a typical out-of-work student entitled to housing benefit and income support could have expected to receive £733.80 over the 12-week vacation.
It is that position of fundamental weakness and poverty that forces them to apply for the Government's student loans.
Ministers will try to hide from the reality.
In his’ Dear Colleague’letter the Secretary of State tells us that the uprating of student grants in 1990-91 was over and above the extra money made available through student loans.
They say that an additional £420 in student loans and an uprating of 5.5 per cent.
in grant is the basis for their claim that students have never had it so good — that they are getting more money now than ever before.
I have already dealt with the £420 loan, which does not even come near to compensating students for the loss of £733 in housing benefit and income support.
But what about the 5.5 per cent uprating?
When it was introduced in September of last year, the rate of inflation was almost twice 5.5 per cent.
: it was 10.9 per cent.
Admittedly we should compare the average rate of inflation for the whole of 1991 with the previous year.
When we do so, we find that the inflation rate comes down somewhat, but it comes down to 7.9 per cent., which is still 2.5 per cent .
above the Government's so-called uprating.
The reality is that, far from being an uprating over and above other increases, this is yet another real terms decrease in students' real incomes.
This year the grant has been frozen at last year's level, with no uprating for inflation.
What are we left with?
First, with the withdrawal of housing benefit and income support and their replacement by student loans, students now get less, not more, money.
Secondly, the so-called uprating has also meant that, in real terms, there is less, not more, money for students.
Ministers can claim until they are blue in the face that students are getting more money and that they have never had it so good, but they cannot justify those claims by reference to the facts, which show that students are significantly worse off than they were previously.
As a far better man than anyone in this House once said,’ facts are chiels that winna ding’, even for Tory Ministers.
The citizens advice bureaux evidence compared student incomes with the incomes of those who are in receipt of income support, which represents the minimum subsistence level below which no one in our society is meant to fall.
What are these minimum subsistence levels?
For a single claimant in the age bracket 18 to 24, it is £1,619.80 in income support per year, plus £1,560 for full housing benefit.
That amounts to a total yearly income of £3,179.80.
What is the subsistence level for students?
It is £2,265 for the full grant and £420 for the student loan — in total a yearly income of just £2,685.
That is almost £500 below the minimum subsistence level for the poorest people in our society.
That level of income has been described by the Prime Minister and the Government as a generous settlement for students, but the citizens advice bureaux provide a very different description.
They say that student grants, taken together with student loans, cannot provide enough to cover even the most basic needs of the poorest members in our society.
The Prime Minister answered a question that I put to him earlier this year by referring to the fact that he did not believe that I live in the real world.
In view, however, of what he said about student support, compared with what the citizens advice bureaux say about student support — the citizens advice bureaux deal with real students suffering real hardship in the real world, while the Prime Minister hides himself away behind locked gates in 10
Downing street — there is only one conclusion that can be arrived at: that the citizens advice bureaux are right, because they live in the real world.
The Prime Minister and all the other Ministers are wrong because they do not live in the real world.
Their reply will be,’ What about the access funds?’
Given that only £25 million were allocated to access funds for the whole of the United Kingdom, the answer must be,’ What about the access funds?’
The Government's intention was that these funds would be a way of helping with one-off exceptional circumstances affecting only a small minority of students, but the reality is that once again they have been shown to be completely wrong.
Throughout the country access funds have been stretched way beyond the limit.
Many colleges ran out of money long before they ran out of students needing help.
The Minister of State, Scottish Office, shakes his head, but he knows that the Government conceded this point when they announced that they would allow colleges to anticipate up to 10 per cent.
of next year's allocation to relieve the pressure on this year's inadequate allocation.
In Dundee in the first year more than 2,000 students applied to the access fund and more than £300,000 was allocated to them.
It is not enough.
The truth is that we are dealing not with one-off exceptional cases of hardship, affecting only a small minority of students, but with a widespread and damaging problem affecting thousands of students.
During the recess I held a number of surgeries in Dundee colleges, which were specifically for students.
I was not short of students who applied for help in the most distressing of circumstances: mature students with spouses and children, who had been denied housing benefit and income support to which they had previously been entitled; landlords pressing for rent payments and students with no money to pay; arrears of rent building up; poll tax arrears building up; overdrafts being extended; electricity supplies being cut off, in some cases to parents and children.
Again and again I heard the same story of deepening poverty driving students to take the decision to drop out of education.
Recently Aberdeen university carried out a survey which revealed that 15 per cent.
of students were considering quitting their courses because of financial hardship.
That is an appalling situation, but it is made more appalling because it mainly affects students from the poorest backgrounds, those whose parents are on low incomes and who get no financial help from their parents because they cannot afford to give it.
Mature students with young families, who are on their own financially and are burdened with the heaviest of financial commitments, are having to scrape by on an inadequate student grant and an even more inadequate student loan.
Dundee is an area of high unemployment, with few jobs to be had.
I came across a number of cases where, in an attempt to increase their chances of employment, people had returned to college to try to get better qualifications.
However, because they had been unemployed, they had not earned enough money in the previous three years to qualify for the mature student allowance, and so it was denied to them.
They also lost their entitlement to housing benefit and income support, upon which they had been very dependent as they were unemployed.
Many had children.
Under income support regulations they were allowed £17 for each child every week, but under the student grant regulations they were allowed just £8 for each child per week.
They too have children, with similar needs, but they are allocated much less because, rather than staying on the dole, their parents wished to return to college and get qualifications to get them back into work.
All of those things were barriers, discouraging and preventing access to education for the poorest people in our society.
Those are the people who need access to education most of all.
All those facts give the lie to the Government's claim that they are extending educational opportunity to everyone and that they are genuinely interested in creating a classless society.
I am prepared to be convinced that that is not the case and that the Government mean well and intend to try to open up educational opportunity to everyone, no matter their class background.
But if I am to believe that, when the Minister replies to the debate she will have to commit herself to two very simple propositions: first, that the Government will institute a full review of student financial support as a matter of urgency; secondly, that they will commit themselves to restoring to all students the housing benefit and income support that the Government have taken away from them.
If that commitment is not made, the Government stand condemned of having betrayed a whole generation of the poorest people in our society by taking away their only means of escaping from poverty, access to education opportunity.
Mr. Ernie Ross (Dundee, West)
Come on, get on with it.
Do better.
Miss Widdecombe
The hon. Gentleman's attitude does not do justice to the seriousness of this debate.
I take the matters raised by the hon. Member for Dundee, East (Mr.
McAllion) very seriously and I suggest that we debate them in a sensible manner.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Dundee, East for raising these issues.
He has mentioned most of them in earlier correspondence with me and I see many hon. Members on the Opposition Benches who have also mentioned them, either in correspondence or in parliamentary questions.
I especially welcome my hon. Friends from the Scottish Office to the debate.
The hon. Gentleman will know that the changes made to students' entitlement to housing benefit and income support were not made in isolation.
The withdrawal of most full-time students' entitlement to those benefits took place at a time when substantial additional resources were being made available to students through the education system.
The issues were discussed many times both in this House and in another place last year, and the social security regulations which gave effect to the changes were fully debated and approved by both Houses.
Nevertheless, it would be helpful if I were to explain the background to the Government's overall policy on the financial support of full-time students.
As long ago as 1985 we set out our intention to remove students' general entitlement to certain benefits.
Since that point we have taken a number of steps to reduce students' reliance on benefits.
That culminated in the general withdrawal of income support and housing benefit in the 1990-91 academic year.
Our view then, which is undiminished today and is at the centre of the debate, is that it ought not to be the function of the social security system to support students, not only because of the administrative burden placed on the Department's local benefit offices and local authorities, but because there already exists a maintenance system for those in full-time education.
Therefore, as I have frequently said in letters to Opposition Members and to my hon. Friends, we regard the support of students as the proper duty of the education system, rather than of the social security system, although there are exceptions that we support under the social security system.
The Government have often been accused of singling out students for special treatment under the rules.
That is because there are alternative sources of financial support — provided from public funds — available to them.
Opposition Members may wish to argue about the level of those funds.
The thrust of the debate is whether the education system or the social security system is the right source of student support.
I should have hoped that there was some consensus on both sides of the House that the responsibility for student support should remain with the educational maintenance system.
Our commitment to that principle was given greater weight by the fact that benefit claims for students frequently presented administrative problems out of all proportion to the amounts of benefit finally awarded and the duration of the benefit periods.
Benefit offices faced periodical surges in claims which were complicated to assess and frequently resulted in no award of benefit being made.
It seemed to us nonsense that the benefit system should be duplicating the role of educational provision in that way.
It also seemed undesirable for students to become dependent on benefits while in full-time education.
Social security benefits are intended to assist those people who, for whatever reason, find themselves in circumstances where they are unable to support themselves and those circumstances could not reasonably be avoided.
Of course, we recognised that we would have to provide the wherewithal for students to support themselves.
In the current academic year, the full-year loan facility plus the grant is more than 30 per cent.
higher than in 1989-90.
This support is 6 per cent.
more than was available in 1991.
These increases will have resulted in the vast majority of students being better off overall.
Research commissioned by the Department of Education and Science indicated that the average loss of benefits among students who actually claimed them — and they were a minority — would have been some £327 in the past academic year.
By comparison, the average loan available is £420.
However, we are well aware that there are some students who, even with the increase in support from the grant and loan, may experience financial difficulties.
That is why the Government have established the access funds.
It has been a fashion among Opposition Members — indeed, this was reported by the hon. Gentleman tonight — to suggest that the access funds alone are intended to compensate for the withdrawal of benefits generally and that the £25 million, which he correctly quoted, must, therefore, be inadequate.
This is not the case.
These funds are only one element of the package of extra resources for students which I mentioned a moment ago.
As I have already said, most students will have extra financial support available to them without having to call upon the access funds.
Those funds are there to assist students who face particular financial difficulties and who, as a result, may not be able to take up or resume their studies.
I think that it would be helpful if, at this point, I were to remind the House that we have made special provision for students in certain groups.
Hon. Members will appreciate, I am sure, that there are some students who have financial needs above and beyond those of their peers.
I am thinking in particular of disabled students and students with children.
The benefit regulations make specific provision for those students, or in some cases their partners, to receive both income support and housing benefit provided that they meet the general qualifying conditions for those benefits.
The new top-up loan provides additional resources for those groups as well as for other students.
The existence in the benefit system to which they have access of a generous £10 weekly disregard on income from a top-up loan means that many students in those vulnerable groups will be better off under the new arrangements.
I know that the hon. Member for Dundee, East is particularly concerned about students' ability to meet accommodation costs from within their resources.
Clearly, this is one area of student expenditure that can vary quite markedly throughout the country.
The student grant has always been intended to provide for accommodation and therefore to some extent reflects variations in costs.
The regional variation in the level of grant has been, and continues to be, reflected in the way in which housing benefit for eligible students is calculated.
Housing benefit is not payable for the first £16.25 of rent outside London or £23.45 of rent within London for any student.
For some years housing benefit has not been available to students in halls of residence or similar accommodation.
Therefore, students generally only really looked to housing benefit to top up their accommodation needs and only then if they were in property not owned by their college.
In fact, only about half of young higher education students live in privately rented accommodation.
The Department's own statistical information suggests that in May 1989 fewer than 15 per cent.
of students were claiming housing benefit and only 2 per cent.
claimed in the summer vacation.
In recent months a good deal of concern has been expressed about students no longer having access to benefits over the summer vacation.
The impression one gets is that, in the past, every student relied on income support, at least over the summer period.
That is a fallacy.
In the summer of 1989 DSS local offices kept a count of student claims; there were 135,000 during that long vacation.
That represents less than a quarter of the student population affected by the benefit changes.
Clearly, some students called upon the access funds in the summer period.
In July, the higher education institutions were told that they could anticipate up to 10 per cent.
of their access fund allocation for the 1991-92 academic year.
The hon. Member for Dundee, East called on us to promise a review, but that comes down to a running review and immediate flexibility.
In this academic year the Department of Education and Science has also provided additional guidance to institutions administering the access funds.
That is intended to assist them in determining how the funds might best be dispersed.
The Government remain of the view that the educational establishments are well placed to assess the financial needs and priorities of their students.
Mr. McAllion
In common with the Minister from the Scottish Office, the Minister rightly says that the institutions are best equipped to know the needs of their students.
Those responsible for the access funds at Dundee university wrote to me to say that their funds had run out even before the summer recess had begun.
There was no additional help for students who found themselves in trouble in the summer.
What advice would the Minister offer to a student who has a full student grant and a student loan but who is still £500 below the income support level, the minimum subsistence level for any individual in society?
That student is unable to get help from his educational institution because it has run out of its access funds.
What should that student do?
Miss Widdecombe
The grant and loan system is designed to cover the entire academic year, not just part of it.
Secondly, access funds are administered by the institutions, which are best able to decide what is needed.
We have reviewed the problem that occurred and, as I said, we have issued additional guidance to such institutions to try to make sure that the problem does not recur.
Students, with a combination of loan, grant and access funds, are well provided for over the course of an entire year.
Hon. Members will be aware that the access fund allocations for the current academic year have already been made.
As before, their distribution among institutions takes account of student numbers and regional variations in housing costs.
The institutions are required to monitor their use of the access funds and the Secretary of State for Education and Science has undertaken to review the operation of the funds in due course.
The hon. Member for Dundee, East raised a number of important issues this evening.
I am grateful for the opportunity to put the Government's views on the matter, but underlying all that I have said is a fundamental conviction that the education system, not social security benefits, should provide for the maintenance of students.
It makes no sense for two such complex systems of financial support to attempt to meet the same needs other than in the most exceptional circumstances.
The educational maintenance system is specifically designed with the financial needs of students in mind and we have made substantial new resources available to ensure that those needs are met.
Mr. Huw Edwards
Why do the Government believe that for people on low incomes in employment the social security system, especially through family credit, has a vital role to play, yet for people on low incomes in education the social security system, through housing benefit, plays no role?
Miss Widdecombe
Because, until the Government introduced family credit, there was no comprehensive assistance for people in work on low incomes in terms of the benefits system.
There is assistance available for students' education through the educational maintenance system and what is currently in operation is the best method for the support of students.
There is no point in running two systems side by side.
If the hon. Gentleman has specific cases of hardship which he wishes to raise, there is a straightforward means of doing so.
He should write to the Secretary of State for Education and Science setting out the problems, and the same goes for problems in respect of Dundee university.
If there is a specific matter in the system which is the Minister's responsibility and which is causing concern, the Minister can respond to it.
I see no point in taking an already elaborate system and running it alongside another elaborate system, rather than having one straightforward source of student income.
Indeed, it must be more comprehensible to, and dignified for, students to get the whole of their resources from the education system rather than from a mixture of social security and the education system.
So there is an administrative advantage and an advantage in terms of comprehensibility in having a single system.
The Government's point is made.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at twenty-three minutes past Two o'clock.
Points of Order
Mr. John McFall (Dumbarton)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I rise as a result of the intervention by the hon. Member for Cannock and Burntwood (Mr. Howarth).
I was here from half-past two.
The hon. Gentleman came in just five minutes ago.
I stood up for six questions, not least for question No. 3, in which I have a constituency interest.
In the light of the by-election result in Scotland and the fact that we have an opportunity only once a month to put our constituency interests, I appeal to you not to hear frivolous comments from Conservative Members but only real issues that concern Scottish Members of Parliament.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
I do not need any help.
This is a United Kingdom Parliament.
The hon. Member for Cannock and Burntwood (Mr. Howarth) has as much right as anyone else to ask a question on a matter of general interest to the whole House of Commons.
I am aware that it is not possible for me to call every Scottish Member at Scottish Question Time, but I thought that it was fair today — I hope that the House will agree — to get as far down the Order Paper as I possibily could.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
We managed to get down to question No. 19, and the hon. Member for Dundee, East (Mr. McAllion) had already asked a question.
That was not bad.
Mr. Tony Marlow (Northampton, North)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Would it be appropriate to remind the hon. Member for Dumbarton (Mr. McFall) that this is the United Kingdom Parliament?
If he wants home rule for Scotland, he can have it, and then we will have home rule for England as well.
Mr. Speaker
I have just said that this is a United Kingdom Parliament.
Sir David Steel (Tweeddale, Ettrick and Lauderdale)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Is not the difficulty in which you are placed the fact that there are now only four Government Back-Bench Members representing Scotland, and 63 of different parties on the Opposition side of the House?
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, if you are obliged to continue to apply the archaic rule in total contradiction of the balance of the parties in Scotland, this place will look increasingly irrelevant to the people of Scotland.
Several Hon. Members
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let me deal with one point at a time, please.
I must keep a balance in this House.
Hon. Members from Scottish constituencies have as much right as an hon. Member from an English constituency to raise a question on defence or any other matter — And they do.
Equally, the whole House will have seen for itself how far we have moved down the Order Paper today and that I have called a number of English Members on hospital trust matters.
Interruption
Mr. Donald Dewar (Glasgow, Garscadden)
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I think that there is a general recognition on the Opposition side of the House that you have a difficult job at Scottish Question Time.
I recognise that it is difficult to balance interests.
That difficult situation is made infinitely worse and more galling to colleagues who have been rising repeatedly, question after question, without success, when a Conservative Member swans in, three quarters of the way through Scottish Question Time, and is instantly called.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Member for Cannock and Burntwood (Mr. Howarth) was not instantly called.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Perhaps those hon. Members who have raised points of order have done a service to the hon. Members who wish to take part in the ballot.
If I take one more, two more Members can sign the book.
Mr. Thomas Graham (Renfrew, West and Inverclyde)
As a Back Bencher, I need the opportunity of raising questions at Scottish Question Time.
It is lamentable that the Government have not set up a Select Committee on Scottish Affairs, which could help us to deal with Scottish matters.
Mr. Speaker
That is as may be.
Several Hon. Members
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
I had better take one from a Conservative Member now.
I call a Member from Cornwall.
Laughter
Mr. David Harris (St. Ives)
Is not the root cause of your difficulties about the complaint that has been raised, Mr. Speaker, Scotland's gross over-representation in this House on matters relating to other parts of the United Kingdom?
Mr. Speaker
I cannot be involved with constitutional matters of that kind.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Ian Bruce (South Dorset)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
No, I think that I had better take one from the Scottish National party.
Mr. Alex Salmond (Banff and Buchan)
This, of course, is the United Kingdom Parliament — many of us think that that is exactly the problem.
However, as you have some discretion in these matters, Mr. Speaker, and while we wait for the Scottish electorate to remove the remainder of the Scottish Conservative party from this House, would it not be appropriate for you to give priority to Scottish Members at Scottish Question Time?
Mr. Speaker
If the hon. Gentleman looks at Hansard tomorrow, he will see that I have done exactly that.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We should now move on, because everybody —
Mr. Ian Bruce rose
Mr. Bill Walker (Tayside, North) rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
We have a very heavy day ahead of us.
I shall have to put a 10-minute limit on speeches, and the hon. Member for Tayside, North (Mr. Walker) might be affected by that.
Mr. Walker
Further to that point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Very well: I shall trade the hon. Gentleman a point of order for a speech.
Mr. Walker
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
I am raising a point of order because my understanding is that this is the United Kingdom Parliament, which has representatives from all over the United Kingdom.
The cornerstone of our democratic system is hon. Members' right to ask questions and to have those questions answered.
Can you confirm, Sir, that you keep a record of the questions that have been asked and that, although the Scots comprise less than 9 per cent.
of the United Kingdom population, their representatives regularly ask more than 9 per cent.
of the questions that are raised in the House?
Mr. Speaker
I must now bring this matter to a conclusion.
I do indeed keep a list of questions, but I advise hon. Members representing Scottish constituencies that the next time we have Scottish Questions those hon. Members who have been called today will not stand quite such a good chance of being included next time.
Asylum Bill Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Speaker
I must announce to the House that I have selected the amendment —
Mr. Max Madden (Bradford, West)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Mr. Speaker
Let me finish this first, please.
I have selected the amendment in the name of the Leader of the Opposition.
In view of the pressure to participate in the debate, I shall put a precautionary limit of 10 minutes on speeches between 7 and 9 o'clock.
If hon. Members who are called before 7 o'clock keep broadly to the time limit, it may be possible, in the interests of the whole House, for the occupant of the Chair to relax that limit later in the debate.
Mr. Madden rose
Mr. Speaker
What is the point of order?
Mr. Madden
I am sorry to detain you and the House, but this is an important matter of order which affects the Bill.
Later this month, the Commission for Racial Equality will consider instigating a judicial review against the Government's proposals to withdraw the green legal aid form in cases of political asylum and immigration.
What opportunity will be given to a Law Officer to give advice to the House on the matter?
The Home Secretary has told the Commission that he cannot give advice on the matter.
There is widespread anxiety that the Bill may be a clear breach of the Race Relations Act 1976.
Mr. Speaker
The hon. Gentleman can raise those matters when I call him in the debate, as I hope to do.
The Law Officers may attend the Standing Committee.
That is a normal procedure.
The Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Kenneth Baker)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time.
The Bill deals with the treatment of asylum seekers and procedures for determining their claims.
As I made clear to the House on 2 July, the numbers of people seeking asylum pose major problems both in Britain and throughout the world.
There have been more than half a million applications for asylum in Europe this year.
Germany estimates that it will receive about a quarter of a million applications.
The United Kingdom total, including dependants, will exceed 50,000 — 10 times the figure only three years ago.
By the end of October we had received some 38,800 principal applications during this calendar year.
The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has estimated that there are 17 million refugees and asylum seekers in the world.
A phenomenon of that order cannot be ignored.
It is not scaremongering or playing the numbers game to recognise and respond to changes on that scale.
On the contrary, it would be a gross irresponsibility for the Government to ignore them and pretend that numbers do not matter.
On the continent, political movements are already emerging which thrive on the flow of refugees and exploit naked nationalism.
In France, Le Pen's party seems to have 30 per cent.
support in opinion polls.
Young fascists march in Germany and chant the slogans of the 1930s.
In Austria this week, a far right-wing party has just won 22 per cent.
of the votes, campaigning on a slogan of’ Vienna for the Viennese’.
Those are disturbing trends, with resonances from the darkest period of European history.
We must ensure that such movements are not given the opportunity to develop in our own country.
We have been working at improving race relations in Britain for over 30 years, under successive Governments.
Some of the speeches by politicians of all parties on the continent in recent months would be simply unacceptable from a politician in Britain.
I draw some comfort from that fact, because it reflects our maturity in dealing with such matters.
But we must keep working at it.
One of the most important messages that we must give to everyone in our country is that we have in place proper, fair and effective policies to deal with the unprecedented flow of asylum seekers.
Mr. Keith Vaz (Leicester, East)
Will the Secretary of State give way?
Mr. Michael Morris (Northampton, South)
Will my right hon. Friend give way?
Mr. Baker
No, I want to get into my speech.
I shall give way to the hon. Gentleman and to my hon. Friend in a moment.
I remind the House of the measures which the Government have already taken, and of four in particular.
First, we have increased by five times the staff who determine asylum claims to over 500 during this financial year; 330 are already in post.
Secondly, we have increased from £1,000 to £2,000 the charge under the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act 1987 for bringing improperly documented passengers to Britain.
Thirdly, we have placed document specialists at Lagos airport.
A second team is currently working at Moscow airport, which has become a major transit point for people without proper documents.
Plans are well advanced for similar exercises elsewhere.
Fourthly, we intend to increase the provision of detention places by 290.
Mr. Vaz
The right hon. Gentleman will recall that, when his predecessor introduced the Immigration Act 1987, he talked about providing a better customer service from Lunar house in Croydon.
Does he not share part of the responsibility for the Government's failure to allocate more resources to deal with asylum applications at least four year ago when the problem first arose?
Does he accept that what he has announced is not sufficient to deal with the applications from asylum seekers, let alone with other immigration applications which are bottling up Lunar house?
Mr. Baker
We are increasing resources constantly, not only at Lunar house but also in the naturalisation department in Liverpool, which is an aspect of that.
We doubled resources in 1989, and as soon as I became Home Secretary, I realised that that was one of the most important issues that I would have to deal with.
I therefore put in hand increases which are now in place.
Mr. Michael Morris
Does my right hon. Friend recall the case of one Viraj Mendes?
He will be aware that I have taken a great interest in Sri Lanka since I have been in the House.
Is he aware that that gentleman hoodwinked the nation for about eight years and that in the end his wife made it clear that the man was entirely bogus?
Is he aware that the Church was totally taken in, and everyone in Sri Lanka in the end made it absolutely clear that the man was bogus?
When he returned to Sri Lanka, he returned to safety and, according to the latest reports, he is now in Germany.
In those circumstances, my right hon. Friend's proposals are greatly to be welcomed, to ensure that Tamils who are genuine and need asylum can be properly considered.
Mr. Baker
I could not agree more with my hon. Friend.
He specified the details of that case precisely.
One of the most important points was that, after a long process when every possible avenue had been carefully and scrupulously explored, when Mr. Mendes was returned to Sri Lanka he suffered no persecution whatsoever.
Mr. Robert Hayward (Kingswood)
In reviewing the measures that have been introduced in the past few years, my right hon. Friend referred to carriers' liability.
He will recognise that that is causing substantial problems for a number of carriers.
Could he review the way in which the regulations work and their impact on some carriers?
Mr. Baker
We are providing a great deal of advice and training for officials of different carriers — and not merely for British Airways, because we do not expect airline officials to be immigration officers; that is not their function.
However, it is entirely right that we should ask them to check whether documentation is correct.
I remind the House that we are not alone in doing so.
Virtually every other country in Europe does it, Canada and America do it — fines in America are $5,000, and in Canada the penalty is $3,000 — because all countries recognise that airlines have responsibility in that matter.
Mr. Peter Bottomley (Eltham)
There appears to be bipartisan agreement that bogus asylum seekers should be dealt with, but there is a good deal of concern among voluntary societies and practitioners.
Could my right hon. Friend make it clear that, during the passage of the Bill, he and his colleagues will have consultations with those who make representations to ensure that their worries about links between people with different claims and the causes of large-scale immigration are considered together?
Mr. Baker
Yes, I shall certainly give that undertaking.
We have already received a considerable number of representations.
My hon. Friend the Minister with responsibility for immigration matters met a delegation from various refugee groups yesterday.
We shall certainly continue to receive representations during the passage of the Bill.
Ms. Clare Short (Birmingham, Ladywood) rose
Mr. Baker
I shall give way to the hon. Lady, but then I must proceed with my speech.
Ms. Short
Will the Home Secretary admit that the problem of bogus applications, and there are some, is entirely the responsibility of the Government, in that the enormous delays in processing applications, which cause great fear for real refugees, have encouraged bogus organisers of fraudulent claims, such as the friend of the hon. Member for Hayes and Harlington (Mr. Dicks)?
I wrote a long time ago to his Department and asked it to move against him and the Department failed to do so.
There is a simple remedy: speed up the processing, and we will not have the problem.
We do not need any other changes or legislation.
The Government's inefficiency bears the whole responsibility.
Mr. Baker
I hope that the hon. Lady will vote for the Bill, because its purpose is to speed up the process.
It is an absurdity to say that we are responsible for bogus applicants.
Can the Government be held to blame for such claims as this — a Turkish Cypriot claiming asylum on the basis that her mother did not get on with her husband and was trying to break up her marriage?
That is the sort of claim that one gets.
I do not want to make too much of them, but there are bogus applications and they are completely clogging up the system.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Baker
To get the balance right, I give way to my hon. Friend the Member for Southend, East (Sir T. Taylor).
Sir Teddy Taylor (Southend, East)
In view of the serious situation that my right hon. Friend has outlined and the excellent policies that he is introducing to deal with it, can we have a clear assurance that the Government will resist any proposals at the Maastricht discussions to transfer immigration control to Brussels or the European Economic Community?
Mr. Baker
I have already made our position on that extremely clear.
I am wholly opposed to a transfer of competence to the European Community on matters of asylum and immigration.
That is our negotiating position.
The matter is rather tangential to this Bill, but I am glad to clarify the position.
To respond to the phenomenon of asylum seeking is not in any way racialist.
This is not about discriminating against non-white applicants.
Eastern Europe remains a major cause for concern.
Despite the growth of democracy there, the number of people from eastern Europe seeking asylum in the west has increased significantly.
Nearly half of Germany's huge total of asylum seekers are European.
Last week, the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) accused me of being unduly alarmist when I referred to the figure of 7 million Russians wanting to leave the Soviet Union.
That was not my figure; it was given by a senior Soviet spokesman at a conference in Vienna that I attended with other Ministers of the Interior at the beginning of this year.
He surprised and alarmed us all by saying that, following the liberalisation of exit controls, he expected that up to 7 million Soviet citizens would want to work in the west.
Many might seek to use the asylum route and, indeed, it would be naive to think otherwise.
I was appalled when, in his party conference speech, the right hon. Gentleman said that we were preparing to play the race card in this matter.
He has flirted with that theme.
He has ducked, bobbed and weaved with it, but he is clearly embarrassed by it now.
His hon. Friend the Member for Edinburgh, Central (Mr. Darling) has not attempted to get into this murky area.
He has not followed the right hon. Gentleman's grubby lead.
As I said at the Conservative party conference, I want to make it clear that our policy is colour blind.
It applies to people wheresoever they come from, whether Africa, Asia or eastern Europe.
The trouble with the right hon. Gentleman is that he has been searching for a way to do nothing about this problem.
He would prefer to turn a blind eye to the problem of asylum seekers around the world.
When he appears on television or in the media, he pooh-poohs and belittles it, and gives the impression that we are exaggerating the problem.
He will not face up to the problem.
Faced with the evidence that we have, any responsible Home Secretary would act as I have acted.
For the right hon. Gentleman to oppose the Bill and underestimate the problem that faces us shows that he is completely unsuited to hold this office.
I suggest to him that he should overcome his natural sloth and complacency.
The only race card being played is being played by the right hon. Gentleman.
Interruption
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Baker
I give way to my hon. Friend the Member for Wolverhampton, North-East (Mrs. Hicks).
Mrs. Maureen Hicks (Wolverhampton, North-East)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that it is a question not of being racialist but of being realistic?
Is there not some hypocrisy when the Opposition talk of problems of unemployment and housing, yet suggest that we add to them —— by advocating an open-door immigration policy that will mean more people coming to our constituencies and competing for homes and jobs?
The people of Wolverhampton, all colours and creeds, live daily with that reality.
May I assure the House that my right hon. Friend has their full support and that they are completely opposed to the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley)?
Interruption
Mr. Baker
My hon. Friend should know that I will deal with the interaction between immigration policy and asylum seeking later.
It is realistic to recognise that there is a significant problem with which we must deal and that it is right to do so.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Baker
I have given way a great deal, and I must pursue my speech.
It is clear that many people are now using asylum claims as a means of evading immigration control.
As numbers rise, a decreasing proportion are found to qualify for refugee status.
In 1980, in the United Kingdom, 64 per cent.
of claimants were recognised as refugees.
Last year, the figure was about 25 per cent.
In Germany, it was less than 5 per cent.
I am anxious to find common ground in the country on this matter and I strongly suggest that it is important that that common ground is found.
My view is shared by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
His director of international protection, Michel Moussalli, wrote in’ Refugees’magazine — the UNHCR publication — in May:’The majority of people coming as asylum seekers into Europe are not refugees but economic migrants.’
He also said that they’ clog up the asylum procedures which cannot function normally any longer.
This in turn proves to be an attraction to many destitute persons abroad, who feel that if they apply for refugee status in a Western country, they will be taken care of by the social welfare system of that country for a year or two, or even longer, while their claims are being examined.’
Those are the words of the international protection director of the UNHCR, and he has touched upon an important point.
Applicants benefit from delays in determination systems and the complicated review procedures after the initial decision.
That pattern is repeated across Europe; that is why we must ensure that we reduce and not add to the delays when we change our system and introduce new rights.
Mr. David Winnick (Walsall, North) rose
Mr. Baker
I have given way a great deal, and I must pursue my speech.
The category of’ refugee’is defined in the 1951 United Nations convention.
It is important to recognise the philosophical background to that definition.
There is a basic assumption in international law — and in common sense — that a state will protect its citizens.
That is the very reason for the existence of states.
The 1951 convention is about citizens whom a state is actively seeking to harm.
It is not enough to say that most asylum applicants are deserving because they come from’ unstable’or’strife-torn’countries.
It is not enough that a state is unlucky or incompetent in its economic, social or foreign policies — that jobs or food are scarce, or that it is at war with itself or with its neighbours.
By the 1951 convention, the international community has singled out the persecution of the individual on racial, religious or political grounds as the cause for special concern.
I repeat clearly today that the Government will continue to honour their commitment to people in that category.
We have followed that noble tradition over the centuries, and that category certainly exists.
When considering measures to resist the exploitation of our procedures by manifestly unfounded applicants, we should not forget the clearly well founded applicants — genuine refugees who often have harrowing stories of suffering, degradation and torture.
We will continue to respond sympathetically to their needs.
Mr. Winnick
Is the Home Secretary aware that the argument is not about bogus asylum seekers?
Those claimants undermine the claims of genuine asylum seekers, and no one would wish to defend them.
However, does the right hon. Gentleman recognise that profound disquiet has been expressed about some of the proposals in the Bill, particularly the fast-track ones?
The letter published in The Times today from the Archbishop of Canterbury and the Cardinal Archbishop of Westminster expresses the profound disquiet among many people who are concerned about genuine asylum seekers.
If the Bill is not amended, those genuine claimants will undoubtedly be penalised.
Will the right hon. Gentleman take that on board?
Mr. Baker
The hon. Gentleman anticipates what I am about to say.
I shall deal with that point in a few moments.
I was dealing with the definition of refugees under the 1951 convention, and concentrating on the well-founded fears of persecution.
There is considerable pressure for people all over the world to migrate, for all sorts of reasons.
But why should the inevitable response to a problem in one country be permanent emigration to the other side of the world?
Should all the 17 million refugees whom the United Nations have identified be allowed to come to Europe if they so choose?
The closer refugees remain to their own countries, the easier it is to organise their return when conditions allow.
If repatriation is not possible, the United Nations considers that integration and settlement within a refugee's region is the next best alternative.
Resettlement outside the region should be considered only in the last resort.
For example, why did more than 600 Angolans apply for asylum here in October alone?
Angola has its problems but it has no ex-colonial links with this country.
Angolans tend to speak Portuguese rather than English, and Angola directly borders four other countries.
In 1969, the Organisation of African Unity agreed a convention under which member states undertook obligations for refugees in their own regions, which goes considerably further than the United Nations convention.
Do Angolans really need to enter Europe in such numbers?
We are not washing our hands of the problem.
The United Kingdom plays a full and honourable part, financially and diplomatically, in alleviating the suffering of refugees in regions close to their own countries.
Last year, we spent some £60 million helping refugees and displaced persons overseas.
The House will recall that we took a strong lead in the international effort to help the Kurds in Iraq.
In that context, asylum-seeking in the west is, in many ways, a damaging and distracting sideshow.
It consumes many times the global budget of the UNHCR in supporting a self-selecting minority, without addressing the real problems that lie behind the asylum-seeking flows.
I remind the House that the United Kingdom and other developed countries of Europe must assist and support the developing economies, especially in eastern Europe, to ensure that people will want to stay and strengthen those economies themselves.
Yesterday's leader article on Austria in The Times concluded:’ The Community must itself look east and rebuild by free trade those shattered economies if the migration on which far-right reaction feeds is to be stemmed’.
Mr. Tim Janman (Thurrock)
Will my right hon. Friend give way?
Mr. Baker
If my hon. Friend will forgive me, I must resume my speech.
I have not given way to Opposition Members —
Interruption
As there is acclamation for my hon. Friend, I am delighted to give way.
Mr. Janman
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the opportunity for this country to help support genuine refugees abroad through various aid programmes is not helped by the fact that, according to a headline in The Times today, bogus refugees bleed Britain of £100 million through benefit fraud?
Has he seen the comments of a DSS officer in the same article that benefit fraud is now a national sport and that bogus asylum seekers think that the way in which this country hands out so much money is hilarious?
Mr. Baker
Like the hon. Member for Walsall North (Mr. Winnick), my hon. Friend anticipates a point that I shall come to.
I shall deal with that matter in a moment.
I shall deal with both points in my own way and in my own time.
Mr. Hattersley
The Home Secretary is shaking his head.
Has he forgotten, within the past hour and a half, the belly laughs that he got from his own Back Benchers with his stories of social security fraud?
Has he forgotten, in just an hour and a half, the pleasure that he gave to his own backwoodsmen by telling stories about multiple applications?
We thought that he had probably found just eight such examples out of a total of 1,000.
The fact that he demonstrated his interest in those eight cases, emphasised them and talked so wildly about them, shows that his concern is not with the genuine asylum seeker, but with diminishing the respect that this country should hold for people who are in desperate trouble and whom, in better and more self-confident days, hon. Members of all parties would have been in favour of helping.
Although while making those allegations and telling their bar room stories the Government have added that they propose to respect their obligations under United Nations conventions, they have always followed that with attempts to make the nation's flesh creep with the thought of the foreign hordes from whom an heroic Home Secretary is now protecting us.
If the Home Secretary meant what he said about increasing the status of asylum seekers and respect for them, why in the debate on the subject at the Tory party conference did he talk about 7 million Russians waiting to move west, when he knew that last year 117
Russians applied to enter this country and less than half of them were allowed in?
Mr. Kenneth Baker
I answered that in my speech.
If I may remind the right hon. Gentleman, I did not invent that figure.
It was the official estimate from the Soviet spokesman at the international conference at Vienna this year.
At the Berlin conference only 10 days ago my German counterpart, the Minister of the Interior, was alarmed at the number of eastern Europeans and Russians who intend to move into Germany.
The extraordinary thing about the tenor of the right hon. Gentleman's speech in the past few minutes is that once again he seeks to make out that this is not a very important problem and that we can push it away.
Earlier in his speech he weakened every attempt to strengthen our defences such as the Immigration (Carriers'
Liability) Act 1987 and fingerprinting.
He does not want any of that.
He represents a weak policy.
We represent a strong policy.
Mr. Hattersley
Unfortunately, there are not enough Tory Members to cheer that extract from the future Tory manifesto.
However, I have no doubt that the Home Secretary reveals his secret self.
He reveals what all this is about.
It is the attempt to claim that he is strong and others are weak.
No one who has listened to this debate so far, let alone anyone who listens to it between now and 10 o'clock, will believe that assertion for a moment.
They will know that the Home Secretary sees the matter essentially in narrow party terms.
I was about to say that, looking back at his record, I could not understand why the Home Secretary wanted to relive his time as Conservative party chairman, because that was hardly his finest hour.
However, when I think of him at the Departments of the Environment and of Education and Science, I realise that it probably was his finest hour.
The point about the 7 million Russians is simply this.
I dare say that there are 7 million Russians waiting to move west.
But the Home Secretary's fraudulent attempt to imply that they were all destined for Heathrow does him no credit and should cause him shame.
Perhaps the Home Secretary will get up to respond on the second point that he made to the Conservative party conference.
He said that the alternative to his policy was the open door.
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
It is right to reorganise the asylum division of the Home Office and increase its staffing and resources.
It is ludicrous that so little has been put into it hitherto.
It is also right that, as we have been urging, the asylum claims should be examined more expeditiously.
Under-resourcing over many years had led to inordinate delays.
Cases are taking 16 months or more, with a backlog of 60,000, and this must be rectified, especially as, we have been told, the number of applications has increased by 10 times in four years — from 5,000 in 1988 to 50,000 this year.
While remedying the deficiencies in the procedures and ensuring that cases are dealt with properly and without delay, it is vital that each application is dealt with fairly and adequately, that each applicant has access to independent legal advice, and that there is a right to proper appeal — a right that the Bill does not give.
Reference is often made to Britain's honourable and proud tradition of welcoming refugees, but in those days they consisted mainly of persecuted individuals.
One thinks of someone like Karl Marx who, expelled from continental countries, was allowed into this country to sit in the British Library and write books.
Our record in allowing in Jewish refugees from Hitler was not quite so good.
The world has changed radically since the admission of individuals such as Marx and vastly in the 40 years since the 1951 convention was drawn up.
Then, what was uppermost in people's minds was the second world war and its aftermath and the convention was framed mainly to deal with Europe rather than Africa or Asia.
Much of the third world was colonised then.
Forty years on, the world is transformed.
The UN tells us that there are now 17.5 million officially registered refugees — there are probably many more who are not registered — with an extra 2 million refugees in the past two years.
In addition, there are many more millions of migrants and what might be termed environmental refugees — people leaving because of natural disasters or because the land, as the result of soil erosion, deforestation and the spread of deserts, can no longer support the population.
These people are fleeing starvation.
Throughout history, there has been migration.
Among the greatest migrants were the British, who populated Canada, Australia, New Zealand and large parts of Africa, often without so much as a’ by your leave’to the local population.
The United States was created by migration and the modern world has been sculpted by migration.
In our strife-torn world, millions of people are on the move, in fear or in hope.
Hundreds of thousands were displaced by the Gulf war and hundreds of thousands seek to escape misgovernment, civil conflict, wars, economic collapse and starvation.
This affects countries such as Somalia, which has been mentioned, Ethiopia, Sudan, Zaire, Liberia, Mozambique, Uganda and Angola.
There are millions of refugees in Afghanistan, as there are in Cambodia.
There are millions of Palestinian refugees and Sri Lanka is being torn apart.
There is then eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
For years we urged rulers there to let their people go and to make their people free.
That is being done, so many people may turn up on our doorsteps not with their tanks but with their suitcases.
We have a new phenomenon across the world, whose economic and social dimensions are beyond our previous experience, and we must address this.
In doing that, we should beware of too much partisan debate, of playing the race card and of charges and counter charges that sweep away reason.
In dealing with this new phenomenon, I have two points to make.
First, it is obviously impractical to solve the problems of war-torn African states or of conflicts in countries such as Sri Lanka by moving their populations to western Europe.
Presumably, if any of those Kurds who desperately clung to snowy slopes at border mountains, trapped between the armies of three states that did not recognise them, had been able to reach an aeroplane and fly to Britain, they would have qualified for asylum under the 1951 convention.
That could not happen now because of the so-called safe havens.
That may give us a pointer to one approach.
It is vital for the affluent countries to do much more through the United Nations to get support and assistance in situ.
Most refugees go to neighbouring countries, which are often living at subsistence levels themselves.
On a far more extensive scale than we have done hitherto, we must help refugees in their own and neighbouring countries.
The world is divided into a number of zones of wealth surrounded by vast hinterlands of poverty.
It would be impossible for the affluent to live in peace if conflict after conflict exploded in the third world.
We need a much stronger global response and more active aid policies.
There cannot be stability while 25 per cent.
of the world's population consumes 80 per cent.
of the planet's resources.
The affluent world found millions for the Gulf war and must find millions to tackle the problems of refugees at source.
My second point — about which the Bill is silent — concerns refugees who gain access to Britain.
There should be an official Government refugee resettlement programme.
At the moment, refugees coming into the ports of entry are left on their own.
They have no guidance and they are left to their own devices.
The Government take no further responsibility for them.
They wash their hands of the matter.
As a consequence, the refugees gravitate to a handful of boroughs that are primarily — I heard the hon. Member for Beckenham (Sir P. Goodhart) refer to Bromley — Labour boroughs, in London and in one or two other cities.
These boroughs, like the London borough of Newham, are weighed down with more than their fair share of problems.
In Newham, our housing is officially the worst in the country.
There are thousands on the housing waiting lists and there are hundreds of families in bed and breakfast.
One in five of the male population is unemployed.
The borough is struggling to raise its low levels of educational achievement.
The borough willingly assumes its responsibilities to help and cope with refugees.
Many other London Tory boroughs, however, do not help; nor do the Government give hard-pressed Newham the assistance that it needs.
That is intolerable.
The Bill is silent on an issue that, so far, has never been addressed in the House.
Newham's refugee population amounts to between 5 per cent.
and 10 per cent.
of its entire population, and many different communities are involved.
A fortnight ago, I was invited to a meeting of Somali refugees in East Ham town hall.
The meeting was packed; many hundreds of people attended.
I was presented with a document whose contents I discussed two days later with community leaders.
According to that document, the borough of Newham contains 7,000 Somali refugees.
Describing the plight of Somali children, it explains:’ Many of them have not been in school for several years when they arrive in this country’.
The problem is not just that the children have not attended a school where English is taught; they have not been to a school of any description for years on end.
They then come, in vast numbers, to a London borough.
The document continues:’ It is difficult for them to adjust to the schools in this country.
The problem is especially great with the over 16's who do not know English and who cannot go to school.
It is getting increasingly difficult to get into further education’.
How, indeed, can someone who does not speak English do that?
’ Most of the Somali students don't speak English and have no idea about the British curriculum’.
Somali students, says the document, would like to be provided with home tutoring; but who will pay?
As I have said, my borough's levels of educational achievement are low.
League tables of exam results will soon be published; given that a class may contain 20 children who cannot speak English, its position in any league table is bound to be low.
That is a problem also for teachers if they are to be paid in line with examination results.
As I have said, Newham's housing provision is officially deemed the worst in England and Wales.
According to the Somali document, accommodation provided by the council is normally in one of two categories — bed and breakfast, or hostels.
On arrival, refugees and immigrants are’ classified into families with small children and elderly people who are re-accommodated into temporary accommodation’.
Each bed-and-breakfast place costs £14,000.
The document complains that few people are given council housing.
That is a reasonable complaint, but our current waiting list amounts to nearly 10,000.
How can Newham help, unless it in turn is helped by the Government?
Health is another problem.
The document talks of’ Inaccessibility the majority of Somali people do not speak English.’
It talks of’ lack of information’, and of’cultural and social problems’.
The Government seem to have washed their hands of the problem: they are taking no responsibility for it, and that is not good enough.
Mr. John Carlisle
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Leighton
No; I am taking up too much time already.
I am glad, however, that the hon. Gentleman is paying attention to what I am saying.
The document says that Somalis who visit DSS offices are treated in a humiliating manner.
So many people are now visiting the office at Jubilee house that they cannot get in.
When Newham Members raise the problem with social security Ministers, they are given the official answer that it is caused by the number of Somali refugees.
Apparently, they are happy for the people of Newham — and the Somali refugees — to stand outside in the rain.
It is difficult for Somali refugees to obtain employment.
That does not surprise me, given that 20 per cent.
of the male population in Newham are currently unemployed.
I understand that 250 unaccompanied children cost a social services department £5 million.
Are the Government at all interested in that figure?
Have they a point of view?
It is clear that they do not wish to take responsibility.
If they did, they would be forced to answer parliamentary questions and they might find that they were responsible for feeding the refugee population.
They would like all the refugees to go off to Newham and similar boroughs, and for the Home Office to hear no more about the matter.
But that cannot continue: I think that London Members on both sides of the House will say the same.
Let me make it clear that my borough is willing to help.
It accepts its responsibility.
But what of the Government's responsibility?
A national programme must be set up.
The Government must face up to their obligations.
It is no good operating a policy of laissez-faire, and leaving the task to the few hard-pressed London boroughs.
Miss Kate Hoey (Vauxhall)
It is nice to follow the first Conservative Back-Bench Member who seems to have looked at the Bill without blinkers.
We should not discuss the Bill without understanding the climate and context in which it is being introduced.
We are seeing a growth in neo-fascism and fascist groups throughout Europe, particularly in Germany, Austria and France.
There is growing hostility to asylum seekers within Europe, spearheaded by organised right-wing groups.
In this country, even some of our popular newspapers have attacked all asylum seekers as cheats who have no right to be here.
I was disappointed that the Home Secretary spent so much of his time this afternoon outlining a few examples of asylum seekers who have been proved to be lying.
The’ bogus’tag has been used indiscriminately and has created a climate of hostility to new arrivals.
Furthermore, the unfavourable climate may have repercussions on the general attitudes to the black population in the United Kingdom.
The Home Secretary said that we must not provide the opportunity for the organised violence against asylum seekers in Europe to spread here.
The Bill will do exactly that.
No matter how much the Home Secretary genuinely may not want that to happen, the Bill will stir up racist feelings and will play on fears and prejudices.
It will give the various groups and Tory Members who seek to play the race card the opportunity to do so.
This afternoon, we have seen evidence of that here.
If such passions are aroused in this Chamber today, there must be real concern about what will happen when it is discussed throughout the country.
Hon. Members should be aware of the widespread feeling among all the agencies that deal with asylum seekers and refugees that there are no merits in the Bill as it stands.
I am thinking of Amnesty International and the Churches.
I abhor the criticism made by the hon. Member for Luton, North (Mr. Carlisle) of Lambeth palace, which is in my constituency.
I pay tribute to the work of the churches in my borough and other inner-London boroughs on this issue.
This is not the time to press this Bill, even if there were merits in it, considering the climate in Europe.
If the Home Secretary meant what he says about keeping public sympathy for genuine refugees, he would address the need for extra resources for the Home Office and Lunar house to speed up the procedures for asylum seeking.
If those resources had been given three or four years ago, we would not have the long delays that lead to so much misery, and the small number of non-genuine asylum seekers would not be here for longer than we would all want.
The British Refugee Council is in my constituency, and I pay tribute, as will other hon. Members, to its work in helping to give support and advice to refugees.
Of all organisations, it has an interest in ensuring that those who apply for asylum as a means of avoiding immigration regulations should not be allowed to enter the country.
I know that it shares that view.
The Home Secretary should have listened sooner to its representations.
No matter what the Home Secretary has said, clauses 5 and 6 mean that there will be no absolute right of appeal.
All must seek leave to appeal from the special adjudicator who is to be appointed by the Lord Chancellor.
The special adjudicator will not grant leave to appeal if he, or perhaps she, is satisfied that the applicant does not have an arguable claim for asylum.
That decision will be made without an oral hearing, and there will be no appeal against refusal.
That is against natural justice.
Applications for leave to appeal must be made within 48 hours of the asylum seeker receiving notice that the application has been refused.
It is assumed that the asylum seeker will receive that notification the day after it is posted.
That is not something of which we can be certain.
The British Refugee Council's concerns about these proposals must be listened to.
Many asylum seekers live in overcrowded, temporary accommodation, including hostels, where access to mail is not necessarily foolproof.
Mail can be delayed.
People who speak little or no English may not understand the need for speed, and it may take time to get the information translated.
At this stage, asylum seekers may not have a legal adviser.
They may not even have a friend.
Even when they have an adviser, that adviser will have to be contacted and an appointment made.
The adviser will have to complete the relevant documentation based on the reasons given for the refusal of the application.
The obvious implication is that many asylum seekers may miss the deadline and lose the chance to appeal.
Clause 7 raises the question whether the asylum seeker wishes to submit any variation or amplification of the notice of appeal.
If so, it must be done within five days of receiving the notification.
I do not believe that the genuine asylum seeker will be treated fairly.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) went through the various clauses in detail and I do not want to add to anything that he has said.
The Government could be taking many measures to ensure that refugees who have the right to stay in this country are assimilated and given equal opportunities.
Apart from their security, the need for independence and self-sufficiency is of paramount importance to them.
Training and employment play a key role, yet there is no planned or co-ordinated policy to facilitate it.
Special programmes must be provided where needed to address the problems that refugees face through their past circumstances to give them equality of opportunity and to avoid eroding their talents and initiative.
I get fed up with people always assuming that refugees have nothing positive to offer this country and that they are merely bringing or being problems.
For too many, the lack of financial security, savings and a clear future mean that they have to live at subsistence level.
Obviously, after what some of them have gone through, they can at least live in safety, but that is no basis for a completely new beginning after a shattered career, education and family life.
The definition of the Confederation of British Industry of the United Kingdom work force as’ under-educated, under-trained and under-qualified’ironically does not apply to the majority of refugees, many of whom are highly qualified and skilled.
Employers should be taking note.
No one is responsible for the education and training of refugees.
The British Government are a signatory to the United Nations convention on refugees.
As such, they have an obligation to ensure satisfactory resettlement.
Unlike some European countries, there is no centrally planned and co-ordinated policy for educating and training refugees.
They are expected to find their own way into our education system.
Much more could be done to help assimilate our refugees — for example, help with schooling and specialist support.
Boroughs such as Lambeth need extra resources to provide the back-up.
We have a large number of refugees, and we need extra resources.
The Bill provides no support for the genuine refugee or assistance with the resettlement of refugees here.
The Home Secretary has an opportunity to extend the scope of grants to local authorities under section 11 of the Local Government Act 1989.
Local authority associations have identified the need for additional resources to provide both housing and education of the children of refugees.
My borough has a large number of refugees, and I am concerned that the Bill may enable some authorities to avoid any responsibility for refugees.
The Bill will do nothing to assist the settlement of refugees in the United Kingdom.
Asylum seekers to this country are exactly that — they are seeking asylum in the United Kingdom, not in a particular local authority.
It is vital that those boroughs that have, for historical or accidental reasons, a large number of refugees should not be financially penalised.
Many of those boroughs also have the worst housing, longest waiting lists and highest poverty levels of the country.
There is no need for the Bill and for the hours of debate that will accompany it.
We need an effort to be made to bring about international co-operation to remedy some of the factors that lead to people seeking asylum in this country.
What is needed is an acceptance of our responsibilities under international law.
The Labour party wants application procedures to be speeded up so that we have a proper, fair and effective system that ensures that this country continues its long honourable tradition of providing asylum for refugees.
The Government will convince no one that they too wish to continue that tradition.
Mr. Terry Dicks (Hayes and Harlington)
I support the Bill, but I have some criticisms of past Government policy.
I agree with the hon. Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton) about the cost of immigration and the cost of refugees.
That cost is increasing because of the number of children who are abandoned at Heathrow.
My local authority, quite rightly, takes on those children because they are in need, but it receives no financial assistance to cope with them.
My right hon. Friend should bear that in mind.
It is no good arguing that we should take in asylum seekers and that we should process their applications quickly if, in the interim, no financial assistance is given to local authorities for that purpose.
I accept that the number of immigration officers at Heathrow has increased, but for a long time the numbers employed were well below what was required.
Those officers do an excellent job and have a great understanding of the needs of that job.
However, it would be extremely helpful if those officers were medically trained.
In many instances, when asylum seekers and others reach Heathrow they can walk straight into the community with any kind of illness, unless they seek medical attention.
Unless an immigration officer feels that someone needs such a medical examination, he is unable to intervene.
To my knowledge, no immigration officer at Heathrow is medically qualified.
The ports of entry should be better manned and in some instances medical advice should be on hand so that certain people have a medical examination before they are allowed into the community.
That would benefit not only the individual, but the community in which he intends to live.
Hon. Members on both sides have argued that the processing of applications takes an awfully long time.
The present problems may be a precise result of that delay.
In the past, however, insufficient priority has been given to processing such applications.
It is ridiculous that people wait up to three years until a decision is reached.
In some instances an applicaton may be deemed to be bogus after a two-year delay.
However, because the individual has settled here the Government say that they cannot send that person back.
If an application is processed quickly and is found to be bogus, the person concerned is sent back to his country of origin.
However, if that application process takes a long time, it is felt that one cannot upset that person's lifestyle — he may be married — and he is allowed to stay.
That is nonsense.
There is a suspicion — no more than that — of which I have no clear evidence, that blanket decisions are taken on some applications.
I accept that individual cases are studied carefully, but Sikhs from the Punjab think that the Home Office department in Croydon does not believe any Sikh from the Punjab who claims political asylum.
It appears that, because we are great friends with the Indian Government and the Indian community, and because they tell us that there is no political persecution in the Punjab, we must accept that.
However, I and others find it difficult to accept that, but I repeat that I have no hard evidence to substantiate my claim.
Tough action is needed.
People seem to forget that Britain is a small island with limited resources of all kinds.
Bogus applicants offend ethnic minorities as much as anyone else.
Sikhs in my constituency are totally opposed to the so-called immigration advisers who extract large amounts of money from would-be applicants.
Many of those applicants do not understand the system and they are misled about their applications.
Perhaps my right hon. Friend should consider introducing a law to make the exploitation of those weak and innocent people — many cannot speak the language — a criminal offence.
Such exploitation has been widespread for too long.
We must accept that the bogus traveller — that is the best title to give to such a person — is seeking no more than a better life.
At times perhaps that is sought at someone else's expense.
I do not agree with the hon. Member for Tottenham (Mr. Grant) that all such people are middle class and able to make a contribution to our society.
Many asylum seekers are middle class, but one need only visit Brick lane to see Bangladeshi people who are suffering a great deal because they are poor.
They cannot speak the language, so they cannot get work and they need help.
When we allow people into the country, be they middle class or poor, we must not run away with the idea of helping them.
If such people are not genuine asylum seekers we must take action to protect the rest of the community, including the ethnic minorities, from them.
Many hon. Members have spoken about the pressures on our social services and educational and housing provision.
The current employment situation is not conducive to allowing in more people to seek work.
Often there is no such work to be had, but if there is, the asylum seekers should not take it at the expense of people already here.
Mr. Eddie Loyden (Liverpool, Garston)
Surely the hon. Gentleman would accept that problems have been associated with unemployment, bad housing and lack of social services for far longer than before any immigrant entered this country.
One cannot accredit those problems to immigration.
Mr. Dicks
It was a mistake to allow the hon. Gentleman to intervene.
I accept that there have always been some problems, but if one keeps filling the pot with water it will overflow.
Given the current circumstances and strains, we cannot afford to let anyone else into the country.
The British people are not prepared to be conned by the bogus political asylum seeker.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Welwyn Hatfield (Mr. Evans) said, Britain is not a soft touch.
We will help those that we have to help legally, or perhaps those whom people want to help, but we will not have foisted upon us those who come here for a good time and a good life.
They seek to come here because it is a nice place.
I welcome the Bill, but I do not believe it goes far enough.
Applications for asylum should not be accepted from nationals of certain countries.
Only last week my right hon. Friend said that people had sought asylum from Canada.
How can anyone be politically persecuted in Canada?
How can people be politically persecuted in America or in many western European countries?
We must start to define where we expect genuine refugees to come from.
If we did that, we could probably reduce the number of applications by about 75 per cent.
overnight.
If someone arrives here from Canada, how can we say that we will consider properly and carefully his application for political asylum?
That person's backside should be kicked and he should be put on the first Air Canada flight home.
I am concerned about clause 3 and its effect on local authority housing.
Why is it that bogus applicants, and even genuine asylum seekers, are given housing when they claim to have no alternative accommodation?
How can we test the authenticity of their claim that their homelessness was not self-inflicted?
My local authority has had to cope with that problem for many years, as I did when I was housing chairman of my local authority.
Unless we send someone back to his country of origin, it is almost impossible to test the authenticity of the statements that he makes.
My local authority has a great many people in bed-and-breakfast accommodation, which costs the local poll tax payer a great deal.
I believe that it is nonsense that we should give such asylum seekers any form of accommodation.
The possibility of getting that accommodation encourages many refugees to come here in the first place.
Mr. Madden
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Dicks
No, I shall not give way.
The other subject that I wish to mention is the Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act 1987.
It is ludicrous that the Government should say that airlines and other carriers should be punished for doing something that is not their job.
They are not immigration officials.
They have people at airports to check in passengers and to push them through.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary commented on people who arrive here having torn up or got rid of their documents on the aeroplane.
It is interesting that, in sush cases, the Government still fine the airline concerned and expect it to pay.
That seems to be wrong.
There are 77 airlines at Heathrow and the Government expect them to act as immigration officials to ensure that people arrive with the right documentation.
In the past, people have destroyed their documents on aeroplanes and in one case someone came with an outdated passport.
Anyone could make that mistake in the urgency of a business flight, yet the airline concerned must pay the Government for that.
That seems crazy.
My hon. Friend the Member for Welwyn Hatfield may have had a point when he said — it was a tough line to take — that all admissions into this country should be suspended until we have caught up, and then we could reduce the waiting period to six weeks.
If the Labour party, the churches, the Hampstead white wine whingers and the bleeding hearts all oppose the Bill, it must be right.
After all, the majority of ordinary, decent working class people support it.
Mr. Jeremy Corbyn (Islington, North)
I listened with great fascination to the hon. Member for Hayes and Harlington (Mr. Dicks), thinking that he might take this opportunity to tell the House about his relationship with Professor Bedi, who is now awaiting trial in Brixton prison.
I thought that he would explain why, although he legitimately supports the cause of human rights of the Sikh people, he has made so many abusive remarks about Afro-Caribbean and West Indian people in the past, especially in an interview in the Tatler in 1989.
The debate is being held against the background of the most appalling racism, promoted by the popular press, some Conservative Members and especially the Government.
For example, today's Daily Mail decided to have on its front page — coincidence I am certain — to go with the Bill:’ Cheating Refugee Rang Up £117,000 Phone Bill’.
I have no idea of the circumstances connected with that but it has nothing to do with whether someone may be an asylum seeker.
The Daily Mail, the Sun and many other such papers have contained a series of unpleasant, vituperative stories against individuals in the past few months.
They have sought to damage the interests of people legitimately seeking political asylum, having fled from oppression, who if they returned to their own countries would face further oppression and possibly death.
A few days ago, we saw the appalling spectacle on television of Vietnamese asylum seekers being dragged forcibly on to a plane to be sent back to Vietnam, a very poor country that has suffered economic embargos since 1976, which have caused great poverty there.
The embargos were supported by the United States and this country.
I fear, as do many others, that the start of the rot was the forced repatriation of the Vietnamese from Hong Kong.
Not so many years ago, a terrified young Kurdish man from Turkey sought asylum in this country.
Despite all the entreaties that we could mount, including substantial medical evidence, the Home Office decided — the matter went to ministerial level — that he must return to Turkey.
He could not face that prospect and took his own life by covering himself in petrol and setting himself alight.
Siho Iyuguven died.
Fortunately, his family was able to come here later and I am pleased to say that they now live here safely.
However, they have never forgiven or forgotten what happened.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Vauxhall (Miss Hoey) said in her excellent contribution, the degree of racism and racist violence on the rise in Europe must be dealt with.
It cannot be dealt with by appeasement or by saying that those people have a legitimate point and that is why they are burning mosques in France and Nazi gangs are attacking migrant workers in Germany.
It must be totally condemned, because anything less encourages the further rise of fascism.
The slightest understanding of the history of Europe in the 1920s and 1930s shows that.
I want the House to consider the circumstances under which people seek political asylum.
It is now part of the history of this country that many people came here to try to avoid the holocaust that Nazi Germany became.
Unfortunately, many did not reach this country, the United States, Canada or any other safe country but ended up in the gas chambers of Auschwitz and Dachau because they were denied the right to asylum.
I know of people who have fled the most awful oppression in other countries in later fascist regimes, such as that of General Augusto Pinochet in Chile, which killed so many.
Many succeeded in gaining political asylum, but unfortunately not everyone.
Now, as democracy is being reborn in Chile, the unmarked graves are being uncovered, the secret prisons are being discovered and the names of the missing are at last being revealed.
If anyone believes for a moment that we should forget about the cause of asylum seekers, I ask them to read some of the evidence of people who fled from Chile, El Salvador, Burma and so many other places where they could not cope with the oppression against them.
It is not easy for people to leave their own country, possibly never to return.
Such a decision is not taken lightly.
It is a sense of defeat and having to start over again.
This country has not faced such a decision in the past 300 or 400 years and I hope that we never shall.
But we should understand those who face such oppression and recognise that, in framing legislation, we should not introduce the remotest chance of anyone being wrongly returned.
If they are, in many cases it means certain death for them.
The concept of a safe third country was mentioned so glibly by the Minister.
He should think for a moment what that means.
Is he saying that France, Germany or the United States are automatically safe?
They are not.
Is someone who has moved to Louisiana safe from the Ku Klux Klan and David Duke?
Is a Moroccan asylum seeker safe in the suburbs of Paris?
Is a Vietnamese migrant worker safe living in Leipzig with Nazi gangs going around?
The Home Secretary should think much more carefully about the concept of a safe third country.
We should also think about the problems of the world as a whole, which cause mass migration in the first place.
People do not lightly take the decision to migrate.
The poverty that is created in some African countries by a combination of the debt crisis, poor harvests and droughts forces people to seek survival somewhere else.
Indeed, Irish people have sought survival elsewhere, and people often left this country because they did not wish to stay in the slums of London, Birmingham or Liverpool but sought a better life in Australia or elsewhere.
We should not be quite so narrow-minded, blinkered and xenophobic about the rest of the world.
The House has not had a good record in the past years.
The Immigration (Carriers' Liability) Act 1987 was an abominable piece of legislation, privatising immigration and putting it in the hands of aircraft and shipping companies, encouraging the use of bogus identity documents and, in many cases, making it impossible for legitimate asylum seekers to leave their own countries.
People living under oppression cannot go to the British embassy and seek an entry clearance document, present it to an airline office, take a plane to this country and then seek political asylum.
The world is not like that.
The British embassy may be observed by the secret police, as may the airline office and many other places.
We should think more carefully about the effects of the legislation.
We should consider the psychological condition in which people arrive.
I know people who were prisoners of war in Japanese camps during the second world war and who, even now, find it hard to talk about the abuse that they suffered.
I was talking to an old man in my constituency only last week.
He found it hard to describe to me the abominable way in which he was treated in a prisoner of war camp.
The same is true of victims of the holocaust who were placed in concentration camps.
People who have been in prison in Zaire, Somalia and many other places find it hard, after the long, arduous and frightening experience of travelling abroad to seek asylum, to talk instantly about everything that happened.
The excellent organisation, the Medical Foundation for the Care of Victims of Torture, collected evidence showing the psychological condition in which people arrive in this country.
The procedure proposed — the fast track, the instant decision, the lack of proper appeal — continually works against those people.
It is hard for people fleeing from oppression to explain everything that has happened.
They have to reveal all, and if something goes wrong how are they to know that all that information will not be handed back to the secret police from whom they are trying to escape by seeking asylum?
I hope that the House will reject the Bill, but I fear that it will not.
We shall fight it in Committee, and I hope that there will be a campaign in this country against the Bill, the xenophobia that it perpetrates and the principles behind it which are so wrong.
Mr. Jacques Arnold (Gravesham)
The Bill must be one of the most sensitive to come before the House for many years.
It affects people and this country's reputation.
We have given asylum to political refugees over many centuries: the Huguenots, the Jews from eastern Europe and Russia at the turn of the century, continental Europeans during the last war — including my father — and many others.
This country has a proud record to uphold.
In this day and age, continuing problems around the world throw up refugees.
One such problem is particularly close to home for many of my Gravesham constituents.
My constituency includes a large community of Sikhs from the Punjab in India.
I do not need to detain the House with a contemporary history of that sad state.
Grievances against the federal Government of the republic of India go back to the time of independence, when many Sikhs felt that Nehru and his Congress party reneged on solemn undertakings.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for the Home Department (Mr. Peter Lloyd)
The debate on a range of issues that lie behind the Bill has been full, at times passionate and occasionally acrimonious.
As my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary said in his opening speech, asylum is a complex subject.
The pressures that induce people to leave their country and seek it are varied.
The motives for choosing a particular country — often on the other side of the world — in which to claim asylum are mixed.
In answer to the hon. Member for Edinburgh, Central (Mr. Darling), I do not believe that the motives of the majority of those who claim asylum are reprehensible.
However, the claims of the majority of those seeking asylum here during the past few years — and of the cases that we have determined — were unfounded in United Nations convention terms.
The hon. Member for Edinburgh, Central and a number of other hon. Members asked me why so many have had exceptional leave to remain, as only 24 per cent.
of the cases in the past few years have been found to be genuine asylum seekers in United Nations terms.
The fact is that we give exceptional leave to remain because it would be inhumane to send some people, such as the Croatian that the hon. Member mentioned, back to their country at this time, even though they may not have made a claim of persecution.
In some cases, because of our long waiting list, people have been here too long — they have married, put down roots and have children in school — and it would be unreasonable to send them back.
I am afraid that I have to confess that we allow a substantial number of people to remain simply because we have not had the staff to pursue their claims to remain through the various hoops available to them.
Mr. Darling
The Government had an open door policy, then?
Mr. Lloyd
It may well be the case that we should have had more staff but I willingly accept that the tenfold increase in the number arriving has overwhelmed our resources.
I do not think that the hon. Member for Edinburgh, Central, his hon. Friends or the majority of my hon. Friends would say that the Government were wrong, rather than giving no status to people who have been in this country for a number of years, to have given them exceptional leave to remain.
That is how that category is made up.
They are not genuine asylum seekers, but a variety of different people with a variety of claims to be here and reasons why they are.
Mr. Darling
The Minister has made exactly the point that I was making — that, in effect, a tiny minority has claims that are unfounded and without merit.
He rightly said that we grant exceptional leave to remain to a number of people if it would be unjust to return them, perhaps to a civil war or something like that.
As I understand it, the Home Secretary has said that he means to cut down on exceptional need to remain.
What will we do when someone misses out on asylum but clearly has a case, albeit one that falls short of asylum, which is not bogus?
Mr. Lloyd
Each case is considered on its merits.
There are at least two categories.
With the speedier decision-making that the extra staff make possible, in which the Bill assists, people will be able to have no said to them very properly.
Beyond all the rarefied discussion of these fundamental forces, beyond the political point scoring and the political footballs, many of which have been kicked around this evening, there remains the overwhelming problem of coping humanely and fairly with the constant flow of individual human beings — now 50,000 a year, which is 10 times more than three years ago.
No responsible Government could ignore that growth.
No responsible Opposition could, either — yet I have heard few thoughts from them tonight about how to deal with that effectively.
We cannot ignore that growth, if only because the machinery and procedures adequate to manage 5,000 are entirely inappropriate for 50,000 and more.
Despite the hard words exchanged across the Chamber from time to time this evening, it is plain that there is complete agreement on both sides of the House that those who arrive here with a well-founded fear of persecution should find a safe haven.
On this side of the House and, I suspect, on many parts of the Opposition Benches there is equal recognition, although unspoken, that those who do not have such a well-founded fear, some other compelling compassionate reason which justifies their remaining or another legitimate claim to stay, should return to their country.
If an asylum claim that is not justified under the United Nations convention is to be the means of obtaining settlement in the United Kingdom, we need at the very least to explain, particularly to the minority communities legitimately settled here, why their friends and relatives who would like to come and join them are not allowed to do so because they told the truth when they made their applications, whereas others who are prepared to make an unfounded asylum claim can remain indefinitely.
There is no justice in that.
I listened to the right hon. Member for Birmingham, Sparkbrook (Mr. Hattersley) and it was plain that he did not understand the Bill.
I had no idea whether he saw the tenfold rise in numbers applying as a problem to be addressed and, if so, how he would deal with it.
His was an exercise in misinformation and complacency.
The Bill and the rules that will accompany it are essentially practical.
They aim to establish a working system that can cope with arrivals on the present scale.
We need to be able to identify and give asylum promptly to those with genuine claims.
It is plainly unfair if they are obliged, as at present, to live in uncertainty for many months or years.
We need to be able to determine accurately and fairly those with unfounded claims.
Unless there is a special compassionate feature, such as the one given by the hon. Member for Edinburgh, Central, we need to return them home before they have begun to establish themselves here, making their eventual removal more difficult for us and even more unwelcome for them.
There is no serious dissent from the general proposition that we should have a system which combines a thorough examination of all individual claims, a clear exposition of the criteria against which they are being assessed, all proper speed and then a clear decision, whether positive or negative, and an effective right of appeal before removal for those whose claims have been rejected.
Obviously, there is room for debate about the means of achieving those objectives and how accommodating our criteria should be.
Because we want the debate to be a real one, we published with the Bill the draft immigration rules which will follow its successful passage, so those rules can be discussed at the same time as the Bill and, if and where necessary, improved.
We have also published for consultation the draft asylum appeals procedure rules.
The Lord Chancellor has made it clear on the front of that document that they have been issued before being finalised so as to facilitate discussion.
I want to dwell upon the draft immigration rules because most hon. Members have mentioned them.
The draft rules make explicit the clear exposition of the criteria against which cases are assessed.
These relate to matters of credibility.
A case that is considered thoroughly is looked at in the round and all the relevant factors are taken into proper consideration.
When it comes to deciding what affects credibility, the operative word is’ may’.
If an applicant has a good explanation for his claim it may, far from harming him, enhance his credibility.
There may be occasions when it is quite right or entirely understandable that an asylum applicant did not make his claim until he had been here for some time.
For others, however, it will be plain that they made their asylum claim to extend their stay here only when they had failed to prolong it by other means.
I understand why hon. Members paused for thought when they first read the draft immigration rule relating to a person arriving with no papers.
There could be a totally innocent reason why someone arrived with no documents.
When papers are destroyed deliberately, however, as they are in half of the cases of those claiming asylum at the ports, apparently to conceal the identification of the claimants and where they come from, that must adversely affect their credibility — unless they have a convincing explanation.
It will affect their credibility not least because the United Nations enjoins asylum seekers to help the authorities by providing all the relevant information to assist in establishing their claim.
Mr. Darling
What is the objection to showing the asylum seeker the completed initial statement and the reasons for the refusal?
At least he could then see what was said against him and, if necessary, make representations about that.
Mr. Lloyd
There is no objection, and that is exactly what we are doing.
On refusal, the failed applicant will be given the reasons why and receive a copy of the papers that will go to the adjudicator.
What the hon. Gentleman wants, he will get.
Not everything is set down in the rules, but it is the practice to provide those papers.
Opposition Members seem to be disappointed.
Interruption
Mr. Darling
The Minister is a reasonable man and he has shown even more reasonableness than I had expected.
If he is now giving us a commitment that the reasons for a refusal will be made available to the applicant, that is welcome.
I should be grateful if the hon. Gentleman will confirm that that is the Government's intention.
Mr. Lloyd
It is our practice and also our intention.
Another rule that worried people on first reading, and I can understand why, is the rule relating to political activity in this country.
My right hon. Friend the Home Secretary has already dealt with that issue.
I accept that political activity in this country could undermine credibility, but it might just confirm credibility.
Given that the rule has caused so much concern, I will repeat our case.
The operative word is’ may’.
Political activity here would undermine the credibility of a claimant only if it was designed merely to enhance a claim or to construct one that did not exist.
Those who have genuinely fled from persecution and who carry on normal, non-violent political activity and demonstration here have nothing to fear.
Paragraph 7 of the draft immigration rules relates to untruths by agents.
That, too, has been raised many times tonight.
Unless an applicant has a satisfactory explanation, his credibility will be reduced if untrue claims are made on his behalf by his agent or representative.
That is the position now.
Staff at the Home Office who give fair and full interviews to applicants must look at all matters which reflect on the claim being made and on the credibility of the individual.
The only difference is that we are setting that fact out clearly in the rules so that people know.
Paragraph 8, which enables some applications to be considered in a group, was raised by several hon. Members, particularly the hon. Member for Caithness and Sutherland (Mr. Maclennan).
Cases will almost always be considered individually.
Paragraph 8 provides that, when an applicant is part of a group of individuals all making the same claim which is clearly unconnected with United Nations convention criteria, the group may be refused collectively.
It deals with the occasional situation when a holiday party arrives on a charter flight and claims asylum en bloc.
The rules make it clear that an individual who can show that his or her claim is distinguishable from the rest of the group must have it heard and he or she will be treated individually.
The procedure rules were also raised by many hon. Members on both sides of the House.
The major purpose of the Bill is to extend appeal rights to all asylum seekers.
There was no such universal right when the Labour party was in office.
The Bill provides for the right to apply to and have papers considered by the adjudicator.
If there are arguable points, the rules are clear.
The case must be considered orally.
I have no doubt that most cases will be considered in that way, because the threshold is very low — lower for leave to appeal than in most other parts of our judicial system such as the criminal courts.
I doubt whether the right hon. Member for Sparkbrook would say that there is no right of appeal in criminal cases.
Yet the Bill is on all fours with that — indeed, it is rather more liberal.
Nevertheless, there must be a filter, as there is in the criminal courts, to ensure that the appellate system is not overloaded by those who enter Britain from a third safe country to which they can return if they manifestly have no claim to asylum here.
For example, my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary mentioned a Ugandan who came here from Italy, where he had spent four years.
Another example was a member of the governing party in his own country who fled here for asylum, saying that his colleagues were rude and inconsiderate.
I understand why he chose this country, where the governing party is never rude, even when provoked, and unfailingly considerate.
Mr. Vaz
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Lloyd
No.
I shall not be able to complete my remarks anyway.
The Bar Council believes that there must be a fast track.
I was interested to see its views.
The UNHCR director for international protection, quoted by my right hon. Friend the Home Secretary, said in May this year that in western Europe unfounded cases clog the system.
Nevertheless, we are prepared to examine the arrangements in Committee with an open mind.
Mr. Vaz
Whose open mind?
Mr. Lloyd
Mine — I doubt whether there are too many among Opposition Members.
The draft rules for the asylum appeals procedure were issued unfinished so as to aid discussion.
One element has caused a great deal of discussion — the two days allowed for an applicant who has been turned down to notify the adjudicator of his wish to appeal and to present the kernel of his or her case.
I am sure that many cases will be able to keep to that timetable, but I see difficulties in many others.
We shall be particularly interested to hear the views of Committee Members and organisations about what that time allowance should be.
The Government want to avoid unnecessary delay, but it is equally their objective that every case with a serious argument for consideration should be heard orally and fully.
We are emphatically not introducing an appeal system in order to truncate or bypass it.
Many hon. Members, notably the hon. Member for Bradford, West (Mr. Madden), mentioned the availability of green form legal aid for advice, and the proposal to end it in immigration cases.
We certainly do not intend to make any change that denies any asylum seeker or immigration applicant full, professional and convenient advice.
I commend the Bill to the House.
ASYLUM BILL [Money]
Queen's Recommendation having been signified
Resolved, That, for the purposes of any Act resulting from the Asylum Bill, it is expedient to authorise
(1) the payment out of money provided by Parliament of
a) any expenditure of the Secretary of State which is attributable to provisions about the fingerprinting of persons who have made a claim for asylum, and
b) any increase in the sums payable out of such money under the Immigration Act 1971 which is attributable to provisions about appeals to special immigration adjudicators, and
(2) the payment of sums into the Consolidated Fund.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
The regulations have not been subject to a report by the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments, but we have printed a memorandum about the statutory instrument that we received from the Department, and made copies of it available.
We thought it right to publish the memorandum to help the House understand the background to the instrument.
In terms of the powers of the Minister, it is quite within order, but we thought that as the background was unusual we should publish the memorandum.
Unfortunately, because, in this case, we are talking about not a prayer — because of the time expiry — but simply a revocation resolution, the usual notification is not given on the Order Paper.
That is why I have raised the matter on a point of order.
Mr. Speaker
It is a prayer, but I thank the Chairman of the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments for his courtesy in giving us that information, which I am sure will be much appreciated by the House.
Mr. Michael Meacher (Oldham, West)
I beg to move, That an humble Address be presented to Her Majesty, praying that the Social Security (Adjudication) Amendment (No. 2) Regulations 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 1950), dated 30th August 1991, a copy of which was laid before this House on 30th August, in the last Session of Parliament, be annulled.
The regulations against which the Opposition are praying concern backdated entitlement to benefit where there has been official Department of Social Security error or where relevant evidence was not known at the time of the original DSS decision.
The regulations represent the Government's second attempt to amend the regulation that previously applied in such cases — regulation 72, introduced in April 1987.
The Government first attempted to exclude altogether supplementary benefit and national assistance from the scope of regulation 72.
By the same token, back payments of income support were to be limited only to a three-year period starting in April 1988.
In other words, the effect would have been that, even where official DSS error was proven and admitted in the case of those receiving supplementary benefit prior to 1988, no back payment to rectify the error would have been made.
So, whatever else followed in the wretched little saga that I am about to describe, it is crystal clear that, right from the outset, the real object behind the Government's manoeuvrings was the cutting back — indeed, the large-scale elimination — of people's entitlement to back payments of benefits where there had been official error.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
You are wrong
Miss Ann Widdecombe
You are wrong
Mr. Meacher
It is perfectly clear.
I am talking about the first attempt to amend regulation 72 to exclude supplementary benefit and national assistance from the scope of that regulation.
If one cuts through all the technicalities and complexities of the document, which has actually gone to the Social Security Advisory Committee, it is perfectly clear that that was the core intention behind the Government's move.
That first Government attempt to amend regulation 72 provoked universal and vociferous opposition from all the bodies from which the SSAC sought evidence and, indeed, from the committee itself.
As a result, the Government backed off, and the new regulation, which should never have been proposed in the first place, was ignominiously withdrawn.
However, the Secretary of State then came forward, in August, with a second, revised regulation, which dropped the exclusion of supplementary benefit and national assistance and sought instead to lay down a more restrictive set of conditions for back payments.
The reasons why the right hon. Gentleman took that action are set out in his letter to me of 14 October.
’ Increasingly the Regulation was being interpreted in a way which was much wider than intended with applications for review becoming ever more speculative.
As a result in some areas the ability of local officers to deal with other customers was being affected by the number of review applications.’
I want to deal with each of those two arguments — and, indeed, with the others that have been advanced by the DSS in support of the present regulations.
First, the Secretary of State clearly blames welfare rights advisers for manipulating the regulations and for making speculative claims.
The answer to that argument is very simple: manipulation is impossible in a system that requires an adjudicating officer, a social security appeal tribunal or a commissioner to be convinced that the law has been complied with.
The Social Security Advisory Committee put it more tersely:’ Cases which have no merit ought to be rejected by the present wording of regulation 72.
To the extent that they are not, this is a matter for adjudication and not an amendment to the regulations.’
That disposes of the Secretary of State's first argument.
In his letter to me of 14 October, the Secretary of State said that the number of review applications would’ have seriously impaired the ability of the Agency to deliver a proper service.’
I can inform the Secretary of State straight away that there is a much more immediate cause seriously impairing’ the ability of the Agency to deliver a proper service’and that is the swingeing cuts in staff numbers of up to one third in each local office that the Secretary of State has carried through in the past two years under the operational strategy.
Again, the Secretary of State's specious point is answered point by point by the Social Security Advisory Committee which stated:’ The number of applications for review, while it creates additional work for local offices, may simply be a measure of use rather than manipulation of the provision.
If such reviews succeed on their merits, this is surely a demonstration of the extent of past missed entitlement.
If they succeed without merit, the fault would appear to lie with the way the appeal system is operating rather than in regulation 72 as it is currently worded.’
I could not have put it better myself.
So much for the Secretary of State's second argument.
That is checkmate for his argument.
The Department of Social Security has also offered arguments with which I will now briefly deal.
The DSS note states:’ There is also the practical problem that the routine destruction of case papers means that evidence no longer exists in many cases.’
However, the Department supports the right to seek a late appeal being kept open.
If enough evidence and expertise exists to deal with a late appeal, there must be enough evidence and expertise to deal with a review under regulation 72.
There is nothing in that argument either.
The DSS then states:’ Moreover, as supplementary benefit was replaced by income support from April 1988, local offices are becoming less likely to possess the expertise to handle supplementary benefit and national assistance matters.’
That is a rum excuse.
The DSS has been arguing successfully for years that if a claimant was ignorant of his entitlement, that did not justify his failure to claim or justify his having a back payment.
If that is so, then by the same reason, if a DSS officer is ignorant of the past benefit system, that does not justify his preventing a person from obtaining retrospective entitlement to benefit.
The only other argument that I have been able to find in support of tonight's regulations is where the DSS states that the use of regulation 72 puts’ an over-emphasis on the Department's welfare role and overlooks the fact that persons acting for the claimant could have made inquiries on the claimant's behalf.’
The Secretary of State and his Ministers do not like to be reminded that they have a welfare role, but I must stress that the back payment of entitlement at issue tonight occurs under the National Insurance Act 1946, a Social Security Act and the Supplementary Benefits Act 1976 which all state that DSS officers shall:’ exercise their functions in such a manner as shall best promote the welfare of persons affected by the exercise of these functions.’
Mr. Scott indicated assent.
Mr. Meacher
If the right hon. Gentleman agrees with that, he should be ashamed at the way in which the Department is now trying to wriggle out of having a welfare role.
The majority of people who had benefited by the use of regulation 72 have suffered some kind of physical and/or mental disability.
How can the limiting of regulation 72 be justified by a Department which has the declared aim of targeting benefits where they are most needed?
It obviously cannot be justified.
It is clear from the right hon. Gentleman's first attempt to amend regulation 72 that the Government's motive is to save money and administration — the motive is so absolutely blatant that I am amazed that even the Parliamentary Under-Secretary, whose eccentricities are well known, could not deny the obvious — while, at the same time, blocking or restricting back payments of entitlement, even where there has been official error.
Furthermore, the indecent haste with which regulation 64A was brought forward in the recess, and then — it must be unprecedented — replaced by another identical regulation 64A, designed to come into operation immediately the next day, in the middle of the 21-day period that a regulation is supposed to lie on the Table before being implemented shows not only the willingness but the eagerness of Ministers to block or restrict those entitlements.
It is sickening that the Government would never dare to treat taxpayers in that way over their entitlements to past reliefs or past allowances.
Such treatment is reserved by this Government only for those who are some of the most vulnerable in our society.
These are mean, niggardly and unnecessary regulations, and I call on all hon. Members who have any decency in them to throw them out.
The Minister for Social Security and Disabled People (Mr. Nicholas Scott)
I was going to say that I was grateful to the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) for raising this issue, because I agree with him that it needs to be properly debated on the Floor of the House.
However, when I heard his speech, I was very grateful to him for having raised the issue in such a way.
It gives me the opportunity to explain in proper terms why the Government took that step and to give the lie to many of the hon. Gentleman's arguments.
There has been much misunderstanding, and the hon. Gentleman has done his best to manipulate that misunderstanding.
Interruption
He has, because he has totally misunderstood.
If he has not misunderstood, he has deliberately manipulated the reasons why the Government introduced regulation 72.
The hon. Gentleman will know, or at least his advisers will know, that regulation 72 was originally introduced in April 1987 to provide for the unlimited payment of arrears of benefits in cases where an error in the determination of entitlement to benefit had been made by an official of the Department.
All hon. Members understand why that was a perfectly proper arrangement.
Until that time, the only statutory means by which payments of arrears in excess of the then statutory limit of 12 months could be made was by means of a late appeal to the social security appeal.
Hon. Members know that that was a cumbersome and difficult procedure.
The annual report of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration criticised the system whereby claimants had to go through a cumbersome late appeals procedure to obtain the full arrears benefit to which they were rightfully entitled where those exceeded the statutory 12-month limit.
When giving evidence to the PCA, the then permanent secretary to the Department agreed that that situation could not be defended, so we decided to put it right.
Our original intention in enacting regulation 72 was to facilitate the unlimited payment of arrears of benefits in cases of clear official — I hope that the hon. Member for Oldham, West will listen to this because his total distortion of the case —
Interruption
Dr. Norman A. Godman (Greenock and Port Glasgow)
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Scott
Of course I shall give way to the hon. Gentleman.
Dr. Godman
I am grateful to the Minister for giving way with his characteristic courtesy.
If we can put all this point-scoring to one side, I should like to ask him a question concerning several thousand of my constituents.
I think that I am right in saying that regulation 3 provides that the changes will not affect pending applications for review.
Will the right hon. Gentleman confirm that the deal relating to the collation of the applications, which was struck in all good faith between the social work department of Strathclyde regional council and the DSS there, still holds?
Will those applications, which total 4,500 from my constituency alone, be assessed fairly and reasonably by the DSS in Strathclyde and will he assure me that there will not be the delays that characterised the applications for disability benefit vis-a-vis vibration white finger and beat knee claims?
Mr. Scott
I think that the hon. Gentleman and I know each other well enough to understand these matters.
Those decisions will not be held back.
They will be decided perfectly properly on the basis that the claims have been made.
There may be some delays, because we have to process them according to the normal procedures, but there will not be any undue delays.
All the claims from Strathclyde and other offices will be properly decided according to the previous arrangements.
I hope that that satisfies the hon. Gentleman.
If it does not, perhaps he will come back to me on it.
Let me try to explain to the hon. Gentleman and his hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West that we were faced with an undoubted campaign to swamp the arrangements for deciding such cases.
Many genuine cases would have been put aside, delayed and not arranged in time — If the hon. Member for Oldham, West would like to challenge me on that —
Interruption
Mr. Meacher
I am very glad to challenge the right hon. Gentleman.
That is an absurd claim when, irrespective of the regulation that we are discussing, there are regular delays of between two and four hours for routine applications to social security offices.
Often benefit is not paid for weeks on end, so to claim that the regulation would result in some of the expeditious service from the DSS that the Minister likes to talk about is absurd.
This is happening for totally different reasons.
Mr. Scott
It is not absurd.
That is exactly the situation with which we were confronted.
Our intention was to ensure that genuine cases could be dealt with properly, such as those where the claimant had contributed or had produced fresh evidence that was relevant to a particular decision.
But the idea of people making frivolous, contrived or other cases in effect to swamp the social security system with decisions was —
Mr. Thomas Graham (Renfrew, West and Inverclyde)
Many hon. Members have written to the Minister about appeals.
We receive letters telling us that a notice was put on a board in the office telling people that they could claim.
Many people are illiterate or do not understand the technical language, so people learn by word of mouth or various other processes that money is available.
These folk claim, but then they are turned down.
I do not know how many times I have had such replies on social security appeals that have been turned down.
It seems that the Government are not prepared to accept that a lot of people are not sufficiently intelligent to understand the system and the bureaucracy that the Government have created.
I have dealt with reasonably intelligent people who have discovered that they could have claimed more money.
The Government say that there can be no back payment.
It is through no fault of those people that they did not receive the money, but there is no way in which they can receive it.
The Minister tells us tonight that everything is hunky-dunky and everyone gets the money to which they are entitled.
That is absolute nonsense.
Mr. Scott
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his intervention.
As the Minister for Social Security and Disabled People, I understand, of course, that some people have the feelings that the hon. Gentleman has just outlined.
However, it is important for him and the Opposition Front-Bench team to understand that when we replaced the old supplementary benefit scheme we sought to target help on the people who needed it most.
When I arrived back in the Department from the Northern Ireland Office, I appreciated the complexities of the old supplementary benefit system.
We wanted to make it simpler for people to understand.
We wanted to make it easier for people to get the money to which they were entitled, and I set my hand to introducing the reforms in a way that would enable people to do so.
The scheme applied to elderly and disabled people, families and lone parents.
Supplementary benefit was run by this Government and their predecessor.
It had become almost impossible for claimants and those who advised them to understand the system.
Mr. Graham
It is clear that many Opposition Members, and possibly some Conservative Members, have received letters telling us that claims could not be paid because a bill board had been placed in the social security office.
It was:’ Hard lines if you can't understand it: you get back only so much.’
But we are talking about people who are living in poverty.
Their poverty creates worse poverty.
All of a sudden, the Government run some campaign to highlight to such people that there is something else that they can claim.
I see the Minister smiling.
It is not a smiling matter when one lives in Strathclyde and sees real poverty.
Such people are looking for help, not hindrance, from the Government.
So please take on board that it is not good enough to answer that a notice was put up to tell people that they could claim, when many people are blind or disabled or do not have the wherewithal to understand.
They are living in poverty.
They are in a dreadful position.
The Government must help them more.
Mr. Scott
The hon. Gentleman's point is important.
We do not seek to deny people their rights and benefits.
Indeed, the thrust of what my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and I seek to do is to tell people of their rights, how they can best achieve them and how they can claim in a way which is much different from before.
Through benefit inquiry line and forms designed and checked out with disability and welfare rights groups, people are given the opportunity to claim benefits to which they are entitled.
The system is much better organised than before.
I promise —
Mr. Cryer
I draw the Minister's attention to the explanatory memorandum of the report of the Joint Committee on Statutory Instruments, and specifically to the fourth paragraph.
The Department stated:’ In anticipation of the proposed revision to the regulation, in some parts of the country’— the Minister has mentioned this —’campaigns were organised which resulted in non-specific applications for review on a scale which would have flooded the benefit system.’
It seems that it is being said that, with the onset of the campaigns, the Department feared a flood of’ non-specific applications’and therefore withdrew the original regulations and laid new regulations, to come into force the following day.
Will the Minister elaborate?
The background is at odds with his claim that he wants people to make applications.
It seems that, with the hint of campaigns in unspecified areas, with no details of the number of applications, the Department took the unusual step that we are discussing — an unusual one on its own admission.
Mr. Scott
I play cricket with the hon. Gentleman, and I know that he understands the laws of that game.
I hope that I can enable him to understand the laws of the game with which we are now involved.
I want to ensure that the genuine claims of those who are in need are dealt with properly, promptly and accurately, I do not want campaigns to be organised on the basis that people sign a piece of paper that has been delivered to them by a welfare rights organisation.
The form may state:’ Put in this claim.
Sign your name at the bottom.’
The result is that the system is swamped.
That prevents the proper delivery of claims by those who are really in need being dealt with properly and in a timely manner.
If the hon. Gentleman really believes that he has outlined a proper approach, I ask him to reconsider his position.
Mr. George Howarth (Knowsley, North)
I am tempted to accept the Minister's explanation of his motivation, but those in my constituency, one of the poorest in the country, who made claims at the time of the reforms found it more difficult to obtain any decent benefits from the system.
That is the experience of the people.
That is what I have been told in my surgeries and elsewhere.
Does the Minister not understand why there is suspicion about the motivation behind the changes that we are debating?
Mr. Scott
If the hon. Gentleman writes to me about any individual cases, I shall respond in detail.
I do not accept that the agency and the new arrangements that have been introduced are delivering a less good service than hitherto.
We are delivering —
Interruption
Mr. Meacher indicated dissent.
Mr. Scott
If the hon. Member for Oldham, West, the Opposition spokesman in this debate, wishes to intervene instead of shaking his head in dismay, I shall give way to him.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Scott
I shall give way to the hon. Member for Oldham, West.
Mr. Meacher
We are some way from the context of the debate, but if the Minister really wants evidence of how appallingly badly the service is being delivered, I shall be extremely glad to send him the 20-page Tower Watch survey of Archway Tower social security office.
It is — The Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Maidstone (Miss Widdecombe), laughs and cackles, but I have no doubt that she has not been to Archway Tower.
A dreadful service is badly delivered.
I went there and found that people who had been waiting for four hours or more had still not received satisfaction.
Interruption
If the right hon. Gentleman is satisfied with that, he should resign.
Mr. Scott
Every piece of evidence that I have seen shows that the service that is now being delivered is substantially better than anything that was ever done, not least when we last had a Labour Government in office delivering those services.
The hon. Gentleman has got it wrong and wrong again.
Dr. Godman
I have a great deal of respect for the officials and managers of my local offices.
There is a widespread belief among claimants in my constituency — about one third are in receipt directly or indirectly of social security income — that claim applications encouraged by what are known as take-up campaigns are subjected to a form of discrimination compared with other applications that go across the desk in the normal way.
Will the Minister give us an assurance that genuine applications that are encouraged by take-up campaigns are not subjected to discrimination in terms of the length of time taken for their assessment?
Why is it that, in Greenock and Port Glasgow, genuine claims for disability benefit in respect of vibration white finger are almost always forced to an appeal?
That is disgraceful.
Mr. Scott
Let me try to put the point.
The hon. Gentleman knows how much respect I have for his campaigns in this area.
Where individual claimants submit a genuine, soundly based claim or appeal to an adjudicating officer, if there is an organised campaign it is reasonable for our adjudicating officers to consider the claim with an eye that, although fair, takes account of the fact that it is an organised campaign.
The hon. Gentleman and other hon. Gentlemen will know that those cases are still looked at fairly, but perhaps with the attitude that all the claimants were given a form and asked to sign their name at the bottom of the list, rather than submitted a carefully considered claim.
It is understandable for our staff in the offices to look at such claims in a different way from that of someone who comes in off the street.
Mr. George Howarth
I had not intended to intervene again, but the Minister has invited me to do so.
If a percentage of those claims turn out to be valid, the process must be utterly fair.
We cannot discriminate between those who happen to have been advised that they might be entitled to claim and those who, of their own volition, decide to claim.
Both are equally valid.
Mr. Scott
Cannot the hon. Gentleman understand that we are running a social security system in which we are trying to deal with the real needs of people who need support?
If a welfare rights organisation or some other body hands out thousands of forms saying,’ Sign at the bottom and send to your local social security office,’that makes it more difficult for people with problems and claims to have their needs settled.
Mr. Peter Archer (Warley, West) rose
Mr. Scott
I have great respect for the right hon. and learned Gentleman.
Mr. Archer
The right hon. Gentleman never fails to show courtesy.
Our problem is that we do not understand how officials can know whether a claim is frivolous until they have looked at it.
Mr. Scott
If a claim comes in in the normal sequence of events and our adjudicating officers are asked to adjudicate, that is one matter.
If they have 500 claims on a pro forma where people are simply asked to sign their name at the bottom, it is not unreasonable for them to consider those claims with a certain degree of scepticism.
There may be some genuine claims among the hundreds or thousands submitted.
Some welfare rights organisations damage the cause of some genuine claimants when they mount campaigns that result in offices being swamped with claims, as that inevitably delays the decision on those genuine claimants.
Mr. Patrick Nicholls (Teignbridge)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that the essence of this matter is that, if one makes a claim, one should be able to give evidence in support of it?
How can anyone who has a genuine concern for the people they are trying to help or any genuine concern for the taxpayers who provide the funds have any well founded objection to producing such evidence?
Just signing a form that states that one would like the list of one's benefits considered is not evidence but mere assertion.
Mr. Cryer
What concerns me is that, in effect, the Minister is saying that all campaigns are condemned before they begin.
If not, does he have any figures relating to such campaigns, the number of forms that were received at offices and the percentage of claims that were rejected?
The right hon. Gentleman has said that those forms were filled in arbitrarily and that they have no substance.
Does he have any figures to support his claim that, in some parts of the country, such campaigns were so vigorous that the Department had to take action?
Mr. Scott
I think that I can satisfy the hon. Gentleman.
In Strathclyde, 39,395 review applications were made.
In Merseyside, more than 16,000 applications were made, and in the north-east, some 13,000 applications were received.
Most of those applications were made in a few weeks.
They came flooding in because they were deliberately organised by welfare rights groups in those areas.
The hon. Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) knows me well enough, and I hope that I can convince him that my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and I will seek to meet any genuine needs.
However, we are aware of campaigns that have resulted in tens of thousands of applications.
People have been simply asked to sign their name at the bottom of a sheet of photocopied paper that says,’ I want you to look again at my rights.’
Such pro forma applications will not help genuine claimants who need help through the social security system.
It is wrong.
Mr. Gordon McMaster (Paisley, South)
Is the Minister suggesting that, because a claim is made on a printed pro forma, it is less valid than other claims?
The right hon. Gentleman should congratulate authorities such as Strathclyde regional council on encouraging people with a genuine entitlement to such benefits to take them up.
Mr. Scott
If I were playing tennis, I would put the ball back in the hon. Gentleman's court by asking whether he thinks that those claims are genuine because they have been put through someone's letter box and because they ask the recipient to sign the form and post it back.
Mr. McMaster
How will we ever know if those claims are not assessed?
Mr. Scott
All such cases are assessed by adjudication officers.
If Labour Members were sitting in my seat
Hon. Members
—’ When?’]
Mr. Scott
Not when — if, perchance, Labour Members were in that position in 20 years' time, would they be prepared to have the whole system of assessing and adjudicating upon genuine claims destroyed by the campaigns that are being organised in some parts of this country?
Mr. Graham
The Minister will be well aware of one of the first campaigns that Strathclyde regional council ever mounted.
I happen to be a former Strathclyde councillor.
We were very successful in getting more than £40 million for unpaid benefits.
Obviously, we have information about poverty and deficiencies in Strathclyde, and it is right that local authorities and organisations tell people that they are entitled to benefits.
Surely they are in the business of improving the quality of life for people living in poverty and of trying to get further finance from the Government for that purpose.
Therefore, I see people who say that the pro forma is a marker.
Never in my life have I seen social security payments abound unless they were for a pound of flesh.
DSS officers do not hand out money lightly, but look for evidence to support claims.
Mr. Scott
I understand and respect the work of welfare rights organisations.
They do a valuable job in alerting the Government and local social security offices to need in individual areas.
However, the speculative element of applications is in real danger of distorting the situation.
In Merseyside, there were more than 16,000 applications for review; 11,000 were decided, and 848 of the 16,000 applicants were awarded payments.
Just think of what that has done to the system there and to all the other applicants who have been seeking help from a Department that tries to ensure that people are given the awards to which they are entitled.
It distorts the situation.
Will Opposition Members try to persuade the welfare rights organisations in their constituencies to behave responsibly?
I promise that I want to ensure that people who really need help get it.
I want to ensure that the system works properly and effectively, but I assure Opposition Members that, if they persuade and encourage welfare rights organisations to make speculative claims, they are not helping those who are in real need.
Dr. Godman
May I put Strathclyde's record straight?
Strathclyde has a substantial history of take-up campaigns, some of which were undertaken with the full co-operation of the DSS.
I remind the Minister of the take-up campaign that sought to improve the lot of mentally handicapped people attending adult training centres.
DSS officials played a constructive role in that campaign.
I also remind the Minister that the then Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), told me in a letter that we had every right to help organise a campaign for former employees of British Shipbuilders, who had a right to 13 weeks unemployment or supplementary benefit.
So let us be consistent.
In the past, the DSS has even helped organise take-up campaigns —
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
I must tell the House and the Minister that there are only 15 minutes left for this debate; other hon. Members wish to participate and I hope that they will get the chance to do so.
Mr. Scott
I shall respond briefly.
I understand that other hon. Members wish to contribute to the debate before it concludes.
There are different sorts of take-up campaigns.
I certainly respect the genuine ones that have been organised in response to industrial injuries, and have been conducted properly and sensibly, and the Government have responded to them.
However, there is a distinction to be drawn between those and some of the speculative campaigns.
If I allow other hon. Members to contribute, perhaps I could have five minutes or so, along with Opposition spokesmen, to make my wind-up speech and give a total justification of what the Government are doing.
Mr. Charles Kennedy (Ross, Cromarty and Skye)
We have heard the Minister repeat the same argument in response to several interventions, and there seem to be two strands running through it: one of principle and one of administration.
As the Minister stressed repeatedly, where there are take-up campaigns involving tens of thousands of vouchers or pro-formas, they undermine and devalue the system.
However, the Minister must be careful when making such an argument.
One could use the intent and motive argument to claim that to maintain the standing of the House one should seriously devalue and perhaps scrap early-day motions.
Even if we have not drafted early-day motions and have not seriously studied their subject matter but are broadly in favour of the sentiment, we stick our names at the bottom.
Does that mean that those motions should be ignored because we have not studied the subject matter in detail in the way that the Minister says he wants people to consider social security matters?
Members can present petitions at the close of business of the House each day, but in future should we disregard them because people have merely put their signatures to something which, according to the Minister, they may not give a damn about?
Surely it is particularly ludicrous to make that argument about social security, because even those with expertise on the subject find it difficult to understand fully.
There are few enough hon. Members who can claim genuine expertise in the intricacies of social security matters.
When we deal with constituents at our surgeries we have difficulty understanding the complexities.
How can people be expected to submit detailed applications when, for a variety of social reasons and through no fault of their own, they do not have the wherewithal, information and literacy to express themselves?
For many of those people it is probably a godsend when someone hands them a piece of paper that might unlock the door to access to a benefit that they would otherwise not receive.
Therefore, the Minister must be careful when he argues about the principle of the matter.
As the hon. Member for Greenock and Port Glasgow (Dr. Godman) suggested, the ham-fisted way in which the regulations were tabled, withdrawn, retabled and finally, under tonight's negative procedure, introduced, meant that many mentally and physically handicapped people lost out on their claims.
Whether or not that was the intent of the regulations — and I am willing to believe that it was not the Minister's intent — that has been the net effect of the way in which the three-week period was cut off due to the way that the regulations were tabled.
If the Minister is saying that the proposal is liable to bog down the entire system and cause administrative chaos, he may be right as regards some of the effects.
However, he should ask himself why it is that, when people are given access and are judged eligible for the benefits, the administration is so inadequate that paying out the genuine benefits breaks the system.
That begs two important questions, and it would be good if the Government were to address those issues rather than the one that they are now tackling.
Mr. Patrick Nicholls (Teignbridge)
One of the difficulties of debating with the hon. Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) is that if one is not careful one is sucked into the vortex of hyperbole in which he seems to live.
I have had the dubious privilege over the years of debating with him on many occasions.
The hon. Gentleman's grasp of detail is usually so light that the idea of actually debating with him at all is risible.
I have debated several prayers over the years, but I have never participated in a debate in which the points made by the Labour party were so bogus.
The Government's proposition is simple: a person making a claim that may date back a great many years ought to be able to produce some evidence to back it up.
The hon. Member for Oldham, West, echoed, somewhat surprisingly, by the hon. Member for Ross, Cromarty and Skye (Mr. Kennedy), says that people should be able to sign a piece of paper in the hope that it will unlock riches for them.
We have a responsibility to bear in mind where the money paid out in benefits comes from.
For the most part it does not come from wealthy people such as the hon. Member for Oldham, West and other hon. Members — The hon. Gentleman seems to think that he can go to his constituents and say,’ Woe is me, I only earn £30,000 a year as a Member of Parliament.’
The amounts given out in benefits may seem trifling to people earning that sort of money.
The hon. Member for Oldham, West may giggle, but £30,000 is riches beyond the dreams of avarice to many of the people whom he claims to represent.
As I say, for the most part the money is not paid by the likes of me or of the hon. Gentleman; it is paid out of the wages of people who never get beyond the basic rate of tax paying.
We owe it to them to ensure that their money is not squandered.
It is therefore plain common sense to require evidence.
Interruption
On these occasions, the hon. Member for Oldham, West is always quick to try to compare social security with the Inland Revenue's processing of people's tax returns.
He always forgets that, with the Inland Revenue, we are considering how much of a citizen's money should be handed over to the state, whereas in matters relating to benefits we are considering how the taxpayer's money is handed out on our behalf.
If the hon. Member for Oldham, West or I wrote to our local tax inspector and claimed that someone had put a form through our letterbox requiring only our signature for the taxation officer to open up our tax affairs for the past 30 years on the offchance that we might be entitled to something, that would be farcical.
Yet the hon. Gentleman thinks that that is how our benefit system should be run.
He was once a social security Minister and he does himself no credit by forgetting that there are two sides to every argument.
He also does himself no good by laying a prayer that has to be among the most bogus, ill thought out and badly argued measures to come before the House for many a long year.
Mr. Graham Allen (Nottingham, North)
After Mr. Nasty, Mr. Nice Guy.
Every Member of Parliament here tonight probably represents thousands of constituents who will be affected by this mean little regulation.
The people targeted by the Government include the elderly, those with learning difficulties and their carers, the mentally handicapped, and the physically disabled.
Those people are not exploiting a loophole or grabbing at a large pot of gold.
They are entitled to these benefits, they should have received them in the past, and they should have received them by law.
The House legislated for that help for the most needy in society, and the proposed legislation will remove from many the ability to claim backdated benefits.
The current legislation allows benefit to be backdated indefinitely by reason only of a mistake made or something done or omitted to be done by an officer of the DHSS.
That is quite simple.
A person unwittingly cheated of his entitlement because of official error would receive backdated benefit when the error was discovered.
There are many people in that position, and they have been found by hon. Members and by social workers and others involved in welfare matters.
Many of those people remain dependent on officials in the Department.
There is widespread ignorance about what may be claimed.
Unbelievably, I discovered tonight that the majority of people in disability categories 9 and 10 fail to claim attendance or mobility allowance.
Many of the claims that we are debating are made by those with a mental handicap, people who almost by definition are unable to act by themselves.
Recently, it was found that a mentally handicapped woman in Durham had been wrongly denied benefit for a number of years and that the cumulative total was £25,000.
That was entirely due to official error.
She finally received the money, but now the Conservatives wish to obstruct such people in their pursuit of backdated benefit.
Mr. Scott rose
Mr. Allen
The Minister tabled the statutory instrument when the House was not sitting and has just delivered a speech lasting 40 minutes.
He has abused —
Mr. Peter Bottomley (Eltham)
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
Is it not unprecedented for an Opposition Front-Bench spokesman to refuse to give way to a Minister in a case such as this?
Mr. Deputy Speaker
I am sure that there are precedents.
It is for the hon. Member who is on his feet to decide whether to give way.
Mr. Allen
It is unprecedented to deny people benefit by means of a statutory instrument tabled and coming into force when the House is not sitting.
When the House finally has a chance to debate the matter the Minister of State takes 40 minutes over his speech.
Conservatives seek to obstruct people who wish to claim backdated benefits.
Mr. Scott
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
May I impress upon the hon. Gentleman that any case of official error
Hon. Members
’ That is not a point of order.’
Mr. Scott
I make it absolutely clear that in any case of official error, no matter how far back the case goes, payment will be made.
Mr. Allen
One is tempted to ask why the statutory instrument is needed.
The Minister is condemned by his own words and by his original statutory instrument which sought to remove entirely the words’ supplementary benefit’from the regulation.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Oldham, West (Mr. Meacher) has said, the Minister withdrew the statutory instrument and introduced the new one only when more than 50 voluntary organisations and others vehemently objected to what he was trying to do.
The new instrument seeks to skin the same cat but in a slightly different way.
This way of skinning the cat involves changing the burden of proof, extending the way in which benefits can be used, and not backdating them.
The burden of proof has switched from the Department which made the error to the claimant.
The individual — perhaps an elderly or disabled person — will already have suffered through losing benefit a repetitive, accumulating and hurtful loss.
It being half-past Eleven o'clock, Mr. Speaker — put the Question, pursuant to Standing Order No. 15 (Prayers against statutory instruments, &c. (negative procedure)):
The House divided: Ayes 211, Noes 271.
PETITIONS
Asylum Seekers
Mr. Robert Maclennan (Caithness and Sutherland)
I wish to present a petition on behalf of 16,300 concerned members of the public, registering protest at the Government's proposals to restrict the rights of asylum seekers — the proposed abolition of legal aid for asylum seekers, the extension of the restriction on airline carriers, and the suggestion that asylum seekers be fingerprinted in a discriminatory fashion.
The petition ends:
Wherefore your Petitioners pray that your Honourable House do not proceed with these unjust proposals.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
To lie upon the Table.
Export of Live Horses for Slaughter
Mr. Elliot Morley (Glanford and Scunthorpe)
I wish to present a petition on behalf of Mrs. Janet Burke of 59 Fairfield road, Scunthorpe, who has gone to considerable trouble to collect signatures protesting against any attempt to reintroduce the export of live horses for slaughter.
Since the petition was raised, there has been some progress in this direction in the European Community, and I am pleased that the EC has been especially sympathetic towards the views of people like Mrs.
Burke and the many hundreds who signed her petition.
However, I understand that the matter is still to be finalised in the Community, and that negotiations are still taking place.
Mrs. Burke's petition is therefore a timely reminder of the issue and gives considerable support to the position that the United Kingdom has adopted in the EC.
The petition reads:
The Humble Petition of the Scunthorpe and district people sheweth That there is great opposition to any attempt to export live horses from this country for slaughter on the continent.
Wherefore your Petitioners pray that your Honourable House will take every step to persuade the European Community not to introduce regulations that will ever allow such trade to be introduced.
And your petitioners, as in duty bound, will ever pray.
I wholeheartedly support the petition.
To lie upon the Table.
Pensions
Mr. Morley
I wish to present a second petition, signed by many thousands of Scunthorpe district residents.
It relates to the calculation of pensions in this country.
In 1979 the link between state pensions and the average increase in wages was broken by the Government.
Pensions were instead linked to the retail prices index.
That change has severely reduced the amount of pension that many pensioners receive.
The people who have raised the petition, in particular the Scunthorpe pensioners rights campaign, point out that they seek not only the restoration of the link that was broken in 1979, but also parity with pensions in Europe.
I believe that our pensioners have had a very poor deal over the past few years —
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
The hon. Gentleman cannot argue his case.
He is tending to pre cis the petition.
Mr. Morley
I am grateful for your guidance, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
I believe that pensioners have had a raw deal and I fully support the petition which states:
The Humble Petition of the people of Scunthorpe district sheweth That there is an essential need to improve the pensions and conditions of the country's pensioners.
Wherefore your Petitioners pray that your honourable House will restore the link between pension calculations and average earning increases, as a first step in bringing state pensions into line with the best in Europe.
And your Petitioners, as in duty bound, will for ever pray.
To lie upon the Table.
Croatia
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Peter Fry (Wellingborough)
At the beginning of this debate, it is necessary for us all to hope that the current ceasefire in Croatia and the negotiations are successful.
If they are not, I fear that the worries that I will express tonight will be fulfilled.
For more than 20 years in the House I have tried to be a friend to all the peoples of Yugoslavia.
Two weeks ago, I revisited Zagreb having previously led a parliamentary delegation there a year ago.
At the time the possibility of the present disastrous conflict was already becoming clear.
At that time, as chairman of the parliamentary group, I urged the newly elected politicians to accept that, although some change was necessary, complete separation was not inevitable.
I asked them to work for a loose confederation of equal republics, largely self-governing, but with certain specified powers on a federal basis.
As an encouragement to them, my fellow officers and members of the parliamentary group called on our Government to help admit Yugoslavia to several international institutions to give greater credibility to the federal Government and greater respectability and authority to the name of Yugoslavia.
Unfortunately, that opportunity was lost.
The western powers misread the situation.
They did not see that the rampant nationalism that had brought Presidents Tudjman and Milosevic to power would so fan the flames of separatism and so reawaken the enmities of 50 years or more, that the compromise that might well have been possible earlier this year and which the European Foreign Ministers have since tried to impose has now become impossible.
Then, greater diplomatic pressure, combined with the offer of a stronger attachment to the European Community and help to deal with the genuine grievances of Serbs and Croats, might have worked.
My recent visit has convinced me that that kind of solution is now dead.
Although both sides say that they want peace, innocent civilians are being slaughtered, their economies are being ruined, more than 400,000 of them are refugees and homeless and Dubrovnik, that jewel of the Adriatic, faces destruction.
Croatia is desperately calling for international recognition as a sovereign state.
I do not believe that that would necessarily bring the help that the Croats think they need.
Indeed, in the short term it could only further inflame Serbian nationalism, with bad results.
Such recognition, which will come, should be part of a general agreement to resolve the whole situation.
Once we play the card of the threat of recognition it cannot be used again.
If the current ceasefire does not hold, we will have to ask what should be done now.
Diplomatic activity so far has failed, despite the gallant efforts of Lord Carrington.
Perhaps he was brought in too late to succeed — I hope not.
The move towards economic sanctions is necessary, unfortunately, but sanctions will take a very long time to work.
Direct military intervention on the ground would be extremely dangerous and even foolhardy without an effective ceasefire.
In any event, a ceasefire has to be observed on agreed front lines.
There is little doubt that the Serbs would want to retain most of what they now occupy, whereas the Croats would want to return to frontiers drawn up by the late Marshal Tito.
Even if there were agreement, much of the disputed territory would still be at the mercy of both Serb and Croat irregulars, acting outside the control of their Government, and those forces would continue to be a source of fighting and unrest unless they were disarmed.
That would be an essential prerequisite for any United Nations force being asked to take over a policing operation.
There is one immediate step that Serbia could take as a clear sign that it wants peace.
That step is to cease attacking Dubrovnik and to withdraw from it.
It was an appalling mistake for the city to be attacked in the first place.
Serbia has never had any legitimate claim to it, and the assault has done much to weaken the Serbian case in the eyes of the civilised world.
A clear warning from the international community about Dubrovnik is long overdue.
Perhaps we should even contemplate some naval action to alleviate the blockade and bring help to the 50,000 civilians still trapped there.
Firm action over Dubrovnik might impress both sides that European powers or the United Nations really meant business.
On Croatia's part, the immediate implementation of its plans to establish and safeguard the rights of minorities would be a sign that it recognises that there have been and are legitimate fears, particularly among the Serbs in Croatia.
Many Serbs, however, continue to live in the cities and the urban areas of Croatia, and they must be encouraged to do so, if necessary, by an international guarantee of their rights.
I met Serbs and the leader of the Jewish community while in Zagreb.
They wanted to stay in Croatia, but they felt that continued conflict would only threaten their own personal security and future.
Any agreement or any peace treaty, when it comes, must recognise that to humiliate either the Serbs or the Croats would be a great mistake.
It is necessary to take steps to deal with legitimate grievances and to consider how a plebescite might be organised, how more aid might be given, and how refugees might be resettled.
No matter what settlement is reached, if either republic, particularly Serbia, feels that it has been unfairly treated, any ceasefire will be temporary, and sooner or later the matter will rise again.
Much more has to be done by the European Community.
Already the Serbian economy is suffering from raging inflation.
In the words of the Vice-President of Croatia, the economy is disintegrating.
Hitherto, European efforts have been well meaning but ineffective.
My right hon. and hon. Friends must take stronger action in concert with our European partners to show the world that we take this situation much more seriously than many people in Yugoslavia seem to think.
I have considerable respect and sympathy for my hon. and learned Friend the Member for Grantham (Mr. Hogg), but we must make further efforts, even if some risk is attached, or the present conflict will spread to Bosnia and other parts of Yugoslavia and perhaps beyond that to other countries.
What is most disappointing is the European Community's failure to act as we should have liked.
In last week's edition of The Sunday Telegraph, Geoffrey Wheatcroft wrote:’ It was a woman speaking from inside Dubrovnik against a background of shellfire who said: We expected so much from Europe and got so little.'
Here is the reality of the European idea': a Community whose finest administrative minds devote themselves to deciding whether a carrot is a vegetable or a fruit, whose political leaders discuss not so much ambitious as fantastic plans for military integration — and which cannot in practice prevent Europeans tearing themselves to pieces and destroying part of what it is not exaggerated to call our European heritage.’
Serious consideration must be given to further diplomatic and other action.
If Europe is serious about a common defence and foreign policy, it must face and deal with the challenge of Yugoslavia.
If it does not, thousands more will die and in future generations the name Dubrovnik will produce anguish and remorse at the stupidity of mankind and the failure of the international community to act effectively.
Mr. Calum Macdonald (Western Isles) rose
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Does the hon. Member for Western Isles (Mr. Macdonald) have the consent of both the hon. Member for Wellingborough (Mr. Fry) and the Minister to participate?
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Douglas Hogg) indicated assent.
Mr. Fry indicated assent
Mr. Macdonald
I am grateful to both the hon. Member for Wellingborough (Mr. Fry) and the Minister for their generosity in allowing me to contribute to this Adjournment debate.
I recently visited Zagreb along with the hon. Gentleman.
It was my first visit and I learnt a great deal from his experience.
I am impressed tonight to see how much we agree about the position there and on the need for much stronger action than has been taken so far.
We have to face the facts of the current situation.
Yugoslavia, as it was, cannot be brought back to life now.
So long the sick man of Europe, it is now not only dead but hung, drawn and quartered.
We have to recognise Serbia and Croatia as separate entities.
Once that recognition is made, all else begins to fall into place.
It does not make it any easier to do what we have to do, but it makes seeing what we have to do much clearer, because it then becomes obvious that Serbia has been the blatant aggressor in the war and that its aggression simply cannot be tolerated by the international community.
The real danger today is not of being seen to condone precipitate separatism but, through the impotence of our response so far, of being seen to condone brutal and barbaric behaviour of a kind that has not been seen in Europe since the 1940s.
The Government, together with their European partners, should go immediately to the Security Council of the United Nations and call, in the first instance, for full and effective sanctions against the Serbian Government, including an oil embargo; and for the authority that is necessary to allow the Community to take whatever further measures, including military measures, may be necessary to bring about an end to the Serbian Government's aggression should Lord Carrington's latest efforts fail.
Of course, everyone is aware of the difficulty of introducing an EC peacekeeping force before there is a genuine peace to keep, but the Government should urgently consider other options such as the naval action which the hon. Member for Wellingborough suggested.
There is also the possibility of an air blockade which would not only guard against sanctions busting but make the Serbian air force desist from its present bombing campaign.
The British Government have a special responsibility in this matter, because British manufacture cluster bombs are being used by the Yugoslav air force, which is de facto a Serbian air force, to attack civilian targets.
I have seen the cluster cases in a village on the front line in Croatia and I can testify to their British markings.
The Serbian forces must be starved of supplies and oil and denied the use of their air power.
It must be made crystal clear that they must withdraw from the land that they presently occupy in Croatia before there can be progress towards a lasting settlement.
The question of borders is always difficult.
There is no such thing as a natural border.
Every border is in some sense arbitrary, but the international community must rigorously enforce the golden rule that no border can be changed by unilateral resort to force.
Changes to borders can come about only by mutual agreement and consent.
That must be made crystal clear to the politicians and generals of Serbia.
There can be no reward for the aggresion that they have undertaken.
If the European Community fails to make that lesson stick in the context of the present crisis in Yugoslavia it will in time feel the consequences as other regions become afflicted with the same madness.
Both the hon. Member for Wellingborough and I were impressed by the EC monitoring force that we met in Zagreb.
When we say that the response of the Community so far has been ineffectual, that is not a comment on the team spirit and competence of that monitoring force.
It has done its best, but it does not have the tools to enable it to do the job.
Now is the time to give it those tools.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Douglas Hogg)
I fully recognise the knowledge and experience possessed by both the hon. Members who have spoken in the debate.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wellingborough (Mr. Fry) is, as he reminded us, the chairman of the parliamentary group.
I have had the opportunity of discussing the matter in detail with him on two occasions and I am conscious of his considerable knowledge and experience.
The hon. Member for Western Isles (Mr. Macdonald) has also had the advantage of visiting Yugoslavia recently.
Therefore, he brings to the debate a clear perception based on recent experience.
Both the hon. Gentleman and my hon. Friend were perhaps slightly unfair to the European Community in their assessment of what it has done.
The European Community has put in place a range of measures which are capable over a period of time of leading to a solution.
As both hon. Members will have in mind, European Community monitors are now in place who have been exposed to a high degree of personal risk.
At the same time we have established the conference, albeit adjourned, under the chairmanship of Lord Carrington.
It provides the framework for a negotiated settlement.
As both my hon. Friend and the hon. Gentleman will also have in mind, last Friday the European Foreign Ministers approved a package of sanctions.
Work is now proceeding within the United Nations to secure further action, most notably perhaps the oil embargo.
The Secretary-General may well report back to the Security Council with further recommendations on what should be done.
Those are all positive steps which, it is true, have not led to peace as yet.
Indeed, while the parties are anxious to continue with the fighting such steps are unlikely to lead to peace.
But they establish the framework within which peace could be created if the parties wished to stop the fighting.
My hon. Friend and the hon. Gentleman have established several points with which I strongly agree.
Both focused on minority rights within Yugoslavia, and I entirely agree that that issue lies at the core of the problem within the country.
There are minorities in almost every republic — that is not wholly true but it is almost true.
There are no ethnic minorities in Slovenia but there are substantial ones in Croatia, most notably the Serbs.
Mr. Robert N. Wareing (Liverpool, West Derby)
There are a few in Slovenia.
Mr. Hogg
I accept the correction.
There are important Albanian minorities in Macedonia and Serbs.
There are minorities of Serba, Croats and Muslims in Bosnia.
If we are to see a solution ot the problems in Yugoslavia, it must be one that addresses minority rights.
I agree with the remarks of my hon. Friend the Member for Wellingborough about the international entrenching of minority rights.
I do not envisage a long-lasting solution to the problem of Yugoslavia that does not take up the issue of minority rights and seek to entrench them, perhaps by international action.
I am sceptical about the proposition that minority rights can be protected by redrawing internal frontiers.
With few exceptions it would be extremely difficult to redraw those frontiers to prevent an ethnic group being a minority in a republic.
I agree with the hon. Member for Western Isles about the importance of frontiers.
They should not be changed by unilateral action, nor by force.
An important presumption to which we should all adhere is that existing frontiers, however inconvenient and however arbitrarily they may have been drawn, are the lines from which we start.
They can be changed only by agreement or by the adjudication of a lawful authority such as an international court.
There are no frontiers within eastern and central Europe with which everyone is wholly comfortable.
Best stay with what we have rather than try to change for something else.
As I have said, the critical problem is that of minorities.
I do not think that frontiers should be changed by force or by unilateral action.
I think that there exists the framework within which an agreed settlement could be brought about if the parties are anxious to see that happen.
Mr. Wareing
As the Minister knows, I agree with the Government's even-handed attitude towards Yugoslavia thus far.
As for minorities and boundaries between Croatia and Serbia, however, there has been a suggestion that President Tudjman of Croatia and President Milosevic of Serbia would agree to a peacekeeping force.
I am aware of the argument about peace before a peacekeeping force, but does the Minister agree that we should pursue the idea — perhaps through the North Atlantic Co-operation Council — that there could be a peace-keeping force within the Serbian enclaves in Croatia and along the Croatian border with Serbia while negotiations take place?
It is the Serbian minority in Croatia that was part of the spark that set alight the flames in Yugoslavia.
Mr. Hogg
I shall respond to my hon. Friend the Member for Wellingborough and the hon. Member for Western Isles on the question of force and then come to the very issue that the hon. Member for Liverpool, West Derby (Mr. Wareing) has raised, which I recognise is relevant.
There is a slight incompatibility between the arguments that have been advanced.
My hon. Friend the Member for Wellingborough and the hon. Member for Wesern Isles began their respective speeches by saying, in effect, that now is not the time to introduce land forces into Yugoslavia.
My hon. Friend was certainly of that mind.
I think that he accepts that that would constitute a long-term commitment, and a hazardous and dangerous one.
My hon. Friend and the hon. Gentleman have suggested, however, that there is a step short of that that they would recommend — most notably air interdiction or, alternatively, a naval force.
There is a distinction.
There is a distinction to be drawn between an evacuation of the kind that we may see tonight in Dubrovnik and an interdiction naval force designed to prevent, for example, the shelling of Dubrovnik by Yugoslav gun boats.
I shall address the second point: whether we could deploy naval units in that form of action.
I do not believe that we can because there is no authority to do so.
Let us be clear about this: if we were to deploy naval units, they could be effective only if they were authorised to fire.
That is an act of war.
We cannot commit an act of war unless it is lawful.
I do not believe that it would be lawful unless it were underpinned by some appropriate resolution of the Security Council of the United Nations.
It is unlikely that we would get such authority at the moment.
Points of Order
Mr. Jack Straw (Blackburn)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I have given notice of my point of order to you and to the Secretary of State for Education and Science, who is in his place.
It relates to the Education (Schools) Bill which is due for its Second Reading next Tuesday.
Page 382 of’ Erskine May’concerns the citing of documents not before the House and makes it clear that a Minister may not’read or quote from a despatch or other state paper not before the House, unless he is prepared to lay it upon the Table.’
It is well known that the Education (Schools) Bill, which seeks to privatise the schools' inspectorate, is a matter of great controversy.
The Bill is based partly on an internal review of Her Majesty's inspectorate which the Secretary of State has refused to publish.
I disagree with his refusal, although I realise that he is entitled to take that position.
He says that it is a confidential document.
That document was today leaked in part in The Independent and the newspaper also contained my allegation that the Secretary of State may have misled the House in relation to figures that he quoted last week in the House.
Normally, when Ministers face the problem of leaked documents, they refuse to make any comment on the content of the document or, sometimes, on its existence.
In doing so, they maintain clear security from the contents of page 382 of’ Erskine May’.
In this case, the Secretary of State has today issued a public statement disputing various parts of the report in The Independent and he has sought to quote from other aspects of the internal review which he has said is so far confidential.
If I may —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This is not a point of order.
It would be more correct to raise the matter in debate.
I do not know whether the hon. Gentleman was here earlier, but a question on the matter was raised with the Leader of the House during business questions and he answered it.
It is not a point of order for me.
Coal Industry Bill
Mr. Andy Stewart (Sherwood)
This Coal Industry Bill must be one of the shortest of its sort ever to come before Parliament.
It is, however, consequential to the future of our coal industry.
It implies a great degree of uncertainty, but equally it presents a challenge to the management of British Coal to fight for every ounce of viable business that it can obtain.
That will mean continuing to reduce unit costs, while increasing productivity.
Clause 1 complements that process and shows the Government's continuing commitment to the industry.
It allows, where necessary, generous redundancy terms for men who wish voluntarily to leave the industry.
It is worth saying that this Bill has nothing to do with privatisation or the Rothschild report; it will give the tools to British Coal so that it can compete successfully for the coal contract post-April 1993.
We already know what is possible — over five years, the miners have increased productivity by 108 per cent., while prices have reduced in real terms by 40 per cent. , representing an annual cash reduction to the generators of £150.
What the people of Sherwood and many others want to know is why National Power and PowerGen have not reflected those bargain purchases from British Coal in lower electricity prices.
The current price paid to British Coal is 180p per unit of energy, with 24 units to the tonne.
When processed into electricity, it arrives at our domestic power points costing £20.
Therefore, for the generating companies to say that by importing coal at the present world price of 145p per unit would benefit the consumers is a gross misrepresentation of the facts.
What it would do is close our collieries, place this country at the mercy of international coal traders, and give Britain an added trade deficit of about £900 million per annum, for a hypothetical saving of just over £1.25 per week for the average household.
Any industry, whether public or private, depends for its success on markets.
What British Coal needs to know now, to enable its investment programme to proceed to meet the threat from coal imports, is the size of the United Kingdom coal market post-1993.
Will it be 40 million, 50 million or 60 million tonnes?
What we do know is that pre-emption means that no fewer than half the power stations' fuel markets in England and Wales are entirely removed from the danger of competition.
Nuclear power survives on the back of the coal industry, subsidised by the fossil fuel levy.
If the reverse were true, coal would be delivered free to the generators with a cash bonus of £10 a tonne.
Gas has also been given favoured status, supposedly to help Britain to meet its modest sulphur reduction targets.
So far, the contracts signed for plants coming on stream up to 1995 are equivalent to 25 million tonnes of coal.
To help the process along the way, the Labour party acolytes on Humberside county council fell over themselves to be the first to grant planning permission for gas generators at Killingholme, replacing coal requirements by 3 million tonnes and with a loss of 3,000 mining jobs.
The synthetic anguish and wringing of hands by Labour Members fools nobody.
However, what stings the coal industry is that all but a few of the new gas plants will produce power at a total cost about 15 to 30 per cent.
above that of British Coal.
Mr. Alan Meale (Mansfield)
Is the hon. Gentleman seriously trying to say that the Labour council in Humberside is responsible for the Killingholme port?
That was forced through this House by Government policy and their votes.
Will he reflect on the fact that, if the Bill is passed, redundancy arrangements will be forced on the coalfields, and especially the pits in Nottinghamshire?
Those pits already have 40 per cent.
of places that they cannot fill because miners have already been moved there from other pits.
If the Bill is passed, there will be a mass pit closure programme in Nottinghamshire, and mainly in the hon. Gentleman's constituency.
Is the hon. Gentleman really trying to be serious, or will he come through the Lobby with us tonight?
Mr. Stewart
There were two parts to the hon. Gentleman's intervention.
The first referred to his colleagues on Humberside county council.
There is no question but that they granted planning permission for Killingholme.
Planning permission was not required from the Department in London.
I shall deal with the second part of the hon. Gentleman's question later in my speech.
What is worse, the part of the fuel market to which I have referred will be closed to competition for no less than 15 years, because the only way to obtain the gas is to sign a binding 15-year contract.
That means that, with the pre-emptions, all coal plants — even the biggest and the cheapest — will be pushed off base loads, forcing 12GW of modern coal plants to close prematurely.
We must not sanction the contracts lying on my right hon. Friend's desk — and by that I mean that there should be no more contracts for gas generation.
Accepting that half the coal market will have gone to privileged fuels by 1993, what are the real business prospects for British Coal, the miners and the coalfield communities?
They will be doubtful if the little Englander view prevails both here and in the boardrooms of the generating companies.
I use the metaphor in the knowledge that Scottish Power has recently signed a five-year contract with British Coal.
It is ironic that Scotland, with an over-production of electricity, is already contracting its surplus to industry south of the border.
Talk about playing golf while Rome burns; just leave the canny Scots to pick up the bargains.
Forget the doubters: British Coal knows that it has only one way to go, and that is forward.
Nevertheless, its greatest threat comes not only from coal imports but from the Labour party.
First, there were the financial consequences of Labour's blind support for a dictatorial trade union leader, who is now as popular in Walworth road as a fox cub in front of the Quorn hunt.
When Labour's support was needed in the House to block the building of the Humber port, which will be capable of handling 10 million tonnes of imported coal, Labour Members showed their true colours and left the Commons at 8 pm.
Only 49 of the 229 Labour Members felt any sympathy for British miners and voted against the Bill.
At that time, their motives were questioned but the questions remained unanswered.
Now, all is revealed through Labour's policy decision to ban opencast mining.
Mr. Richard Alexander (Newark)
Will my hon. Friend remind the House how many Conservative Nottinghamshire Members of Parliament attended that unfortunate debate, compared with the attendance of Labour Nottinghamshire Members?
If all Labour Members, who were supposedly so opposed to the Bill, had turned up, the Bill would not have become an Act.
Mr. Stewart
My hon. Friend is correct.
All Nottinghamshire Conservative Members were present at that debate, and they voted against the Bill.
If the Labour party had put its money where its mouth was and voted with us, the problem facing us today would not have arisen.
As I said, at that time the motives of Labour Members were questioned, and the questions remained unanswered.
Now all is revealed through Labour's policy decision to ban opencast mines.
The implication of that for Nottinghamshire's deep mines is catastrophic.
Thousands of jobs will be lost.
Thirteen of the 14 Nottinghamshire collieries require low-chlorine coal from opencast sites to sweeten their product, on a ratio of 6 tonnes deep mined to 1 tonne open cast, before it is accepted by the power generating companies.
The loss of that low-chlorine coal by itself is disastrous, but the loss of the £200 million annual profit from British Coal's opencast division, which is used to subsidise deep-mined coal, would increase prices by almost £5 a tonne, leaving British Coal with no market or jobs for its miners.
That bombshell, coming from the Labour party at a time when Nottinghamshire miners are continually breaking production records, shows Labour's lack of faith in and support for the coal industry, and why Nottinghamshire miners abandoned socialism in 1985.
Notwithstanding that threat, I am confident in backing our miners, because only they can offer the generators long-term contracts which guarantee falling prices, paid for in sterling and free from exchange rate fluctuations.
It is an offer that no other coal supplier at home or abroad can make.
One may well ask why, with such a generous offer, the chief executives of our generating companies are not queuing up at British Coal's door.
For a start, they are inexperienced in the commercial world, having spent their earlier years in the cosy surrounds of a nationalised concern.
Since privatisation, they have yet to make a major decision.
Remember, the present coal contracts were fixed for them by my right hon. Friend.
With such complacency, it would be an abrogation of our duty to allow two commercial companies to ruin a major industry and its jobs and to wipe out a multi-billion pound investment made on behalf of taxpayers.
Therefore, the time has come for my right hon. Friend to exercise our 40 per cent.
shareholding in National Power and PowerGen and instruct the chief executives to sit down with British Coal and negotiate a mutually beneficial contract from 1993.
What I have advocated is possible and not just a dream, but it would be remiss of me not to consider the nightmare scenario of colliery closures at a time when we are increasing restructuring grants by £1,000 million.
The death of a pit is the end of an era, in some cases lasting more than 100 years.
Gedling colliery in the constituency of my hon. Friend the Member for Gedling (Mr. Mitchell) closed a week ago after a four-year battle by the miners to make it successful.
Nobody, not even the Labour party, could change the geological conditions.
On behalf of the 400 men from Sherwood who work at Gedling, I thank my hon. Friend for his endless time and effort, not only during the past few weeks but over years, to keep that colliery open.
He was such a regular visitor that he was given his own pit boots and locker.
However, we must ensure that there is life after death by creating new workplaces on the former colliery sites.
The target number of jobs should equal those lost from the indigenous mining communities.
A prime example of that can be seen at Blidworth in my constituency.
Within hours of the colliery closing, Newark and Sherwood district council started work, in conjunction with other agencies, on a rebuilding programme.
Two years later, the new developments are on stream, bringing the target of 400 job opportunities even closer.
The only criticism is the time taken to put the financial package together before work could begin.
Grant applications have to be made to the EC, the Rural Development Commission and the Department of the Environment, with approvals taking months at a time when speed is of the essence.
A simple change of policy, making British Coal Enterprise Ltd. responsible, would be a first step.
It has a proven track record, creating 71,000 new job opportunities since it was formed seven years ago.
A closure dowry based on a ratio of £X million for every 100 jobs lost would enable BCE to take control on day one, working in partnership with local authorities and matching pound for pound any EC contribution.
By doing that, we would eliminate the 12-month delay.
Time wasted cannot be recovered, so it is crucial that we have a system designed and ready to implement the moment that any colliery closes.
Britain has commercial coal reserves at today's extraction rates to last more than 200 years, whether in clean coal power generation, gasification, liquefaction or chemical derivatives.
It is one of our most valuable assets, like the land that produces our food.
No one in his right mind would ever suggest that our farmers become nothing but park keepers as a result of surplus food in the world.
Agriculture is part of the common agricultural policy and I urge my right hon. Friend to see the British coal industry as part of an integrated European energy regime.
It would keep our industry competitive and offer a future to our miners.
They deserve no less.
Mr. Derek Enright (Hemsworth)
I shall be better able to reply to the speech of the hon. Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart) when the usual conventions no longer apply in three weeks' time.
In the meantime, I pay tribute to my predecessor George Buckley.
No one could but admire the fortitude with which he bore his last painful illness and the way in which at the same time he stuck to his constituency work which he performed with great conscientiousness.
He had been equally conscientious as a councillor when I worked with him and he was a fine and scrupulous justice of the peace.
I recall, and perhaps you recall, too, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that during one election period George Buckley was accused of being an extremist.
He was extremely hurt by that and announced that he was a moderate and a patriot.
I declare here and now that I intend to follow that same path.
Above all, I should say that George was a family man.
He looked after his family; he cared for them.
I am sure that the House will join me in sending our condolences to his widow and children.
Because Hemsworth has always had a large Labour majority, it sounds like a great monolith, but it is very far from that.
It is a series of villages in the south-east of Wakefield metropolitan district which were essentially rural in character.
But over the years, because of coal mining and their transformation into pit villages, they have become rural areas with urban problems, with poor communications.
But each village has a fierce patriotism.
The patriotism is not to Hemsworth unless one lives in Hemsworth.
To someone who lives in Upton, Upton is the centre of the universe.
Perhaps Upton people are right to say that because they have a tremendous history.
I am sure that they will have a tremendous future.
They populate the world.
It is said that one cannot go anywhere — I know that this was true in west Africa — without meeting someone from Upton who will give good and wise advice.
There is also the village of Ackworth, where Geoff Boycott took his first faltering steps at the crease to become the greatest cricketer that the world has ever seen and a great Yorkshireman.
Ultimately, because we pray for him every night, he will change his politics.
The constituency has been destroyed because of the destruction of its industry, mining; a destruction that was completely unnecessary.
We are left with real problems of unemployment and all that goes with that with the drifting away of hospital care so that everything is centered outside the constituency; with the drifting away of real jobs so that people have to move outside.
One reason for that drifting away is that, as a result of the Government's failure to obey European Community rules, we are not getting the money that we should under RECHAR.
Cato used to end all his speeches with the words,’ Delenda est Carthago’.
I will conclude all my speeches with a plea for money from RECHAR.
We have already sown the seeds of what needs to be done to bring about job regeneration in my area.
The small extra amount of money for that purpose already approved by the Commission would make a tremendous difference.
The mining part of the community that I represent is extremely important, even though only one working pit is left.
Our history and our traditions are in mining, and those traditions remain even when people move into other kinds of industry.
I want to consider for a moment the true price of coal.
A very good friend of mine, George Gough, died last Saturday from emphysema.
I pay tribute to the work done by my hon. Friend the Member for Pontefract and Castleford (Mr. Lofthouse) in the area and promise that I will assist him in his fight.
The true price of coal centres on the lack of safety that is to be found in the mines, which reflects the lack of concern that is often shown.
The fear the Frickley colliers have now is that when their mine is privatised — and they are convinced that will happen soon, unless there is a change of Government — safety standards will fall.
They look forward to other assistance from Europe in respect of the social charter.
The Minister said that the Government are waiting for certain European directives, but failed to mention that the Government are blocking several directives that would assist workers in my constituency.
I think particularly of consultation on change, which must take place under the social charter but which has not been observed.
The miners of Frickley have in no way been consulted over their futures.
I warn again that I will be fighting for that, too.
Featherstone is another area that once relied on coal and it is also where I taught for 12 years as deputy head of a comprehensive school which I established.
I am extremely proud of the comprehensive education system.
My school vied with eight grammar schools and produced results better than any of them — and for many more children.
That is why I am proud of the comprehensive system and why I will support my hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, Central (Mr. Fatchett) in all his splendid work to make education once more a human thing with human values.
Also in Featherstone we have a rugby team which will win the cup this year.
I look forward to the Prime Minister being present that day — but, of course, by then it will be a Labour Prime Minister.
I will co-operate with and fight alongside my hon. Friend the Member for Rother Valley (Mr. Barron) for the interests of coal and do all that I can to assist my party's energy team in that fight.
I want to make sure that Hemsworth can continue to be proud of its history.
I will rail against its present problems and I will certainly fight for its future.
Mr. Martin Brandon-Bravo (Nottingham, South)
It is truly a privilege to follow a maiden speech, and I am sure that I express the view of right hon. and hon. Members in all parts of the House in extending a warm welcome to the hon. Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) and complimenting him on his words.
Given the hon. Gentleman's background, he will clearly represent the constituents who elected him last week.
I thank the hon. Gentleman also on behalf of us all for his glowing and deserved tribute to his predecessor.
The hon. Member for Hemsworth stuck, within reasonable bounds, to the conventions of the House in not making an over-contentious maiden speech, but he came very near to being contentious
Hon. Members
Rubbish.
Mr. Martin Brandon-Bravo (Nottingham, South)
when he suggested to a Nottingham Member of Parliament that Boycott was one of the best cricketers in the world.
Given that I was born and brought up in Middlesex and spent my childhood idolising Compton and Edrich
Hon. Members
More rubbish
Mr. Martin Brandon-Bravo (Nottingham, South)
the hon. Member for Hemsworth ought to be more careful in his support for Boycott, or he will fall out with many of his own right hon. and hon. Friends.
As to his reference to rugby league, I plead ignorance and will not interfere with private griefs.
I declare a small and indirect formal interest in the affairs of the coal industry and in British Coal.
If ever there was a clear indication of the Government's understanding of the changing needs of industry, the effect of change on a particular industry, and the Government's willingness to take on board the social consequences of change, the last five years and the Coal Industry Bill clearly demonstrate the Government's balanced commitment to honouring their duty to consider the wider public interest.
I am committed to the coal industry, but not blindly so, as are some Labour Members.
I am committed to Nottinghamshire miners, which is hardly surprising — but that is not the case, or has not been, with Labour.
I am committed also to the wider public that we must all represent.
That requires an understanding of the environmental impact of energy production and usage, and of the price of that energy to commercial, industrial and domestic users.
It is the Government's role to understand and to respond to the need for balance.
Labour is clearly unwilling to address that issue, and tailors its words to suit its audience.
If one considers the commitments of various members of Labour's Front Bench whose portfolios touch directly or indirectly on energy, one finds total conflict, one with the other.
In that regard as in others, we wonder what the policy of Labour Members would be if, heaven forbid, they ever sat on the Government Benches.
There is no way that we can be sure, from the statements of members of Labour's Front Bench, what the Opposition's policies would be in the context of the Bill and of the industry that we are trying to preserve and strengthen.
If coal was just another industry or a medium-sized company in the private sector whose product was not as much in demand as previously, or had been superseded by another product that it could not make or compete with it, that industry or company would slim down or might even close altogether — with the same tragic effect on families and communities as has been seen in the coal industry.
Given the social changes that have been necessary, and the consequences of those changes, I doubt whether any incoming Government would have looked after the coal industry as the present Government have.
Dr. Kim Howells (Pontypridd)
We are discussing not a medium-sized company like any other, but a company that is concerned with one of our great energy assets.
Energy, by any definition, is out of the ordinary: it is very close to the cockpit of politics.
The need of a nation for energy — for the consistent supply of electricity, for instance— is vital, unlike the need for the products of many medium-sized companies.
Mr. Brandon-Bravo
I do not disagree with that.
I apologise if I did not make myself clear.
I meant that, in the case of any other industry, we probably would have let nature take its course.
Firms slim down; firms close.
There would have been no more than the statutory redundancies.
Over the past five years, however, the Government have taken account of the very point that the hon. Gentleman has just made.
All that has happened proves that they have taken on board the social consequences of change, while also recognising the future needs of a very special industry — the energy industry.
Yes, the coal industry has slimmed down; yes, it may even have to slim down further.
But no, it will not disappear — because, as the hon. Gentleman rightly implied, it is a vital resource.
It therefore has a long-term future.
By producing this Bill, and by everything that they have done, are doing and will do, the Government are endeavouring to give British Coal the time and the means to meet what we perceive as longer-term needs.
Mr. Nicholls
Well, apart from those who are completely prehistoric.
These days we try to be more communautaire than thou.
No doubt the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) would say,’ En passant’.
As I understand our responsibilities and obligations in Europe, we no longer have the freedom of movement that we might want in terms of banning imports.
The days when we could defend good old British bulldog industry by slamming on trade tariffs and erecting a barrier against the rest of the world have gone.
Will it be possible in the context of our presence in the European Economic Community for us to restrict coal imports?
I doubt whether that will be the case.
As I understand our obligations in Europe and in GATT, even if restriction was a good idea — and we could debate that if we had to — that will not happen again.
I cannot see how that aspect of Labour party policy can be squared.
If it were possible to diminish the use of gas, to increase British coal production and to erect trade and tariff barriers to ensure that we cannot import foreign coal, what would the consequences be for those who want to use the power that is generated?
Understandably we hear a great deal about how increases in the very staples of life bite on those who can very often least afford those increases.
The consequences of erecting barriers — even if we could do that — to produce and use fuel at a price that we could achieve only if we erected those barriers would have a direct effect on the cost of power.
It is easy to debate in this House and reveal inherent contradictions between one side and the other and to make simplistic points about how one side must be right and the other wrong.
I do not do that in this debate.
The Labour party is utterly impaled on the horns of a dilemma from which it cannot escape.
On the one hand, Labour Members know where their roots are and they know how much they matter to them desperately.
On the other hand, they know that the price of preserving their communities in the way that they want will be too high for their own country to have to pay.
The words of the Green party are not usually cited by Conservative Members to justify their own position.
I cannot think of many times when I have been able to say that the Green party is very much on our side in this matter.
The Green party has said that the Labour party's position is’ wobbly, ineffectual and dictated by the unions.’
That view was quoted in the Daily Mail in September last year.
At the end of the day, those who pay the piper must call the tune.
There is a price to be paid for not realising that the days of production of coal at the expense of all other power fuels are over.
We need to know more about that price.
I hope that my hon. Friend the Minister will be able to help us on that point tonight.
Mr. Alexander Eadie (Midlothian)
In his maiden speech, my hon. Friend the Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) demonstrated great knowledge and ability.
Hon. Members will be glad to hear him speak again.
The most significant aspect of my hon. Friend's speech was the reference to his predecessor, George Buckley.
His comments will certainly endear him to his hon. Friends.
As the debate rages on, the Government will surely not attempt to deny that the moneys provided in the Bill will be regarded by thousands of miners as the prelude to the Government's plan to privatise the coal industry.
My hon. Friend the Member for Holborn and St. Pancras (Mr. Dobson) referred to the speed with which the Government introduced the Bill and his comments add credence to my view.
It would be weak for the Government to deny it, because the ink of the Queen's Speech is hardly dry, and it stated that the Government will’ continue to prepare for the privatisation of the British Coal Corporation.’
All hon. Members are guilty of using flowery language.
I am certainly as guilty as everyone else.
However, certain language to which I take exception is used when the Tory party tries to defend the privatisation of the coal industry.
I read — I do not know whether it came from the Department of Energy or from Conservative central office; I suspect that it was the latter — that privatisation of the coal industry will drive a stake through the heart of Dracula, the leader of the NUM.
What a way for a party to defend its proposals.
Yes, a’ stake’is involved — the jobs of 30,000 to 50,000 miners.
The Government must be reminded that the average age of the labour force in the coal mining industry is about 30 years.
The prospect of being flung on to the scrap heap in a period of rising unemployment is daunting for young men with wives, children and mortgages.
The dangled prospect of £30,000 is not much if one is trapped in the dole queue in an area where employment prospects are practically nil.
That point enables me to raise with the Minister the matter of aid to mining areas, which was also referred to by my hon. Friend the Member for Hemsworth.
Hedley Salt, chairman of the Coalfield Communities Council, wrote to me on the subject of RECHAR and additionality.
Much-needed economic generation is taking place in Germany, Belgium, Spain and France because RECHAR money has been made available to them.
However, the United Kingdom Government will not honour the regulations that they agreed.
The RECHAR programme is covered by the same European Commission regulations as the structure funds in general.
I repeat that the Government agreed those regulations.
We hear talk nowadays about being good Europeans.
The Commissioner will not release the funds unless the United Kingdom agrees, as Germany, Belgium, Spain and France have done.
It is stated that the moneys have to be additional to any funding by a member country which qualifies for assistance — hence the word’ additionality’, which is associated with funding.
I am advised by the Coalfield Communities Campaign that RECHAR moneys — £100 million — allocated to United Kingdom coalfields in December 1989 have still to reach the United Kingdom.
Therefore, it is urgent that the Minister's Department and the Government honour what they agreed, or that money and many other benefits will be lost to the United Kingdom.
I now refer to the proposals regarding the repeal of the Coal Mines Regulation Act 1908.
The Secretary of State did not provide a good defence of the Government's proposition.
I wish that I had time to go into the matter in more detail, because the proposals in the Bill are seriously flawed.
It is no use any hon. Member saying that the length of miners' hours has nothing to do with safety.
That argument was demolished in speech after speech by my hon. Friends.
The 1908 Act currently limits the shift length for underground miners to seven and a half hours.
The 1908 Act was introduced and subsequently amended because of the realisation of the dangers caused by excessive working hours in the mining industry.
As well as providing legislative protection, it underpins the collective agreement which provides for a basic shift of seven and a quarter hours plus winding time for underground workers and eight hours for surface workers.
It is a disgrace that the Government's proposition was incorporated in the Bill without any consultation with the unions.
The only consultation that the Government had was with civil servants.
Some of my best friends are civil servants, but what the hell do civil servants know about working in the mining industry?
The clear view of both miners and my hon. Friends is that the proposed abolition of the 1908 Act is to pave the way for privatisation by deregulating vital safety provisions and allowing the employer to introduce an extended normal working day in the guise of a flexible shift.
What upsets and angers my hon. Friends is that the Department of Energy is praying in aid the proposed European Community directive on working time as a justification for that change.
I wish that I could go into the matter in more detail.
The Government's attitude is two-faced — they are also devoting all their energies to preventing the directive from coming into force.
The directive is based on minimum standards — but I am caught out by the time, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Madam Deputy Speaker: I am much obliged to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Simon Hughes (Southwark and Bermondsey)
I begin by welcoming the hon. Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) to the House.
I say that on behalf of the party he beat as opposed to the one that he put into third place — the Conservative party, which was marginalised in that by-election.
I cannot agree with the hon. Gentleman's choice of best cricketer in the world, because I am a Glamorgan supporter, or with his preference for league rather than union rugby, because I am a Welshman by background.
However, I am sure that, if he can add support for those sports to his campaigning on behalf of his electorate in west Yorkshire, he will serve his people well.
I wish him well in that job.
It is obvious from the speeches of the hon. Members for Midlothian (Mr. Eadie) and for Teignbridge (Mr. Nicholls) and from that of the right hon. Member for Llanelli (Mr. Davies) that underlying today's debate is a debate on Britain's energy policy.
We would not have needed much of today's debate if we had a proper energy policy.
One of the frustrations of being in opposition for so long to what is, in effect, a minority Government is having to watch this country go on for such a long time without any energy policy.
If we had a rational energy policy, we could ensure not only that coal had a role to play now, but that it could continue to play an important role in the future.
The hon. Member for Teignbridge cannot argue simply that nuclear power is cleaner and environmentally more safe and that it should therefore always take precedence over coal, because we can do things to coal that would make it environmentally far more acceptable.
In addition, nuclear power is potentially far more dangerous to the world than any activity in a colliery.
I should like to make a couple of points about the Bill's two substantive provisions before turning to its hidden agenda.
My hon. Friends and I will vote against the Bill on Second Reading because —
Mr. Keith Mans (Wyre)
Only the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Hughes
No, it will not only be me.
My colleagues and I will vote against the Bill, and not for any obscure reason.
We do not believe that its two main provisions have a necessary part in this year's legislative programme unless they are intended to enable the privatisation of British Coal next year if the Tories are still in power.
That argument is self-evident from the words and figures.
The Bill's first provision is to extend the power of the Secretary of State to make grants to the British Coal Corporation beyond the 1987 legislation.
The figures are clear, and the Library note confirms them.
The Secretary of State's capacity to make grants is at present limited to £1,500 million.
The table provided in the Library note projects that we shall not come up against the upper ceiling of the present capacity in either this or the next financial year.
It is true that we have had to continue to increase the amount of money that is paid by the Government — by the taxpayer — for restructuring the industry, but we will not reach the ceiling either this year or next year.
We could address the issue of whether we need to raise capacity just as well next year as this year.
I have not heard a single argument — there was not a sentence in the Secretary of State's speech — to suggest that the upper limit will be reached in the coming year.
It will not be reached as a result of any programmed present redundancies, or by any new contracts with the generating industries, because they will not be renewed until early 1993.
Therefore, I can see no immediate obvious or even superficial justification for the provisions.
The same argument applies to the repeal of the Coal Mines Regulation Act 1908.
The hon. Member for Holborn and St. Pancras (Mr. Dobson) had some difficulty about attributing this and therefore did not say that that eminent legislation was passed by a Liberal Government.
At that time, Winston Churchill was a Liberal Minister.
I am glad that he finds such favour with the Opposition.
Apart from the fact that the 1908 legislation was commendable and is still valid, it is unnecessary to repeal it, because the European Community directive is intended to establish minimum standards.
Let us assume that the directive is fully supported by the Government, who do not wish to amend one jot or comma of it and who are willing to sign up to its immediate implementation.
The directive does not impose any stricter standards than the 1908 Act.
That legislation is a tougher regulatory measure governing hours of work than the current European Community directive.
The last draft of the directive that was considered by the European Parliament refers to a normal minimum of eight hours' work.
That is made clear in the Library note and is generally known.
For historical reasons, to which many hon. Members have referred, the 1908 Act has a lower minimum.
If one wished to do so, one could sign up for the directive while keeping the 1908 legislation in force.
There must therefore be another reason for the Government's proposals, and it was not honest or honourable of the Secretary of State to pretend otherwise.
He said that he would not introduce his power to repeal the 1908 Act until the directive was in force, but it is not necessary entirely to repeal the legislation when the directive comes into force, because they are compatible.
Under the European Community legislation, one could have tougher standards in national law without any difficulty.
One could not have more standards, but there is no argument on that.
The hon. Member for Nottingham, South (Mr. Brandon-Bravo) tried to get himself out of a largehole —
Mr. Dobson
Out of a pit.
Mr. Hughes
Indeed, out of a pit.
I was amazed that the hon. Member for Nottingham, South could believe that the provisions have nothing to do with safety.
One need only read the 1908 debate — as I have done — to see clearly that the Liberal Government addressed that question.
To complement the quotation from Winston Churchill's reply to the debate on the then Coal Mines (Eight Hours) Bill that was given by the hon. Member for Holborn and St. Pancras, I should like to draw the House's attention to other words of Winston Churchill in the same speech, which are as self-evidently true today as they were then:’ We have reminded the hon. Gentleman of it often; but why should cheapness of production always be achieved at the expense of the human factor?
The hon. Gentleman spoke with anxiety of the possibility of a rise in miners' wages as a consequence of this Bill.
Has he considered the relation of miners' wages to the selling prices of coal?’
At that time, miners' wages were only 60 per cent.
of the selling price of coal.
It is very often possible to have better wages and cheaper production costs.
It does not necessarily follow that decent wages and working conditions with fewer hours mean a higher cost to the consumer.
The peroration was typically Churchillian.
He said that, in 1847, Parliament’ trusted the broad generous instincts of common sense; they drew a good, bold line; and we to-day enjoy a more gentle, more humane, more skilful, more sober, and more civilised population the blessings of which have followed their acts.’
Mr. Jimmy Hood (Clydesdale)
I echo the congratulations to my hon. Friend the Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) on his maiden speech this evening.
I also associate myself with his kind remarks about his predecessor, my good friend and colleague George Buckley.
George was an especially good friend although, for 20 years, we lived 30 miles apart and never met.
He was active in the Yorkshire coalfield while I was active in the Nottinghamshire coalfield.
I met George only when I came here, and it was a pleasure for me to meet such a good and conscientious man of the people.
I do not envy his successor, because he has a hard job in trying to follow him.
George may have been small in stature, but he was a giant of a man to all who knew him.
The Bill is a preparation for privatisation.
During the run-up to the general election, the Government do not want to hear the word’ privatisation’, but that is what is in store for the coal industry — or is it?
I believe that there is a third option.
I and my hon. Friend the Member for Midlothian (Mr. Eadie) have twice met the new chairman of British Coal.
Reference was made to the high wages that the new chairman earns.
On his appointment, the wages were increased from £90,000 a year — which he thought was a poor salary — to £220,000 a year.
I remember that my hon. Friend the Member for Midlothian challenged the Prime Minister to comment on the increase, and he answered that the chairman must be worth that salary.
The Government must have thought that he was worth the money when they gave him the job and they must value his advice.
The truth is that the new chairman of British Coal has told the Secretary of State that he cannot privatise the coal industry in its present state and that the Rothschild report may understate what is really in store for the coal industry.
The industry may be run down to 12 or 14 pits, and there may be no interest from the private sector, because long-term contracts may not be negotiated, especially in view of the amount of imported coal.
The imported coal is heavily subsidised, as we have said many times in the House.
If the matter is left to an incoming Tory Government — God help us all if they are re-elected — the choice will be whether to keep a public coal industry or to close it.
The third option is the elimination of the coal industry, and we should not overlook that possibility.
I was a miner for 23 years before coming to the House.
I was a union representative for 14 years, and I know a lot about the industry and how important the legislation to protect the hours of working is to miners.
When I was a union official, most — if not most, a good part — of the serious or fatal accidents that occurred at my pit involved men who were working excessive hours.
I am talking not about someone working in an office for a couple of hours but about men working 3,000 ft underground in heat of up to 120 deg, who must swallow salt tablets to stop themselves fainting during their shifts.
I remember when I worked at Ollerton colliery in the constituency of the hon. Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart) that the management had to use haulage bogeys to take fresh water to the miners, who were drinking it faster than it could be ferried to them.
It is bad enough when people are asked to work long hours.
In the coal industry, people are now working not two hours' overtime or nine or 10-hour shifts but 12 or 14 hours or sometimes more per shift.
The legislation is not intended to legalise what already happens in the industry.
It is not intended to legitimise the longer working day in the present industry.
It is to accommodate the six or seven-day working week.
As I said earlier, that is the thin end of the wedge which brings us closer to the day of ruin.
The former Prime Minister used to talk about Victorian values, and some of my hon. Friends have mentioned them this evening.
Victorian days involved 12-hour shifts and six or seven-day weeks, and we are certainly returning to those arrangements.
Women are now eligible to work down the pits under previous legislation, but there is protection for kids, for the 16-year-olds who come into the industry.
There has always been protection to prevent them from working long hours and being exploited and bullied.
The repeal which we are considering will open the way for the exploitation of young kids.
We are being led back to Victorian times.
Mr. Jack Thompson (Wansbeck)
One element — that of the private mines — has not been mentioned this evening.
I understand from the figures given to me by British Coal that more than 1,600 men are employed in private mines.
We know that safety standards in private mines are absolutely abysmal and well below those of British Coal.
Those miners are open to even more exploitation than the exployees of British Coal.
Mr. Hood
My hon. Friend makes a valuable point.
The safety record in the private sector is worse, because it reflects the fact that those in the private sector are already forced to work longer hours.
Miners in the private licensed mines used to receive a few extra pounds for each shift to entice skilled workers away from the coal industry.
Now British Coal is getting rid of miners and private enterprise has too much manpower, so it is lowering wages.
Miners now work in the licensed mines for less than they were paid in British Coal's mines.
That has been happening for some time, but the Secretary of State and the Minister should know that.
I am conscious of the time, so I say only that it will be a sad day if the Government are allowed to change the legislation, not only for the miners and their communities or for those who, directly or indirectly, are involved in or seek employment in the industry, but for the whole of society.
We have treasured our coal.
I do not want to rely on quotations from Nye Bevan, but he was right when he said that we were a country built on coal.
That is certainly the case, but the Government are walking away from that fact by encouraging imports of coal to destroy the fabric of our communities.
The mining communities have been hammered enough.
The Government govern not by consent or even by diktat but by spite — spite against the mining communities.
Mr. Bill Walker (Tayside, North)
I shall be brief, because I understand that the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) wishes to speak.
I look upon him as the authentic voice of the Labour party, and I want him to be heard.
I respect his views, although I do not agree with them.
I welcome the opportunity to speak.
The Government have clearly shown during their 12 years in office that, whatever the Opposition may say, one does not spend £2 million of taxpayers' money every working day with the objective of closing something down.
The Government's objective was to make the industry more efficient, to bring it into the latter part of the 20th century and to make it possible for British mines to produce competitively.
All that has been achieved.
People with a genuine interest in mining will welcome that.
Coal must still form an essential part of our energy policy.
So long as there is coal in the United Kingdom that can be extracted efficiently from the ground, I see no day when we could envisage an energy policy that did not embrace coal.
That would be nonsense.
The Bill will produce the finance necessary to allow the mines to operate efficiently and effectively, and will give the people who work in them the opportunity to feel that they are part of an industry no longer hooked on public subsidy.
Whatever one's views on public subsidy, the plain fact is that people involved with industries that receive public subsidies always know it and they have that awful feeling that other people are supporting them.
That is not true today in many areas that previously had public subsidies.
I do not say that in order to condemn the people who work in those industries.
I have tremendous admiration for anyone who has spent a lifetime in the mining industry, especially at the coalface.
I have a genuine respect for people who live their lives in that way.
Their unique quality is demonstrated in many ways, not least their loyalty and service to the Crown in times of need.
Mining communities have always proved admirable in that way.
I see that the clock is moving on, so I shall leave much of what I wanted to say until another day, and let the hon. Member for Bolsover speak.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
The hon. Member for Tayside, North (Mr. Walker) talked about subsidies, and that leads me straight to the idea which has sometimes been muttered during the debate — that the mines should not have a subsidy.
Yet most mines are interspersed with farming communities.
There are a lot of fields, then a pit village, a pit tip and another dozen fields.
The farmers get the subsidies, but the miners are supposed to get none.
The real trouble is that we hand over £18 a week for every family in Britain — a total of £14,000 million — through the common agricultural policy.
The farmers live cheek by jowl with the pits that are shutting down.
Some small farmers say,’ We are not getting the money either,’and they are right.
The tin-pot agricultural policy over there in the Common Market has sent the money to the German farmers and all the rest.
A load of hypocrisy is talked on the subject, and the business about the hours adds more.
The Government say,’ We are not having any social charter.
Get it out of the road.
We will not be infected by it.’
Then, when an idea about making miners in pits work up to 48 hours comes along, the Government, with all their hypocrisy, say,’ Oh, yes, we shall have to implement that Common Market directive — in order to make the miners work longer.’
There is more hypocrisy to do with imports.
The figures for this year show that £20 million-worth of coal will be imported to Britain by the end of December — the equivalent of closing 20 average-sized pits and getting rid of between 20,000 and 25,000 miners by throwing them on the scrap heap.
They will then have to get money from the dole or the Benefits Agency, which will cost taxpayers a great deal more on top of the £25 billion that the state is already paying out for the unemployed.
That is the economics of the madhouse.
What is more, 20 million tonnes of imported coal means another £1,000 million added to the balance of payments deficit.
The Tory Cabinet comprises so-called business men.
Nineteen former Tory Cabinet members enjoy 59 directorships between them.
Theirs is the party of big business, yet the Cabinet, littered with all these people with all their business acumen, is making Britain bankrupt because of Ministers' desire to shut pits.
We are on solid ground when we say that we will oppose this Bill.
When we get into government, as we shall some time early next year, we will tell the Common Market to stuff its directive on hours.
We will make sure, too, that imports are reduced to the same levels as they were under the Labour Government.
If we do that, we will save jobs for the miners and make this country richer as a result.
Mr. Kevin Barron (Rother Valley)
I congratulate my hon. Friend the Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) on a magnificent maiden speech and I agree with him and others who have praised his predecessor, George Buckley, who was a good colleague of ours.
The Secretary of State's ringing declaration that this Bill has nothing to do with privatisation is an example of the double-speak that the Tories use when they start talking about the British coal industry.
The Bill clearly belongs to a continuous line of Government action and legislation aimed at the so-called ultimate privatisation of British Coal.
As the Queen's Speech put it, the Government’ will continue to prepare for the privatisation of the British Coal Corporation.’
One of the barriers to what the Government would regard as a successful sale is the amount of regulation covering coal mining activities.
That is why the abolition of the 1908 Act was sprung on us, on British Coal's management and on the work force.
The Government have done this despite repeated warnings from the Energy Select Committee and from elsewhere that such moves should take place only after full consultation and agreement with the unions.
I understand that my hon. Friend the Member for Midlothian (Mr. Eadie), who spent many years on both sides of the Dispatch Box defending the interests of the nation and the British mining industry, pointed that out in his speech.
A former Secretary of State for Energy, the right hon. Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker), on being asked about a change in the hours of work legislation by the Energy Select Committee in 1986, said that’ if it had gone through all its processes.
If the unions and the Health and Safety Commission all said it was okay’, it would be all right.
This Secretary of State does not feel the need to go through such a consultation process.
He wants to keep the Government's proposals for the future of the industry a deep and dark secret — and so they remained until the Rothschild report saw the light of day a few weeks ago.
The Secretary of State may try to dodge the issue but tonight he is asking us to allow him and British Coal to pay for the top-of-the-range redundancy levels which the interim report from Rothschild urges as a necessary prerequisite for privatisation —
Sir William Clark (Croydon, West)
Who wrote this?
Mr. Barron
I did.
The report is not part of a plot hatched by the Opposition to make the Government look bad.
It is part of the Government's plot to trade mineworkers' jobs and one of the nation's most valuable assets for a fast buck.
That looks bad not just because the Government commissioned the report, but because they refuse to address its contents.
All the ducking and weaving since the report was made public has convinced no one.
The report has informed the contents of the Bill, so will the Secretary of State or the Under-Secretary tell us whether the Government are going to reject the advice in the Rothschild report about the future size of the coal industry?
Are the Government prepared for the industrial coal market to disappear, something that is implicit in the Rothschild report?
If, as we have been told, that is only one of the options, the Minister should tell us what the other options are.
If he does not, the uncertainty of the past few months — which has become worse in the past three weeks — will continue to hang over the coal industry.
The Secretary of State said that one of his justifications for further cuts in the coal mining industry is the growth of environmentally-friendly gas generation which we are led to believe is cheap.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Llanelli (Mr. Davies) disputed that in terms of the cost of gas and he had every reason to do so.
The hon. Member for Exeter (Mr. Hannam) referred to that as well.
The debate about the price of generating electricity with gas is one of the most ill-informed debates to enter this place.
As evidence of that, I want to refer to comments of Mr. Colin Webster, the marketing director of National Power.
He is hardly someone who has made friendly remarks about the coal industry of late.
He presented a paper on 5 April in which he stated:’ I am bound to conclude that looked at from the perspective of the economics of heat and power, it makes no sense to replace existing coal-fired plant with CCGTs unless gas prices are lower than today's.’
That is not the coal lobby talking — that is the view of senior people in National Power who know exactly what is happening in terms of electricity generation in this country.
That removes the Government's mask which they have worn over the past few months as they have tried to pursue the idea of cheap gas.
That was simply another attack on the British coal industry.
If the Government sanction all the deals on gas burn that have been agreed to in principle, we will witness the transfer of 40 per cent.
of power station coal consumption to gas.
Recent information has shown that all but a few of those plants will produce power at a total cost above that of British coal at present prices.
Some could be between 15 per cent.
and 30 per cent.
higher.
Even retrofitting of flue gas desulphurisation at the big coal stations would not make them more expensive than some gas burn.
That part of the power generation market will be closed to competition for 15 years because that is the length of some of the gas contracts that have been signed.
At the press conference when the Bill was published, the Secretary of State said that cuts in the mining industry are part of a plan for the reduction of carbon dioxide emissions.
Those comments were quoted in The Observer the following Sunday.
Reducing carbon dioxide emissions to required levels will not be achieved by ceasing to mine coal in Britain.
No one would disagree about the need for a plan.
However, what plan was the Secretary of State talking about in front of the journalists?
Under pressure he simply blurted out a few words, but nothing follows from them.
He made no mention today of a plan about what the Government are going to do about carbon dioxide emissions.
They seem to think that bringing foreign coal into this country and burning it in place of British coal will do something to limit carbon dioxide emissions.
What nonsense.
At least the Under-Secretary of State for Energy, the hon. Member for Wells (Mr. Heathcoat-Amory), is trying to be sensible.
With regard to a carbon tax he said at Energy Questions on Monday that if that’ were done unilaterally ahead of the rest of the world, it could put British industry at a severe disadvantage.’
He was absolutely right.
He should not introduce such arguments when we know what the Government are after — attacking the British coal industry.
The Bill and the Rothschild report, with their prospects for the closure of 30 collieries in England and Wales, do nothing to reduce the amount of carbon dioxide that we produce.
They merely pave the way for an increasing proportion of those emissions to come from the burning of imported coal.
We need a plan, but we need a sensible plan — one that Britain and the rest of the world can agree.
The Government obviously do not have such a plan, or it would have been mentioned today.
The Government's prime motivation is to carry out an act of revenge on coal miners and coal mining communities.
These days, the Government pretend to care about the environment.
However, they use it as a weapon to bash the coal industry.
If only they had had the sense to invest in cleaning up our power stations, as the Germans have done, we would not watch electricity industry representatives and Ministers rushing around trying to find cheap fixes to meet their European obligations.
If only the Government had concentrated more resources on the development of clean coal generators, we would not be light years behind the United States, Japan and other coal-producing countries in Europe.
They profess wholehearted support for clean coal technology, but, by forcing British Coal to search for private sector money, the potentially world-beating topping cycle developments at Grimethorpe have been delayed and delayed.
Why is it that the first and second phases of planned underground gasification demonstration plants are to be made in Spain and Belgium?
It is because those Governments have been arguing for coal utilisation while our Government have sat on their hands wanting to take a swipe at miners and their communities.
The next Labour Government will look after the future of that great national asset.
Whenever the Government want to call a general election, that is what we will do.
Some Conservative Members have made their last speeches in a Second Reading debate on coal.
We have enjoyed them.
The Secretary of State for Energy, on the Monday of the Labour party annual conference, phoned a few national newspaper editors to talk the Conservative party out of a general election this month.
The following Tuesday, the chairman of the Tory party stood up at the Tory party conference and said,’ We are going to wipe out Labour at the next general election.’
They cannot both be right.
They did not want an election on 7 November.
Instead, there are two fewer Members on the Conservative Benches than there were in July.
Conservative Members know what is in store for them when they have the guts to call the general election.
Opposition Members cannot wait to take the majority off them.
An integral part of Labour's plan to look after the coal industry will be the adoption of European proposals for the coal industry.
Clearly, decisions reached in the forums of the European Community have affected and will increasingly affect our energy industries with the advent of the single-energy market.
In the past, I have argued that using the spot price of coal on the world market as a benchmark for comparison with the British coal industry is simplistic and short-sighted.
Recent discussions within the European Community endorse that view.
A current Commission-approved discussion paper that the Secretary of State must know about on state aid for the coal industry states that there is an urgent need to define the reference price for European coal.
That is, a price that would establish an acceptable ceiling on production costs, taking account of the regulatory effect on the world market and a premium for security of supply.
The reason for that is that the spot market varies with the dollar exchange rate and, for a long time, has been affected by the dumping of coal into Europe — something about which British Coal has complained to the Commission.
We still never hear Ministers support the anti-dumping case.
The reference price would allow aid for a long-term market to be established.
When the Council of Energy Ministers meets with those proposals before it, Opposition Members and the British coal industry would like to know what attitude Britain's representatives will adopt.
Will they support the proposals that would provide for the coal industry's future?
Will the Secretary of State bat for the British coal industry in the way that the German Government bat for theirs?
It seems perverse that the expensively subsidised and more expensive German deep-mined coal industry has not suffered the rigours through which our coal industry has been put.
The agreement that has been reached —
Mr. Hannam
The agreement is just about to be reached.
Mr. Barron
The hon. Member for Exeter may say that an agreement is about to be reached, but agreement has been reached this week.
It will reduce our production by 15 million tonnes between now and the year 2005.
Mr. Hannam
No, the year 2000.
Mr. Barron
No, it is the year 2005 when the figure will be 15 million tonnes.
The British Government have been practising euthanasia on the British coal industry and the Rothschild report is about to take that even further.
Its proposals will make what has happened up to now look like a day out at the seaside.
It seems odd that the coal pfennig has been given the green light by Brussels when we have been continually led to believe that state aid for our coal industry would not be allowed.
Industries in Europe, however, will receive state aid until the year 2005.
That is not good enough.
Nobody could believe that the Government do anything for the British coal industry because they are absent from the debate and have not done anything to help our plight.
The Secretary of State and his Back Benchers talk about how the Government have supported the coal industry.
That is yet more Tory doublespeak for a decade that has seen the Government inspire a decline in coal production from 120 million tonnes per annum to 91 million tonnes; for a decline in employment from 223,000 jobs to 74,000 jobs and for the closure of more than two thirds of our collieries.
If that is support for an industry, I should not like to be part of an industry that the Government were against.
Thurcroft colliery in my constituency is now threatened with closure because of a short-term geological problem, yet it has 20 million tonnes of workable low-sulphur reserves.
If the colliery were allowed to overcome that problem, it could soon continue to earn the money that it has earned ever since the pit was sunk earlier this century.
However, the Government are intent on that pit closure by which the nation will lose that asset of 20 million tonnes of coal.
My hon. Friend the Member for Easington (Mr. Cummings) referred graphically to Murton colliery in the north-east and spoke about what it means to a community to lose 600 jobs.
That is what is threatened at Thurcroft at the moment.
Even when the Government have closed the pits, their vendetta against our communities continues.
What other complexion can we put on their refusal to conform to the EEC regulations on RECHAR?
What reason can there be other than the Tory party's vendetta against our coal mining communities?
The Secretary of State said that British Coal's market has been in decline for decades.
That was certainly the case until the early 1980s, but British miners then started to lose their jobs to imports.
That is what the Government want to continue to happen to miners even after all that they have been through to achieve their productivity increases of 100 per cent.
in the past six years.
Despite that, the Government want to take away thousands more jobs by importing coal.
The Secretary of State also said that the restructuring grant limit is’ not determined by any view of the future of the industry.’
I hope that I have quoted the right hon. Gentleman correctly.
However, only last year in discussions on the level of restructuring grants, I was told by the then Under-Secretary of State that that was’ linked to expected redundancies.
It is for British Coal to decide what manpower it requires However the Government need to make some estimate of the number of redundancies in order to seek the necessary estimate provision for restructuring grant.’
Everyone knows that the Bill is part of the privatisation process.
The Government and their Back-Benchers know it.
We know it, miners and their families know it, and the country knows it.
That is why we shall oppose the Bill in the Lobby tonight.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Energy (Mr. David Heathcoat-Amory)
The debate has been characterised by deep-seated differences of opinion, but it has been recognised on both sides of the House that the British coal industry faces formidable challenges.
That was certainly recognised by the hon. Member for Hemsworth (Mr. Enright) in his maiden speech.
He made it clear that he will represent the industry in his own way.
I disagreed with much of what he had to say, but I welcome him to the House from this Bench and look forward to debating these issues with him on many occasions.
We can certainly agree that coal sales are dominated today by the contracts between the generating companies and British Coal.
The contracts specify both prices and volume — 70 million tonnes this year, falling to 65 million tonnes next year.
They have been cleared by the European Commission because they were transitional contracts.
They expire in March 1993.
Thereafter, the market will not be easy.
Several large gas-fired electricity generating stations will begin to operate and that will inevitably take away a proportion of the market.
Just as natural gas displaced some of the coal and coal gas in the domestic market during the 1960s, so gas-fired stations will affect electricity generation in the 1990s.
That is inescapable.
But despite those structural changes, there will continue to be a large market for coal.
Like Opposition Members, we want to see British Coal secure as much of that market as possible.
Negotiations for contracts after 1993 have not started, so we do not yet know the tonnages or the volumes.
However, we know that the volumes will depend on the efforts of the managers and mineworkers in responding to those opportunities.
Any Government and any industry in the public or private sector has to face those challenges in not only Britain but other countries.
Mr. Barron
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I wish to make one more point.
The hon. Member for Rother Valley (Mr. Barron) mentioned Germany in his closing remarks.
The German coal industry has been held out as something of a model by Opposition Members.
It has recently announced a likely 30,000 job losses in the years ahead, on top of the 26,000 or so redundancies made during the past three years.
The restructuring that we are seeing is mirrored on the continent.
Mr. Barron
The Minister mentioned volumes.
Will he or the Secretary of State reject the volumes mentioned in the Rothschild report — 25 million tonnes deep-mined and 15 million tonnes opencast?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
As the hon. Gentleman has referred to the Rothschild report, let me make it crystal clear that we have appointed advisers, including Rothschilds, to analyse options for privatisation of the industry.
As part of that, it considered a range of possible developments in the energy sector.
No decisions on the timing or form of privatisation will be taken until after the general election.
Those decisions will be taken by the Government, not advisers.
Rothschilds and the other advisers have absolutely no role in decisions on the future of individual collieries.
It is perhaps characteristic of the hon. Members for Rother Valley and for Holborn and St. Pancras (Mr. Dobson) that they take the most pessimistic scenario and present it as fact.
We are determined to ensure the development of the largest possible economic coal industry that the market can support.
We are confident that when the new contracts are negotiated the industry will respond to keep the lion's share of that market throughout the 1990s and beyond.
Productivity improvements over the past five years, admittedly from a very low base, have been highly impressive.
Moreover, the industry is beginning to lose the industrial image that it once had of a strike-torn and unreliable supplier.
I am confident that that, too, will help in the years ahead.
Mr. Benn rose
Mr. Hardy rose
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Both the right hon. Gentleman and the hon. Gentleman made speeches.
I ask them to forgive me for not taking interventions.
Mr. Joseph Ashton (Bassetlaw)
Will the Minister give way?
I have not spoken in the debate.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Yes.
Mr. Ashton
The Government have encouraged the Union of Democratic Mineworkers to consider buying into any sort of privatised industry.
If the Government are re-elected — God forbid — is it not a fact that privatisation would come in 1992 and that in 1993 contracts for the supply of coal to the power stations would be awarded?
With massive imports, the Union of Democratic Mineworkers would not be able to match the price of that coal and would have to advise its members to take wage cuts to meet the contracts.
Is not that the reality?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
Absolutely not.
We believe that the best chance of keeping out imports is to improve the efficiency and productivity of the industry.
We believe also that that will be best done in the private sector.
That is why in due course we shall be making proposals to do just that.
I recognise that there will not be an easy transition.
That is why we are introducing the Bill and why clause 1 extends the overall limit on the payment of restructuring grant by a further £1.5 billion.
I remind the House that since 1979 the Government have approved over £7.5 billion of new investment and have provided for grant aid of about £17 billion to the industry.
That has been provided by the Government — by the taxpayer — and is a measure of the Government's commitment to the industry.
We are continuing to invest in it at a rate of over £1 million for every working day.
Restructuring grant represents a specific commitment by the Government to the work force.
The money supports British Coal's costs of redundancy, transfers between collieries, retraining for jobs outside the industry and the excellent work of British Coal Enterprise.
The money helps BCE to carry out a range of initiatives, including the provision of soft loans for new businesses, managed workshops for new businesses, low-cost premises for expanding businesses, training for ex-mineworkers and job shops.
I listened carefully to my hon. Friends, and especially my hon. Friend the Member for Sherwood (Mr. Stewart), when they set out their ideas for extending and expanding the work that I have described in the affected areas.
We shall consider their proposals carefully.
Restructuring grant has been paid by the Government since 1987.
It has been raised in progressive stages to the present limit of £1,500 million.
The grant provides support for 90 per cent.
of the costs of the corporation when it pays redundancy sums to mineworkers.
It allows the corporation to pay its mineworkers lump sums of up to £37,000 on leaving the industry, which is generous by any standards.
That is why Labour should be supporting the Bill instead of criticising it.
If we are to continue the high levels of payment to those affected by restructuring, the Bill is essential.
If we are to continue the retraining and employment schemes, we need the Bill.
The Labour party should know about the cost of restructuring because it did so itself when in government.
As my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State said, between 1964 and 1970 it was a Labour Government who shut nearly 280 collieries.
As a result, 170,000 men lost their jobs in the mining industry during those years.
In that period, however, there were not the generous redundancy terms or the restructuring payments that are now available.
Mr. Simon Hughes
Will the Minister accept that the flaw in his argument is that no figure is projected for the next financial year which will take the amount needed over the present limits agreed under the 1987 legislation?
We do not need to increase the limits for at least another 18 months.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
We do not yet know the precise figures required — that is up to British Coal.
It controls individual collieries and it will decide the sums required.
It is a restructuring grant paid to British Coal, to fund up to 90 per cent.
of the sums that may be required when British Coal shuts collieries as part of its restructuring exercise.
Mr. Allen McKay
In the finances that are being made available, is there anything to continue the concessionary fuel arrangements?
If privatisation occurs, will the Government guarantee everything that currently exists, will that be left to the private owners, or will the miners be sold down the river?
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I am happy to give the hon. Gentleman the assurance that entitlement to concessionary coal will be preserved.
I am happy to put that on the record once again.
If Labour Members oppose the Bill, they and the miners will know that the redundancy terms on offer — which are generous by any standards — the transfer payments available for those wishing to move to other pits, the retraining help, and the managed workshops are all being provided by a Conservative Government, despite opposition from the Labour party.
They know that all that would be put at risk if there were the prospect of a Labour Government.
Frankly, it is not an adequate response for Labour Members to pretend that they can somehow keep the market for coal at its present level.
The hon. Member for Rother Valley referred to a national plan for energy.
He did not tell us what was in that plan, other than mentioning something called a reference price.
He did not tell us what the reference was.
He avoided any of the hard decisions that would have to be made if he wanted to stabilise the industry at about its current size, as promised by the hon. Member for Holborn and St.Pancras.
The hard decisions —
Mr. Barron rose
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
I shall not give way as I am responding specifically to the hon. Gentleman's speech.
Will the Labour party shut down the new gas-fired generating stations, break those contracts and lay off the men?
Will it restrict the use of the electricity interconnectors to France and Scotland?
Will it ignore the European single market and GATT by restricting coal imports?
If so, that is hardly in line with Labour's new-found enthusiasm for the European single market and free trade.
Without facing at least some of those hard choices, Labour's promises remain, quite simply, empty phrases.
We have heard from Opposition Members a wholly misleading account of clause 2.
The 1908 Act is an obsolete restriction that is not appropriate for modern mining methods.
It has been overtaken by local practices and informal agreements — and that has been the case since mechanisation of the industry began in the 1950s.
If it is true, as alleged by Labour Members, that the 1908 Act is so essential for safety today, why did not the previous Labour Government enforce it?
I wish that the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn) had dealt with that point in his speech, because he was the Energy Minister when the letter of the Act was being breached.
He did nothing about it then, so how can the Opposition claim that the Act is pivotal to safety in today's mines?
Repeal of the 1908 Act will not jeopardise safety — we would not let that happen.
The coal industry has a good safety record and it has a strong safety culture reflecting the accumulated wisdom of the management, the work force and the mines inspectorate.
The Act plays no part in the safety regime.
Therefore, we intend to repeal the Act when alternative regulations governing working times are in place.
That does not affect our commitment to safety and it has nothing to do with privatisation.
For Opposition Members to suggest otherwise shows that they have either not understood the Bill or are trying to bolster a weak case with irrelevant scares.
Hon. Members from both sides of the House have commented on the environment.
Mr. Harry Barnes (Derbyshire, North-East)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
At 10 o'clock when the Division bell goes, the House will have been sitting for seven and a half hours, from prayers through questions, statements and this debate.
Is not that a long enough period for miners to be working down the pit?
Some of us will believe that we have done a good job during that period.
Mr. Speaker
That has nothing to do with me.
Mr. Heathcoat-Amory
My hon. Friends have made the good point that the Labour party is posing as the party of carbon dioxide reductions while at the same time it wants to force electricity generators to burn more coal, phase out the nuclear industry and, in its phrase, to’ deter’the generators from using gas for power generation.
That is a neat package for increasing the output of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere.
But when talking to a different audience at a different time, the Labour party poses as the green party, committing itself to the tough and demanding target of cutting carbon dioxide emissions to 1990 levels by the year 2000.
That is a glaring and continuing contradiction between its energy and environmental policies, and it cannot disguise the fact.
However, I shall at least admit that that contradiction does not exist on the Liberal Democrat Bench.
I have been examining the Liberal Democrats' environmental document called,’ Costing the Earth’.
They want — I suppose that there is some merit in honesty — an immediate energy tax with the highest rate on coal specifically designed to switch fuel use away from coal.
Their energy tax is targeted at coal reduction.
I then looked at the section of the report headed’ Economic Impact’where there was nothing at all about the damage to the coal industry.
It was not even mentioned.
That is how it dismisses the coal industry.
There may be some honesty there, but please do not let us hear from the Liberal Democrats that, if they vote against the Bill this evening, they have anything constructive to offer either existing coal miners or those displaced by restructuring.
This evening we have seen the old familiar Labour party of intervention, protectionism and high prices.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Bolsover (Mr. Skinner) for reminding us of that in the last speech from the Opposition Back Benches.
What we do not know is how it squares those beliefs with its later beliefs in market forces, the EC and industrial efficiency.
I shall leave that to be worked out by the political analysts.
I am concerned about the practical effect of the Labour party's opposition to the Bill, which would be to hamper or prevent the necessary restructuring of the coal industry which we all know to be necessary.
The Bill will allow British Coal continued and necessary access to restructuring grant.
Without that, British Coal will be unable to continue the present level of redundancy pay or the redeployment, retraining or job placement schemes that it supports.
The Bill also empowers the Secretary of State to repeal an obsolete and out-of-date Act of Parliament from 1908 which threatens the industry's productivity and the earnings of its work force.
I commend the Bill to the House.
Question put, That the Bill be now read a Second time:
The House divided: Ayes 287, Noes 196.
COAL INDUSTRY BILL [Money]
Queen's Recommendation having been signified
Resolved, That, for the purposes of any Act resulting from the Coal Industry Bill, it is expedient to authorise any increase in the sums payable out of money provided by Parliament which is attributable to —
a) increasing to £2,500 million, with power to increase by order to £3,000 million, the limit imposed on the aggregate amount of grants made under section 3 of the Coal Industry Act 1987, or
b) enabling such grants to be made in respect of costs falling to be charged to accounts in respect of financial years ending after March 1993 but not later than March 1996.
STATUTORY INSTRUMENTS, & c 
Motion made, and Question put forthwith pursuant to Standing Order No. 101(5) (Standing Committees on Statutory Instruments, & c .).
Public Health
That the Food Protection (Emergency Prohibitions)(Paralytic Shellfish Poisoning)(No. 12) Order 1991 (S.I., 1991, No. 2077), dated 13th September 1991, a copy of which was laid before this House on 16th September, in the last Session of Parliament, be approved.
—[Mr. Wood.]
Question agreed to.
ENERGY
Ordered, That Mr. Eric Illsley be discharged from the Energy Committee and Mr. Joe Benton be added to the Committee.
WELSH AFFAIRS
Ordered, That Mr. Alan W. Williams be discharged from the Welsh Affairs Committee and Mr. Huw Edwards be added to the Committee.
PETITION
Tobacco Advertising
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
I beg to ask leave to present a petition on behalf of Yorkshire Action on Smoking and Health.
It calls upon the Government to sign the EEC directive to ban tobacco advertising.
There is clear evidence of a relationship between tobacco advertising and the likelihood of children starting to smoke.
To lie upon the Table.
Brewing Industry
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Stan Crowther (Rotherham)
I declare an interest in this matter, as I am the parliamentary adviser to the National Licensed Victuallers Association.
I am pleased to have an opportunity to draw the House's attention once again to the upheaval that has taken place in the brewing industry and the licensed trade since the beer orders of December 1989.
There can hardly ever have been a piece of legislation that has so utterly failed to achieve its stated objectives.
We were told that the orders were introduced with the intention of increasing competition, thus providing more choice for customers and holding down prices.
In fact, competition has been reduced, prices have rocketed, thousands of public house tenants have been forced out of the trade and thousands more have felt that they have no reasonable option other than to accept the terms being imposed upon them by the brewers and accept long leases at enormously increased rents, with full responsibility for repairs.
The brewers have decided to destroy the traditional tenancy system.
It is on its way out.
It must be understood that the brewers' actions have not been forced upon them by the legislation.
The beer orders did not require them to do anything of this sort.
In that connection, I should like to quote from a letter that the Secretary of State wrote to the right hon. Member for Selby (Mr. Alison) who was concerned — rightly so — about a letter that a tenant in his constituency had received from Grand Metropolitan Estates.
The Secretary of State wrote:’ I can assure you that the action the company has taken has not been forced on it by any of the measures the Government has introduced following the MMC's report on the brewing industry.’
The Secretary of State went on to say that he was concerned that the letter from Grand Metropolitan Estates tried to imply that the orders had forced the company into the action it was taking against the tenant.
The Secretary of State was right.
The orders did not require such action to be taken.
I am grateful to the right hon. Member for Selby for allowing me to quote from the letter.
In discussions with me, representatives of all the major brewing companies have admitted that the orders did not force them to take those actions against the tenants.
I have been told that the companies were merely prompted by the orders to’ review’their commercial strategy.
Whitbread and Bass have both used that expression.
What they mean by’ reviewing’their commercial strategy is that, because they will have to dispose of 11,000 tied houses, they are determined to squeeze every penny they can out of those that remain.
The way in which they do that is to abolish the old tenancies and to introduce long leases under which full repairing responsibility is placed on the tenants.
On top of that, they introduce massive rent increases.
In your constituency, Mr. Speaker, the case of Mr. David Harper of the Clifton Arms is typical.
I have spoken to your constituent and he is happy that I should cite his case, because it demonstrates the way in which things are happening.
In Mr. Harper's case, less than two years ago, his rent was doubled from £12,000 to £24,000.
The amount was then increased by another £2,000 because it was related to the retail prices index — I do not know why.
Now his landlord, the Allied Brewery group, has invited him to accept a 10-year lease at a starting price of £36,000 a year.
Before he can even accept the lease, he is required to put the place into good repair, which may cost him another £30,000.
Such things are happening all over the country.
Many public houses have been grossly neglected for years by their owners, yet the owners now demand that the tenants pay all the cost of putting the public houses into good order.
In some cases, the costs are enormous.
I know of at least one case in which the cost is likely to be £80,000, which is a measure of the neglect by the brewers of their own properties.
I have details here of scores of cases, but as I cannot take up the time of the House in referring to all of them, I will pick one or two examples.
There is a Whitbread house, the Kings Arms, in Temple Sowerby near Penrith.
The present rent is just under £12,000, but the proposed rent is £22,000.
The capital cost of the repairs which the tenant must pay before he can even have the lease is £10,000.
There is a Whitbread house, the Seven Stars, in the Wirral.
The present rent is just under £15,000, but the rent now being demanded is £35,000.
There is the Black Bull at Birstall in West Yorkshire, which I know.
It is a nice, small public house for which the rent is £16,120.
The owners now want £30,000.
It is impossible for the business at that pub to be increased to such an extent, because it is a very small house.
There is a John Smith house called The George at Stanningley near Leeds.
John Smith is now part of Courage, although Courage is now called Fosters.
The present rent there is just under £14,000, but the proposed rent is £33,000.
One of the worst cases is that of the Broadway hotel at Dunscroft in Doncaster.
It is again a Courage house, for which the present rent is £18,000.
The company now seeks a rent of £42,000.
That is happening all over the country and the tenants will be required to accept all the costs of repairs.
Earlier this year, the Secretary of State met the representatives of all the major brewery companies, having received a deputation from the National Licensed Victuallers Association.
To his great credit, he persuaded the brewery companies to accept the principle of independent arbitration.
I thought that we were making progress.
Unfortunately, matters are not quite as simple as some of us thought they were.
Bass, for example, requires a tenant to put down a deposit of £1,000 before he can even contemplate arbitration.
In many cases, the arbitrator may be appointed only from a list of people approved by the brewer.
Many of them usually earn their living by carrying out valuations on behalf of brewery companies.
The most astonishing thing — indeed, it is almost unbelievable — is that tenants are required to sign a lease before the rent has been fixed.
What type of arrangement is that?
In normal commercial life, no one would dream of doing such a thing.
It is not surprising that, in those circumstances, very few tenants are invoking the arbitration procedures.
I asked Grand Met how it justified the rent increases being imposed.
As many hon. Members know, Grand Met is no longer a brewer, as it has transferred all its breweries to Courage, or Fosters, as it is now called.
Grand Met is essentially a pub-owning company, apart from its other interests.
When I asked Grand Met how it could justify the high rent increases, I was told that tenants could easily afford them because tenants would now receive all the proceeds from the amusement machines instead of sharing them with the brewers, although they still have to pay a high licence fee and rent.
I was told that the tenants would also make more profit from guest beers.
How are they to do that?
Grand Met said that tenants could negotiate a discount of £30 or £40 a barrel.
I said that, as brewers never sell beer at a loss, why did not the brewers knock £30 or £40 off the price of a barrel to the tenants of their tied houses in the first place?
I did not receive an answer, but the sum involved would have been about 10p a pint, which could be taken off the retail price and still leave brewers with a profit.
I also asked Grand Met what percentage of its tenants had left the trade completely since the beer orders were introduced less than two years ago.
The answer was 40 per cent.
My inquiries suggest that roughly the same figure applies to all major companies in this country.
That is appalling.
The tenants gain great skill and experience over the years in serving the public and in running their public houses.
They have disappeared from the scene, but I am sure that that is not what the Government intended.
Meanwhile, the concentration of ownership has continued apace.
When the MMC's report was published, the four biggest brewery companies had 58 per cent.
of the market.
They now have 70 per cent.
of the market, and the proposed merger between Allied and Carlsberg will push that figure even higher.
The latest scheme devised by Bass to circumvent the beer orders — the intention, not the letter, of the orders — is to sell 372 public houses to a company called Enterprise Inns, which has immediately signed a contract with Bass to supply Bass beers to all those public houses.
Nothing has changed — they are as tied as before, but they are now excluded from the beer orders, so that they have no guest beers.
I am repeatedly told that all the fuss is being caused by a vociferous minority of licensees.
No one can persuade me that the 3,000 licensees who went to Blackpool to take part in a protest march during the week of the Conservative conference are all mindless militants.
They are ordinary, decent licensees who want to continue to do their job of serving the public.
They see their livelihoods put at risk and the traditional tenancy system disappearing.
That is what concerns them.
Despite what I have said, I am not especially critical of the brewers.
They operate in a hard commercial environment.
They are looking after their commercial interests, but unfortunately they are doing so at the expense of the tenants and customers, the very people who are supposed to benefit from the legislation.
That is the paradox that the Government will not acknowledge and that is why I must criticise them.
I do not criticise them for getting it wrong in the first place.
Anyone can make a mistake.
I criticise them for refusing to accept that they made a mistake and for refusing to take any action to put matters right, when it was patently obvious that everything was going disastrously wrong.
In another measure, the Government extended the Landlord and Tenant Act protection to the licensed trade but they would not bring it in immediately — it had to be implemented some time in the future.
Protection that does not come into effect until half the people whom it is supposed to protect have already disappeared from the scene is hollow protection indeed.
Many hon. Members believe that the Secretary of State should immediately instruct the Director General of Fair Trading to review the position urgently and in detail, so that we can discover whether there is still some possibility of saving something from this awful mess.
He should not wait until 1993, which is the present proposal.
By then, all the damge will have been done.
I am reminded of the famous poem, by Robert Southey, about the battle of Blenheim, when little Peterkin asks:’ But what good came of it at last?’
Old Kaspar replies:’ Why that I cannot tell, ' said he, But' twas a famous victory.'’
Almost two years after the beer orders went through the House, we are entitled to ask the Minister what good came of them at last.
The Government certainly cannot claim that it was a famous victory.
The customers are definitely no better off.
Tenants have suffered great distress; many thousands of them have been forced out of their homes and businesses.
The brewers, who spent millions of pounds campaigning against this legislation, have shot it to pieces.
Mr. James Hill (Southampton, Test)
I had applied for an Adjournment debate on this subject, but I realised that the hon. Member for Rotherham (Mr. Crowther) had a prior right, representing as he does the NLVA.
I have today won a concession from the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, in as much as he is going to give a delegation from the Southampton and district licensed victuallers an opportunity to see him at the Department to talk over some of these matters.
Worthy servants of the brewers are being turned out of their livelihoods and homes by these draconian rents, set in the main by estate agents who have no concept of the harm that will be done to these people.
I thank the Secretary of State for this concession, and I am sure that, with good will on the part of the Government, we can arrive at a successful outcome.
The Minister for Corporate Affairs (Mr. John Redwood)
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Rotherham (Mr. Crowther) for raising this important subject.
He has tirelessly put the views of the National Licensed Victuallers Association to the Government during the course of these discussions and changes.
The hon. Gentleman suggests that the orders have failed, but the main order, to break the tie, is not yet in effect, so it is premature to say that the proposal has failed to introduce competition.
We must wait and see what its impact is before making that judgment.
To review the position before this judgment can be made would be far from helpful.
It would create a great deal of additional uncertainty for tenants, customers and all in the brewing industry.
Perhaps, on reflection, the hon. Gentleman will agree that that could make matters worse.
It would certainly encourage the brewers to look again at their commercial strategy.
The hon. Gentleman was critical of the way they had done that as a result of the orders while the review was under way.
It would be wrong to encourage such a move before it is possible to form a view on how the orders have worked out in practice.
I am grateful that the hon. Gentleman pointed out that the closure of pubs, which was a common feature of the industry before the orders were thought of, has nothing to do with the Government's policy or the MMC inquiry.
If a pub is closed, that is a commercial judgment by the publican and the brewer depending on the relationship between them.
It is usually by the brewer.
That commercial judgment is made on the basis of the pub and its location.
Hundreds of pubs closed before the orders and, unfortunately, some pubs are closing now.
Closing a pub does not help a brewer to comply with the important brewing order; it is essential that the House understands that, as many hon. Members have problems involving pubs, and they need to answer that point, which shows that the brewing order is not the cause of the pub closure.
The hon. Member for Rotherham made some interesting points about independent arbitration.
The Secretary of State and I have worked hard in discussions with the brewers to get improvements in the way in which they treat their tenants.
One of the important points was to get the offer of independent arbitration where all else has failed.
I will certainly consider the points that the hon. Gentleman made when I read Hansard and consider the ways in which it may be possible to dilute or circumvent the effect of independent arbitration in the way that the hon. Gentleman suggested.
The Government are committed to pursuing a vigorous competition policy in the brewing industry and elsewhere.
We will continue to look closely at mergers in the brewing industry which fall for consideration under the fair trading legislation.
Although the Monopolies and Mergers Commission report did not think that concentration in brewing was a problem, the authorities do not wish to see undue erosion of competition in brewing, and that will obviously inform our assessments and judgments in future transactions.
There has been little change in the combined market share of the six national brewers owning more than 2,000 pubs since February 1989.
The increase in concentration of the big four, to which the hon. Gentleman referred, is entirely due to the Grant Met-Courage pubs-for-breweries deal.
Those transactions were considered fully by the MMC.
The number of pubs freed from ties as a result of the undertakings required by the Secretary of State will be much greater than would have been required under the orders.
It was the tie which the MMC thought created all the problems.
That explains the judgment in that case.
I do not accept that recent acquisitions of regional brewers and closures of breweries are the result of the beer orders.
Regional brewers are not affected directly by them.
The industry has long been characterised by mergers between brewers, closures of breweries and sales of public houses.
The decisions of regional brewers such as Boddingtons and Greenalls to cease brewing were commercial ones taken by the managements of those companies and they were not forced on them by any of the Government's measures.
An important way of encouraging vigorous competition in the brewing industry is to give regional brewers the chance to expand.
The beer orders do just that.
Regional brewers have opportunities to acquire further premises from the national brewers, and they can sell their beers to a greater number of’ free outlets’after November 1992.
Regional brewers such as Morlands, Greene King and Wolverhampton and Dudley have already seized the opportunity to expand their estates.
The guest beer provision also provides opportunities.
The Publican on 17 June reported:’ the guest ale tidal wave is swelling, as many national tenants prepare to take a non-brewery tied beer’.
The Morning Advertiser of 24 September reported on an in-depth survey that it had carried out into the effects of the guest beer provision.
This found that some 40 per cent.
of the tenanted pubs of the national brewers were now offering guest beers.
That figure could well increase significantly.
The survey found that Wadworths, Youngs, Fullers, Marstons and Adnams among the regionals had all done particularly well from the provision, accounting together for nearly 30 per cent.
of the guest beer market.
Several new micro-brewers have sprung up.
The Morning Advertiser of 30 October reported the story of Jim Botur, who spent his redundancy money from Matthew Brown on starting his own independent brewery.
He said:’ We have received a lot of support from both free trade customers and tenants who are now able to stock a guest beer in their pubs.
We were confident that the new Beer Orders would give us the opportunity we needed.’
The hon. Gentleman referred to recent increases in the price of beer which, I agree, have been large.
As the brewers do not have to comply with the main measure of the orders until 1 November 1992, it is too soon to judge what impact the orders will have on prices.
I notice that the steepest price rises in past years have been in pubs tied to the national brewers.
The beer orders target precisely those brewers, by ordering a reduction in their tied estates by 11,000 outlets.
Customers will have more choice of outlet and beer.
They can shop around if some prices rise too far.
We have asked the Director General of Fair Trading to review the orders in late 1993, when their effectiveness can be properly assessed.
Mr. Richard Alexander (Newark)
Apart from what the customer may or may not find with the price of beer, is it not the case that what the hon. Member for Rotherham (Mr. Crowther) has described would not have taken place if the beer orders had not been passed by the House?
Mr. Redwood
I am not sure whether that is true.
We can never be sure, because those events took place.
However, there were changes under way in the brewing industry before the beer orders were drafted and put to the House.
We saw leading brewers thinking about segregating property from brewing, and we saw one major brewer thinking about introducing new styles of lease, which is the main burden of the hon. Gentleman's criticisms.
One can argue that there were changes under way in the brewing industry before the beer orders came along.
I am not sure whether all those changes are the result of the beer orders or the threat of the beer orders.
I and the Secretary of State are worried about the notices to quit that some brewers have issued to many of their tenants.
The major brewers do not have to evict tenants to comply with the requirement that they release pubs from ties by 1 November 1992.
Closure of a pub does not help them to comply with the orders in any way.
Most of the notices have been issued to allow the brewers to renegotiate existing agreements; few will result in eviction.
The Secretary of State and I have urged the brewers concerned to keep the number of notices sent out to an absolute minimum, and to make their purpose clear to tenants.
The timing of notices was determined by the fact that all tenants will be protected by the Landlord and Tenant (Licensed Premises) Act 1990 by July 1992 as a result of the legislation that we enacted last year at the tenants' request.
I remember seeing a delegation from the tenants at that time.
The Government moved swiftly to meet their requirement to introduce the landlord and tenant legislation.
Mr. William Cash (Stafford)
Does my hon. Friend agree that, in certain cases, it has been extremely difficult for some smaller pubs to be able to pay the amount of money that some of the brewers have been asking them to pay?
Mr. Nicholas Winterton (Macclesfield)
It is impossible.
Mr. Cash
It is a simple point, but it has caused certain distress.
Mr. Redwood
I know that tenants are worried by the extent of the price rises for their rents that the brewers are suggesting.
Mr. Winterton
Are you?
Mr. Redwood
But that will be determined by the marketplace.
There will be independent review in cases where agreement cannot be reached.
Of course I would like tenants to have realistic rent demands and then have successful businesses on the back of them, and I hope that the rent demands will turn out to be realistic in relation to the actual security of tenure offered under the new style of lease and in relation to the business opportunities offered under that style of lease as well.
The hon. Gentleman fairly pointed out that there is a larger range of business opportunities available under the new leases, and that, of course, will be reflected in the rent charged under those lease arrangements.
The longer-term leases which many brewers are insisting should replace existing tenancy agreements represent a different kind of lease with a different rental price on them.
Over the summer, the Secretary of State and I met to encourage them to adopt best practices in dealings with their tenants.
At our prompting, all the major brewers have now agreed to allow independent arbitration or assessment of rent in difficult cases where agreement cannot be reached.
They have accepted the need to be flexible towards tenants who would have real difficulties in taking on a long-term lease, treating those nearing retirement with special consideration.
That flexibility might involve the offer of a short-term agreement or a long-term lease with an appropriate break clause.
The brewers have also agreed to consider offering compensation to such tenants in exceptional circumstances on a case-by-case basis.
The Secretary of State, in the letter he sent to all hon. Members, said that it would be unrealistic to expect the removal of all differences between brewers and their tenants.
We have been encouraged to hear from the president of the National Licensed Victuallers Association that he has seen some softening in the brewers' approach since our meetings with them.
I understand the NLVA's continuing fears, but I am glad that its most recent letter to the Secretary of State began by saying:’ the reaction of the national brewers to the recent series of meetings held with yourself and John Redwood MP would initially seem to be both positive and encouraging’.
I shall, of course, continue to watch the situation closely and will read all the comments that have been made tonight, including those made from sedentary positions in support of the hon. Member for Rotherham.
I shall also do all that I can to ensure that brewers behave responsibly towards their tenants.
However, I am convinced that a further review of the industry at this stage would only create additional uncertainty, which would not be in the interests of the industry, the tenants or the customers.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at sixteen minutes to Eleven o'clock.
House of Commons
Friday 15 November 1991
The House met at half-past Nine o'clock
PRAYERS
Mr. Speaker — in the Chair
Citizens Charter
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. Francis Maude)
I am glad to have the opportunity to debate in the House today the White Paper which we published in July this year entitled’ The Citizen's Charter’.
The citizens charter is simply the most comprehensive programme ever launched by any Government anywhere to improve public services.
It will cover all the public services, including Government Departments and agencies, local authorities, hospitals, schools, courts, railways, buses the Post Office and the utilities, such as gas, electricity, water and telecommunications.
No part of the public service will remain untouched and the citizens charter will improve the life of every citizen in the land.
For too long, it has seemed to us, involving the citizen in how public services should be provided has been seen as an optional extra.
It is important that we should question that.
All public services are paid for by individual citizens, either directly or through their taxes.
In return, citizens are entitled to expect high-quality services which are responsive to their needs and provided efficiently at reasonable cost.
Certain essential services such as health and education should be available from the public sector irrespective of the citizen's means.
The citizens charter is all about achieving what I have described.
It starts by recognising that the best way to improve standards of services is to increase competition.
In a free market, where the consumer has choice, competing firms must strive to satisfy their customers or they will not prosper.
Where there is limited choice or competition, as in many public services, individual citizens cannot as easily make their voices heard or their views count.
Often, they simply cannot make the ultimate consumer's choice, which is to vote with their cash and their feet and go to someone else for the service.
Wherever possible, we need to increase choice and competition.
Where that is not possible, we need to develop other ways of ensuring good standards of service — for example, through regulatory bodies which have real powers and responsibilities.
As promised in the citizens charter, we shall shortly publish a White Paper which encourages and makes possible a much more open attitude to the buying of services in the public sector.
The citizens charter sets out principles that will govern the way in which every public sector organisation treats those who use their services.
It builds on what is best in the public service.
The first principle is standards.
Each organisation will have to publish explicit standards on what it will offer to its customers.
Standards should not be hidden away for internal use only, but should be clearly displayed at the point of service delivery.
They should include a commitment to prompt and effective action.
That will be expressed perhaps in terms of target response, waiting time and accuracy in carrying out the service, and always in terms of courtesy and helpfulness from staff.
The standards should improve as the service becomes more efficient.
Every year, we expect public service standards to be ratcheted up.
Another important principle of the charter is openness.
There should be no secrecy about how the service is delivered, how much it costs, who delivers it and whether it is meeting the standards set for it.
The days of faceless, nameless bureaucracy are gone.
That is welcomed by those who work in the public service as much as by those who use it.
Unless there is a real threat to personal safety, all those who deal directly with the public should wear a name badge and give their name on the telephone and in letters.
Even now, visitors crossing the hallowed threshold of the Treasury are met by an individual wearing a name badge.
Information is another vital principle to enable the citizen to influence the provision of services.
Again, the citizens charter builds on past achievements.
For example, the days of dull, impenetrable forms that seemed designed to obscure rather than to convey information are passing.
Much excellent work has been done, and the work of Government Departments and agencies has resulted in 29 awards from the Plain English campaign.
This is not just about forms; it is about telling people about all the available services, explaining properly how to use them and what to do when things go wrong.
It is about making services easy for people to use and telling people what to expect.
Not only should targets be published: more importantly, the results achieved against those targets should be published.
They, too, should be made more straightforward for people to understand and should be provided in a comparable form.
In that way, people can see how effective the organisation is against other providers or against a regional or national average.
That creates strong pressure to emulate the best and so will lead to improved quality and efficiency.
Quality and efficiency go firmly hand in hand.
The Education (Schools) Bill, which was published last week, aims to do precisely that.
In future, schools will publish more information in a comparable format, so that parents can see easily whether their child's school is up with the best.
Choice should not be just a private sector option.
Wherever possible, the public sector should provide a choice of services.
That choice should not be limited to’ the way we have always done it’or by the organisation's view of what it should be delivering.
Decisions should take account of the views of customers.
Their views should be sought regularly and systematically to inform decisions about what services should be provided.
British people are sensible.
They know that they cannot have everything and that on occasions they may have to wait.
They will consider paying a bit more for a premium service.
What they do not like is being let down.
If a public sector organisation says that it will do something at a certain time, the customer wants that to happen.
We should ask the people what they want and trust them to answer sensibly.
I intend to commission a survey soon to find out more about what the public want from the citizens charter and what their expectations and priorities are in taking forward this work.
Access is another important principle of the citizens charter.
Services should be run to suit the convenience of customers, not of staff.
Services should be easy to find and to use.
That means flexible opening hours to suit local users, telephones that are answered promptly, inquiry points that are helpful, informative and efficient in directing the caller to the person best placed to help him or her, and signposts to help the citizen locate whatever he or she wants.
Inevitably, there will be times when things do not go right.
When that happens, it is not a question of simply saying that money should be poured into the organisation as a remedy.
One of our primary responsibilities as a Government is to the taxpayer, and we will not neglect that responsibility.
When things go wrong, the citizen wants to be told fully, honestly and, preferably, there and then why it has gone wrong.
For example, most people will not mind waiting a few extra minutes in a hospital waiting room if they know that the doctor has been called away to deal with an emergency.
They will not put up with simply being left without being told the reason for being apparently let down.
When things go wrong, people want an apology properly expressed, and they should be entitled to one.
There should be a well-publicised and readily available complaints procedure.
Lessons should be learned from complaints, so that mistakes are not repeated.
Mr. Steve Norris (Epping Forest)
Listening to the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) saying that it was not the Government who had thought of the citizens charter but Mr. Herbert Morrison reminded me that old habits die hard — in particular, the old habit, much beloved of socialist Governments everywhere, of rewriting history.
I remember the marvellous Soviet history that concluded that the Soviet Union was responsible for the invention of television, computers and penicillin.
I would put Labour's commitment to a citizens charter roughly in that category.
A citizens charter could only ever be a creature of a Conservative Government, for one cardinal and overriding reason — the Labour party is beholden, in terms of funding, finance and philosophy, to the producers, rather than the consumers, of services.
That fundamental divide will put them at a permanent disadvantage in endeavours to provide quality services to the citizen.
Mr. Galloway
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Norris
I am already beset by offers to interrupt my pearls of wisdom and, in deference to my good friend, I give way to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Galloway
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for giving way so early in his speech.
Does not the concept of a citizen imply the existence of a society?
Did not the former Prime Minister memorably state that there was no such thing as society, only individuals?
Mr. Norris
Much as I would enjoy debating this matter with the hon. Gentleman, whom I might also call my hon. Friend, I do not wish to go down this path.
I have always felt that the great truth of the words uttered by my right hon. Friend the former Prime Minister was that she had pierced the bubble of the omniscience of the social worker — the concept that every problem in society can be resolved by the intervention of a bureaucrat — and had identified the fact that the real core of social development is an individual's self-reliance and reliance upon the family.
That was the virtue of my right hon. Friend's remark, which I wholeheartedly endorse.
I am grateful to have the opportunity to do so.
Mr. Dicks
Does my hon. Friend agree that the very people of whom Labour Members complain, saying that they do not give a service in Government Departments, almost always belong to unions who support the Labour party?
Why does not the Labour party tell union representatives to make sure that the staff who pay their union dues provide that service?
The very supporters of the Labour party provide bad services to the ordinary people.
Mr. Norris
My hon. Friend anticipates what I am going to say.
Those of us in public life are aware that, whenever complaints of poor service come before us, there are always Labout Members who will blame either the absence of public funds, although they never make any reference to where the money has to come from, or the Government.
It is never — or perhaps only on occasion — the fault of an individual who has not done his job conscientiously or with an adequate standard of service.
It is not always true that deficiencies in service are to blame.
Governments of every political persuasion wish to spend more on an almost limitless number of service areas, but far too often — infinitely more often than Labour Members care to admit — the fault lies in the simple failure of an individual to deliver a conscientious personal commitment.
This is nowhere better exemplified than in the treatment that some consultants in the NHS offered those who had to visit them as out-patients.
It is now common knowledge that there were consultants — were, because the Government have done something about the problem — who simply said,’ I am a very important man.
My time is extremely valuable, and I am not going to be kept waiting here while people like patients take up five or 10 minutes when I shall not be earning at a rate that would put the salary of Members of Parliament to shame.
Instead of inviting my patients to see me at 10-minute intervals — generally I offer them each 10 minutes of my time — I shall invite the lot to attend at 9 o'clock in the morning.
When we get to 12 o'clock, some of them will have waited for three hours.
That is their problem.
I am a very busy man who has to go and earn a lot of money in the private hospital next door.’
That sort of personal approach to the individual citizen is, more than anything else, likely to outrage the individual citizen who is being treated by the national health service.
Where does the fault lie that produces that outrage?
First, it is clear that putting the National Union of Public Employees, the National and Local Government Officers Association and the Confederation of Health Service Employees back in the driving seat will never solve the problem.
The Labour party's reliance on producers rather than consumers will constantly bedevil its attempts to convince the British people that it is serious on these issues.
Differences in quality standards, to which my hon. Friend the Financial Secretary referred, involve issues that are too serious for us to ignore.
There are palpable differences between the quality of service that is offered at individual hospitals.
The same can be said of individual schools.
Differences in the quality of service of local authorities is evident, and London is a marvellous example.
Let us take Lambeth and Wandsworth.
I shall not embarrass Labour Members by reminding the House in detail that there is no community charge in Wandsworth because the authority is such a good manager of its moneys, while a huge charge is levied in Lambeth, which unfortunately I have to pay.
The difference between the quality of service that is offered by the two authorities is obvious on reaching the boundary between the two.
The black sacks full of fetid rubbish that are to be seen in Lambeth do not meet the eye on entering Wandsworth.
That is despite the fact that I am paying hundreds of pounds a year for the privilege of a so-called collection service.
Mr. Tony Banks
I have ridden in the hon. Gentleman's car, which is so large that it enters Wandsworth as soon as it enters the boundary of Lambeth.
I agree with the hon. Gentleman's remarks about consultants getting everyone to attend between 9 o'clock and 10 o'clock, for example, and then keeping them waiting.
He is right when he says that that should be stopped.
He then said that that system is created by the National Union of Public Employees and the Confederation of Health Service Employees.
Of course, no consultants are members of organisations such as NUPE and COHSE, so the hon. Gentleman should not try to run the two things together.
Mr. Norris
I shall make some concessions to the hon. Gentleman.
First, I concede that not many consultants are members of NUPE or COHSE.
He is right about that.
Secondly, I have an extremely large car.
He is right about that as well.
However, the hon. Gentleman has never shown any reluctance to enter my car.
I happen to pass his house on the way to my own.
I extend to the hon. Gentleman an open invitation to join me on any subsequent occasion.
I promise him the same standard of service in my car as that which he would expect to be provided by a Conservative borough, or even a Conservative taxi service operated by myself.
Mr. Tony Banks
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman could help me.
I thought that Duncan Nichol was leaving his post as chief executive of the health service in June.
Mr. Mitchell
I cannot help the hon. Gentleman on the departure of Duncan Nichol or on its date, but I can help him on the point that I sought to make.
It is all right complaining under the charter to the person who runs the service about which one is complaining as long as there is a further port of call — a further person to whom one can complain.
There are wide discrepancies in the service that patients in different areas receive.
The conclusion of a deep and extensive report on day-care surgery published a year ago by the Audit Commission was that waiting lists for day-care surgery could be cut by a third through the more efficient use of such surgery.
In other words, if every health authority performed as well as the best in this important respect, there would be an immense increase in the amount of day-care surgery that could be undertaken.
The Audit Commission focused on the 20 most common operations, which account for about 30 per cent.
of all surgery conducted, and came up with a most impressive figure.
If all the health authorities performed at the same rate as the top 25 per cent., an additional 186,000 patients could be treated at no extra cost.
That will be a great prize if we can achieve it.
The parents charter will enhance parental choice and strengthen parents' rights and it will make far more information available to help parents to exercise those rights.
They will receive written reports annually and their children's schools will be inspected every four years.
Many of us may wonder why it has taken so long to achieve the last two objectives, but I am delighted that the proposal is now to go ahead.
A number of my hon. Friends and I introduced a Bill earlier this year to oblige all schools to publish their public examination results in common form.
Unfortunately, the Bill was vetoed by a Labour Whip although, since then, I note that, in The Guardian, the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw), who speaks for the Labour party on education, said:’ Let a thousand league-tables bloom.’
In the light of that, I am not clear where the Labour party will stand on this aspect of the Bill when we debate its Second Reading next Tuesday.
This is an important change and I am glad that we have got away from the odious and patronising attitude of so many local education authorities — particularly Labour local education authorities — that say that one cannot trust parents with objective information about how their children's schools are doing.
The charter is a great step forward and the publication of objective results will be immensely valuable in increasing choice and improving standards.
When the Prime Minister said in Blackpool recently that the trendy liberals in education’ have had their say and had their day’hundreds of thousands of parents all over the country let out a huge sigh of relief.
That aspect of the parents charter will do a great deal to help.
Parents do not want trendy socio-economic arguments about why their school is not as good as another.
They want the best for their children and an assurance that the school will improve its perforance and give their children better opportunities.
We have made good progress on education.
The pay review body with its commitment to performance-related pay is immensely important.
There have been large funding increases for education, not least most recently in the autumn statement.
Perhaps we could all agree that it is not only a question of money.
I was interested to read that in Japan half of all 16-year-olds reach a standard in maths which is reached by only 2 per cent.
of children of an equivalent age in Britain.
Yet the Japanese spend less per head on education that we do.
I hope that the education measures that are enshrined in the citizens charter will do a great deal to improve standards for our children.
It is a pity that there are not more hon. Members here to take part in the debate.
The charter is immensely important and will be greatly welcomed by our constituents.
In the 1980s much was achieved in the economy and many essential and fundamental changes had to be made after the IMF was called in in the late 1970s when Labour was in power.
I am sure that the citizens charter is the big idea for the 1990s.
It will improve public services to the point of excellence, restore the morale of the people who deliver them and make them more efficient and capable of delivering good service to our constituents.
Mr. Tony Banks (Newham, North-West)
I welcome the hon. Member for Gedling (Mr. Mitchell) to the Friday crowd.
He will have noticed, as have those of us who are Friday habitue s, that the Benches are sparsely populated.
Perhaps performance-related pay for hon. Members could be debated by those of us who are here on Fridays for important debates such as this.
Perhaps the 10 hon. Members who are in the Chamber could receive the pay of the other 640.
That would be a nice little earner for us.
The hon. Gentleman does not have to worry about the normal courtesy of staying to listen to the next speaker.
No doubt, in his constituency office and at his surgery at this very moment, impatient constituents are waving their charters and working out the waiting time that they have to put in while the hon. Gentleman is in London delivering a good speech.
If the hon. Gentleman wants to be on his way, I would not wish to delay him for a moment.
I have always found it a great advantage to loathe my political opponents.
It is not usually difficult, but the Prime Minister is certainly not one of those that I loathe.
How could I?
We both grew up in Brixton, we both support Chelsea and, oblivious of each other 's existence, we travelled on the No. 45 bus from Brixton to Stamford bridge on Saturdays.
We both support Surrey and watched the team through that glorious period when Surrey won the county championship six years in succession.
We both served as Lambeth councillors.
We both like beans on toast, although I like mine with liberal lashings of Worcester sauce, which I expect is far too exotic for the Prime Minister.
Where on this conjoined road of shared experiences did the Prime Minister go so badly wrong and become a Tory?
I think that it was when he got turned down for the job of a bus conductor.
He had set his heart on punching tickets and helping little old ladies on and off the bus, but he was spurned.
At that point, he vowed hideous revenge on us all, but to be able to get it, he first had to push a little old lady from Finchley off the bus.
Having achieved that, he has now turned his attention to the rest of us.
Our fate is to be even more horrible than to be frogmarched out of Downing street.
We are to be buried alive under charters.
I thought that the charter was just one document, and that after the press conference and the photographs it would go away.
That does not appear to be the case, because there are more charters in store.
Mr. Dicks
Are not there fewer pages in our charter than there were in’ Meet the Challenge: Make the Change’, the document produced by the Labour party?
Mr. Banks
I have never actually read that document, but it was far too long.
Its very length was designed to put off the rank and file member from reading it.
It achieved its objective in my case.
I tried to ask the Prime Minister, in a parliamentary question, to give details of the additional charters in the various service areas which arise directly from his own citizens charter and to say when each of the new charters would be published.
I should have thought that, in the new found spirit of glasnost in the Tory Government, with public officials being required to give direct answers, the Prime Minister would hasten to give me a reply.
It was:’ I am asking the Table Office to make the necessary transfer arrangements to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.’
The first offer that the Prime Minister gets to say something about his charter he shuffles the buck off to the Chancellor of the Exchequer.
Did I expect anything better of the Chancellor?
I did not.
I was right, as the answer was that I should get a reply’ as soon as possible’.
I cannot even find out how many charters will flow from the original one.
Mr. Arbuthnot
Only two Fridays ago, the hon. Gentleman was berating Conservative Members for not having read’ Meet the Challenge.
Make the Change’.
When I said that I had read it, the hon. Gentleman said that he had also read it.
May I now tear up my copy?
Mr. Banks
The hon. Gentleman must know that I am a liar.
In those circumstances, if he believes that, he will believe anything.
It is more important that Conservative Members read Labour party policy documents, because they might learn something.
I do not have a great deal to learn from such policy documents.
If one reads the citizens charter, one realises that it will spawn more charters than the hydra could grow heads.
I understand that we shall have charters for patients, tenants, parents and the taxpayer, charters to cover British Rail and London Underground, the post office, social security benefits agency, the police, local authorities — the list goes on.
We shall have government by charter.
I can imagine the Prime Minister responding to every new idea in Cabinet with the comment,’ That's a most agreeable suggestion.
Let's have a charter on it.’
He will inundate us with charters — and all because London Transport turned him down for a job.
We shall have charters to cover all manner of groups, but none to cover the Government — a point made by my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) from the Opposition Front Bench.
There is no charter to give voters the right to claim compensation from the Government when they have pursued policies that have created unemployment, homelessness, high interest rates, social injustice and economic incompetence.
There is no charter provision for a general election so that the people can have their say at the ballot box at a set time, rather than having to hang on until the Government can find the most appropriate time to make a rush to the polls.
The citizens charter is nothing more than a glossy confection.
It is an epitaph to the accumulated failures of 12 years of Tory government.
Having systematically run down and denigrated public services since 1979, they now expect the country to be grateful for being offered lower standards of service than we used to enjoy, and ones that are derisory in the light of what is enjoyed in many other European countries.
I shall take two examples of that and apply them to London.
The first is housing.
There were 37,240 households accepted as homeless by London councils last year — a rise of 12 per cent.
on the previous year.
There were 33,432 households in bed-and-breakfast accommodation, hostels and other temporary homes — an increase of 31 per cent.
over the previous year.
The comparable figure in 1979 was 2,750.
Over 60,000 Londoners are more than three months in arrears with their mortgage repayments.
For council tenants, London rents have more than trebled between 1979 and 1989.
For example, in Conservative Ealing, tenants have had to face a 100 per cent .
increase in their council rents since January this year.
We have people living rough in cardboard boxes in doorways in the streets of London.
There is no local authority provision for young people who are homeless — that should be written into a charter.
I hear young people ask why they cannot find homes.
One of the reasons for their homelessness is that the Prime Minister, when he had ministerial responsibility for social security, changed the rules and regulations.
The young people who sleep rough in the streets of London have the Prime Minister to thank for having only £31 a week income support.
We all know that £31 buys next to nothing in London now.
Homelessness has more than doubled in London in the past decade.
In 1979, London local authorities started more than 9,000 new homes in the capital.
This year there were 363 starts, the fewest since the second world war.
That has come about because of Government policies.
Capital spending by London councils fell by 85 per cent.
between 1979-80 and 1989-90.
The allocation for London in the current financial year 1991-92 has been cut by a further 8 per cent.
This Conservative Government are spending £6 billion less on provision for housing than was provided in 1979.
It is not necessary to have a doctorate in housing management to understand why there is a homelessness crisis in London and throughout the country: the answer lies with Government policies.
The homeless and the badly housed of the capital do not want glossy charters waved under their noses.
They want homes, but they will not get them until a Labour Government are elected.
The citizens charter brims with transport issues.
I remind the House that traffic speeds in central London have fallen to 10 mph, which is no more than the speed of a horse and cart at the turn of the century.
The Confederation of British Industry estimates that congestion costs its members in commerce and industry in London and the south-east £10 billion a year.
London passengers pay the highest charges in fares per mile for bus, tube and rail travel in the whole of the European Community.
Indeed, they pay double the average fare in other European cities.
Since London Transport was taken away from the Greater London council, fares have increased by 25 per cent.
on average in real terms.
Some fares have increased by much more.
The fare for a short-hop bus journey in central London has increased by 61 per cent.
since 1984.
Mr. James Arbuthnot (Wanstead and Woodford)
I am one of those who welcome without any reservation the citizens charter that has been brought forward by the Government.
I was a little disappointed, although perhaps not surprised, at the grudging welcome for some of the suggestions from the Labour party.
Many of the suggestions made by the Government in the citizens charter give us an opportunity to contribute our own ideas to what should go into the citizens charter and for those ideas to expand and to grow as a result of the kernel in the programme that the Government have produced.
The citizens charter is not only a programme of new suggestions; it is a framework under which we can produce further suggestions ourselves.
I am sure that that is a process in which the Opposition would wish to take part.
I suggest that it is a process in which the Opposition have tried to take part in their own citizens charter.
I wish that I had found the Opposition's citizens charter a little more convincing, but half the ideas that they put forward in their citizens charter, as a spoiling exercise to the Government's, were already in operation and the other half were vague promises and side-stepping some of the problems that have been created by Labour-controlled local authorities up and down the country.
One important part of the citizens charter is not so much that it contains many individual ideas and proposals for change, but that it is intended to change the entire attitude of public servants and the way in which citizens approach them.
In other words, we now have a certain expectation of the sort of courtesy and level of service which we can receive from our public servants and that is something we have not had in the past.
It is as a result of the citizens charter that we are able to have that expectation.
’ Competing For Quality’
The Financial Secretary to the Treasury (Mr. Francis Maude)
With permission, I wish to make a statement on the White Paper,’ Competing for Quality’, which is published today.
The citizens charter sets out a comprehensive programme to improve the quality of public services and make them answer better to the wishes of their users, where that can be done, by providing choice for the citizen.
At the heart of the charter lies our commitment to provide services of the highest quality and the best value that can be bought with taxpayers' money.
Extending competition is crucial to that.
The citizens charter promised a White Paper this autumn on the extension of competition and choice in the provision of public services.
’ Competing for Quality’fulfils that promise.
Governments of all persuasions have always bought in some services, but this Government have taken the process further.
Where competition has been introduced, the results have been impressive — market testing has typically cut the cost of providing services in central Government by no less than 25 per cent.
Good managers everywhere know that they need to look both inside and outside their organisation to get the best deal for the citizens who use their services.
Competition does not mean invariably choosing the cheapest service; it means combining quality and price to provide the best value for money for the service.
That is what the best managers are doing.
The White Paper will make it easier for them to do so.
We have already made some progress.
The White Paper marks a step change in our programme for reforming the public sector.
It sets out how the Government intend to extend competition in the provision of public services further and faster than ever before right across the public sector.
That means providing incentives, removing obstacles, and enhancing purchasing skills — in short, it means driving competition much further into our public services.
Central Government Departments which achieve savings through competitive tendering will in future be able to apply those savings for the benefit of their programmes.
Each Department and agency will set annual targets, with private sector help, for testing new areas of activity in the market.
There will be a new public competition and purchasing unit in the Treasury to carry forward that work, led by a part-time chairman from the private sector, who will also be a member of the advisory panel on the citizens charter.
I hope to announce that appointment before long.
Performance pay will play a crucial part in delivering the citizens charter programme.
The successful application of competition to increase value for money should be an important factor in determining performance pay.
Market testing procedures in central Government have often taken far too long.
They will be simplified and streamlined.
In some parts of the public sector, documentation has been so unwieldy that businesses have been deterred from tendering.
This will change.
Competition must be conducted fairly and openly.
We shall remove tax distortions, require in-house services to be clearly costed and accounted for, and ensure that one-off costs are appraised over a realistic period.
This will ensure that there will be no bias between public and private sector providers.
We shall welcome suggestions from private companies on services which might be suitable for contracting out, and on ways of improving contracting out procedures.
The Government are committed to a publicly funded health service, firmly located in the public sector.
None of the proposals in this White Paper will change that, but the NHS has always bought a substantial amount of services from external suppliers.
We estimate that the drive to market test support services throughout the NHS has brought savings of some £626 million over the past seven years.
These savings can be ploughed directly into patient care.
The White Paper sets out good practice to encourage buying in high-quality support services in hospitals, to improve direct health care for patients.
We also propose that health authorities and provider units should report on their plans and achievements and that there should be a new national database on contractors for major services.
In local authorities, expanding competition through compulsory competitive tendering has shown many successes for about a decade.
The White Paper sets out how we propose to take this further.
It reflects the proposals which my right hon. Friends the Secretaries of State for the Environment, for Scotland and for Wales issued for consultation on 5 November.
Local authorities should buy the services that meet the needs of their local population, wherever the services can best be obtained.
Many local authorities have responded enthusiastically to the competitive challenge.
Some have led the way and have used the private sector to deliver a range of professional and technical services.
We want to ensure that all local taxpayers reap these benefits.
So we are consulting on proposals to extend competition under existing legislation to more manual and direct services; extend competition requirements to construction-related professional services such as architecture, engineering and property management; and in the longer term, require core services such as legal, finance, personnel and computing services to be opened up to competition.
As a necessary first step, authorities would set up internal trading accounts, to identify the true costs of providing each service.
We also intend to bring forward proposals to introduce competition into the important field of housing management — in ways which will enable tenants to participate.
The private sector must be given a fair chance to compete for local authority contracts.
The Local Government Bill currently being considered in another place contains provisions for securing greater consistency of practice between local authorities.
Competition is good for the users of public services.
It gives them a wider variety of facilities and services.
Competition is good for taxpayers who get better value for their money.
It is good for managers who can concentrate on their core activities, looking for the best deal for their customers.
It is good for staff, who can give of their best in a more competitive environment.
It is good for business, giving private firms new opportunities to market their services.
The services that we get from the public sector affect all our lives and cost a great deal of money.
For that reason, services must be bought wherever the best deal can be obtained.
What the Government buy matters as much as what they spend.
This White Paper expresses our determination that the taxpayers' money which the nation can afford should buy the best quality services for our citizens.
This lies at the heart of the citizen's charter and the Government's programme for public services in the 1990s.
Mr. Chris Smith (Islington, South and Finsbury)
Once again, the great expectations unleashed by the Prime Minister and the inflated claims made for the citizens charter when it was first announced have resulted in a half-baked set of proposals which will do little to improve the real quality of public services in Britain.
Is the Financial Secretary aware that, in some instances, greater competition may lead to improvements in quality, but that that does not automatically follow?
Only a Government as dogmatically fixated as this one would believe that all one needs to do is introduce a market or privatise sections of service and all will be well.
Is he aware that that has not been the case in large parts of the national health service, where food, cleaning and laundry services have been put out to competitive tender, and where, as a result, standards have often fallen far short of what they ought to be?
On the health service, how was the figure of £626 million of savings in seven years calculated?
Is it not the case that a similar figure would result from calculating seven years' worth of tax relief for private medical insurance?
Is it not also the case that the cost of one or perhaps two years' worth of the administrative introduction of the NHS changes for the internal market would again result in the same figure?
How dare the Government say that they are going to improve patient care when they are wasting money so disgracefully in other parts of the health service?
On housing, what exactly does the Financial Secretary mean by the introduction of competition into housing management?
Is he aware that the Institute of Housing has recently reported that it does not believe that competitive tendering in housing management is a sensible option, saying that it does’ not easily lend itself to competitive tendering’?
The Opposition strongly support tenant involvement in housing management.
Labour-controlled authorities have been introducing imaginative schemes for tenant involvement for years.
How on earth can the Government ensure that tenant participation takes place if they force through a tendering process which will not necessarily guarantee the tenant involvement we want?
Is the Financial Secretary aware that the introduction of more rigorous management and purchasing provisions in central Government will be welcomed by everyone, but it hardly needs a massive White Paper and a citizens charter to start the job?
Surely the greatest guarantee of performance in central Government would be the guarantee of democratic access?
Why do the Government still refuse to endorse the principle of freedom of information, and why do they not agree to support the freedom of information Bill which will shortly be brought before the House?
Finally, will the Financial Secretary accept that there is no dispute between us about the sheer importance of ensuring quality in our public services?
Our disagreement is on how that is best achieved.
Competition and privatisation are not always the guarantors of quality.
Indeed, the cheapest price, which competition will principally lead to, may ensure the worst service.
The best guarantors of quality are rigorous management, open government, access to information, customer participation, clear contracts with the public which have been pioneered by a number of Labour-controlled councils, and the public sector's absolute determination to provide quality.
That would be a much better way forward than this very disappointing statement.
Mr. Maude
The remarkable thing about that response was that the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) failed to tell the House whether he agreed with our proposals.
I take it that, as he did not say that he opposed what we are going to do, we have his wholehearted support.
The hon. Gentleman said that the proposal was half-baked.
A programme that offers the prospect of harvesting efficiency savings of 25 per cent.
through great swathes of the public sector does not seem to me to be half-baked.
It seems to represent a programme which is extremely good value for the taxpayer and which offers the best prospects of much better services for the user.
The truth is that the Labour party does not dare come out in favour of a programme of competition of this nature because it is in hock to the very public sector unions that have sought to oppose it over the years.
That is why the hon. Gentleman timidly teetered round the edge of this at the outset, saying that of course there may in some circumstances be benefits.
Either the Labour party believes that competition is good for efficiency and the quality of service or it does not.
I make no bones about the Government's position: we believe firmly that, where competition can be exercised, it has a wholly beneficial effect.
It enables good-quality managers and staff to test their services against the best that can be provided elsewhere.
That is good for morale and for the user of services.
The Labour party owes it to the House and the country to tell us freely, frankly and openly where it stands.
If it does not, all its claims to be the guardian of the citizen and service user fall to nothing.
If the hon. Gentleman genuinely thinks that services that are contracted out are of lower quality than those done in house, I invite him to make the short journey between the London boroughs of Lambeth and Wandsworth.
In the former, he will find services provided in house by members of the National Union of Public Employees at extremely high cost and of poor quality.
Over the boundary in Wandsworth, he will find services provided by the private sector at lower cost and of much better quality.
I invite the hon. Gentleman to reflect again on his knee-jerk reaction to our proposals and to tell us frankly whether he is in favour of them and on the side of the citizen, the user of services and the taxpayer or on the side of Rodney Bickerstaffe, the Confederation of Health Service Employees and NUPE.
Mr. Michael Morris (Northampton, South)
Is my hon. Friend aware that, of all the White Papers that I have read in recent years, this document is one of the most detailed and practical?
It shows a sensitivity that we have perhaps not always come to expect from Government Departments.
The section on the management of theatres and arts facilities explains that certain community-based facilities may be exempt and that, provided that subsidies are put up front and form part of the tender process, they may be allowed, yet it is appropriate that there should be tendering for the management of theatres such as the Derngate in Northampton.
That is greatly to be welcomed.
Will he re-emphasise that at the end of the day the document is all about contracting out to produce as good a service at less cost or a better service at the same price?
Mr. Maude
My hon. Friend puts his remarks well, and I am grateful for them.
His point about subsidies being shown is an important one.
To return to the point made by the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith), this is all about transparency and opening up the process to much greater public scrutiny, so that the public can see what is going on, the taxpayer can see what his or her money is being spent on and the customer can see the standard of service being contracted to be provided.
That is a good deal for both customer and taxpayer.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce (Gordon)
Will the Financial Secretary accept that we welcome the proposals that will allow managers to buy competitively?
Clearly, if that leads to lower costs and more services, we support it.
How does he square the Government's commitment to allow public service managers the right to manage with compelling them to opt for competitive tendering in circumstances where, he will accept, that can be costly to prepare and can lead to inflexibility in meeting changing circumstances?
Surely managers should have the right to make that decision.
Will the Minister explain why, if competitive tendering is to be encouraged as a means of securing better value for money, the national health service trusts are to be exempt from the process?
Indeed, some of them are making a virtue of their exemption by saying that that is part of the reason for opting for trust status.
If it is a good idea, should it not extend to all forms of public services — not just those that the Government decide?
Mr. Maude
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for expressing the support of his party for our proposals.
That emphasises once again that the last redoubt of reaction in this matter is the Labour party.
Just by coincidence, half its members are sponsored by the public sector trade unions — there may be a connection between the two facts.
The hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) asked how the proposals will square with the delegation of management powers to the chief executives of agencies, which is a fair point to raise.
The process of reform upon which we embarked some time ago runs against some ingrained attitudes in public sector management, but they are beginning to change.
I have no doubt that the chief executives of agencies will want to embark upon this programme wholeheartedly.
They will welcome the support that is given for that process from the centre.
As for NHS trusts, we have made it clear that we will expect them, as well as the directly managed units within the NHS, to report annually on what they have done.
The hon. Gentleman will understand that the programme of NHS reforms gives managers a strong incentive to ensure that the money that they have to spend buys the very best possible.
That is a strong incentive to ensure that what is being bought has been properly tested against what can be provided in the private sector.
That is the way in which to maximise the amount of money that can go to buy direct patient care.
I should have thought that the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury, as much as my hon. Friends, would strongly support that.
Mr. Steve Norris (Epping Forest)
May I make it clear to my hon. Friend that this is a document that the Labour party simply could not write, because the principle of being critical of the producer is anathema to a party that is totally in thrall to the producers?
Will my hon. Friend underline the clear concept that, in terms of public expenditure, it is not what one spends but what one buys that finally counts?
Mr. Maude
My hon. Friend is entirely right about that, and about the Labour party.
The Opposition have given a pitifully embarrassing performance today by refusing to tell the House whether they support the programme.
We have a duty, as the authority that extracts money from the taxpayer and then spends it on buying services for the taxpayer, to ensure that every pound we spend on the taxpayers' behalf buys as much as it possibly can.
Except for the last Albanians in the Labour party, I do not believe that anyone seriously disputes that the process of competition is essential to maximise what is bought for the taxpayer.
Even the Liberal party has eventually come to that conclusion — even the Albanian Government have come to that conclusion.
However, as in so many other things, it is only the Labour party that is still way back in the tired old 1960s.
Mr. Chris Mullin (Sunderland, South)
Is the Minister aware that, in Sunderland, we have recently had a taste of the Government's competition policy, because private companies have won the contracts from the local education authority to provide school meals and from the health authority to clean health centres?
Those companies propose to reduce the hours of the already not well paid workers to below the level where those companies have to pay national insurance and take responsibility for pension payments, sick pay and holiday pay — all the things that we used quaintly to associate with civilisation.
Will the Minister accept that many decent people will not accept cheaper services at the cost of rubbing the noses of people who are already quite-downtrodden in the dogma with which the Government have come up?
Mr. Maude
I cannot comment on the individual circumstances of the contracts.
Ms. Marjorie Mowlam (Redcar)
Deal with the principle.
Mr. Maude
I will deal with the principle, since the hon. Lady invites me to.
The remarks of the hon. Member for Sunderland, South (Mr. Mullin) suggests that his primary concern is not the interests of the taxpayer who supplies the money or the customer who uses the services, but the staff who work in those services.
That shows that the Labour party remains the producer party — the party in hock to producer interests.
The Conservative party is concerned with the taxpayer who produces the money and with the quality of service provided to the customer.
I make no apology to the House for that.
Sir John Wheeler (Westminster, North)
Does my hon. Friend agree that the secret of contracting out is the drawing up of a contract between those who buy a service and those who supply it, and that, together with independent inspection, that is an essential ingredient to ensure that quality and standards are maintained in the public's interest?
Mr. Maude
My hon. Friend is entirely right.
Every public sector manager should be doing that, whether a service is contracted out or not.
The process of putting a service to competitive tendering requires that very beneficial process.
Indeed, the hon. Member for Sheffield, Brightside (Mr. Blunkett) made precisely that point.
He is a latter-day convert to the cause.
Unfortunately, like the response of the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) today, his conversion is half-hearted and timid.
We believe in that process; that is why we are pushing the programme forward.
Mr. Bruce Grocott (The Wrekin)
Is the Minister aware that he has done a useful service to the House in spelling out the inadequacies of so many of our public services after 12 years under Tory management?
Will he explain something that puzzles many Opposition Members as well as many voters?
Why are the Government so sensitive to our explanation of the creeping privatisation in the health service, when the tenor of his statement is of the tremendous benefits that privatisation is supposed to bring?
The Opposition and the electorate at large do not believe that.
Finally, if the proposed programme is a follow-up to the citizens charter, will the Minister confirm what the Prime Minister said in a written answer to me, that the citizens charter's provisions to improve our public services promise not a penny in additional public expenditure?
Like the previous blue glossy document, this blue glossy document contains Conservative party propaganda published at taxpayers' expense.
How much did it cost?
Mr. Maude
On a point of information, the hon. Gentleman may have noticed that the citizens charter was not a glossy blue document but a glossy red one.
Mr. Gordon Brown (Dunfermline, East)
I beg to move, to leave out from’ That’to the end of the Question, and to add instead thereof:’this House declines to give a Second Reading to a Bill which fails to establish independent consumer ombudsmen; fails to strengthen consumer representation; fails to give sufficient priority to energy saving and environmental protection; fails to take action where there are excess profits; and does nothing to prevent privatised boardroom salary excesses.’
In view of the widespread concern about the standards of consumer service, which is reflected in the large number of complaints, consensus on the need to strengthen consumer representation, a demand that we create ombudsmen, and widespread pressure to take action on excess profits and on privatised boardroom salary excesses, the Bill offers too little, is too limited and is too long delayed.
It is not the most that could be done to protect the consumer, but the least that the Government thought that they could get away with.
Their failure to take action on the essential measures that we have proposed is a confirmation of the power of the privatised vested interest rather than the promised assault upon them.
There are to be no statutory ombudsmen or ombudswomen to represent the consumer, despite the Government's admission in their document entitled’ Citizens Charter Implications for the Regulators of Privatised Utilities’:’The principal advantage of introducing ombudsmen for each of the utilities is that they are seen by the public to be impartial and independent of all parties.’
Yet nothing is done.
There are to be no improvements in consumer representation, simply because — I quote the same document:’ It would be more difficult to secure the support of other Departments to a major change so soon after privatisation’.
As the consumer associations and others have said, the result is that consumer representation in most of the utilities is completely inadequate.
There are to be no changes in the price formula, despite widespread dissatisfaction with the pricing policies of our utilities and representations from many consumer bodies.
There is to be no widespread review of the prices, profits and performance of the utilities, despite the original proposal in the Government's draft document issued before the publication of the citizens charter:’ The Government will therefore in consultation with the regulators review the performance of the utility companies the results of the review willl be published’.
None of that is in the Bill.
None of that is promised by the Government.
While the Government have to admit that, after pursuit of the policy of privatisation for 12 years, substantial problems have arisen that must be corrected, the best that they can propose is that Ofwat, Ofgas and Oftel should be raised to the standard of OFFER, the Office of Electricity Regulation, as if OFFER were the champion of the consumer against the might of near-monopoly power.
I suspect that OFFER is hardly a household name, even in the Prime Minister's household.
The citizens charter was advertised as’ a revolution in services one of the central themes of public life in the nineties a transformation of our services’.
It was to be the big idea.
The best that the Government can do is propose to bring the worst regulator up to the standard of the inadequate, when we need regulation aspiring to the standards of the best.
I have checked on how the public can contact OFFER.
Mr. Alan Williams (Swansea, West)
It is always a pleasure to speak in the same debate as the hon. Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith).
Although one may not agree with it, what he has to say is always considered and well argued.
I was particularly encouraged by his response to the idea of an ombudsman — it was in sharp contrast to that of the Secretary of State.
The hon. Gentleman conceded that it was an idea worth considering, whereas the Secretary of State mocked it from the outset.
The hon. Gentleman's contribution stood better in the traditional approach of the House in the past two decades to issues relating to consumer affairs.
There has been an attempt to find a consensus.
That is not to say that there has been universal agreement, but there has been an attempt to discover what is best for the consumer.
I recall leading for the Opposition in the early 1970s on the Fair Trading Act 1973.
We opposed various stages of the Bill, regretting the fact that it did not cover consumer safety; but, on Third Reading, I committed our party at the Dispatch Box — this was just before an election — to honouring the existence of the Office of Fair Trading and the appointment of John Methven as director general.
That was how, for many years, the parties approached these matters and it is why I greatly regretted the style adopted by the Secretary of State.
I am sorry that he has gone, since I do not like criticising him in his absence.
It was not so much the right hon. Gentleman's arrogance to which I objected — we are accustomed to that.
What I regretted most was his ignorance.
He made great play of the Opposition never, as he put it, having supported the consumer.
That only shows how little parliamentary experience he has.
Perhaps he has been promoted a little too rapidly and a little too high.
I remind the Secretary of State and his Ministers that the National Consumer Council, which he quoted several times, was set up by Shirley Williams and me when the Department of Prices and Consumer Protection was still in existence.
We set up an independent Ministry of consumer protection: this Government closed it down.
We set up a national network of consumer advice centres: the Government closed them down.
We gave more funding to the citizens advice bureaux: the Government even tried to axe the NACAB grant, but had to back down.
It was particularly offensive to hear the Secretary of State talking about price increases in the gas industry before privatisation, as though he were not a member of a party and Government who decreed that gas prices had to rise arbitrarily, unilaterally and unnecessarily by 10 per cent.
above general price increases for three years in succession.
When compounded, that amounted to an increase of more than 30 per cent.
utterly unnecessarily imposed so as to fatten up the privatisation turkey — and the Government have the cheek to tell us how much better things are now.
I consider myself highly privileged to have been the first Minister for consumer protection in a completely independent consumer protection Department.
The consensus that I have described is still enshrined in legislation.
Before the 1974 election, the Consumer Credit Bill was going through the House.
It fell at the election.
I picked it up after the election and modified it in the light of the amendments that we had tabled when we were in opposition.
With the co-operation of Conservative Members, we enacted it.
My greatest contribution to human happiness was either the decision to abolish the cartel on cross-channel ferries or, less delicately, the decision to abolish monopoly price fixing for condoms.
In the 1970s it was recognised that for decades there had been a growing imbalance between the consumer and the supplier or manufacturer.
Changes in marketing methods, such as mass marketing on top of mass production, kept the customer further and further away from the suppliers of goods.
The complexity, technology and chemical make-up of goods made it more difficult for people to understand what they were buying and to make a judgment at the time of purchase.
More important, the cost of legal action to seek redress had become so prohibitive that the consumer had little chance of taking legal action against suppliers.
That is significant in terms of the ombudsman proposal.
We tried to switch the balance, and there was a move on both sides to do that.
There was an attempt to push the balance back in favour of the consumer, but privatisation has achieved the opposite because it has resulted in a major shift of power away from the consumer to the producer.
The House is debating a complex Bill presented by a Government who for 12 years have said that legislation is not needed on consumer protection issues.
They have said that there is too much legislation and that voluntary codes are required.
The Government are not saying that now.
We are hearing a different song.
The Government should be honest enough to recognise that their actions have prejudiced the consumer.
The Bill is a confession because in it the Government say,’ We have done wrong by you, consumer.’
The firms listed in the Bill are not minority suppliers, because everyone in the United Kingdom is a consumer of at least one and probably several of the services covered by it.
Every consumer has been disadvantaged by the privatisation of those industries, and the Bill is the Government's attempt to make amends.
We all know that the privatised monopolies have become virtually unaccountable and are an embarrassment to Ministers, who try to put a bold front on enormous salary increases.
They do not disagree with them instinctively, but they are politically embarrassed.
The Government wish that such increases were not happening, but realise that they can do nothing about them.
Wales is not the most prosperous part of the United Kingdom and there is great bitterness there over the antics of Welsh Water.
Three years ago the chairman of that company had a salary of £46,000.
He increased it to £76,000 in the first year, which was a modest 65 per cent.
increase, and he doubled that increased salary in the following year.
His salary is now £143,000, which means that it has more than trebled in just a couple of years.
The only productivity gain that he can show for it is in the courts.
Welsh Water has dragged many old-age pensioners and under-privileged people through the courts of Wales because they have fallen down on the odd instalment on their water charges.
While those people are being credit blacklisted because of the actions of Welsh Water, the chairman of the company plays computerised monopoly in his Cardiff headquarters.
I am willing to wager that the Government will not present proposals before the election about the salary of top civil servants.
That is because comparators are involved, and what is happening in the private sector will have repercussions in the public sector.
We shall be given all manner of reasons why there should not be a top salary review, or whatever it is called since the former Prime Minister tore up the negotiating arrangements for the civil service.
Conservatives will be embarrassed and will find it difficult to defend increases in civil service salaries.
However, they will have to accept those increases because of what they have allowed to happen to salaries in the comparator industries.
The privatised boards have given themselves an inbuilt incentive to exploit their monopoly position.
When they were privatised I was on the Opposition Front Bench and did the job so well that I am no longer there.
I was there when British Telecom was privatised and I warned of the grave dangers in turning public monopolies into private monopolies.
The new board is able to award itself performance bonuses based on monopoly profit and to take share options on share values which reflect that monopoly profit.
The members of those boards would be saints if they did not seek to take advantage of the position in which the Government have placed them.
That is exactly what is happening.
They are making hay while they can.
Their snouts are in the trough.
A coat of arms for the Government would consist of a silver trough with Tory snouts rampant and in the corner there would be a cardboard box, symbolising the situation in which far too many of our people find themselves.
Mr. Rowe
The right hon. Gentleman is not entirely correct,.
A former Prime Minister accused Conservatives of selling off the silver.
Mr. Williams
That is correct, and the privatised noses are in among the privatised silver, getting the benefit.
I suspect that the hon. Gentleman makes an amusing debating point and is not advancing it as part of a serious political argument.
Many of the ideas before the House are well worth examining.
For example, the proposal for an ombudsman is sensible.
The difference between the overall strategic regulatory power of the directors and that to deal with the often small complaint from the consumer is important.
I am delighted that Professor Carsberg is here listening to the debate.
However, he cannot be doing his job properly in his supervisory and regulatory role if, at the same time, he is bogged down in a morass of consumer complaints.
My hon. Friend the Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) mentioned a number of consumer problems with these industries.
The Government would be well advised to look constructively and positively at the suggestion that there should be an ombudsman.
Mr. Tim Smith
I am interested in what the right hon. Gentleman is saying, but I am not sure that there will be a conflict, in principle, if the regulator regulates both economic matters and complaints.
I should have thought that it was a good idea so that he could see, from time to time, individual complaints about the businesses that he has the responsibility for regulating.
Mr. Williams
I shall draw a comparison with the Act that I mentioned earlier, whose survival for so long is a sign of its success — that establishing the Office of Fair Trading.
The Director General of Fair Trading has an overall strategic role in making proposals for regulating the market and protecting the consumer, but he does not deal with individual cases.
Information on individual cases is referred to him in so far as it might help him to frame proposals for orders and changes in the law.
There is a distinction.
For example, the West Glamorgan consumer protection department deals with the problems of the local small shopkeepers and the Office of Fair Trading collates information from it and from all the other consumer departments so that it can identify whether there is a general abuse that needs remedial action.
I hope that the hon. Member for Beaconsfield will serve on the Committee that will examine the Bill, although I am not trying to condemn him to that if he does not wish to be there, because I think that we might be able to find some common ground.
That there is some common ground is shown by the welcome that the hon. Gentleman gave to the concept of the Public Accounts Committee looking at the regulators and to our slightly wider suggestion that there should be a Select Committee to deal with the matter.
There is something new here which, with good will, both sides of the House could pick up and use.
I have two personal proposals to make — to my party, as I know that they will not be welcomed by Conservative Members.
I am not saying that unpleasantly: I am just recognising that there is a philosophical divide between us.
First, I hope that my hon. Friends will commit themselves to referring every one of these privatised monopolies to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission during our first period of Government.
British Telecom and the water authorities should be the first to be so referred.
My second recommendation is that both parties think in terms of a return to an independent consumer protection Department.
It was too narrow in its previous incarnation.
Too many Whitehall battles were fought because, for example, tourism had to stay with trade, with the result that a whole series of issues that should have been in the consumer department were not.
I make that suggestion for this reason.
Someone has to appoint the director and the ombudsman, if we have one.
They have to report to someone at parliamentary level when they have completed their analyses.
It is imperative that that voice, at the Government end, should stand equal in Cabinet with the voice speaking on behalf of the commercial and industrial interests and that that voice should be independent.
Therefore, I hope that the prospect will appeal to hon. Members on both sides of the House.
Mr. Roger Knapman (Stroud)
Thank you for calling me, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Looking around the sparsely attended Chamber, I had a feeling that I might catch your eye sooner or later.
I am glad to be able to contribute briefly to the debate on the Bill, although I can see that there will not be a meeting of the minds.
In any socialist society, competition is absent and, because it is absent, services are usually non-existent.
I congratulate my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry on his excellent speech.
I am sure that all my colleagues are as delighted as I am to support this excellent Bill, not least because it builds on the firm foundation organised during the passage of our privatisation measures.
The attitude taken to privatisation is one of the key differences between the two parties.
We as Conservatives believe in privatisation, as do the Russians, the Poles, the Czechs and the Slovaks.
Very shortly, the Albanians will also approve of it.
However, tonight we have heard that the Labour party will never approve of it.
The Labour party's amendment shows that it is still wedded to clause 4 and to renationalisation, despite the fact that the leader of the Labour party said recently:’ We must learn to run capitalism better than the Conservatives.’
If he meant that, the Labour party would not have tabled the amendment.
The more astute Labour Members recognise that, with £35 billion-worth of promises under their belts, renationalisation in the event of a Labour Government would be most unlikely.
Therefore, their secret agenda is how best to strangle the utilities with as much bureaucracy and red tape as possible.
The hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown) criticised the £8 billion of profits from the various companies which would yield about £2 billion or £2.5 billion of taxation to the Exchequer.
He is prepared to forgo that.
If he were here, it would be interesting to know how that deficit would be reflected in Labour party policy.
What would it cut as a result?
To promise £35 billion-worth of extra expenditure without the benefit of privatisation revenues is absurd.
To promise £35 billion-worth of extras and then to renationalise these concerns — as has been said, it might cost as much as £10 billion — is not just absurd but highly irresponsible.
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State and my hon. Friend the Minister have achieved in the Bill a delicate balance between encouragement of the private utilities so that they remain profitable and strengthening consumer interests, without excessive bureaucracy.
As a result, I have never been less tempted to support an Opposition motion, although I assure my hon. Friend who is the Whip on duty that I am never tempted in that direction.
The amendment is opposition for the sake of opposing, but of course the Labour party has opposed every privatising Bill.
I wonder whether, if Labour Members present were Members not of this but of a similar Parliament in an eastern European country or in Russia, they would be taking this attitude.
I am disappointed with the amendment principally because it says that the Bill’ fails to establish independent consumer ombudsmen’.
This is bad, Surely they mean’ ombudsperson’.
I wonder whether Opposition Members have looked at the excellent background paper produced by the Library research division, entitled’ The Regulation of Privatized Utility Companies’, which was published on 1 July and is available in the Library.
The paper goes to the core of the argument and the answer to it is to be found in paragraph 1(a) at page 1.
I should think that Opposition Members normally get that far into a document.
The passage states:’ Reference is often made to the regulators by name.
Thus it is said that a particular decision was taken by Sir Bryan Carsberg rather than by Oftel.
This approach is not adopted in order to personalise the issues but to reflect the legal position.
The Acts of Parliament which carried out the privatisations and established the powers of the regulatory agencies lay the various duties upon the Directors of the various industries and not upon the regulatory agencies as corporate bodies.
Each agency is there to assist the director and not legally to share in the decision-making process.
One cannot say, for example, that Oftel decided something by a narrow vote' or that personnel changes in an individual agency will change the approach.’
We arrive now at the crux of the matter, and it is described as follows:’ The actual decisions are made by the Directors of each agency separately.’
As I have said, I have quoted from the first page of the background paper, which is available from the Library.
When the Opposition call for an independent consumer ombudsman, I suggest that that is exactly what they have under the present arrangements.
I believe, however, that the regulators have much stronger powers than those for which the Opposition are calling.
The issue does not stop there, because the Opposition's amendment suggests that the Bill’ fails to strengthen consumer representation; fails to give sufficient priority to energy saving and environmental protection’.
The protection of customers has been successfully achieved since privatisation and my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State produced several examples.
British Telecom's prices — the undertaking has been the subject of some criticism in the press — have decreased by 20 per cent.
in real terms since 1984.
Mr. Malcolm Bruce (Gordon)
The Bill is certainly necessary, although it is rather late and its fundamental objectives are rather weak.
The Secretary of State made more extravagant claims for the Bill than its content would justify.
To some extent, it increases regulation on the margin, which is welcome and necessary, and proposes some competition on the margin.
However, it does not deal with the fundamental problems in a radical way.
Indeed, as several hon. Members have already said, it is a confession by the Government of how they have mismanaged the entire privatisation programme.
During his opening speech, I asked the Secretary of State a question to which he did not give a full or satisfactory answer — why had not the Government sought to introduce those measures before they privatised monopolies, rather than wait until the customers had suffered the consequences of several years of high prices and not necessarily improved services?
The Monopolies and Mergers Commission has already been mentioned and it has been suggested that it will have to be involved again.
One of the problems is that the Government's momentum to privatise was determined for ideological reasons and on a tight time scale.
As a consequence, it was not possible to privatise in a way that put customers' and consumers' interests first because the overriding interest was the Conservative Government and ensuring maximum take up.
The potential shareholders' interests were far more important than those of the consumers.
Indeed, it was necessary for the Government to carry the management of those companies with them so that any radical measures to expose the industries to serious restructuring or competition were not on the agenda.
It was well known that Sir Dennis Rooke made it clear to the right hon. Member for Worcester (Mr. Walker) that the privatisation of gas should be on his terms, and those were the terms on which gas was privatised.
On the first major privatisation — that of British Telecom — the right hon. Member for Hertsmere (Mr. Parkinson) gave the game away when he said:’ I have decided against breaking up BT before offering it to the public.
To do so would require a delay of many years in order to put British Telecom's accounts into a form that would make piecemeal disposals possible’.
The idea was considered but rejected because it did not meet the Government's timetable.
The right hon. Member for Hertsmere made extravagant claims at that time for the purposes of privatisation which, had they been fulfilled, would have made today's Bill unnecessary.
He said:’ In the past, it seems, we have never been concerned enough to regulate our monopolies.
Customers have had little redress against BT, or the Post Office before that.
It has been impossible to judge whether increases in telephone charges could be justified.
After all, when people point to the profits, a monopoly can turn in large profits year after year, whether it is efficient or not.’
That is the crucial point about the argument about British Telecom's current profits.
Mr. Redwood
How do the duopoly policy in telecommunications and the restructuring of the electricity industry fit that picture?
Did the electricity industry management welcome it?
Mr. Bruce
The point about the duopoly policy in telecommunications has already been made by the statistics.
The proportion of the telecommunications industry that is outside British Telecom control does not constitute a duopoly.
It is a monopoly with a little managed competition on the fringes.
That managed competition may increase in time but it is stretching credibility a long way to suggest that a company that accounts for more than 96 per cent.
of the market does not have a monopoly.
In that respect, the Minister's intervention is not valid, but he may have a point in relation to electricity.
The right hon. Member for Hertsmere blew the whistle on his colleagues when he disarmingly said that, when he privatised electricity, he would not make the same cock-up as they had done with British Telecom and British Gas.
He did not, but he made a different one.
He created two competing monopolies which are causing considerable unrest within the industry.
Only this weekend, industrial users in the electricity industry have been looking to break up power generators and introduce competition, and there is a suggestion that the Director General of Electricity Supply might yet refer the electricity industry to the Monopolies and Mergers Commission on the issue of industrial prices, as happened with British Gas.
The interesting factor in all those arguments is that my hon. Friends who sat on the respective Committees or spoke on the Second Reading of Bills associated with privatisation said at the time that the Government were privatising monopoly, not introducing effective competition and regulation, and the matter would have to be examined again.
We were rubbished then, but we have been vindicated, and the matter will not rest when the Bill has been passed.
Anyone who believes that the Bill goes far enough or is radical enough to satisfy customers' interests is living in cloud cuckoo land.
Several more pieces of legislation will have to be enacted before there is effective competition or regulation within the privatised industries.
Despite the much-vaunted claims of Conservative and Labour Members about their faith in competition, it is interesting that a truly radical step to introduce competition into the privatised utilities has yet to come.
Last week, the Liberal Democrats published proposals for breaking up British Telecom into a number of components to provide effective and proper competition, and create regional corporate headquarters of benefit to our regions, which find that massive monopolies concentrate their headquarters elsewhere in the country — by definition, in one place.
If effective competition is to be introduced, whether in gas supply, telecommunications, water or electricity, there will have to be a division of the market into effective competitors.
That has not taken place.
At present, we are the only party prepared to grasp the nettle and to recognise that consumers' interests require both effective competition in the marketplace — the Government have a long way to go before they create that — and effective regulation where the market cannot produce a solution.
The Bill provides a little extra competition and regulation on the margin, but it does not fundamentally transform the regime.
The Bill was brought forward in response to the outcry from consumers and the industry about the way that, over the years, they have been ripped off by the privatised utilities and the fact that, while the regulators have made a contribution — no one would deny that — they have not done anything like enough and do not have the necessary power or resources to advance consumer interests and issues.
The Minister for Corporate Affairs (Mr. John Redwood)
What an extraordinary performance the hon. Member for Dewsbury (Mrs. Taylor) gave.
She asked us to go back to the golden age of Callaghan.
All that one can say is that he was better than the current Labour party leader.
I do not want to return to a world in which the lights go out, there is no money in the country, we have to turn to the International Monetary Fund, and investment in the leading industries has to be cut back.
That is the state to which the Labour party would return us.
It was because the Callaghan Government ran out of money to spend on the water industry and the big utilities that they encountered such problems.
The hon. Lady did not seem to realise that the diversification policy of those industries cannot be cross-financed from the core businesses — I wish that the hon. Lady would listen, because she might learn something and avoid mistakes in future.
Under the rules of the water industry, the diversifications cannot be financed from the core businesses, but are clearly segregated by the regulator.
Interruption
The hon. Lady complained about what she called secret deals to cut price increases.
I welcomed moves to cut price increases and did not find that they were being done in secret — I read about them in the newspapers and elsewhere.
The hon. Lady was also worried about methods of debt recovery, but admitted that legislation states that a court order is needed.
As a result, the number of such procedures is well down on previous years because the process is much better.
I hope that she will welcome that.
Mrs. Ann Taylor
Will the Minister resist any attempts to change the position in the water industry and any attempts to remove the need for a court order for disconnection?
Mr. Redwood
The Government have announced no change of policy.
The Government's policy, of which we are proud, remains the same.
The hon. Lady also said that she was worried about people buying more bottled water.
Perhaps she does not realise that that is a characteristic of people becoming more prosperous.
Perhaps she does not realise that they are buying private water which is in competition with other private water.
Hon. Members make strange predictions when we try to introduce measures to improve such industries and their performance.
When the measures to privatise British Telecom were being debated in the House, Opposition Members said that the public telephone box was threatened with extinction.
We have heard in this debate that, far from being extinguished by these policies, it is flourishing.
Many more call boxes are working, and there are many more of them.
Hon. Members told us that rural services, emergency services, call boxes and provision for the blind and disabled would all have an uncertain future under privatisation, yet in each case the future has been better, thanks to the privatised industry and the regulatory world that we have created.
The leading Opposition spokesman, on Second Reading of the BT legislation, said that privatisation would be a’ devastating blow’.
Perhaps he had in mind profits collapsing or the inability of the industry to finance its capital programme.
Tonight, however, the Opposition come to complain that the industry is too successful and making too much money, even under the tight price controls that the Government and the regulator have imposed.
I am happy that BT is profitable.
I want it to have the money for the investment that it needs to build the phone service that we require for the 1990s.
I am also confident that BT is not achieving that by exploiting customers because of the tight price controls which Labour could never offer, since in its day the company was nationalised and did not work nearly as well.
We have had a good if somewhat sparsely attended debate.
My hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield (Mr. Smith) made some extremely good points about prospectuses, competition and the regulatory task.
Opposition Members should study them before going into the Committee.
The right hon. Member for Swansea, West (Mr. Williams) made a miscued attack on my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
He did not understand my right hon. Friend's point about how the Government have stood up for consumers by introducing competition and the right kind of legislation.
He should reflect on the Secretary of State's opening remarks, which were clear and helpful to customers, as this Bill will be.
The right hon. Gentleman asked why we were introducing a Bill on this subject.
The answer is that our policies are evolving.
What we have achieved so far has been extremely good, so we want more of it.
We recognise the need — the Government always have recognised it — for regulation, when there are elements of monopoly.
We also believe that competition is superior to regulation, so whenever possible we promote competition so that the need for regulation is not as great.
My hon. Friend the Member for Stroud (Mr. Knapman) understood all these points and put them clearly to the Opposition.
At the same time, he made a good contribution on the difficulty in which Labour will find itself, if it is ever in government, with its massive plans for overspending.
Indeed, Opposition Members did nothing to clear up the uncertainties about the huge expenditure on which they would have to embark to renationalise these industries before messing them up again as they did in the 1970s when they were under national control.
My hon. Friend the Member for Stroud pointed out that a regulator is much better than an ombudsman.
If the person sorting out complaints for consumers is also the person regulating the industry and setting the prices, he is in a much stronger position.
That gives the regulator much more clout.
How could the ombudsman improve on that?
The hon. Member for Worsley (Mr. Lewis) made a sincere if overlong speech on premium-rate services.
I read in the guide to Members of the House that he is the embodiment of the success of Government policies.
He sports a fax number, a pager, a messenger service number and several telephone numbers, as listed in that excellent publication.
I am glad that the hon. Gentleman is proud to join in the consumers' society that has been created by our policies.
Mr. Roger King (Birmingham, Northfield)
A yuppie socialist.
Mr. Redwood
I thought that phrase went out with the 1980s.
We shall have to think of a new one, but I am grateful to my hon. Friend.
Mr. Lewis
Would the Minister like my complaints about the service by fax, pager or mobile phone?
Mr. Redwood
I shall be happy to receive them in any form in which the hon. Gentleman cares to send them — but they should probably go to the independent regulator, as he well knows.
Like him, I do not like sleazy and unpleasant chatlines or dirty recorded messages.
That is why powers were taken in the legislation to stop just that sort of abuse.
That is why licence powers are being used to control it and why this Bill, soon to go to Committee, will give the director general still more powers, should he want to use them.
I am sure that he will hear from the hon. Member for Worsley if he does not want to use them.
I do not think it right to ban all these services.
I do not want to stop people listening to football commentaries or cricket scores.
These services are subject to gradation and it is difficult to distinguish between them sometimes.
Of course we want to ban the disgusting material, and the powers exist to do so.
I want to give people a choice, and the system that we have set up through ICSTIS and the regulator will do just that.
The hon. Gentleman defeated his own argument by saying that 0898 numbers are barred in the House in order to stop hon. Members exploiting them.
Mr. Lewis
The Minister misses the whole point.
Large organisations such as this can impose such a bar, but domestic customers cannot, nor should they be expected to do so.
The small business man with two men and a dog working for him cannot afford the call-bar facilities that are in the House.
I am trying to get the Minister to remove his blinkers and do something in favour of the small person.
Mr. Redwood
Call barring is available to all those using digital exchanges, which now cover large chunks of the country and will shortly cover the whole country.
I am happy to add my voice to that of the hon. Gentleman to ensure that the facility is understood all over the country.
My hon. Friend the Member for Taunton (Mr. Nicholson) welcomed the Bill.
He and my hon. Friend the Member for Beaconsfield posed the best question of the debate when they asked whether it could apply to rail.
I do not know whether I have the best answer to that, but I remind them that the Bill relates only to those utilities that have been privatised and to which a policy of independent regulators applies.
The task would be more complex and would require other policy issues to be considered in relation to industries that are still nationalised.
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Gordon (Mr. Bruce) for giving one or perhaps two cheers for the Bill and for saying that his party would support it.
He took a rather wrong-headed view of the history of the development of competition in these industries, although he will not be surprised to learn that I agree with his criticisms of the Labour amendment.
He seemed to be unaware that there had been a further post-duopoly review and that competition within the telecommunications industry is being opened up generally.
I hope that on reflection he will agree that that is good.
My hon. Friend the Member for Mid-Kent (Mr. Rowe) justifiably praised British Gas and British Telecom for elements of their services which are now very good.
He asked whether competition between the old private companies and the newly privatised ones is fair.
Wearing my competition hat, I shall be happy to examine any evidence which suggests that competition is not fair.
If my hon. Friend can make a case, we shall have to think about the issue.
I entirely agree that salaries should be performance-related and subject to shareholder control.
The hon. Member for Sheffield, Heeley (Mr. Michie) did not mention BT's low-user scheme, which is a major advance and solves some of the low-income consumer problems that the hon. Gentleman described.
He did not mention the point missed by the hon. Member for Dewsbury, that disconnections are now at a low level.
The hon. Member for Neath (Mr. Hain) easily won the prize for the longest words in the debate, but that does not mean that his speech had the best content.
For example, he thought that BT should be allowed to offer entertainment services but seemed to be unaware that it could and had applied for cable franchises.
He also seemed unaware of the great progress in laying fibre optic cable around the country, mainly between cities.
That has come about because of our liberalisation policy and as a result of the investment moneys that British Telecom and others have available.
I agreed with the thoughtful contribution by the hon. Member for Pontypridd (Dr. Howells) about the problem of a shortage of gas.
However, I did not agree with some of the hon. Gentleman's other points, especially about his hatred of combined cycle gas.
That is the technology that the new electricity industry wishes to build because it is environmentally better and cheaper.
Those are two good reasons for pursuing such schemes.
The hon. Gentleman seemed to be unaware of the great progress being made in building an independent and renewable sector in electricity.
In the long tirade by the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East (Mr. Brown), there were about 10 debating points and if time permits I shall try to answer them.
I shall begin by correcting an error in the hon. Gentleman's speech.
He said that there had recently been 102,000 complaints against British Gas.
I am told by British Gas that that is untrue, and that the hon. Gentleman has taken the number of inquiries and complaints made to the Gas Consumers Council.
That includes people ringing up to ask where they can pay their bills, which is hardly a complaint.
I hope that the hon. Gentleman will accept the correction that, far from there being 102,000 complaints, British Gas received 23,000.
The hon. Gentleman's first request was for a widespread review of the prices, policies and performance of these industries.
Where was he during the past year's review of the telecoms industry?
Is he aware that the duopoly policy was re-examined on the stated date and competition was introduced generally?
Is he aware that, in the case of telecoms, the price control formula started at retail prices index minus 3 and went on to RPI minus 4.5 and only recently has been increased to RPI minus 6.25?
Where else in the world can one get a pledge of a 6.25 per cent.
real cut in telephone prices year after year?
If the hon. Gentleman goes to France — a country he seems to admire more than ours — he will find that it has introduced a price formula that is far less tough than ours on BT because it knows that its nationalised industry would find it difficult to match the performance of BT.
If the hon. Gentleman would listen rather than talk, he would learn that the price formula for gas has also been revised: where it was minus 2 on the controllable costs it is now going to minus 5 — another tough target.
I hope that, the hon. Gentleman will welcome these tough targets and recognise that they mean that when the time is right, these matters are reviewed and the customer gets a better deal because we make sure that he does and that the regulators do their job excellently.
I was surprised by the hon. Gentleman's attack on the standards of the work of some of the regulators.
I should have thought that hon. Members would have got behind the work of the regulators, who are standing up for the interests of the customer.
He asked where OFFER's telephone number was.
It is on the back of the bill.
Interruption
I suggest that the hon. Gentleman looks in the right telephone directory.
My hon. Friends have already dealt with the Labour party's idea for ombudsmen, and I have also mentioned it in my reply to them.
The regulators have stronger powers than ombudsmen could have, not only with the new powers in the Bill but with their existing powers.
The trouble with the hon. Gentleman is that he believes his own propaganda.
Halfway through our policy discussions in preparation for the citizens charter and the Bill, he obtained a leaked document containing the views of some officials.
He claimed in the press that it set out Government policy, but it was a million miles away from our policy.
He is now upset that it is not our policy and keeps saying that the views in it must be the views of Ministers.
They are not — it was a working document from officials; Ministers' views were set out in the citizens charter as they are set out in the Bill.
They are different from the views that he is saying are ours, and I wish that he would retract that.
The hon. Gentleman said that there was not enough consumer representation.
Perhaps he should read the Bill, in which there are several references to the Gas Consumers Council.
The regulators will consult widely with consumer groups and customers before setting out standards, in conjunction with the industries.
The hon. Member has been trying to make out that the Government have been putting profits, the success of BT and the shareholder interest before our policy.
How can the Labour party say that in the year when we opened up the whole of industry to competition, in the year when we tightened the price control and made it clear that the customer is high on our list of priorities?
His claim is absurd and he should withdraw it immediately.
We have set out the policies for customers, and that was what motivated the main changes this year in our telecoms policy.
Much of the speech by the hon. Member for Dunfermline, East, which lacked content, was taken up by a series of jealous tirades against the pay of people in the private sector who have satisfied shareholders, directors and other representatives of their need for a pay rise.
He claimed that complaints were up but nobody ever thought of complaining when the Labour party was in power because there was not a proper procedure, and in many cases the service was so bad that people did not bother.
The hon. Gentleman then said that he was thinking of municipalising water.
Heaven help us!
I know that the House will reject that idea.
I know that the House will vote overwhelmingly for the Bill, which I wholeheartedly recommend.
Youth Training Guarantee
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
The non-implementation of the youth training guarantee is of great importance to individual young people and to the nation's future.
There will be no decent future for our young people unless they acquire skills, and no future for Britain unless its population is educated and trained to world standards.
To catch up with Germany by the end of the decade, Britain's productivity growth must exceed Germany's by 3 per cent.
a year, but we cannot do that with an under-educated and under-trained work force.
In the debate on the Queen's Speech, foolhardy and complacent Ministers tried to foster the illusion that our training matched Germany's.
Although, no doubt, some British training compares with that of Germany, many of our young people get absolutely no training whatsoever, and that is a scandal.
Many young people enter employment offering no training, and many more do not get even that.
They leave school with no job and no youth training place, either.
They start their young lives by being thrown on the scrap heap at 16, 17 or 18.
In Germany, all young workers get a thorough, three-year externally examined apprenticeship.
Here, the Government like to claim that those without jobs are guaranteed a two-year YT place, but even that, something inferior to the German model, is not being delivered.
It is a fraud.
Through the mouths of Employment Ministers, the Government claim and pretend that there is a YT guarantee.
Continually, they stand at the Dispatch Box and repeat the mantra that they are committed to the guarantee.
So that is all right; it sounds good.
The innocent might imagine that something will flow from that, but I smell a rat when I hear the word’ commitment’.
What does it guarantee?
Very little at all.
The Government do not deliver the so-called guarantee.
It has conveniently been handed over to the training and enterprise councils, but then the Government cynically deny them the resources to do the job.
The truth is that Ministers who mouth those grandiloquent guarantees know little of what is happening on the ground.
They hide behind the TECs, they do not listen to constituency Members who know what is happening in their areas, and they do not listen to the TECs, either.
I discovered that when I reported to the House that hundreds of young people in the London borough of Newham had no jobs or YT places.
All they got was the usual complacent, superficial parroting of the empty nonsense about commitments and guarantees.
Ministers do not know how many young people are without a YT place.
The TECs themselves are often vague.
The people who know are in the careers service.
Last Friday, I received a letter from the Newham career service.
It told me the figures in east London.
The figures are from 10 October, and they show Barking and Dagenham 437, Havering 539, Redbridge 537, Tower Hamlets 911, and Waltham Forest 566.
The figures for Newham are dated 14 November, so I hope that we do not hear Ministers say that they are not up to date.
In Newham, there are 519 young people without a job; 58 say that they are not interested, so that means that 451 are seeking a YT place.
I randomly tried a number of careers offices, and I received a fax showing the situation in Derbyshire: Alfreton 56, Derby 832, Ilkeston 184, Long Eaton 105, Matlock 37, and Swadlincote 103.
In total, in Derbyshire there are 1,317.
A fax from Leeds shows that there are 873 there.
Another one from Birmingham shows 538 there.
I have information from Leicestershire showing 1,300.
In Lambeth there are 586, the Wirral 444, Newcastle 342, Gateshead 264, and West Sussex 544.
I emphaasise that those figures are all random, and they show that hundreds of young people all over the country are denied a job or a YT place.
As the Secretary of State knows, the Select Committee on Employment has received letters from 69 TECs, and those letters have been placed in the Library.
Those letters tell us that more than half the TECs are not meeting the youth guarantee.
Five TECs have reported having more than 1,000 youngsters awaiting offers of training places, and another five have between 500 and 1,000 waiting.
Many TECs explain graphically that they have inadequate money and that employers are offering too few work experience places because of the recession.
One of the major causes is the Government's cuts in expenditure on training.
Department of Employment expenditure has fallen by 42 per cent.
in the past five years.
Expenditure fell as unemployment fell, but it has continued to decline as unemployment has rocketed again.
In the past year, unemployment has risen by a massive 47 per cent., but instead of rising by a similar amount, expenditure in 1991-92 will be 10 per cent .
less in real terms than in 1990-91.
Next year, instead of the required substantial increase that is needed, there will be a derisory and inadequate increase of 2 per cent.
In 1993-94, the downward path will resume, with a further fall of 6.5 per cent.
To measure the scale of the cuts, in 1994-95, the real value of all Departments' expenditure is planned to be 82 per cent.
more than it was eight years earlier.
But the Department of Employment's expenditure is planned to be 34 per cent.
less than eight years earlier.
Resources for employment training have been cut this year and for youth training are roughly the same, even though the need is so much greater.
I have here some of the letters which the Select Committee has received from the TECs.
The one from Avon says:’ there is difficulty at present in meeting the YT guarantee in Avon.
The main cause is a lack of work placements due to the present economic climate.’
The letter from Bedfordshire says:’ our budget is based largely on an historically low number of unemployed people in the County.’
But between July 1990 and July 1991, the percentatge of unemployed doubled.
The letter continues:’ The TEC cannot address the guaranteed programmes for young and unemployed people in isolation from this economic background.
In addition to insufficient budget in a time of deep recession we now realise that TECs are facing an unmanageable task.
We are required to operate demand led programmes with cash limited budgets.’
The letter from Bolton-Bury TEC says:’ On Youth Training there are currently approximately 500 young people within the guarantee group who are awaiting placement with an employer.
The Managing Agents have cited the recession as the reason for the shortfall of placements.’
The letter from Calderdale says:’ Negotiations with the Department are taking place on an increase in funding but have proved difficult to achieve so far.
The Department of Employment are insisting that the TEC use funds earmarked for other projects to meet the Youth Training guarantee.
This is causing considerable disquiet amongst TEC Board members who do not wish to see long-term plans hijacked by such short-term changes in the demand for national programmes arising from the recession Many employers are reluctant to become involved either because they have a shortage of work or they cannot afford the financial contribution expected of them.’
The Calderdale TEC says that it has many young people waiting.
CambsTEC in Cambridge says:’ Over recent months, CambsTEC has become increasingly concerned about Youth Training's ability to meet the increasing demands placed upon it, due to the limited employment opportunities presently available to young people.’
It says that unemployment has doubled in its area this year.
As of 12 September 1991, 200 young people in the CambsTEC area were waiting for a youth training place.
The chief executive of the central London TEC says:’ I know that we are not alone in our concern about our ability to meet ET and YT guarantees, given current levels of funding.
This, combined with the effects of the recession on training demands and budgets, and the problems of placement of trainees with employers and into jobs, leaves us with an almost unsolvable problem without further funds.’
She says that the TEC is struggling to manage but is far from achieving an acceptable position as yet.
The City and Inner London North TEC says:’ The most recent figures indicate that there are around 490 young people on the waiting lists of YT providers and another 461 on Careers Service waiting lists.’
The Dorset TEC said that it was struggling to manage but that it might manage’ with the provisos that the average length of stay on the scheme remains one year’.
It is supposed to be a two-year scheme.
In Germany, it is three years.
Yet the Dorset TEC said that it could manage only if the scheme was cut in half.
Greater Nottingham TEC says:’ the current recession has had the effect of reducing the number of employer placements available.
Without these placements YT providers are unable to provide the’ job training’required for National Vocational Qualifications, secure contributions from employers towards the cost of training and, consequently, meet the guarantee of a YT place.’
It cannot meet the guarantee.
It said:’ We are working closely on this matter with the Careers Service, who advise us that currently we have outstanding approximately 800 youngsters’.
The Greater Peterborough TEC says:’ Within the Youth Training programme we have about 150 young people actively seeking a place for training who at the moment have not been given an offer the fundamental problem is that the unit cost on which the funds are allocated being for this programme are too low we would hope that more money will be available to meet the guarantee because again, it is not a genuine guarantee, it is a demand-led guarantee and if we are funded on the basis of historical take-up this is bound to change when the economic climate changes, as has been experienced recently.
If it were a guarantee then we should be funded accordingly.’
The Heart of England TEC says:’ there will be an estimated likely shortfall of 400-450 places.’
Northamptonshire TEC says bluntly:’ It became clear to us in the early summer that we would not be fulfilling our Youth Training guarantee.’
Lincolnshire TEC says:’ The funding package assumes a contribution towards the overall cost of the training from employers, usually by paying wages or meeting the allowance cost in the case of unemployed trainees.
A high proportion of trainees are placed with small employers Without that contribution the funding package simply does not add up.’
The Central England TEC tells us that the system of’ funding must be commensurate with the Government's guarantee.
This has not been the case so far this year with several results’, one of which is that’ Government credibility has been severely tarnished, particularly with regard to perceived dedication to improved training.’
Humberside TEC says that it cannot get employer placements, so it is not getting’ NVG III provisions’and the quality of training is falling.
The Isle of Wight TEC says that it notified the Department of Employment in August that it might be unable to meet the YT guarantee within the funds allocated for the purpose.
It says:’ Such concentration on meeting the Government guarantee, and use of funds originally earmarked for other purposes for YT, inevitably means that other aspects of our proposed programme may suffer and that we also neglect the long term development of Youth Training itself.’
Manchester TEC tells us that there are’ between 1,200-2,000 young people in the Guarantee Group wanting to join YT for whom there were unlikely to be places available before Christmas.’
Milton Keynes TEC says:’ 495 young people are registered with the local Careers Office with 14 notified job vacancies and no Youth Training vacancies.’
I have a thick wad of these letters which I would love to read out, so that they would be put on the record.
However, I want to leave sufficient time for the Minister to answer.
Where does that leave the Government's so-called guarantee?
Looking pretty sick.
Some TECs have told us that it is not their guarantee but the Government's.
Under the YT programme, the Government are paying less and expect the employer to pay more.
The scheme is based on employer participation, TECs cannot deliver without employers and their contribution, but the employers have given no guarantees and recognise none.
Due to the recession, employers are struggling to survive.
They are making many staff redundant, and they are largely pulling out of the programme, thus leaving a huge hole in numbers and finance.
TECs do not themselves provide programmes; they contract out to training providers.
However, trainers are also pulling out, because the sums do not add up, it is not worth their while and quality is suffering.
The Minister will know of one trainer, Astra Training Services, because he paid it to take the skill centres away.
Astra says:’ many training providers are currently in financial difficulties and are leaving the training market.
This damage to the training infrastructure may take years to repair The current Government funding regimes for both ET and YT are reducing the numbers of providers and offer insufficient incentives to encourage new organisations to enter the market.’
It also tells us:’ Although there are now additional opportunities to expand our share of the YT market, the funding arrangements are considered inadquate to make such a move worthwhile.
There is evidence to suggest that both ET and YT providers are finding the current funding insufficient to justify a continuing role.
Some have withdrawn voluntarily; others have been forced into liquidation by their creditors.
Thus whilst there are increasing opportunities to bid for a larger share of this business, it would be financially imprudent to do so.’
So the trainers are pulling out.
In my area of east London, the TEC has asked the careers service to canvass for places because the training providers are not coming up with them.
I am not criticising the TEC: it does not have the resources.
What, finally, is the reality?
What is the convoluted chain of command?
The Government proclaim their commitment.
The TECs are given the responsibility.
The employers, although they are expected to contribute, do not want to know.
Many training providers pull out because it is not worth it.
At the end of the line, the local authority careers service is called in to rescue what remains of this shambles.
That is the much-vaunted commitment.
That is the travesty of the guarantee.
The way forward is for the Government to admit that the guarantee is not being delivered and that it is being overwhelmed by the recession.
They must go back to the drawing board and review the whole of youth training.
They should sit down with some of us who are interested in these matters and draw up a quality scheme that works.
Otherwise, they will continue to fail thousands of our young people and our country's training needs.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Employment (Mr. Robert Jackson)
I congratulate the hon. Member for Newham, North-East (Mr. Leighton) on raising this important topic.
The House knows that he takes a great personal interest in the training of young people, not only in his constituency but by virtue of his chairmanship of the Select Committee on Employment.
First, I reiterate the Government's guarantee to young people.
It is that all young people under 18 who are not in full-time education or a job and who are seeking youth training are entitled to be offered and, if necessary, re-offered any number of times entry to a suitable YT programme and to receive such training.
All young people falling into that category but over the age of 18 who have not been available for YT because of disability, ill health, pregnancy, a custodial sentence, remand or language difficulty are entitled to an offer of a suitable YT programme and to receive such training.
That is the guarantee.
Despite the hon. Gentleman's figures, a moment's reflection will enable the House to recognise that managing the delivery of a guarantee of this kind for hundreds of thousands of young people is not a simple, straightforward operation.
For a start, there is the question of how to plan and predict the numbers of young people who will exercise their entitlement.
We know that there are in principle X young people who could qualify for that entitlement — that information is available from the census — but their choice whether or when to exercise it is not predictable.
When one thinks about that, it becomes apparent how complex the matter is.
The first critical factor, which emerged clearly in our debates this year, is the staying-on rate in full-time school and college education.
Young people who have completed GCSEs at 16 can choose whether to stay on at school or college, or come out into the labour market and, possibly, take an entitlement to YT.
We do not know what the staying-on rate will be until the autumn, and it is capable of further revision during the year.
Many young people — I am in no way blaming them — are unclear about their personal plans.
Many will register with the careers service.
That is where the hon. Gentleman gets his numbers from.
The hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) has been extremely critical of the new inspectorate's authority, independence and role, because he is obsessed by the numbers employed in HMI.
In a wholly typical fashion, the union objects to the reduction in numbers that I am proposing.
If the union objects, the hon. Member for Blackburn objects; he makes his judgment based on the number of employees.
The numbers of staff that we shall employ in the new office will be those needed to discharge the duties set out in clause 2.
The numbers that I have given publicly hitherto are the best estimate that the senior chief inspector and I can make — about 175 at the end of the transitional period.
I have given that estimate before, and the hon. Member for Blackburn is reported to have said on the strength of a newspaper article that we both read:’ the Secretary of State has come close to misleading the House of Commons over the numbers required.’
I utterly refute that.
I repeat what I have always said: 175 is the best estimate that the senior chief inspector and I could make of the number required after the transitional period to carry out the duties that I have described.
Mr. Straw rose
Mr. Clarke
I hope that the hon. Gentleman is rising to withdraw that allegation, because it was totally groundless and misleading.
Mr. Straw
The comparison that I made in The Independent newspaper was based on what the Secretary of State's own review had recommended as the number required to run the system.
The Minister of State, Department of Education and Science (Mr. Tim Eggar)
How does the hon. Gentleman know
Mr. Straw
The Minister of State asks me how I know.
I know from a statement made by the Secretary of State in response to the Independent article, a copy of which I have here.
The Secretary of State said that the review team had concluded that a maximum of 380 to 390 HMI inspectors would be needed.
That was based on certain stated assumptions and the review team's recommended package.
The Secretary of State must explain how the assumptions of the review team differ from the assumptions that he now makes.
What did the review team say that the Secretary of State disagrees with?
Mr. Clarke
The hon. Gentleman made a totally false comparison before he made the totally false allegation that I had misled the House.
He had read the article in The Independent and my response to it.
The figures in the article were not those that I have ever given to the House.
My figures were the best estimates that the senior chief inspector and I could make of the numbers required to carry out the policy that I have laid before the House.
It is most unfortunate that the hon. Gentleman does not have the courtesy or good sense to withdraw an allegation based on his misreading of a newspaper article.
Hon. Members
Withdraw.
Mr. Straw
The Secretary of State made the statement once outside the House.
Will he now agree that the figure of 380 was that recommended by the review?
Mr. Clarke
Last week, the hon. Gentleman was trying to be a lawyer and attempting to make me read out on the floor of the House a document that he wanted me to table.
The hon. Gentleman has no ideas and is desperate for the advice of my officials.
He thinks that he can lure me into making a statement that will have him attempting to give a poor man's reading of’ Erskine May’and saying that he wants me to lay the document before the House.
I shall not do so.
The figure that the hon. Gentleman is quoting from the newspaper article bears no relation to the figures that I used, which constituted the best estimate that the senior chief inspector and I could give of the numbers required to carry out the policy.
The hon. Gentleman had no basis for saying that I misled the House, and he has no basis for declining to withdraw his allegation.
He should stop fooling about and making the barrack-room lawyer performances that are starting to creep into his approach to the HMI review.
Two key assumptions lie behind the senior chief inspector and myself arriving at the figure of 175.
Responsibility for the inspection of further education and sixth form colleges will transfer to the Further Education Funding Council under a Bill now before another place.
I suspect that it will involve largely the same personnel, but they will no longer be on the strength of Her Majesty's inspectorate and will work for the funding council responsible for further education and sixth form colleges.
The senior chief inspector and I have made the best estimate we can of the savings that can be made in the complement of Her Majesty's inspectorate based in local offices and engaged in the inspection of schools in liaison with local education authorities.
Many of those activities will be displaced by the substantial increase in the evidence available from 6,000 reports each year by inspectors registered with Her Majesty's inspectorate.
Dr. Dafydd Elis Thomas (Meirionnydd Nant Conwy)
I want to be helpful, although I shall not stand as a referee between the two Front Bench teams.
When the figure of 175 was given, was that simply the clause 2 figure for England, or was the clause 5 figure for the Welsh inspectorate also included?
Mr. Clarke
They are English figures.
The Welsh inspectorate is not my responsibility.
The Secretary of State for Wales will form his own estimate with his own chief inspector.
The inspections will be carried out at local level by independent inspectors who will be registered with Her Majesty's Inspectorate, which will withdraw the registration of inspectors who are not up to standard.
That means that inspectors will be supervised and monitored by Her Majesty's inspectorate and will not be allowed to carry out inspections unless they are up to standard.
Ms. Gordon
Will the Minister give way?
Mr. Clarke
No.
I have given way many times, and I should like to proceed.
The independent teams and Her Majesty's inspectorate will contain some people who are not members of the teaching profession.
I make no apology for that.
Of course the vast majority of inspectors will have professional qualifications in teaching, but inspectors should not be exclusively drawn from that stable.
Many perfectly sensible and intelligent people could be trained to make a contribution to inspection.
People would value lay judgment alongside the professional judgment of information about the inspection of a school.
I shall now deal with how that proposed system is being challenged.
The issue between the Government and the Opposition — if there is an issue on the Bill — is that the hon. Member for Blackburn advocates a policy of patsy, unquestioning inspections of schools by people who are well known to those schools.
The hon. Gentleman accuses me of doing that, but it is his mechanism.
My understanding of his proposal is that inspections should be carried out only by local government inspectors.
The hon. Gentleman also takes the view that only local government should be allowed to run schools.
Therefore, Labour's policy, as I understand it, is that only local councils should be allowed to run schools and that those schools should be inspected only by local government inspectors.
I cannot think of a more patsy, unquestioning system better designed to produce the cosy relationship about which the hon. Gentleman so frequently speaks.
Some head teachers — a minority, I am glad to say — ask why their schools cannot be inspected by inspectors they know.
There are even those who ask why they cannot be inspected by those who advise them.
That would not be a desirable system.
Under the registration of inspectors advocated by the Bill, local government inspection will be universally up to the standard which at the moment only the very best attain.
I am not the only one criticising local government inspection.
The Secondary Heads Association shares my view of the system that the Labour party seems to defend.
The general secretary of the association, Mr. John Sutton, in a letter to the Prime Minister on 23
September, said:’ That some reform is necessary is not in dispute.
Schools are very rarely inspected in depth by HMI and there is a need for a more regular and systematic coverage.
LEA inspection has not provided an adequate substitute or back-up for HMI.
This is because: 1.
They have not been co-ordinated with HMI.
2.
The practice and provision has varied very widely across the country.
3.
There have been no agreed criteria or standards.
4.
The overall calibre of inspectors has been poor.
5.
The functions of inspection and advice have been mixed.
6.
Inspectors have been able to control elements of expenditure, although LMS will largely stop this.
7.
Their procedures have not been seen as being as open and impartial as those of HMI.
8.
With individual exceptions, they have lacked the qualities which have been judged praiseworthy in HMI.’
Labour's reaction to that is that local authority inspection should be made the universal norm, with local authorities inspecting the schools which only they are allowed to run.
I cannot think of a recipe for diminution of standards that is more likely to succeed.
The association and others criticise what I describe as independent inspectors, but we can reassure them in the Bill and elsewhere by showing how powerful HMI will be in ensuring that standards are up to the required level.
I do not know whether the hon. Member for Durham, North-West (Ms. Armstrong) on the Opposition Front Bench agrees with such systematic inspection, but if she does, the Labour party is instantly converted to such inspection and reports to parents.
Interruption
There are choices.
The choices are either that local
Mr. Straw
We have already proposed that.
Mr. Clarke
The hon. Gentleman must have proposed it so sotto voce that neither I nor any member of the public has heard his proposal.
His method of expressing himself often has its imperfections.
Ever since I produced my proposals about three months ago, I have thought that he was opposing them.
It is absurd, every time we introduce another element of our policy, for him to leap on to the populist pitch and then, as he no doubt will in a few minutes' time, find some detailed reasons for being opposed to it.
If there is to be local inspection of 6,000 schools a year, there are several choices.
The first is to have it done by local government.
The second is to increase the establishment of HMI so that it employs thousands of people, but I do not believe that a centralised civil service approach is desirable.
The third is the one that we are providing — giving the governors of schools the choice of teams of inspectors, who will be up to the standards required by HMI at the centre.
The most important product of this will be the reports to the parents.
They will get from the inspectors straightforward summaries saying what the strengths and weaknesses of each school are.
They will then get the governors' action plans, which will be the results of all this.
When I say that parents will receive this information, I must make it clear that it will not be available on application to those parents who realise that they can obtain it.
It will be sent unsolicited to all parents, so that there will be a great increase in the information available to them about the school.
Teachers will be praised for their achievements and be given incentives and guidance to improve their performance.
We will build up pride in individual schools on the back of the influence of parents in what those schools are doing.
The Bill will allow for reports, comparative tables and inspectors' reports.
It will increase, as all our policies do, parental influence and parental choice in education on a scale on which we have never previously embarked in state education.
I disregard Labour's attempts to agree with part of this.
As I have said before, I do not believe that a Labour Government would have embarked on any of this.
They would not have challenged any of the interest groups that wish to maintain the status quo.
The Bill will let light into the education world.
Given the reaction that we are getting, it is probably not for us to defend our policy — it is more for the Opposition to tell us how darkness, secrecy and the protection of a closed professional world will serve the public good in education.
I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr. Jack Straw (Blackburn)
We have listened to the Secretary of State speak for an hour and a minute, and during those 61 minutes never once did he utter a word about the central feature of the Bill — the doctrinaire destruction of Her Majesty's inspectorate of schools and the privatisation of the national and local schools inspectorates.
The Conservative party has no mandate for the Bill, which will undermine standards in schools, demoralise the teaching profession and, through the privatisation of the schools inspectorate, deny parents independent information about the education of their children.
It will prevent the taking of prompt action to improve failing schools.
In three successive general election campaigns, the Conservative party has promised higher standards in education.
After 12 years of Tory government, anxiety about standards in schools has never been greater.
Britain lags behind its competitors in every measure and is bottom of the league table.
For four years running, the Government's teachers' pay committee has reported that teachers' morale has never been lower.
Investment in education as a share of national wealth has slumped.
Parents are being forced to pay more and more out of their own pockets for their children's education.
What is the Secretary of State's response to the overwhelming lack of public confidence shown in every test of public opinion about the Government's education policy and his stewardship of it?
It is not to change the policy or feel some humility about 12 years of failure.
Instead, it is to send for the advertising man to produce yet another glossy pamphlet — this time, a parents charter which is allegedly embodied in the Bill.
There is nothing new in the idea of a parents charter.
It is a device which Conservative central office has used twice before when it was in a hole with its education policy.
The spokesman for the Opposition, the then Mr. Norman St. John-Stevas, had one in 1974.
The then Secretary of State, Mr. Mark Carlisle, had another in 1980, but both sank without trace.
The idea of a parents charter is not new; what is new is the brazenness with which the Government play fast and loose, spending taxpayers' money on party political propaganda.
While teachers are underpaid, schools are crying out for repair and children for books, Ministers' standard answer is to say,’ You can't solve problems by throwing money at them.’
However, when it comes to the central problem faced by the Secretary of State and his colleagues — that of being re-elected — their only solution is to throw money at it, providing that it is not their money or that of their supporters but taxpayers' money.
Although the share of national wealth invested in education as a whole has gone down, taxpayer spending on publicity by the Department of Education and Science has risen in real terms since 1979 by no less than 28 times.
This year's spending of £6.5 million is four and a half times the level of two years ago.
The parents charter does not merely inform people of the rights that they already have and which are approved by Parliament, but contains a list of proposals on the privatisation of the inspectorate.
They are highly controversial and cannot come into force until after the next election.
Mr. Martin Flannery (Sheffield, Hillsborough)
It is always sad when someone is driven into a corner and becomes desperate.
The hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth (Mr. Pawsey) thought that no one would have read the report that he quoted.
He did not say where it came from.
It is the editorial from the magazine of the Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association, which has 135,000 members, and it was written by Mr. Peter Smith, the general secretary.
When the hon. Gentleman stoops to taking a few words which are in headlong collision with the view of an entire article, and tries to convey the impression that the article said what he says it said, it is very sad.
It leaves one open to an accusation that we dare not make in this Chamber; otherwise, the hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth would hear me say it.
I had marked another part of that article — not the paragraph that I read in an intervention, which was near the paragraph quoted by the hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth.
Hon. Members should listen to what Mr. Smith said next:
‘The attack upon local education authority inspectorates and advisory services is yet one more example of what has become an obsessive vendetta against local government in all its manifestations.
Proper concern about the need for high quality, value for money public services is becoming the increasingly mindless Orwellian chant of Private sector good, public sector bad.’
That is another paragraph from a report which says the exact opposite of the group of words that the hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth quoted.
I can understand that, because the Bill is so complicated and is born of desperation and stridency, it is difficult to explain, especially for Conservative Members who, only a few months ago, were defending the poll tax and saying how good it was.
The hon. Member for Rugby and Kenilworth stood up and praised it to the heavens — they all did, calling it the flagship of their policy.
Now the flagship has been sunk, more quickly than the Mary Rose, but unlike that ship it will not come up again, even after a few hundred years.
It is gone for ever.
Mr. Alan Amos (Hexham)
I begin by congratulating my right hon. and learned Friend on introducing the Bill which is a logical and sensible next step in the implementation of the citizens charter.
Its two underlying aims are to raise standards and improve the quality of our educational system and also to widen choice which will be an informed choice and, with open enrolment, real and meaningful.
The Assistant Masters and Mistresses Association said:’ We support the broad aims which underly this Bill — improved school inspection arrangements and increased public access to information about the quality of the publicly-funded education service.
We believe that proper steps towards these aims would contribute to securing further improvement in the quality of children's education.’
The National Association of Head Teachers said
Mr. Derek Enright (Hemsworth)
Read the rest.
Mr. Amos
The hon. Member for Sheffield, Hillsborough (Mr. Flannery) read from the same brief.
As he is a natural pessimist and I am a natural optimist, I quoted the good and he quoted only the bad.
Mr. Fatchett
The hon. Gentleman quoted the first paragraph of AMMA's report.
I know that he would not like to do any injustice to the report, but if he were to read the second paragraph, which contains its judgment on the Bill, he might come to a different conclusion.
To put the record straight, I shall read the second paragraph:’ We judge that the provisions of the Bill, as printed, are confused and inadequate for their purposes.
We therefore ask Members to seek very considerable revision to the Bill in Committee, in order to secure more confidently that the reforms will realise their intentions.’
If the hon. Gentleman is to be consistent with his opening sentence in which he quoted AMMA's report, he must proceed to argue — rightly — that the Bill is confused and inadequate for its purposes and he must tell us what revisions he will seek.
If not, I suggest that he withdraws his reference to AMMA.
Mr. Amos
I was a member of AMMA for eight years and I understand its concerns, but I have quoted the brief which shows its support for the Bill's underlying aims.
Therefore, it seems logical to support Second Reading and to debate the details later.
The National Association of Head Teachers said:’ There is undoubtedly a need to improve the regularity of formal school inspections, as well as a strong case for the provision of detailed information about schools to parents.’
That is an example of another highly respected teaching organisation which supports the principles behind the Bill.
Therefore, I assume that the Opposition will want to give the Bill an unopposed Second Reading.
Mr. David Evennett (Erith and Crayford)
I welcome the opportunity to speak in this important debate.
As someone who came through the state school system and benefited from the investment that previous taxpayers spent on our schools, I believe that it is vital that today's children and their parents get value for money from the present state school system.
I believe passionately in the state school system, and I want the very best for our children and our country.
A great deal of work is done in our schools, and we must not underestimate it.
However, there are also many problems.
Despite the vast increases in expenditure on education in real terms recently, the public are not satisfied with the performance of our schools.
Pupils are dissatisfied, and industry and commerce remain somewhat dismayed at the results from our schools.
Therefore, something must be done.
In the past few years, the Government have introduced a number of beneficial educational reforms, which will definitely improve matters.
I believe that the Bill continues that process.
It should and will be welcomed by the vast majority of people, and it proves that the Government are continuing their endeavours to improve our schools and our education system.
The Conservative party believes in choice and opportunity for people in terms of how they spend their money and their time.
We believe in providing people with the opportunity to utilise their talents to the full.
Education is a passport to a full and fulfilling life.
However, in some schools, in some areas, many children are being denied that passport.
That is unacceptable to the Conservative party, and further action must be taken to improve the situation.
I am sure that the Bill will improve the standard and quality of educational provision.
I must preface my remarks about school performance by stating that school provision in general is extremely good in my borough of Bexley.
We have a varied mixture of good schools — grammar, technical, comprehensive and single sex.
We also have a bilateral school in Erith in my constituency.
Therefore, parents in my area have a true choice.
I admit that our schools are so good that parents from neighbouring boroughs such as Greenwich, Lewisham and Bromley want to send children to our schools in Bexley.
My hon. Friend the Minister knows only too well that that desire has caused concern to parents in Bexley.
We have urged him to legislate to reverse the Greenwich judgment, so that priority is again given to children of our borough.
Although I welcome the Bill, I fear that publication of performance tables could make our problems in Bexley worse.
Unless the Greenwich judgment is overturned, parents in Greenwich and other neighbouring boroughs — once they see how good and how well our schools perform — will be even more enthusiastic in their attempts to get places in Bexley schools.
That would be detrimental to children in my constituency, unfair to parents and unacceptable to me.
I hope that the Minister will note that.
On a positive note, I welcome the fact that schools will have to disclose their GCSE and A-level results.
That is a big step forward, because parents will then be able to use examination results to challenge schools to improve.
The educational establishment likes to keep up an old-fashioned mystique on such matters, and I believe that that establishment is one of the problems we face.
It believes that it knows best and what is good for us and for our children.
It believes that it alone can analyse, comment and advise.
It is amazing how dominant the educational establishment has been for so long, which is totally unacceptable.
Today the Opposition revealed themselves as dinosaurs because they acted as mere apologists for the old established order.
Just as the old order has fallen in eastern Europe, so it is falling in educational establishment circles in Britain.
There is a new mood afoot.
Parents will no longer accept being fobbed off by the so-called experts.
After all, parents are concerned about their children.
They have a right in today's society to as much information as is available.
Let us remember that parents are making choices about their children and their future.
They want to know how school examination results compare, about the level of truancy and about the staying-on rate after 16.
Many parents also want to know what pupils do and where they go after leaving school — how many go into further education, to university or into employment.
The facts that will now be provided will give parents the missing information which will allow them to judge a school overall.
Good schools will have nothing to fear.
Weak schools will be encouraged to improve.
Children and education will be the winners.
The idea that information should be hidden from or denied to parents, as apparently advocated today by the hon. Member for Blackburn (Mr. Straw) and the Labour party, is amazing.
It is also insulting to parents.
Mr. Straw rose
Mr. Evennett
I will give way to the hon. Gentleman shortly.
He spoke for a long time.
Most parents of children at poorer schools already know about those schools, though they do not have the information to confront the governors, teachers and heads to urge them of the need to improve the school.
Mr. Straw
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will look at the Official Report tomorrow and tell me where I said that information should be hidden from parents.
At no stage did I say that, nor do we believe it.
Mr. Evennett
The hon. Gentleman implied it in what he said during his very long speech.
Parents need more information about their children.
The jargon, the mystique and the experts have dominated in the recent past.
As a public service, schools should provide each year a written report on each child's progress.
That would be helpful to parents in the task of continuing their children's education at home.
Opposition Members seem constantly to forget that parents, not teachers, are the primary educators of children.
The teacher is the professional, so the teacher should report on the child's progress.
The aim must be to help the child and keep the parents fully informed and advised.
That is why the reports will be most helpful.
Inspection has come in for much discussion today as a major part of the Bill.
Inspection in schools must be considered a vital part of the education system.
It is essential if we are to know how schools, teachers and pupils are progressing, highlighting areas of concern and problems, while praising and congratulating areas where good practice and work is being carried out.
A radical reform of HMI is long overdue.
As a former teacher with a wife who is a teacher, and as one who was a school governor throughout the 1970s and into the early 1980s, I have always been surprised and disappointed at the way in which most schools are infrequently inspected.
Educational fashions change.
Over the years, teaching fashions have changed and have become less formal.
The results were often not good, yet only in a few severe cases did HMI go in and make an impact with its report.
Investigations are not meant to condemn but to evaluate, suggest and recommend.
Yet with such infrequent investigations, there is often considerable disadvantage for the schools and the children.
Four-yearly inspections must be good news; I warmly welcome that part of the Bill.
A result of the Government's proposals will be more inspections and reports.
HMI will still have a vital role to play, despite the remarks of the hon. Member for Blackburn.
Indeed, it will have an enhanced role.
It will have a new independent statutory role, not only to inspect and produce reports, as now, but to advise and monitor the new system for schools with delegated budgets.
There will, of course, continue to be local council inspectors to inspect schools without delegated budgets.
Regrettably, over the years local inspections have varied widely in quality, for many reasons.
But to the Labour party, it seems that the solution always lies in having more ex-teachers, more ex-educationists and more establishment figures who alone, Labour thinks, are capable of doing the necessary inspections in our schools.
I find that view absolutely amazing.
We need a breath of fresh air in school inspections.
We must look at the standards and work in schools from an objective standpoint, and that should involve some outsiders, which means non-educationists, looking, inspecting and reporting.
As I say, we must introduce a breath of fresh air into the inspection system.
So long as HMI monitor and control the standards of the inspections, the changes proposed will bring many positive benefits.
The most important will be better education provision for our children and the nation.
During the last five years, we have highlighted the problems and brought forward many reforms in the schools system, to the benefit of education and the children.
It is vital that our children have the best possible education to allow them not only to have the best possible standard of life and maximise their opportunities, but for the benefit of Britain, so that we can compete in the world in trade and industry.
We must not simply retain the old-fashioned, traditional ways.
It is clear from the remarks of Labour Members that they do not like change, even though they have no ideas about what should be done to improve the education system.
They are mere apologists for the existing system.
They believe that it will be fine so long as more money is put into it.
That is clearly not the solution to the problems of education in Britain.
Over the years, more money has been put into education, but regrettably in certain areas little has been achieved.
More money was spent in ILEA than in any other authority, yet the results were a disaster.
A basic amount of money must be provided, and the Conservatives have put more money than ever in real terms into education.
We need an improved education system, and the Bill will go a long way to achieving that for the benefit of our children.
Mr. John McAllion (Dundee, East)
It is said that those whom the gods wish to destroy, they first make mad, and it is clear that Tory Ministers are mad.
If they seriously believe that in the context of the present constitutional crisis between Scotland and the rest of the United Kingdom they can introduce what are crude and dangerous league tables into Scottish education — and do so by means of a single clause tacked on at the end of an English and Welsh Bill which is otherwise wholly irrelevant to Scotland — they have taken leave of their collective senses.
They will have to pay a further political price for their insensitive treatment of Scotland.
Some hon. Members believe that the Tories have got themselves into a spot of bother in Scotland, and we are not referring to the occasional by-election disaster such as occurred in Kincardine and Deeside recently, or even to the reduction of Scottish Tory representation in the House to the completely inadequate level of nine.
We are talking about a spectacular slide in support for Conservatism in Scotland, which has taken the Tories from the high point of being the majority party in Scotland in the mid-1950s to the point today when they are on the edge of extinction as a serious and significant force in Scotland.
One might think that, in those circumstances, Ministers would begin to ask themselves a few basic questions, such as,’ Where have we gone wrong in Scotland?
What are we doing or not doing in Scotland that is alienating from us our natural Scottish supporters?’
It is not for me to help Scottish Tories in those circumstances, but I suggest to them that it may have something to do with the way in which the Government treat Scotland in legislative terms.
The Government treat Scotland as an afterthought and something to be tacked on at the end when the serious business has already been dealt with.
I can imagine the scenario that must have taken place before the Bill was introduced.
A team of Education Ministers will have been locked up together for days or even weeks on end to thrash out the details of the Bill.
They will have gone into detail about Her Majesty's inspectorate for England and for Wales and about the powers of the chief inspector for England and for Wales.
They will have discussed the supply of information for grant-maintained, state and private schools in England and Wales.
Then, just when they thought that they had finished and were about to leave the room, up pipes a small Scottish voice in the corner which says,’ What about Scotland?’
The Government had forgotten all about Scotland.
The Secretary of State was so ignorant that he believed that the Bill applied to Scotland.
He was unaware that 20 of the 21 clauses and all the schedules had nothing to do with Scotland.
In answer to a question from me, he suggested that the Bill affected all areas of the United Kingdom in the same way, with additional provision for Scotland in clause 17.
He appeared to be completely at sea again when I asked why primary schools in Scotland were excluded from the Bill, and did not seem to know that Scottish primary schools had been excluded.
It is contemptible for a Government to behave in that way about an important and constituent part of the United Kingdom.
They treat Scotland as no more than a mere appendage of England, and seek to impose on Scotland an educational agenda that is irrelevant to the real needs of Scottish education.
Indeed, the Bill is aimed primarily at England, rather than at England and Wales.
The Bill is contemptible in practical terms because, when it is debated in Committee, there may be only one Scottish Member on the Committee.
The Labour party will ensure that Scottish Labour Members are represented, but will the Government ensure that there is Scottish representation in the Conservative party?
The Minister of State, Scottish Office was present during the opening speeches of this debate but he has since disappeared and has not returned since.
Nor is he likely to wind up the debate as I understand that the Under-Secretary of State, the hon. Member for Darlington (Mr. Fallon), or some other English Minister will do so.
In any case, a concurrent Bill will involve the Scottish Office Minister, so there is unlikely to be a Scottish Minister in the Committee.
There are unlikely to be any Scottish Conservative Back Benchers either, not only because there are so few of them but because none of them has participated in this debate, apart from a brief intervention by the hon. and learned member for Perth and Kinross (Sir N. Fairbairn) that could hardly have been described as serious participation.
Mr. Straw
He was drunk.
Mr. McAllion
He may have been drunk, but his participation was not serious.
A Scottish Labour Member could find himself isolated on the Committee and virtually speaking to the walls of the Committee Room, because he will get no reasonable or logical answers from Ministers who have no responsibility for Scottish education and will be unable to deal with the criticisms and questions which that Labour Member may raise.
For the House to deal with Scotland in that manner shows nothing but contempt for Scotland and the Scottish people.
Clause 17 should be dealt with separately, if not by a Bill in its own right then at least by the Scottish Grand Committee, which should sit separately to consider clause 17, as it applies only to our country.
My hon. Friend the Member for Glasgow, Garscadden (Mr. Dewar) will apply for an early sitting of the Scottish Grand Committee to deal with clause 17.
He will have the support not only of Labour Members but of all Scottish Members who are genuinely concerned about Scottish education and keen to see it debated properly in the House.
Like Scottish plays, Scottish clauses will become famous in Westminster and a Scottish clause will now be added to every Bill to deal with Scotland as an afterthought.
Clause 17 provides for the publication of crude league tables showing exam results, truancy rates and the destination of pupils once they have left school in Scotland.
Ministers claim that the clause is designed simply to convey more information to parents and give parents a choice about the educational future of their children.
That is so much bunkum, as every Labour Member knows.
The tables are designed to exclude from comparison all the factors that influence examination results, particularly the social class make-up of a school.
It has long been known in education circles that a clear correlation exists between social class background and examination success.
League tables that do not take that correlation into consideration distort reality and are inaccurate.
The league tables published under the Bill will distort and be inaccurate and, to that extent, they will be useless as a guide to parents on how to choose a school.
Much more important is the use to which those league tables will be put.
Parents will naturally clamour to get their kids into schools at the top of the performance tables.
Those schools will then be in the fortunate position of being able to pick and choose between applicants.
They will be aware that the reason for their educational success in the first place was the high proportion of their intake coming from social classes 1 and 2.
Therefore, they will be predisposed to choose applicants from those social classes, thereby reinforcing their examination success and leading them on to greater success than ever.
The Bill will reinforce the marked differences that now exist between schools in terms of the social class make-up of school populations.
Successful schools will have a higher proportion of pupils from social classes 1 and 2.
Pupil rolls will be full to bursting and staff will be of the highest standard because of the large school rolls.
Additional pupils bring additional resources, which will create yet more success.
The other schools will have fewer pupils from social classes 1 and 2.
Fewer pupils will attend the schools and they will thus have fewer teachers.
The schools will have fewer resources and a narrower range of subject options and, as a result, their relative failure will be reinforced.
The old senior-secondary and junior-secondary divide will be re-established in Scotland, like the old grammar-secondary modern divide that used to exist in England and Wales.
Tory Governments have always been about creating a two-tier educational system.
Mr. Pawsey indicated dissent.
Mr. McAllion
The hon. Gentleman shakes his head in disagreement.
I refer him to a pamphlet that was published in the mid-1980s by an obscure group of Back-Bench MPs called the No Turning Back group.
The pamphlet was called’ Save our Schools’and its authors included the right hon. Member for St. Albans (Mr. Lilley), who is now the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, the hon. Member for Enfield, Southgate (Mr. Portillo), who is now the Minister of State, Department of the Environment, the hon. Member for Gainsborough and Horncastle (Mr. Leigh), who is Under-Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, the hon. Member for Stirling (Mr. Forsyth), who is the Scottish Office education spokesman, the hon. Member for Mid-Worcestershire (Mr. Forth), who is now at the Department of Trade and Industry, the hon. Member for Darlington (Mr. Fallon), who is sitting on the Front Bench now, and the hon. Member for Southampton, Itchen (Mr. Chope), who is now a junior Transport Minister.
The pamphlet described the system of comprehensive education under local education authority control as a’ monolithic system’that was impervious and insensitive to parents.
It said that it was an impossible system, inside which able teachers had become imprisoned — a system that thwarted those who genuinely care about pupils and education.
It referred disparagingly to’ comprehensive conformity’and bemoaned the departure of grammar schools, which it described as having taught rigorously, maintained discipline and specialised in the production of excellence.
That was the attitude of those hon. Members when they were obscure Back Benchers and I am convinced that it remains their attitude now that they are Ministers at the very heart of the Government.
Mr. Fallon
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving way.
May we return to his attitude?
Is he arguing — as he seemed to be before he lurched off into the quotation — that no examination result should be made available to Scottish parents?
Is that the position of the Scottish Labour party as distinct from the English Labour party?
Mr. McAllion
The Minister is naturally anxious to get me off the subject of the’ Save our Schools’campaign, the No Turning Back group and his views on comprehensive education.
I shall answer his question directly: we do not believe that the information should be denied to parents, but we believe that crude performance tables should not be used to distort the choices that parents make between different schools in Scotland, as would be the case if the Bill were implemented.
The Minister's attitude reveals a clear determination to break up the system of comprehensive education in this country and replace it with something different.
EDUCATION (SCHOOLS) BILL [MONEY]
Queen's Recommendation having been signified
Resolved, That, for the purposes of any Act resulting from the Education (Schools) Bill, it is expedient to authorise the payment out of money provided by Parliament of —
a) any sums payable under the Act in respect of the office and functions of Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Schools for England and the office and functions of Her Majesty's Chief Inspector of Schools for Wales;
b) any other expenses incurred by the Secretary of State under the Act; and
c) any increase attributable to the Act in sums payable out of money provided by Parliament under any other Act.
BUSINESS OF THE HOUSE
Ordered, That, at the sitting tomorrow, the Motion in the name of the Prime Minister relating to European Community: The Inter-Governmental Conferences may, notwithstanding the provisions of Standing Order No. 14 (Exempted business), be proceeded with, though opposed, until Midnight.
Trunk Roads (Leicestershire)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Sir John Farr (Harborough)
I am most grateful to have the opportunity to develop once again on the Adjournment the problems associated with trunk roads in Leicestershire.
I am especially grateful to my hon. Friend the Minister for Roads and Traffic, who has paid particular attention to the problem over recent months to try to get things right.
As my hon. Friend may know, three problems concern us.
The first is what is known as the EDDR — the eastern district distributor road.
The second problem is the new proposed Leicester eastern bypass and the third, which concerns me very much, is one of the most important east-west roads in the county — the A427 which runs from Loughborough to Market Harborough.
The eastern district distributor road is part of the relief road system round the city of Leicester.
My hon. Friend, who has been courteous and kind in meeting delegations led by me and by other hon. Members to discuss the problem, has pointed out from time to time that the scheme is the responsibility of the county council.
The county council started the EDDR almost 50 years ago and it is still not finished.
My hon. Friend was kind enough to tell me in answer to a question on the third problem, asking him whether he would make the east-west A427 a trunk road, that it came under the county council's responsibility for bypasses.
Yet in the 20 or so years during which we have been associated with processions and demonstrations about the A427, not a single bypass has been built.
The EDDR was planned and begun more than 50 years ago under the aegis of the county council.
The House and the public at large are entitled to study the performance, or lack of it, of the county council in that respect after 50 years.
From the results on the ground, it seems that there is a great deal left to be desired.
At the present speed of work on the EDDR — when it is finished it will provide much relief for traffic going round the city — the road is unlikely to be completed this millenium.
In other words, it is unlikely to be completed before the year 2000.
The part of the Leicester relief road known as the SDDR — the southern district distributor road — is already discharging traffic on to the A6 at Oadby, a borough in my constituency, to the south of the city.
In fact, the SDDR, upon which work has progressed well and speedily — it is all part of the relief road system round the city — has started to discharge traffic at a great rate on to the A6 at Oadby, which is seeking to percolate further south on the A6 or further east towards the A47.
When the traffic reaches the end of the SDDR at Oadby, there is nowhere else for it to go.
As far as I can see, there is not likely to be anywhere for it to go for the next five or 10 years, except east on the A47 or south on the A6.
There is no connecting link.
Part of the EDDR is missing and that leaves a gap of two or three miles.
As I have said, that stretch of road is not likely to be completed this millenium.
Most of my constituents find it amazing that that part of the road is missing, given that it is a planned and agreed eastern relief road for city traffic.
I say planned and agreed, because, as my hon. Friend the Minister knows, more than one public inquiry has taken place and the go-ahead has been given after all the proper formalities have been gone through.
The EDDR, which is causing so much concern among my constituents, is the last piece of the Leicester ring road.
Nine tenths of the Leicester ring road is finished and has been for some years.
But the remaining tenth, on the eastern side of the city, running from Humberstone to the A6 at Oadby is still held up.
My hon. Friends and I feel justified in asking for a special debate to call attention to the ridiculous fact that, at Humberstone, which is part of the EDDR route, a mile of new road costing £1.5 million has stood finished and unopened for over a year, while the county and city councils argue about a proposed route by the side of the clinic on Scraptoft lane through a recreation area which happens to be owned by the city council.
Meanwhile, the sealed-off stretch is being vandalised while it stands idle.
I find it extraordinary that the EDDR, planned for over 50 years, has been blocked by the city council.
The council built 120 new houses on Goodwood road, which, in my view, should be demolished forthwith.
Many people feel that that constituted a deliberate attempt by the city council to block Goodwood road, even though the council knew that it was part of the long-planned eastern relief road.
That was an ill-advised planning decision by the city council, and questions could well be asked about the considerable waste of public money involved in building the new houses in Goodwood road.
European Social Charter
Mr. Neil Kinnock (Islwyn)
I beg to move, to leave out from’ House’to the end of the Question and to add instead thereof: regrets that Her Majesty's Government's preoccupation with divisions in its own Party has meant that in the Inter-Governmental Conferences it has not taken the negotiating approach necessary to ensure that the United Kingdom exercises decisive influence on the future of the Community in ways which will help to advance the living and working standards of the people of this country in company with other peoples of Europe; calls upon Her Majesty's Government to work for an agreement at the European Council which ensures inclusion of the Social Charter, qualified majority voting on social and environmental matters, powers for the European Parliament to hold the Commission to account in ways that complement the role of national parliaments, decision-making at the level — local, regional, national or Community — where maximum democratic control is at all times exercised, foreign and security policy co-operation without the development of a European Community military role, widening of the Community as rapidly as practicable, co-operation to combat terrorism and other crime, and strengthened powers for ECOFIN as the politically responsible counterpart to any European Central Bank system; and urges the Government to work to secure agreement to, and adopt policies for, high levels of employment, sustainable non-inflationary growth, balanced regional and national economic development and social cohesion, and for the fundamental reform of the CAP, in order to achieve real economic convergence in the years leading to economic and monetary union and a single currency as the essential foundation for those changes and to safeguard the long-term interests of the people of the United Kingdom. '.
The background to this debate, and clearly the cause of this debate, involves the great change — or different kinds of change — taking place across the continent of Europe and within the European Community.
The basic question at issue in the debate is whether the United Kingdom is to be carried along in the wake of those changes or to be a driving force for change.
It is essential that our country takes a lead.
That is the only way to exert the decisive influence over the direction and nature of the economic, political and social development under way in Europe.
The British people know that; they are well aware of the dangers of Britain being in a second division in Europe, and they do not want to be left behind.
The need for an active and positive approach to change is well understood by Governments in the rest of the Community.
They recognise the reality of the economic interdependence that now exists and which will be intensified by the completion of the single market.
As a result, they are determined to build on that interdependence by moving towards economic and monetary union.
They are clear about their objectives; they know what they want.
This Government most certainly are not clear.
’ As so often in the past, our Government are stuck in the defensive mud.
Grabbing a begrudged compromise here; clutching an opt-out clause there.
Devoting maximum diplomatic effort to dilution and delay.
This is a dreary, demeaning and ultimately self-defeating posture.
It is playing for a draw.’
I am grateful to the Daily Mail for that accurate description of the Government's attitude.
It is not good enough for our country to have a Government who are playing for a draw.
It became clear as the Prime Minister's speech progressed that that is precisely the most that he is playing for.
The country cannot be properly served by a Government who pretend that they can somehow call a halt to or defer the agreed purpose of the rest of the Community.
As the right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe) advised everyone in the Financial Times last week,’ There is nothing to prevent a group of countries pressing on with a separate Treaty The fact is that we cannot, even if we wished, stop the others going ahead.’
The Government must face that reality and its implications squarely, but they have not.
They must stop trying to persuade themselves or the country that some sort of semi-detached arrangement can be made that will serve Britain's interests — there is no such arrangement.
Anyone who thinks there is should simply consider what our country's position would be if our neighbours and trading partners formed a monetary union and, even though economic convergence had been achieved, Britain stayed outside.
The Prime Minister refused to answer that question, which was asked by the hon. Member for Glasgow, Govan (Mr. Sillars).
The implications of the Government staying out of a union when they had decided, on the basis of convergence, to form one, are serious and potentially disastrous.
More immediately, before those years pass and there is any immediate prospect of monetary union, it must be recognised how vulnerable Britain would be if the Government's strategy were to avoid commitment to the process under way in the European Community.
That is not a theoretical matter, but a practical issue.
If a British Government continued, as a matter of policy, to stand apart from the process, would inward investors who need access to markets of the whole community think of locating in a semi-detached country?
The Prime Minister referred to Nissan at Sunderland.
Everyone in the House must want further inward investment and the development that comes with it.
In the intervening period between Maastricht and the further stages, the Prime Minister and the Government must face the fact that, if they are standing apart, they will put a question mark over the prospect of further investment and further development.
Mr. Robert Adley (Christchurch)
The right hon. Gentleman spoke a short while ago of consistency and clarity.
A few seconds ago, he mentioned inward investment and a Japanese company.
I do not recall that that was always his keenest and most enthusiastic point.
In 1972, when he and I were both in the House, I voted in favour of the European Communities Bill, as it then was, and the right hon. Gentleman voted against it.
In 1974, I opposed the referendum on Europe when he was in favour of it.
Will the right hon. Gentleman give the House one example —
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is making an intervention, not a speech.
Mr. Adley
Will the Leader of the Opposition give the House one example of one major issue since 1970 to this very afternoon on which he has not changed his mind, purely for the electors' convenience, that relates to the European Community?
Mr. Kinnock
Immediately the hon. Gentleman and I entered the House — on the same day — I formed the view that he was a jerk, and I still hold that view.
Hon. Members
Withdraw!
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let us settle down.
This is a very important debate that is being listened to outside the House.
I am not sure
Hon. Members
’ Withdraw.’
Mr. Speaker
whether’ jerk’is an entirely parliamentary expression.
I have heard worse things here.
Perhaps the right hon. Gentleman will refine his reference to the hon. Gentleman.
Mr. Kinnock
The question to which the Government must respond —
Hon. Members
Withdraw.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
This gives a very bad impression to those outside the House.
Mr. Ivor Stanbrook (Orpington)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
Is it in order to insult an hon. Member by calling him a jerk?
Mr. Speaker
I have just said that I think that’ jerk’is not among the list of unparliamentary expressions but I asked the Leader of the Opposition to refine it.
Perhaps he will now do so.
Mr. Kinnock
Thank you, Mr. Speaker.
The question that the Government must answer
Hon. Members
’ Withdraw.’
Mr. Kinnock
if they are to maintain their position — If the Tory party demonstrates its great nervousness by its attempts to disrupt, the whole country will form an accurate opinion —
Interruption
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Let the House settle down.
I said to the Leader of the Opposition that’ jerk’is not on the list of unparliamentary expressions but, bearing in mind the nature of this debate, it would help the House if he refined what he has said in the interests of good order.
Mr. Kinnock
I respect you, Mr. Speaker, and I respect the House.
If the hon. Member for Christchurch (Mr. Adley) is offended, though I doubt it, I withdraw any offence.
The question that the Government must answer is whether, if they were to maintain their stand-back attitude and what they call their options, British investors — not simply inward investors — who want to sell their produce throughout the Community and the rest of Europe would give priority to investing and developing in Britain when they had every reason to believe that the Government were ever ready to withdraw from the European process.
That is the real problem.
Mr. Terry Dicks (Hayes and Harlington)
Get on with it.
Mr. Kinnock
The hon. Gentleman has an incurable problem, so I cannot help him.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer (Mr. Norman Lamont)
The House will be grateful to the right hon. Gentleman, because he has been making a clear statement and drawing a clear distinction between the two sides of the House.
May we take it from what he has said that he is saying definitely that he would be prepared at Maastricht to make an irrevocable commitment to a single currency?
That is what he is saying.
Mr. Kinnock
I am coming to that precise point.
It is interesting that the Chancellor should anticipate it, and I am sure that he will find the answer very satisfactory indeed.
He will also discover that my desire — indeed, my absolute commitment — to ensuring that the House has a proper decision to make at any stage of development in the EC is at least equal to his.
Interruption
Mr. Speaker
Order.
Will Conservative Members now please settle down?
The Prime Minister was heard in silence, and I expect the same courtesy to be extended to the Leader of the Opposition.
Mr. Kinnock
The problem of the Government demonstrating a commitment to the continuing process in the EC is highlighted by the so-called opt-out clause.
I understand that the Prime Minister wants to call it the opt-in clause.
That is an interesting literary distinction, but I do not think that it is much more than that.
As there is no possibility of any Government in the Community, certainly no British Government and certainly no Labour Government, not referring to their Parliament for a mandate before taking a step into entering monetary union, the opt-out clause simply codifies what will happen in any case, I believe, in every single one of the European Community democracies.
If that clause was taken to be a definition of the Government's position and repeatedly referred to as an escape route, which appears to be the intention, it would fundamentally undermine confidence in the Government's commitment to the European process.
It would be a deterrent to investment and a disincentive to industrial development.
That is a matter of basic practical issues, of jobs and of prosperity.
Opting out would mean losing out.
That is not an issue for some distant day in 1996 or 1998.
Mr. Norman Lamont
I assure the right hon. Gentleman that what he has said is not correct.
Other countries are prepared to give a commitment that they will move to a single currency without reference back to their domestic Parliaments.
We are not prepared to do that, and that provision will not be in the treaty unless we ask for it.
Is the right hon. Gentleman saying that he would give a commitment on any terms less than those that we are prepared to give?
That is a question that he has not answered.
Mr. Kinnock
I would not be giving evidence of bad faith by looking for an opt-out clause — and the reason is that, unlike the Prime Minister, I do not have to try to patch my party together.
The issue of the strength of the Government's commitment to the process is not one to be kept until 1996 or 1998, but must be faced by the Government now — not with devices to mollify the rival factions in the Conservative party, but with a determination to promote the opportunities for, and the living and working standards of, the people of this country.
Mr. John Butterfill (Bournemouth, West)
Will the right hon. Gentleman allow me to intervene?
Mr. Kinnock
No, I will not give way.
There have been a few interventions.
The divisions in the Conservative party have already undermined the Government's position in their negotiations at the intergovernmental conferences.
Every other Government in the European Community know that, for months past, the British Government's negotiating energies have been directed not at shaping the future of the Community but at papering over the cracks in the Tory party.
The Prime Minister must, even at this late date, put country before party.
In the 20 negotiating days that remain before Maastricht, the Prime Minister must work for a treaty that will serve the best interests of Britain, and in doing so serve the wider interests of the Community.
The right hon. Gentleman can do that by negotiating a more practical approach to the co-ordination of economic policies within the European Community.
Would it be right to conclude from the Prime Minister's remarks about the limitations on deficits that he completely rejects the 3 per cent.
limit?
Would it be right to conclude from his remarks also that in place of the stipulations that exist — which are much too rigid and impractical to be accepted — he would allow the co-ordination of deficits by the market?
Would it not then be the case that the market would have a form of control — indeed, sovereignty — that would not work to the advantage of the Community generally or of Britain specifically?
It would be useful if the Prime Minister intervened to tell the House precisely what formula he had in mind for the limitation of fiscal deficits.
In a reply to me in July, the Prime Minister recognised that there was a need to achieve’ flexibility’in responding to changing economic circumstances.
Is that what he has been seeking to negotiate in the references that he made to the limitations on deficits?
There is widespread interest in that aspect, and I am sorry that the Prime Minister does not take this opportunity to make clear what should be a very straightforward point.
The Prime Minister
I have done so already, expressly and explicitly, in my speech — as the right hon. Gentleman would know if he had listened.
Mr. Kinnock
I am sorry, but the Prime Minister — I am sure without any intention — is not right about the way that he expressed himself on that point.
However, the House will have further opportunities during the debate to clarify that important point.
The Government should be negotiating on the basic question of the European central bank, to ensure that, in the Prime Minister's words to me,’ a European central bank would be accountable to a directly elected body.’
I understand that the Government have not been negotiating for that.
They should have been negotiating over the location of the European monetary institute and of a subsequent European central bank in the City of London, but they have never even raised those questions, despite the fact that, of all the countries of the European Community, the location of the central bank has much the greatest importance for Britain.
Our economy has a substantial financial services sector, which would be greatly disadvantaged if the central bank were located anywhere in the Community other than in this country and in London.
The Government should be fighting hard, especially given the importance to the economy generally, and of jobs in particular, to ensure that the bank's location is established even as the European monetary institute is established.
Above all, the Prime Minister and the Government should be negotiating for the inclusion of a wider and more positive concept of economic convergence in the treaty than any that has yet emerged.
As the Prime Minister said,’ convergence would certainly mean bringing the European economies closer together.’
He meant in regard to’ growth’and’performance’, as well as in regard to ’inflation’and’fiscal deficits’.
I agreed with that definition when the Prime Minister offered it in the House in July.
That is the position from which he should be negotiating, but he has not started to do so yet.
The treaty definition of convergence is, of course, of crucial importance to the whole process of monetary union.
The Government should be negotiating to gain full recognition of the fact that monetary union and a single currency could work successfully only if there were convergence in the real economic performance of countries: convergence in terms of growth and employment, as well as in terms of inflation and interest rates.
No one can be satisfied with the present position.
British and German inflation rates have moved together, but the German economy is growing at a rate of 3.5 per cent., while the British economy is in recession and shrinking by 2.5 per cent .
Real convergence would mean similar and sustained growth rates, as well as similar inflation rates.
If that real convergence is to be achieved, it will be necessary for the Community and member states to have worked out, and agreed to implement, regional and structural policies that — in the words of the draft treaty —’ promote balanced development’; but the Prime Minister is not negotiating for that either.
Real convergence of economic performance, accountability of institutions and active policies for balanced development are the essential ingredients that will be required to make a single currency practical and beneficial.
Mr. Nigel Forman (Carshalton and Wallington)
The right hon. Gentleman has just mentioned balanced economic and social development, and his amendment refers to’ social cohesion’.
Is he aware that some EC partner states want mechanisms for cohesion to be written into the text of the treaties that may be signed after Maastricht?
What is his party's attitude to that idea?
Mr. Kinnock
I understand that the Spanish have made a specific point of seeking to ensure that outcome.
On the basis of recent information, I am able to distinguish between their insistence at this point and a useful negotiating ploy.
The hon. Gentleman would be well advised to pay some regard to the settlement of next year's budget, and to set arguments for including specific references to social cohesion in the Maastricht treaty in the context of the bargaining that that budget will involve.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer has recognised the importance of convergence.
Last Thursday, he said on television:’ If that convergence is not achieved then the establishment of a (single) currency could be a tremendous dislocation and be at tremendous cost.’
The right hon. Gentleman was, of course, absolutely right; but he went on to say:’ We ought to wait and see if this convergence happens’.
There you have it, Mr. Speaker.
From the man who told us that unemployment was a price well worth paying, we now have the strategy for the 1990s —’ wait and see’.
The Wilkins Micawber of 11 Downing street tells us to wait and see.
No other Government in the European Community are taking such a supine attitude to the need to secure convergence.
Mr. Peter Shore (Bethnal Green and Stepney)
My right hon. Friend has made a number of important points about the changes that will be necessary if European monetary union is not to do the country enormous damage.
Can he assure us that he would not be prepared to support the present EMU treaty, which does not contain the provisions and safeguards that he has mentioned?
Can he confirm that he does not merely wish to have a treaty that does not currently exist?
Mr. Kinnock
The unfortunate fact that my right hon. Friend must recognise is that the current treaty has been negotiated by the current Government, who do not share our sense of priorities.
I can tell him that, if we had been involved in the process during the years in which this Government were involved, proper priority would have been given to the very stipulations that we laid down some time ago about convergence, the accountability of institutions and the need for a change in regional and structural funding — as well as several other considerations, some of which are now contained in article 2 of the treaty.
Given my right hon. Friend's well-known views and his desire to protect the interests of the British people, I am sure that he would have found his part in the process very satisfying.
The Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs (Mr. Douglas Hurd)
Surely the right hon. Gentleman realises what nonsense he is talking.
If he had been in charge, we would have been out of the Community, because that was the basis of his election campaign.
Mr. Kinnock
If Britain follows the policies and approaches set out by the right hon. Gentleman, it will be in the second division in the Community.
To illustrate that point, let me remind the right hon. Gentleman of what his right hon. Friend the Chancellor said:’ wait and see if this convergence happens.’
That is not being said by any other country or Government in the Community.
Other countries are not saying,’ Let us wait and see if convergence happens; let us wait and see whether performance improves.’
They are saying,’ Let us get on with building economic strength and working actively to secure convergence.’
That is what we in Britain must do: we must catch up, and then we must compete effectively as we have not done since the present Government came to office.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Members who are rising are on the list of those wishing to speak in the debate.
It will not make it very easy for them to be called if they seek to interrupt now.
Sir Geoffrey Howe (Surrey, East)
I begin by joining my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) in lending my full support to the Prime Minister in everything that he said, and in giving my full support to the motion — although I fear that my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley and I may not be able to agree on other matters, with which I shall deal later.
The Prime Minister's speech was as comprehensive as it was meticulous, and well reflected the balance of the motion.
It deserves the wholehearted support of the entire House.
The only thing that makes me doubt that is that the general proposition underlying it appears to have received some incoherent support from the Leader of the Opposition.
If anything could have frightened us away from the proposition it would have been the failure of the Leader of the Opposition to advance a sensible argument on anything at all.
I cannot imagine what comfort that gives the right hon. Gentleman's party.
Underlying the debate, a number of ancient fallacies have begun to re-emerge in this country and elsewhere.
One that keeps recurring is that the Community to which we still belong remains an economic community, devoted only to economic objectives.
That was never its purpose.
It was one of the great post-war institutions whose central purpose was political — to put an end to the frightful nationalistic quarrels which had for decades, indeed centuries, seen the people of Europe tearing each other to pieces and spreading havoc far and wide.
The Community has gone a long way towards achieving that central purpose; towards taming nationalism without suppressing patriotism; towards sharing sovereignty without destroying nations; and towards putting the magic of markets to work for society in a stable democratic setting.
In that way it has used economic means to promote the central political objective of’ ever closer union among the people of Europe’.
That was at the heart of the process at the outset, and it remains so.
The next fallacy that causes some confusion in the discussion is the persistence of what I regard as a narrow outdated approach to the notion of sovereignty.
Such an approach was repudiated by Harold Macmillan, the then Prime Minister, when we applied to join the Community, as it had been by Winston Churchill before that.
That idea is that sovereignty is something to be guarded, preserved and held in splendid isolation, the idea that we must always think of sovereignty as something that we are required to hand over, required to lose, to surrender or to sacrifice — conceding, in the words of my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley, powers demanded by the Community.
That strikes me as an unduly negative approach.
Sovereignty is not an undivided thing.
If it were, the only ruler who was absolutely sovereign and monarch of all he surveyed was Robinson Crusoe.
But he was sovereign of everything and master of nothing.
There is a great confusion involved in regarding sovereignty as in some way akin to virginity —’ Now you have it, now you don't.’
It is not a zero sum game, or some kind of single-entry book-keeping exercise, related to’ graph-paper economics’.
Sovereignty is an asset to be used, deployed, exploited, committed and joined in partnership with that of others.
I make no apology for reminding the House of the quotation from Sir Winston Churchill upon which I drew last year:’ It is said with truth that this involves some sacrifice or merger of national sovereignty.
But it is also possible and not less agreeable to regard it as the gradual assumption by all the nations concerned of that larger sovereignty which can alone protect their diverse and distinctive customs and characteristics and their national traditions.’
That is a more positive and valuable view of sovereignty.
The historic deepening process of the Community was foreseen from the outset, which is why those who commended it to the country 20 or 30 years ago took care to see that it was not misunderstood.
Harold Macmillan, at the time of the 1962 party conference at Llandudno, when he applied to join the Community, described it as’ perhaps the most fateful and forward-looking policy decision in our peacetime history.’
And so it remained.
’ Ever closer union’is an objective which has been reaffirmed and defined time after time in successive meetings of the European Council.
I remember that at the first European Council which my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley and I attended together, in Stuttgart, it was reaffirmed as a clear objective.
The Single European Act in 1985 reaffirmed the need to make concrete progress towards European unity in accordance with the Stuttgart declaration.
There has always been a temptation to regard the successive recommitments to the central political purpose of the Community as being confined to the small print, to be accepted only through gritted teeth and only on our terms.
But it was never thus.
It was always part of the process whose importance was made clear at the outset.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath) echoed Harold Macmillan's theme when he spoke to the House on 28 October 1971:’ I cannot over-emphasise the importance the scale and quality of the decision whether we are going to decide that Western Europe should now move along the path to real unity our decision tonight will vitally affect the sort of world in which we British people and many generations to come will live their lives’.
It was more than an event; it was the start of a process.
It is a fallacy to regard that process as some kind of negative slippery slope along which each reluctant step should be seen as more sinful than the last.
That negative, apprehensive, fearful, even sometimes hostile tone with which some Euro-sceptics approach and discuss the question is wholly contrary to the best interests of Britain.
Those who most confidently claim to speak for British interests sometimes seem to have the least confidence that those interests are likely to prevail.
All too often they see the European enterprise as one huge thicket of hostility and conspiracy.
They far too seldom see it as a field in which British talents and interests can prevail and multiply.
We need to see the process as a series of opportunities to be exploited and carried forward in good faith.
Dr. David Owen (Plymouth, Devonport)
I am a lifetime supporter of British membership of the European Community, but I have never believed that that support implies acceptance of a united states of Europe.
The Social Democratic party will support the Prime Minister's motion.
We believe that it represents the best way forward, not just for this country but for Europe.
I wish that we had been able during the last few months to persuade our European colleagues that we are not arguing just for a narrow British position.
I want a common foreign policy and a common defence policy.
I want the maximum degree of unity, but I also want a treaty to be constructed that carries no inexorable commitment to a united states of Europe.
We cannot stop our European partners arguing for a united states of Europe.
They are entitled to do that in a free European democracy, but we are entitled to hold our ground and to argue that we as a nation were never committed to a united states of Europe in 1973, that we are not committed to it now and that we do not intend to pre-empt that decision.
The former Prime Minister, the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs.
Thatcher), was in danger of being, like a tram, stuck in a groove.
She referred to the debate on Jacques Delors proposals in 1989.
They were anathema to all of us.
They sought to impose a single currency on all Community states.
We do not sufficiently realise that we are no longer discussing a treaty that, like a tree, has grown only from the trunk of the European Commission, the European Parliament and the treaty of Rome.
We are now discussing treaties that are based on three or four separate pillars.
I accept that all aspects relating to the single market fall under the treaty of Rome and carry a commitment to more powers for the European Commission and the European Parliament.
We cannot interpret the single market as narrowly as some Conservative Members of Parliament.
It embraces social factors and the environment.
It will pay us to recognise that.
The right hon. Member for Finchley was right to concede majority voting so that the single market could be in operation by 1993.
Those of us who desperately want Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary to be admitted to the European Community during this decade, with the transition over by the year 2000 before they are economically ready for it, have to accept that majority voting will be needed if the single market is to be operational in former command communist economies.
It is geopolitically essential that we put Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia and Austria before Sweden, Finland and Norway in terms of membership.
An exact parallel can be drawn with Spain, Portugal and Greece when they were admitted early for political and democratic reasons.
When I look at the European Community I see foreign policy and internal security pillars and ask myself how well the Government have been able to keep them purely intergovernmental and how many commitments we are making that will damage British interests in the future.
My major concern about the Maastricht negotiations relates to the limited majority decision making envisaged for foreign policy.
I do not see how we can separate principle from practice, policy from implementation.
I beg the Foreign Secretary to look again at this issue with the utmost scepticism.
I understand the intention — of wanting to try to make a conciliatory gesture — but this could be the thin end of a very dangerous wedge.
The Prime Minister's formulation is that it is for the other 11 member states now to demonstrate to us in watertight treaty terms that the right of all member states to determine their own foreign policies is not being abandoned or abdicated.
I say that for another reason.
I still have grave doubts as to whether it is right to go for a single currency, fixed exchange rates and the whole of that considerable abdication of political sovereignty.
I recognise, however, that sovereignty, as with most other things, moves with the times.
It may be considered to be a vital British interest that we are not on the outside of the single currency in five years' time.
That judgment will have to be made at that time.
I do not know how we can make that judgment until we have seen the texture of the decision that we are being asked to make.
One thing, however, is clear.
We cannot have a single currency, a single immigration policy, a single foreign policy and a single defence policy without being a united states of Europe.
If we go for a single currency because we wish to protect, above all, the position of the City of London — still the premier financial centre of Europe — and if we also concede ground on foreign policy, in terms of majority decision making, and on defence policy by creating effectively a defence community, and if we allow the Commission to issue visitors' visas, we shall be on a slippery slope.
This House would then resist even more the move towards a single currency than it might otherwise have done.
That is the advantage of postponing the decision on a single currency.
We should not find it easy to go for a single currency if we had already moved down the federalist route in a dangerous way on foreign and defence policies.
It is in the interests of this country, therefore, to stand firmer now on foreign policy than appears to be the Government's position.
Frankly, I do not believe that there should have been all this talk about a little bit of majority voting on foreign policy.
It would be better if the Government made concessions in other areas.
I know that it will be difficult.
Some of them may involve social policies; others may involve environmental policies on which we shall have to give ground during the next 10, 15 or 20 years.
It is essential, however — if we do not want a united states of Europe to retain the right, within a co-operative framework to try to forge a consensus on foreign policy — to make our own decisions.
The treaty on foreign policy carries with it more than a commitment to co-ordinate our policies.
That can lead only to a number of results.
It means that Britain will no longer have a permanent presence in the Security Council in 10 or 15 years' time.
It also means that there will be occasions when decisions cannot be taken, such as that taken by the former Prime Minister at Aspen, with President Bush, to put troops into Saudi Arabia.
Such decisions will not be able to be made by a single Prime Minister without reference back.
The present Prime Minister would be unable to come out of No. 10 Downing street and say,’ We are standing by the constitution of the USSR and we condemn the coup as unconstitutional.’
That was quite different from what was said by President Mitterrand and Chancellor Kohl.
If we value independence in foreign policy making, let us not forget what happened in 1940.
If we want to have that freedom again — to stand out against the trend and, if necessary, to be on our own — then I pray that the Government will look hard at the question of retaining the right of a single foreign policy, with the decisions made by this country alone.
In that context — I do not know what Labour Members are saying.
All I know is that the Labour Government, who were in favour of the European Community, did not need any convincing that they were not in favour of a federalist united states of Europe.
The danger is the convert being more zealous than the Pope in suddenly believing that we can abdicate on all issues of policy.
If the Labour party is abdicating the right to retain foreign and defence policy in this country, it is not speaking for the country, and the Government will exploit that against it in the next general election.
Interruption
Mr. Alistair Burt (Bury, North)
I make no secret of my gratitude for being a member of a fortunate generation who have not been called on to fight in Europe.
There are coats of arms all around the Chamber of hon. Members who gave their lives for peace in Europe.
I thank those who fought for that gift and who built the lasting institutions of NATO and the European Community from the ruins of 1945.
We should never forget their origins, nor the driving force among continental Europeans who suffered occupation and war on their soil.
The driving force of a European structure that would end the fear of war on the continent is sometimes not fully understood in these islands.
As my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe) said, the Community is a living thing.
It has advanced at the pace of its peoples and must continue to do so.
Maastricht is a further part of that evolution — not the end of it.
Historically, it is less significant than the passing of the Single European Act in 1986.
My hopes for Maastricht are twofold.
Firstly, I hope that we shall use Maastricht to reiterate our concerns about what is wrong with the European Community.
The Commission is outside a sensible structure of democratic accountability and has shown a tendency to impose a Euro-synthesis at micro-level — silly proposals for the nooks and crannies of our life that antagonise the man and woman in the street.
Sadly, that insensitivity to national sympathies undermines the fundamental principles of European co-operation and has helped to build a stronger anti-European feeling in this country than is truly justified.
We are right, therefore, and are acting in the best interests of the Community and this country, to seek to correct such unnecessary Commission interference by expanding the role of the European Parliament.
I hope, too, that we can convince our neighbours about the sensitivity of time.
The past 45 years are but a fraction of more than 2,000 years of recorded European civilisation, yet we have achieved much.
There is no need to settle the final irrevocable shape of Europe at Maastricht.
Indeed, there may never be such a thing.
Forcing nations together too quickly risks undermining the progress that we have made.
We seem to be more alert to that than many others; hence our firm determination, which was re-emphasised by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister this afternoon, to make subsidiarity work.
That must be the right way to progress.
Secondly, I wish to see our participation at Maastricht emphasising and improving those matters on which the Community is going in the right direction.
It would be a tragedy, as some have argued, to see the door closed on closer economic convergence with the prospect of a single European currency at the end of it.
I do not believe that our European neighbours will hang back from this for long.
They have, on the whole, run fairly successful economies since the 1950s or since their accession to the Community.
They firmly believe that greater economic rigour, based, it must be said, broadly on Conservative principles, will continue that prosperity.
They have some claim to know what they are doing.
Should it be proved to the satisfaction of the House that the benefits that I have described will accrue, any decision to stay outside would be of immense disadvantage to us.
Foreign investors would see us not as the launch pad to Europe but as some backwater.
For those whom we represent — for their employment, standards of living and the standards of their families — those should be the major guides to our thinking on Europe.
I hope that we shall make progress, along the cautious lines suggested by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister this afternoon, on a common foreign and defence policy.
The right hon. Member for Yeovil (Mr. Ashdown) was right in his analysis of Yugoslavia nations forced together ultimately come apart.
But those that come together for mutual support can and do survive.
The real genie that has emerged from the bottle of a changing Europe is nationalism.
What structure can be devised to contrain the pressures and forces behind that?
Are we truly prepared to offer no model of co-operating nations sinking their differences to achieve greater security, or are we prepared to live with a Europe that is increasingly fragmented, where nations' first demand on sovereignty is to equip themselves with weapons to tackle or to defend themselves from new nations on their own borders that have the same heightened state of frenzy and determination to do the same?
We cannot be sanguine about the emergence of nationalism and the fragmentation of Europe.
The European Community could provide a structure for people to bury their differences, not their dead.
At the end of the debate, the House will give its support for the Prime Minister carrying on playing a full part in European evolution — an evolution about which we have been too hesitant for too long.
For too long, we have been hidebound by fears borne of self-selected memories and infused by a false jingoism — a vision of Europe in which Britain sees itself surrounded solely by enemies and not friends.
Mr. Tim Devlin (Stockton, South)
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Bury, North (Mr. Burt), I am a member of the youngest age group in the House.
Like my hon. Friend, I want to concentrate on the future rather than the past 20 years.
The arguments that were current in 1973 about our membership of the Community have been rehearsed over and over again today in the same vein.
The important thing that we must do is look ahead 20 years to the time when those of us who are, I hope, still active in politics will be asked difficult questions.
We will be asked why the House diverted its attention towards those sceptics who persuaded us to shy away from an agreement at Maastricht.
We will be asked why we did not see the importance of the emerging European bloc on our doorstep.
We will be asked why, given the evidence of the time, when EFTA and the east European countries were queueing up to join the tighter Community that was being proposed, we allowed ourselves to be left outside.
People will ask why, given the importance of the single market to our high-volume, low-cost producers and the importance of our country — as a member of the Community — to the companies of the United States and Japan who have invested so heavily with us, we did not grab with both hands the opportunities that the Maastricht summit offered to fashion the Community to our advantage in the future.
Surely people will ask us why, in 1991, we did not recognise young people's aspirations to travel and work abroad.
They will want to know why we did not appreciate the inconvenience and stupidity of having to change currency constantly as one moved from country to country in the Community.
Given the history of European developments in the past 20 years, those people will also want to know why we did not learn from Britain's earlier mistake.
They will want to know why we did not join the Community at its inception and fashion the very fabric of it to our advantage.
We now have the opportunity to do that.
I agree with my hon. Friend the Member for Esher (Mr. Taylor) that other countries are offering to help us to use their sovereignty in a way that will benefit us in the future.
It is no coincidence or mistake that it was the Conservative party that applied to take Britain into the Community, and which took Britain in.
It is no coincidence that it was a Conservative Government under my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) who signed the Single European Act and joined the exchange rate mechanism.
It is not a mistake that all that happened as a result of Conservative policy, because the Conservative party has consistently been dedicated to raising the living standards and the material prosperity of our people.
That is why we have consistently adopted a pro-European stance.
We are following the commitment that we gave in 1973 to ever closer union, so why are we now beginning to get cold feet?
Surely the House appreciates that some problems go beyond national frontiers, particularly those affecting pollution and international trade.
Our ability to negotiate a better deal for our people can only be strengthened by ever greater co-operation with other countries.
Young people look forward to co-operation, and aspire to building something good for the future.
They are not looking back at what happened in the past.
A question that has still not been answered at any point during the debate was asked by my hon. Friend the Member for Buckingham (Mr. Walden): what happens if the other countries go ahead without us?
No one has given a satisfactory answer to that.
We have heard some fine arguments about sovereignty, but sovereignty falls into two categories.
First, there is legal sovereignty — the legal right to do as we please.
Secondly, there is real sovereignty — the real ability to do as we wish.
That is what the argument is really about.
I hope that this debate will be about the valuable contribution that Britain can make to the European community, rather than a sterile argument about whether the king's prerogatives will be taken over by the Government and given away in the face of the people.
Britain has one last chance to ensure that it is part of the considerations in the emerging power block.
It has a chance to influence that power bloc, democratise its institutions, correct the many faults in the present European community institutions, bring the new financial centre to London, and ensure that the bloc is a benign institution, shouldering world problems and finding aid and defence solutions to them.
The biggest mistake that we have made so far is the one that critics of the European Community so often turn against us — the fact that we were absent when the common agricultural policy was established.
For all those who sit on European committees, the CAP is the main criticism that we have of the Community's work.
The way in which some of the subsidies work is ludicrous, but had we been there at the beginning, we might have been able to reform it so that it could work to our advantage.
It is interesting that Britain and Denmark — the two most recent members — have been in the forefront of its reform.
Under the Administration of my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley, Britain regained her pre-eminence in world affairs.
However, we have a long and enduring experience of wider responsibility in the world.
We have taken on UN commitments to Kuwait and initiated efforts on behalf of the Kurds.
Even now, a former Member of this House leads the European peace efforts in Yugoslavia, a conflict into which the European Community has been drawn because of its geographical position and economic strength.
As yet, it does not have the power to solve it.
In the 1990s, we approach a new world in which the old cold war of the two super-powers has given way to three emerging super-power economic blocs: North America, South-East Asia and Europe.
Some issues can be tackled only at a European level.
They include the control of inflation and the provision of sound economies, because we have such interrelated and interacting economies.
They also include the control of environmental pollution, and we could benefit greatly through co-operating further on defence and foreign policy.
Britain could have much more clout with the combined power of our neighbours than as an individual country.
I believe that the British people look forward to greater development within the Community because they want the material benefits that that may bring.
Naturally, they are worried that the Queen's head may disappear from our currency, but if we had economic and monetary union, as we have with Scotland, nothing would stop us providing different notes, even with a different name, provided that they had fixed values that were easily exchangeable.
Although people are concerned about the democratic deficit, their biggest worry is that they will not have the power to remove unelected bureaucrats in Europe.
Therefore, they need the democratic powers and the rights of the European Parliament to be developed to ensure that those who are elected can be called to account.
I do not approach this question thinking only about how we shall hand ancient privileges over to foreigners.
Like many people who promote the European Community in this country, I promote it because I see enormous financial, economic and environmental advantages for our country.
It is essential, therefore, that the Prime Minister should sign an agreement in Maastricht.
I strongly urge him to do so, if he can reach a sensible and reasonable compromise.
I do not for one minute believe that we shall hand over everything that this country has ever stood for in terms of its independence.
Rather, I see the process as continuing way into the future — a process in which Britain must play a leading and important part.
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
As a good European, I attended a conference of Anglo-German parliamentarians earlier this year in Germany.
A British Conservative MP — a great Euro-enthusiast — addressed the conference on what he called’ the British problem’.
He explained the British problem to the Germans by saying that the British people had been lied to — they had not been told the truth about what used to be called the Common Market and is now called the European Community.
He said that there was no full-hearted consent originally and that the 1972 White Paper presented by the right hon. Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath) explained that essential sovereignty would not be eroded.
He said that in 1975 we had a referendum in which it was suggested that it was an economic and trade rather than a political matter.
He referred to the fact that the Government of the day distributed a manifesto to every household in the land.
It said, first, that no decision could be taken in Brussels without the consent of a British Minister who would be answerable to the British Parliament — in other words, no political union.
Secondly, it said that there had been a threat of economic and monetary union which threatened to bring unemployment, but that that had been removed and therefore people could vote in the referendum knowing that there would be no economic or monetary union.
It was suggested sotto voce that that could be a matter for our grandchildren.
It is not a matter for our grandchildren or even our children, but it is to be decided in a fortnight's time.
We are now told that, having been lied to over the years, the British people now have the prospect of political union, and they react against it and shy away.
That is because they were told that it would not happen.
A
Conservative Member explained to our German colleagues that that was the reason for the’ British problem’.
At each stage of the story, Britain has been the odd man out.
Why is it always the odd man out?
It is because our system is one of parliamentary self-government, which is incompatible with the European Community system.
We have been asked to give that up and to go over to the European Community system, with the European Court and majority voting — the shoe is pinching all the time.
The Commission make us do things that we do not want to do and stops us doing what we want to.
Our former colleague, Sir Leon Brittan, is a far more powerful man now than when he was a Cabinet Minister and now tells us what we can do with Rover.
Value added tax has been put on spectacles and surgical boots, which we would never have dreamed of doing.
I heard it being suggested to the Minister that we should reduce value added tax in relation to the Royal Society for Prevention of Cruelty to Children.
She said that the European Community would not allow us to do so.
The Community even tells us through which fields we are to put our roads.
All that is resented by Parliament and our people.
The current proposition is that we should go further.
As Mr. Delors explained — my hon. Friend the Member for East Lothian (Mr. Home Robertson) and others will be interested in this — the suggestion is that 80 per cent.
of our economic, social and political affairs should be decided in Brussels.
Who wants that?
Hon. Members
We do.
Mr. Ron Leighton (Newham, North-East)
Who wants that apart from a few wildly unrepresentative fanatics?
The British people do not want it.
Mr. Derek Enright (Hemsworth)
How does my hon. Friend know that?
Mr. Leighton
The public opinion polls showed that three quarters of the British people do not want it.
We have had discussion about the word’ federal’.
I know it is a word that can mean various things, but we must ask why some continental politicians refer to the word’ federal’at every opportunity.
It is because they want a super-state.
The British people have not been told the truth about that.
Some people say that’ federalism’means devolving power downwards to the people, which sounds good.
They are trying to kid us again.
To use the jargon, federalism means extending the competence of the Euro-institutions to defence, foreign, immigration and asylum, social, and economic policies — the bread and butter issues of our politics are to be removed from this Parliament and transferred to Brussels.
The power is not being devolved downwards, but up to the centre.
That is the truth which the people of this country must face.
If that is what one or two of my extremist fanatical friends and the people of this country want, so be it, but, that will destroy our democracy.
How does one define a democracy?
The more I think about it, the more I believe that it is a political unit in which the minority accept the verdict.
If the Conservative party wins a general election, I am upset and I don't like it, but I am willing to accept the result because I accept the verdict of the people.
I think to myself that I can serve in opposition, make my case and perhaps win the next election, so I accept the result.
However, if decisions are to be made in Brussels by alien institutions whose representatives are not elected by us and by people who we cannot remove, and those decisions damage my constituents, am I supposed to accept that?
I do not think that we shall.
With my colleague, the hon. Member for Glasgow, Govan (Mr. Sillars), in mind, I say that such a process will break up the United Kingdom.
If the decisions are all to be made in Brussels, why should the Scots send Members of Parliament to Westminster?
It would be a waste of their time to come down here, because the decisions will not be taken here, but in Brussels.
The process constitutes a national threat because it will break up the United Kingdom.
Economic matters including interest and exchange rates, monetary and fiscal policy, budgetary policy, are all at the heart of Government and all are to be decided by a central bank, which will be the most important institution.
The treaty states that Governments will undertake not to seek to influence the central bank.
It states that they will even undertake not to influence their national central banks, which means rule by bankers.
I did not become a Labour Member of Parliament to hand over all power to bankers.
Clem Attlee nationalised the Bank of England because he did not think that we should have rule by central bankers.
The other idea is that we should have a single currency.
If there is a single currency and economies get out of line, they cannot be adjusted by movements of the exchange rate, which is the normal way — so what happens?
Countries will become blighted and depressed regions, with mass unemployment.
I did not become a Labour Member of Parliament or the Chairman of the Select Committee on Employment to work for policies that would lead to chronic mass unemployment.
Why should we agree to anything of that sort?
If we have a Labour Government after the next general election — obviously that is the result that I want — they will need the tools to do the job.
That Administration will need to control interest rates, exchange rates and budgetary policy.
If we go along with the present approach we shall have unilateral economic disarmament and many crucial matters will be decided elsewhere.
If so, what is the point of having this Parliament?
What is the point of having the Labour party?
What is the point of having elections?
These matters —
Interruption
The hon. Member for Derbyshire, South (Mrs. Currie), who is making expansive gestures, may be in favour of the consequences that I have described, but I do not think that the British people share her view.
Ms. Joyce Quin (Gateshead, East)
I am sure that, as parliamentarians, we are all greatly influenced in our views by different levels of loyalties — to our constituents, to our party, to our region, whatever part of the United Kingdom we come from, to the United Kingdom and, if we believe in an evolving European Community, to what we think are the best interests of the Community as a whole.
Indeed, we should look wider than that, to the rest of Europe and to the world beyond.
I shall seek to evaluate the Maastricht proposals in the light of these different levels of loyalty to help me to decide whether what is on offer is worth supporting.
I have never thought that the EC was intrinsically or automatically good or bad, as much depends on the effect of what is decided on our constituents and, indeed, on the people of Europe as a whole.
As a result, I have regretted the frequent over-simplification that often takes place in European Community debates.
Indeed, the oversimplification that is involved in the labels pro and anti-European is often unhelpful.
I am not convinced that the new labels of Euro-sceptics and Euro-federalists are much more helpful, for’ federalism’seems to be a misused and contested term.
In my view, federalism, while having an element of union, is based very much on the principle of decentralisation.
The term’ subsidiarity’has been used during the debate.
The Prime Minister seemed to describe the concept as denoting national versus European decision-making levels.
To me, subsidiarity means taking decisions at the most appropriate level, whether it be European, national, regional or local.
All levels of decision taking have an important part to play in our political process.
The over-simplification of the issues was part and parcel of a Gallup poll that took place last weekend.
I and many other Labour Members were contacted and asked many over-simplified questions about our views on the European Community issue.
I did not know at the time who had commissioned the poll, but I learned afterwards that it was the Conservative party.
I strongly resent having my views sought in such an underhand way.
I much prefer expressing my views publicly in the House to my constituents and others.
The main reason for many Opposition Members feeling more warmly towards the European Community now than they did in the past is the record of the Community in the past few years and the contrast between what has happened elsewhere in the Community and what we have seen take place in Britain.
I believe that we have fallen badly behind in the three important areas of economic development, social policies and, sadly, the quality of our democracy.
On economic development, we have failed to pursue the policies of partnership between Government and industry which are commonplace elsewhere in Europe and which involve not only management but trade unions and workers' representatives in a much more positive way than anything that has happened under this Government.
We have fallen badly behind in terms of investment.
We have higher interest rates, and recently we have also had rapidly rising unemployment compared with the rest of the EC.
On social policies, our record has been appalling: on that, I agree strongly with the points made by my right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition and by my right hon. Friend the Member for Birmingham, Small Heath (Mr. Howell), who has just come into the Chamber, who strongly criticised the Government's record on social policies.
It is clear that there are two different views in the House of what a large market should be all about.
There is the Government's view, which seems to see a large market as an end in itself, and there is the view expressed by my right hon. Friend, which sees a large market as successful only if it improves the quality of life of our citizens.
The British people understand what is happening in the EC, and they understand that the Government have stood out against other Governments in blocking positive measures which would have benefited our citizens.
Three questions about the social dimension should be addressed to the Government.
First, is it fair that bad employers should effectively be subsidised by the state?
In the absence of a minimum wage, many of our constituents earn such low wages that they have to resort to state benefits on top.
Why should the state subsidise bad employers in that way?
Secondly, how do other countries that have a minimum wage and a better employment rights structure manage to cope so well?
Thirdly, have the Government forgotten that, in the preamble to the treaty of Rome, which they say they support, there is a commitment to the constant improvement in living and working conditions of the people of Europe?
For me, a key test will be how far the social provisions can be incorporated into the Maastricht agreement.
That is important, and I am glad that the Opposition's motion makes it so clear.
Unfortunately, the only thing that seems to unite Conservative Members in this debate is their refusal to accept the social charter and the social measures which many of us feel are so important.
The final element to which I wish to refer is the quality of our democracy, which has exercised the minds of many hon. Members today.
In the past 12 years, we have become one of the most centralised states in the EC, which I greatly regret.
I am dismayed that so little has been done to decentralise, when so many other EC countries have clearly felt the benefits, both economic and political, of taking the decentralised route.
One of the Maastricht proposals is the proposal to create a body to represent the regions of the EC.
I recently asked the Prime Minister about that, and was rather surprised to receive the answer that the Government supported proposals in the intergovernmental conference for a new consultative body to represent the regions at Community level.
I hope that, when the Minister replies, he will tell me how that representation will be decided.
Will all the regions be represented as well as the nations of the United Kingdom?
Can we be assured that those regional representatives will reflect the political majority in those regions and will not simply be Government nominees, as we have seen in so many quangos and regional bodies that have been set up in recent years?
The Maastricht summit gives us great opportunities for economic, social and democratic reform.
However, the Prime Minister is not capable of obtaining a deal which will be to the benefit of the British people.
He cannot have it both ways.
He cannot claim on the one hand to be at the heart of Europe and at the same time want to be on the periphery of Europe and seem to want us to go at a slower speed than anyone else.
That is an inconsistent position.
If the Prime Minister really wants to help the British people, he should use Maastricht to give us a system which will promote balanced regional economic development throughout the United Kingdom, attack some of the social ills and divisions which beset British society at present and, finally, enhance not detract from the quality of British democracy.
Mr. Churchill (Davyhulme)
I strenuously reject the suggestion of the hon. Member for Gateshead, East (Ms. Quin) that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister is not the best person to negotiate on behalf of Britain at the forthcoming summit.
I believe that the House will overwhelmingly register its confidence in his abilities in that role.
This remarkable and fine debate has thrown up some strange bedfellows, including the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn) and my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs.
Thatcher)— who found common ground on the question of a referendum.
In the 20 years since the House voted to accede to the European Community — which is now the destination of no less than 52 per cent.
of Britain's exports — it has become a major factor in world trade and international power-broking.
It has more than fulfilled its founding fathers' two objectives: to rebuild the economy of a shattered Europe, and to bury the hatchet between France and Germany and so bind together the nations of Europe that they would never go to war again.
Those substantial achievements are already on the record.
We are now on the verge of a new, exciting, and long-overdue step — the creation of a single European market.
That has already been agreed, and it will be in place by the end of next year.
In a typically British way, we have failed to take the credit that is due to us for that achievement, which had its origins in the Kangaroo group of Members of the European Parliament founded by the late Basil de Ferranti specifically to break down the trade barriers that existed in Europe at a time when none of the other major Community partners wanted to know anything about it.
They rested secure behind their trade barriers, and it was above all a British initiative that led to the creation of the single European market.
After advancing at a snail's pace for many years, we suddenly find ourselves invited to participate in a Gadarene rush towards economic and political union.
I have always believed in the cause of European unity.
It was the issue that first brought me into active politics as long ago as 1964.
I believe still that Britain's place is at the heart of Europe, although every time that puffed-up functionary, M.
Delors, vouchsafes a little more of his vision of a centralised, bureaucratic, and socialist Europe, I confess that I have my doubts.
For one who claims to be the champion of European unity, M. Delors is its worst advocate, having a unique capacity to raise the hackles of the British people.
That said, let no one doubt Europe's importance to Britain.
Once the channel tunnel is built, from my Manchester constituency alone, seven freight trains a night will leave Trafford Park for Europe.
Nor should we underestimate the importance of Britain to Europe, for we have much to contribute and not just to the agricultural fund.
Some half a million of our sons lie in Flanders fields — our sacrifice against tyranny in Europe.
And today we have a contribution to make in terms of our history of free trade, our outward-looking attitude to the world, and the weight of our tradition of parliamentary and democratic government stretching back over the centuries — something unmatched by any of our partners, for some of whom the very concept of democracy is of recent origin.
We stand on the brink of two momentous decisions at Maastricht.
We are invited to sign up for, on the one hand, economic and monetary union and, on the other, political union.
I agree with everything that my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister said today, and I wish him every success at Maastricht.
I have little doubt, however, that, despite Britain's reservations, our partners will move forward to economic and monetary union, and to the creation of a single currency.
It will be difficult, if not impossible, for Britain to stand aloof from that process without unacceptable damage being done to our economic interests.
I happen to believe that the fears that have been voiced on that account are exaggerated.
I do not accept that the proposal represents a major surrender of sovereignty.
Just as the dominions of Canada, Australia and New Zealand were able to conduct their own economic policies while belonging to the sterling area — having their own Chancellors of the Exchequer operating their own fiscal policies, and raising their own tax revenues — so Britain will retain a wide freedom of action, while enjoying the benefit of belonging to a currency and economy underpinned by what will undoubtedly be the strongest currency in the world.
But political union is a different matter.
Thanks to our parliamentary system and the stability that it has given us, the British people have been spared the horrors of revolution, civil war and invasion for more than 300 years.
In that we are unique.
Our Parliament has prevailed in the face of fascism, Marxism and communism, where others succumbed.
Mr. Butterfill
And socialism.
Mr. Churchill
Indeed.
That, undoubtedly, is why the British people hold this Parliament — if not its Members — in such affection.
But woe betide the Government, or the Members of this House, who sell our Parliament for a mess of European pottage.
The British people will not accept the relegation of the mother of Parliaments to the level of the legislature of the state of Nevada; but that is what is on offer to us if we go down the path of full political union.
The House must retain control of those aspects of our national life that are properly dealt with here: above all, we must retain responsibility for key decisions about foreign policy and defence, and the issues of war and peace.
I have every confidence that my right hon. Friend will not sell the pass on those vital issues, and that, if need be, he will indeed exercise our veto.
To paraphrase Canning, however, it is time to call into being eastern Europe to redress the balance of western Europe.
In the present circumstances, it is more important to widen the Community — to include the nations of EFTA and the new democracies of eastern Europe — than to deepen the political union among the Twelve.
I do not believe that those countries will be half as eager to abandon their new-found sovereignty so soon after regaining it.
That is the path that we must pursue, with vigour and determination.
We must build a free and democratic Europe, from the Baltic to the Mediterranean and from the Atlantic to the Urals: a Europe that will, however, respect the essential sovereignty of national Parliaments, and not trample them underfoot.
Mr. Denzil Davies
Who decides whether the deficits are excessive, and are there any definitions of’ excessive’?
Mr. Maude
There are no definitions under stage two.
The decision is made by the Council.
The protocol sets out some reference values, which are still subject to negotiation, but only for member states that participate in stage three.
The Council's power to issue policy recommendations under stage two has been in existence since the convergence decision in 1974.
The right hon. Member for Llanelli (Mr. Davies) may have played some part in that decision.
He is shaking his head and pleading not guilty, but he may know something about its origins.
Under stage three, the Council will have no greater power over member states that have exemption status.
The latest draft treaty gives the Council power to instruct a member state participating in stage three to reduce its deficit and to impose sanctions if it does not do so.
As my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister said earlier, we believe that the most effective sanctions are imposed by the market, and we shall continue to argue that in the IGC.
Some hon. Members have argued that the distinction between stages two and three cannot be maintained.
They fear either that we are committed to move to stage three or that, irrespective of the provision in the treaty allowing us a free choice, we would none the less be obliged to move.
We are still negotiating, but let it be perfectly clear that we shall not accept a text that involves such a commitment.
The reference to a single currency in the opening articles of the draft treaty is explicitly qualified by the reference to the procedures set out therein, and those procedures include the right to opt for exemption status.
If the procedures are acceptable — we are clear that they must be — the opening articles are also acceptable.
It has been suggested that, once we had accepted stage two, there would be intense and irresistible pressure to move to stage three.
That has been described as the’ slippery slope’argument.
I was interested in the argument of my right hon. Friend the Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley), that, if convergence is achieved, a single currency is not necessary.
That may be true, and it might affect the balance of advantage and disadvantage, but it does not need to be resolved at this stage.
The hon. Member for Banff and Buchan (Mr. Salmond) asked what would happen to the pound if the United Kingdom were exempt from stage three.
The answer is straightforward: the exchange-rate mechanism would continue, run by the enlarged chamber of governors, and all currencies that were not in stage three could remain in the exchange-rate mechanism or outside it, depending on what they chose.
That applies equally to eastern European states that become members of the European Community in the meantime.
There are no provisions in the treaty that would exclude them from taking part in it.
When my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister opened the debate, he made it clear that he had sensed right the mood of the House and of the British people.
They want the Government to be in the heart of Europe, negotiating positively and effectively not only for British interests but for a better Europe.
That means a Europe in which national Governments retain the power to make proposals and in which national Parliaments retain their powers.
How different that is from the Labour party's position — it wants to lead according to the principle which states that where others go must be right.
That is like the motto of the famous French revolutionary leader who said,’ I am their leader; I must follow them.’
How little the Opposition have thought about the issue.
They want to commit themselves to a single currency and to deny a future Parliament or Government the power to make a vital decision.
They say that they want real convergence and decisions in the treaty for which no one else in the Community has argued at any stage.
They continue to argue for what no one else is prepared to offer and they are wholly isolated in a fantasy world.
They claim to be nearer than us to the European consensus, but they are as far from reality as they ever were.
It being Twelve o'clock, the debate stood adjourned, pursuant to Order [19 November.]
Debate to be resumed this day.
Rape Case (Criminal Investigation)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Dr. Norman A. Godman (Greenock and Port Glasgow)
I wish to make known my deep concern about the circumstances surrounding the brutal rape of a constituent of mine, who will be known as Mrs. X, about the way in which the criminal investigation was conducted and about certain matters relating to the horrible affair.
I wish to ask the Minister a number of questions about such cases.
Incidentally, I shall use the name Mary as a double blind in the sense that none of the woman's family or friends knows her as Mary.
I believe that the victims of sexual assault, of child abuse and/or sexual abuse should be treated in a decent, compassionate and sympathetic manner during the criminal investigation of such allegations.
The compassionate and sensitive treatment should not harm the search for sound forensic and other evidence.
Prejudice and bias have no place in the scheme of things.
The Minister knows my views on such matters when they might affect service personnel and families.
In every case involving armed forces personnel and their families, the benchmark must be the best practices found in civil society.
An example of what I mean can be found in Strathclyde, where in every division of the police force there is a well-established female and child unit, staffed principally by female officers who are well trained and highly experienced in interviewing skills and techniques in cases involving sexual assault, child abuse and/or sexual abuse.
When dealing with previous Bills affecting the armed services, the Minister and his colleagues have always sought to assure me that the armed forces are keenly aware of the need to treat complainers — irrespective of age — in a sympathetic manner.
My first question to the Minister, who is apprised of the case, is whether he is satisfied that Mrs. X and her husband were treated with compassion.
In the summer, I received a letter from Mrs. X which disturbed me greatly.
She wrote:’ I am writing to you in the hope that you can help me with the injustice which has occurred.
On 16th February 1991 whilst my husband was serving in the Gulf on Operation Granby, I was invited to attend a function at the Corporals Mess’— in a particular regiment which, of course, I shall not mention —’ which I did attend with some of my friends.
I enjoyed the function and my friends kept me in good cheer as I was obviously anxious about my husband being in the Gulf and did have a few too many drinks.
I also had a plaster of Paris cast on my leg (which had been injured in a fall some weeks before) and consequently had some difficulty in walking, I was put on the Regimental Mini Bus which was run purely to ferry married personnel to their married quarters after functions.
I arrived at my quarter at what time I do not know due to me being very intoxicated and when I awoke some hours later I discovered the following’.
I am quoting verbatim as you would expect, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
’ 1.
My blouse had been unbuttoned.
2.
My bra had been forced over my breasts.
3.
My underwear had been removed and left torn in half on my bed.
4.
My trousers had been removed with some force as my right leg was in a great deal of pain around the cast.
I then tried to deduce the events of the previous night and discovered some time later that I had been raped by force by XYZ who had been on the mini bus and followed me home.
I went to the medical centre and there a male doctor did a very degrading examination of my body.
The investigator from the...
Special Investigation Branch obtained the following statement from XYZ.
He had whilst I was lying intoxicated on my bed in my quarter had oral sex, had masturbated over my body and had entered my vagina for about 10 seconds.
I was assured by the SIB that there would be a court martial and XYZ would be charged with rape but that did not happen, he was charged only with being in the married quarter area, fined 14 days wages and demoted in rank to Trooper.
So dear Dr. Godman I feel I have been treated badly in this case and would be grateful if you would pursue this matter further.
I have listed the facts to assist you: 1.
I asked for my husband to be returned from the Gulf but this was not possible due to the ground war beginning.
2.
I asked for my Mother to be brought from the UK to give me comfort in my husband's place, it took 3 weeks for this to happen.
3.
The investigator of the SIB assured me that the evidence obtained from XYZ, written and recorded, warranted a court martial.
4.
I asked for professional counselling which I didn't get.’
Mrs. X goes on to list a number of complaints.
I wrote to Mrs. X to inform her that I would take her case up with Ministers at the Ministry of Defence.
In a letter to the Secretary of State, I outlined my deep concern over the case and over the way in which the allegation by Mrs. X had been investigated.
In reply, the Under-Secretary of State for the Armed Forces gave me certain assurances.
He said, for example, that the matter had been’ thoroughly investigated by the Special Investigation Branch of the Royal Military Police.
In accordance with normal regulations, their final report was forwarded to the Commanding Officer who sought legal advice on its findings.
Legal advice recommended that, as Mrs. X was unable to remember anything of the alleged incident and that, as it may not be possible to prove beyond reasonable doubt that, not only did she not consent, but also that XYZ knew that she was not consenting, the case should be dealt with summarily by the Commanding Officer.’
The Minister also said that the medical examination had been carried out in a sympathetic and professional manner.
I sent a copy of the Minister's letter to Mrs. X and she responded a few days later on 20 October.
She wrote:’ Thank you for your letter dated 9th October 1991 which I have read with great dismay.
You were right in saying that the minister Earl of Arran has disappointed me to no end.
I find it very hard to understand that if a person who admits to having raped a person can get away with it.
On his admission to a policeman in civilian life no doubt that person would be convicted of rape.
Yet in the army, a person who admits to having raped a married woman whilst her husband was fighting to preserve peace can get away with it.
I am now pursuing civil legal action and if need be publish it in my local daily paper and some other well known daily papers.
The army has a lot to answer for.
I intend to uncover the old boy system where everybody covers up when cases like this arise.
Who knows how many women have had the same ordeal as myself?
No wonder no woman ever comes forward to seek help if this is the sort of justice the army say it is.
And because I was drunk and can't remember anything about my ordeal, does that give him the right to do what he did to me?
So if all women are drunk and are raped then the person doing indecent assault has no case to answer to.’
I sincerely hope that Mrs. X's complaint was not treated in a dismissive way because, as she readily admitted, she was drunk at the time of the assault.
I know that the hand that rocks the cradle is supposed to be steady 24 hours a day, but that does not always hold.
No woman should be treated in a certain way simply because she was drunk when she suffered an assault.
Mrs. X mentioned in her letter that she was giving thought to taking civil legal action, so I sought advice on private prosecutions from both the Attorney-General, for such actions in England, and the Lord Advocate, for similar cases in Scotland.
Both offered only circumspect answers.
The Attorney-General said in response to a parliamentary question on Tuesday 19 November:’ The information is not readily available.
I will reply to the hon. Member as soon as possible.’
In a letter dated 19 November, the Lord Advocate said that in Scotland’ Civil actions are raised in the Court of Session or Sheriff Court Mrs. would have to establish first of all that she does indeed have a right to raise an action arising from the unfortunate incident of which she has complained.
She would probably have the right to do so in the court in Germany which would have jurisdiction in relation to the place where the events happened, assuming that German law recognises the ground of action contemplated.
A court in the United Kingdom might have jurisdiction if the alleged perpetrator was domiciled here because of the provisions of the Civil Jurisdictions and Judgments Act 1982.’
That Act also determined the next question — whether the action should be brought in England or Scotland.
Everyone in Scotland knows of the famous Glasgow case involving a female complainer who took out a private prosecution in such a case.
The case will be keenly remembered by the hon. and learned Member for Perth and Kinross (Sir N. Fairbairn), who was the principal Law Officer for Scotland at the time.
I readily acknowledge that I cannot expect definitive statements from the Minister when the answers given by his ministerial colleagues, who have greater legal experience than the Minister and I possess, are, to say the least, somewhat circumspect.
I must also acknowledge to the Minister and the House that I have been unable to interview my constituent face to face.
Our exchanges have been by telephone or Royal Mail, so I readily acknowledge that there may be some problems there.
Nevertheless, in my view, Mrs. X has been shabbily treated in what I can only call a squalid affair.
I seek the help of the Minister with some questions.
Will he explain why the perpetrator of the offence is to be allowed to return to the base where Mrs. X's husband is stationed and where she lives?
Mrs. X told me in a telephone conversation today that the acting commanding officer and the warrant officer, who is the family officer, have informed her that the man is to return within the next two weeks.
I appeal to the Minister: the man should not be allowed to return to his unit; he should remain where he is at this moment.
In cases of this nature, is the victim, following the successful prosecution of the accused person, advised about financial compensation?
Does a member of the armed forces serving in the United Kingdom or overseas, or a member of his or her family, have the right, where appropriate, to seek compensation from the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board?
If armed services personnel and members of their families have that legal right, are they made aware of it by their commanding officers?
Is the Minister confident that the counselling services offered to someone in such circumstances are of the highest quality?
Does it equal the counselling that a woman can obtain in Scotland, England, Wales, or indeed Ulster?
Is the Minister confident that medical officers carry out only one examination in each case, and is it conducted in a highly skilled and compassionate manner?
What practical advice could the armed forces offer to someone who contemplated taking out a private prosecution?
Could that person obtain advice from people in the armed forces who have legal training, or could the armed forces obtain that sort of advice for the person seeking it?
Will the Minister give me an assurance that Mrs. X was not discriminated against because, by her honest admission, she was drunk when she was assaulted?
I sought this Adjournment debate in the hope thatMrs.
X and her husband could find peace of mind and could somehow be helped to strengthen their marriage.
They have suffered a terrible ordeal, and it is my sincere hope that they will find the peace of mind that they so richly deserve.
I have mentioned the Gulf war.
While I was opposed to that operation, I have the highest respect for our armed forces personnel, and — for rather quaint reasons — I have great sympathy and respect for members of the Royal Military Police.
Mr. Gordon McMaster (Paisley, South)
Why is that?
Dr. Godman
I shall make no confessions.
My constituent, Mrs. X, who is still suffering badly, had been treated in a less than fair way by those who conducted the criminal investigation and also by those who decided that there were no grounds for bringing the perpetrator in front of a court martial.
I seek those assurances from the Minister.
The Minister of State for the Armed Forces (Mr. Archie Hamilton)
The hon. Member for Greenock and Port Glasgow (Dr. Godman) has been successful in securing this Adjournment debate.
I know that the hon. Member has shown considerable interest in the case that is the subject of the debate, although I find it surprising that he has chosen to raise the matter in this way.
As he has outlined, the details of the case are extremely delicate and sensitive and, considering some of the descriptions of the case that he has given, it seems extraordinary that he chose to raise the matter on the Floor of the House.
He could quite easily have asked to meet me or my noble Friend the Under-Secretary of State for the Armed Forces — with whom he has been corresponding, as he said — at the Ministry of Defence, where we could have discussed the matter in a more suitable environment.
Notwithstanding, we are debating the matter on the Floor of the House and I shall have to go into some matters of delicacy in my response.
This is an emotive case, which has been subject to a full investigation by the special investigation branch of the Royal Military Police, and disciplinary action has been taken against the soldier in relation to the allegations.
The charge was supported by the evidence collected by the Royal Military Police inquiries.
As the hon. Gentleman has said, Mrs. X has indicated that she may be taking proceedings further, so it would be most improper for me to go into too much detail on this case.
Having said that, I feel that there are significant aspects that should be brought out in order to put the matter in perspective.
As the hon. Gentleman has stated, Mrs. X, by her own admission, was very drunk.
On more than one occasion she has admitted to being very intoxicated and I understand that she has stated that she had consumed about 24 single measures of dry Martini and lemonade, together with some white wine.
It is perhaps not surprising that her recollections of that evening are vague.
Indeed, the case against the soldier involved rests primarily on his evidence, not hers.
Once Mrs. X had made her allegations, there followed a full investigation by the special investigation branch, Royal Military Police, which included a full medical examination.
I can confirm that, although the medical examination was clearly an unpleasant experience for Mrs. X, it was in accordance with the regulations and was conducted with kindness and sympathy throughout.
Indeed, the examining doctor was a registered medical practitioner — a reservist called up in the course of the Gulf conflict.
The examination was conducted in the presence of a female nurse and a female member of the Royal Military Police.
As we know, the whole indignity that women have to go through for these examinations is, of necessity, I am afraid, an unpleasant experience.
In this case, as in all cases, the examination was done with as much sympathy as can be shown.
When the case was presented to the commanding officer of the unit involved, he sought advice from the appropriate Army legal branch, which advised what charges, if any, were supported by the evidence.
I should almost like to repeat that.
It is important that we do not get away from the fact that, when any charge is laid, there must be evidence that will hold up for convicting somebody of that charge.
The hon. Gentleman will be aware that a similar role is undertaken by the Crown prosecution service in criminal proceedings, and I am sure that he will agree that it is right and proper that such an independent assessment of the facts should take place.
This independent assessment results in a judgment being made about the likelihood, based on that evidence, of a court finding a case proved beyond reasonable doubt.
Clearly in this case, where both parties were, by their own admission, drunk and unable to remember fully the events that took place, the commanding officer was placed in a very difficult position.
The forensic evidence did not support a charge of rape or any other assault.
What evidence there was supported a relatively minor charge under military standing orders and the soldier concerned was charged, found guilty and punished under the powers accorded to the commanding officer.
Mrs. X and the hon. Member are aware of the nature of this punishment.
By the same token that we do not want to be able to identify Mrs. X, it would not be appropriate for me to reveal the exact nature of either the charge or the punishment received by the soldier.
This is a most regrettable incident, but I cannot accept a charge that the Army did not take the allegations seriously and that the full and thorough investigation was not conducted in anything but a professional and sympathetic manner.
The hon. Gentleman pointed out that the soldier returned at one point when Mrs. X and her husband were still at the base.
That was covered in the letter sent to the hon. Gentleman by my noble Friend the Under-Secretary of State for the Armed Forces on 28 August.
The hon. Gentleman will see that the letter says:’ In the interests of all parties’, the soldier’was posted following this incident.
It was unfortunate that he returned for a short time but this was necessary in order for him to complete training prior to deploying on an operational tour.’
The reasoning behind that was explained to Mrs. X and her husband.
I am afraid that the circumstances of the case — two people who were extremely drunk and who have a very hazy understanding of what went on — make it difficult for any charge to have any validity.
In those circumstances, I believe that the military pursued this with all the diligence that they could.
I regret that they were unable to pursue the matter any further.
None of us knows what happened on that occasion, and it is sad that the participants cannot remember, either.
Question put and agreed to.
Adjourned accordingly at twenty-four minutes past Twelve o'clock.
Business of the House
Dr. John Cunningham (Copeland)
May I ask the Leader of the House to tell us the business for next week?
The Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons (Mr. John MacGregor)
The business for next week will be as follows:
Monday 25 November —— Second Reading of the Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill.
Motion on the Library Charges (England and Wales) Regulations.
The Chairman of Ways and Means has named opposed private business for consideration at seven o'clock.
Tuesday 26 November —— Second Reading of the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill.
Wednesday 27 November —— Opposition day (1st Allotted Day).
Until about seven o'clock there will be a debate described as’ The Housing Problem’followed by a debate entitled’Sports Provision in the United Kingdom’.
Both debates arise on Opposition motions.
Motion to take note of EC documents relating to the 1992 EC budget.
Details will be given in the Official Report.
Thursday 28 November —— Proceedings on the Welsh Development Agency Bill.
Friday 29 November —— Private Members' motions.
Monday 2 December —— Second Reading of the Transport and Works Bill.
The House will also wish to know that European Standing Committee B will meet at 10.30 am on Wednesday 27 November to consider European Community document No. 7485/91 relating to child care.
European Standing Committee B will also meet at 4.30 pm on Monday 2
December to consider European Community documents relating to indirect taxation.
Details will be given in the Official Report.
Dr. Cunningham
Will the Leader of the House arrange for a statement early next week by the Home Secretary?
Is he aware of the serious allegations made in the television programme’ Thames Reports’last week about the alleged involvement of the police in the break-out of terrorists from Brixton prison last July?
Are not those very serious allegations?
Is it not also serious that it is implied that the Home Office knew about that involvement at the time?
Is not the House of Commons, indeed the country as a whole, entitled to hear from the Home Secretary in person exactly whether those allegations have any foundation?
Will the Leader of the House arrange for an early oral statement on that important matter?
What has happened to the statements that we expected on revenue support grant?
Given that the decision of the Department of the Environment and of the Scottish and Welsh Offices will have huge implications for the levels of poll tax that people will be expected to pay next year, should we not have an early statement in the Chamber on those issues?
Turning now to his own responsibilities, when does the Leader of the House expect to be able to make a statement on expanding the provisions of communication between Members of this House and the institutions of the European Community?
I hope that the right hon. Gentleman will be able to tell us about that soon and that he will make a statement on that matter next week.
Can the Leader of the House find time soon for a debate on the economy of London?
Is he aware of the report by the Henley Centre for Forecasting, which states that, in the first nine months of this year, 12,359 small businesses failed in London and the south-east, which is more than in the whole of last year and shows an alarming and continuing increase in business failures in our capital city?
The economy of London is suffering dreadfully in this second Conservative recession, and we should have an opportunity to debate that matter in the House as soon as possible.
Mr. MacGregor
No statement is necessary on the Brixton escape and there will not be a statement next week.
I understand that, in view of the allegations about the conduct of Staffordshire special branch officers, the chief constable of Staffordshire has arranged for a full investigation by the deputy chief constable of another force.
It would not be appropriate for the Home Secretary to comment until the inquiry is completed.
On the hon. Gentleman's request for a revenue support grant statement from my right hon. Friends the Secretaries of State for the Environment and for Wales, the hon. Gentleman is correct in intimating that statements on those matters are necessary, and I hope that they will be made very soon — I hope next week.
I cannot give a precise date, but that is the intention.
In answer to the hon. Gentleman's point about travel — which is what I think that he had in mind when he referred to’ communication’— by hon. Members to European Community institutions, I hope to table the necessary resolutions very soon.
They are being technically completed at the moment.
In view of our heavy business, especially that relating to legislation, I see no prospect for a debate in Government time on the economy of London.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Speaker
Order.
No fewer than 82 right hon. and hon. Gentlemen are seeking to take part —
Mrs. Edwina Currie (Derbyshire, South)
And Ladies.
Mr. Speaker
Yes, and Ladies — are seeking to speak in the European debate.
Would the hon. Gentlemen — and Ladies — who wish to participate please reserve their fire at business questions so that we can get on?
I may then be able to call them.
Sir Dudley Smith (Warwick and Leamington)
Will my right hon. Friend encourage the Opposition to initiate a Supply day debate in the not-too-distant future on the subject of the recession, because there is a strange idea, fostered by the Opposition and the media, that it is a peculiarly British disease, whereas it is worldwide?
A debate would present a good opportunity to underline the fact that many countries are experiencing far more difficulties than we are.
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend has made the point.
Those of us who travel abroad know that he is right.
The economic issues that he has menioned exist in many other countries and have implications for our position.
I am sure that he will agree that the improvements in manufacturing exports clearly show how well British industry is doing, given the world situation.
Rev. Martin Smyth (Belfast, South)
Will the Leader of the House arrange for a statement by the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland on yesterday's meeting of the Anglo-Irish intergovernmental conference, especially in the light of the Prime Minister's failure to respond to the second part of the question that was asked by the hon. Member for Antrim, East (Mr. Beggs)?
Mr. MacGregor
I am not sure whether a statement on yesterday's meeting would be appropriate, but I shall draw the hon. Gentleman's request to my right hon. Friend's attention.
Mr. Michael Latham (Rutland and Melton)
Will my right hon. Friend accept the thanks of the whole House for agreeing to extend last night's debate until midnight, thus allowing a large number of Members to be called?
Mr. MacGregor
I am most grateful to my hon. Friend.
Mr. Max Madden (Bradford, West)
Will the Leader of the House arrange for the Home Secretary to make a statement next week about political asylum fraud?
Will he ensure specifically that the Home Secretary gives an assurance that no pressure or persuasion is being applied to the Metropolitan police in the case of Mr. Mohinder Paul Singh Bedi of Hayes to halt their inquiries or withdraw requests to investigate the bank accounts of Members of Parliament who have business or other links with Mr. Bedi?
Mr. MacGregor
I cannot comment on that case.
The issue of political asylum is, of course, being debated in relation to a Bill which is currently going through the House.
Sir John Farr (Harborough)
Has my right hon. Friend had a chance to look at the Order Paper recently?
Has he noticed that several right hon. and hon. Members on both sides of the House have tabled a motion about the establishment of a Select Committee on Northern Ireland affairs?
Has my right hon. Friend been able to consider that point yet?
Mr. MacGregor
As the House knows, because I have said it several times in business questions, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland has said that the establishment of a Northern Ireland Select Committee is best taken forward in the context of the fresh political talks.
I believe that that is right.
We must all hope that in due course the talks will proceed.
Mr. Dennis Skinner (Bolsover)
Will the Leader of the House ask the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food again to make a statement about the dioxins in Bolsover?
Is he aware that, when the dioxin-contaminated milk was transferred in the summer from Bolsover to Severn-Trent for disposal, Severn-Trent did not have a licence?
Then an attempt was made to get rid of it at 800 deg C in the west midlands but the incinerator needed to be at 1,200 deg C. The result was that the dioxins from Bolsover in the east midlands were transmitted all over the west midlands.
It is high time that there was a public inquiry into the matter and that the Minister of Agriculture made a statement at the Dispatch Box.
Mr. MacGregor
I have responded as fully as possible when the hon. Gentleman has raised the matter, and I have drawn it to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food.
As I have said before, the results of the testing will be published when all the data have been evaluated in the new year.
Mr. John Greenway (Ryedale)
What is the progress on introducing the Bill to increase the penalties for youngsters who steal cars?
Is my right hon. Friend aware that last night in my constituency a woman was killed in a car accident and three others were injured, one extremely seriously?
The driver of the other car, which was stolen, was a 16-year-old boy.
Will my right hon. Friend join me in sending condolences to the bereaved family and wishing those who are injured a speedy recovery?
Does he agree that the sooner we put new measures on the statute book, the sooner we can instil into these young criminals the knowledge that such selfish and irresponsible behaviour will not be tolerated?
Mr. MacGregor
I certainly join my hon. Friend in sending condolences to the bereaved family and wishing a speedy recovery to the injured.
I am sure that the whole House deplores such incidents.
There can be no doubt about the message to young people who engage in this activity.
I assure my hon. Friend that we are proceeding with urgency on the Bill.
Technical considerations are being completed, and I hope that we shall be able to put it to the House before long.
In view of what my hon. Friend has said — with which I am sure that everyone in the House agrees — I hope that the Bill will have a speedy passage through the House.
Mr. D. N. Campbell-Savours (Workington)
May we have a statement on Sunday trading?
Is it true, that B&Q sponsored the agents' ball at the Conservative party conference?
What is the connection?
Mr. MacGregor
I am not certain whether that is true, but I am sure that there is no connection.
We have no plans to make any changes to the legislation on Sunday trading in the near future — for example, before Christmas.
As the House knows, the Minister of State, Home Office, my right hon. Friend the Member for Mitcham and Morden (Mrs. Rumbold), has had detailed discussions on the reform of Sunday trading.
Everyone recognises that the law is anomalous.
The difficulty is to find a solution that will command majority support in the House.
My right hon. Friend is continuing to explore that in her discussions.
Mr. Paul Channon (Southend, West)
Does my right hon. Friend agree that, before we get to Maastricht, it is important that we should have the views of all hon. Members?
Therefore, will he arrange another debate before the summit so that we can hear the views of the right hon. Member for Blaenau Gwent (Mr. Foot) and establish whether all ex-leaders of the Labour party support its present policy?
Mr. MacGregor
If we tried to extend that to all Labour Members rather than to ex-leaders, we would have to debate the issue all week to tempt them to their feet.
I entirely agree with my right hon. Friend.
He is right to draw attention to the divisions on the Labour side of the House, which were made clear by the way in which the House responded to a point that the Leader of the Opposition made yesterday about the so-called unity of the Labour party.
However, we have endeavoured to have as long a debate as we can on the issue yesterday and today.
Mrs. Alice Mahon (Halifax)
Would the Leader of the House ensure that we discuss the relationship between a Secretary of State and a Select Committee of the House at the earliest opportunity?
I refer to the’ Waldegate Affair’, of which I am sure he is aware.
Mr. MacGregor
That is a completely wrong description of a matter which the Select Committee on Privileges is now discussing — which is why it would not be appropriate for me to say anything further.
Dr. John Blackburn (Dudley, West)
Will my right hon. Friend consider early-day motion 209, which relates to a British company that has achieved a wonderful contract in Kenya?
[That this House calls upon the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry and the Minister of State for Overseas Development to grant Aid Trade Provision Cover and ECGD cover over three years from 1992 to enable Communication Supplies Ltd. to continue to export further System X telephone exchanges and ancillary equipment to Kenya, which they have done successfully for the past seven years; and furthermore notes that the Kenyan Government considers this project as top of their list of priorities for trade with the United Kingdom, and the project will save and provide many thousands of jobs throughout the United Kingdom and will lead to repeat business for many years to come, and that if funding is not forthcoming the contract will be lost to the United Kingdom and awarded to either Japanese, French or Italian companies, all of whom have shown open interest.]
Will he consider an early debate on that important issue, or convey the motion's sentiments to the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry?
Mr. MacGregor
I shall certainly convey the sentiments, but I am afraid that I cannot promise my hon. Friend an early debate.
Mr. Archy Kirkwood (Roxburgh and Berwickshire)
Does the Leader of the House acknowledge that the discussions in which Ministers are involved in the European Commission regarding the MacSharry proposals are of fundamental importance to the future of British agriculture?
Will he undertake to debate, in Government time, the negotiations before their conclusion is reached or, alternatively, afterwards?
Mr. MacGregor
I certainly agree about the importance of the MacSharry proposals.
The hon. Gentleman asks whether we could debate them after they have been debated in the European Community, but we are talking about a long time ahead.
I understand that the Scrutiny Committee is due to examine the detailed text on 27 November, and we certainly plan to have a debate in early December.
I agree with the hon. Gentleman on this matter.
Mr. Steve Norris (Epping Forest)
Will my right hon. Friend note that, with 82 hon. Members wishing to express an opinion in the debate later this afternoon, any suggestion that the additional two hours provided is adequate is clearly wide of the mark?
Will he give the House an assurance that, when we discuss the post-Maastricht position, the debate will be unlimited?
On his discussions with Front-Bench Members, in the absence of a commitment to a referendum, will he ensure that, at least on this side of the House, there is a free vote?
Mr. MacGregor
I have done my best to give as much time as possible to the debate yesterday and today, including making my answers to business questions as short as possible so that we can get on with the debate.
However, I would certainly not want to give a commitment about a further debate.
Mr. Robert Hughes (Aberdeen, North)
Is the Leader of the House aware that the representatives of every medical and professional body in Aberdeen and Grampian region oppose the opt-out application for Foresterhill hospitals?
Although he may not care to remember as far back as a fortnight ago, does he recollect that every candidate in the Kincardine and Deeside by-election, including his own, expressed opposition to the opt-out proposals?
Will he ensure that next week the Secretary of State for Scotland comes to the House and rejects the proposals out of hand?
Mr. MacGregor
My right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for Scotland is considering the proposals and will make a statement on the matter as soon as he is ready.
Mr. Jerry Wiggin (Weston-super-Mare)
Is the Leader of the House aware that more than 70 right hon. and hon. Members on both sides of the House have signed a prayer against the explosives regulations?
Will he find time to debate the matter?
Mr. MacGregor
I have noted what my hon. Friend has said.
I shall have to consider it.
Mr. Dave Nellist (Coventry, South-East)
Has the Leader of the House seen early-day motion 148 about the disgraceful closure of Coventry colliery with the loss of 1,300 jobs?
[That this House condemns British Coal for its closure of the Coventry Colliery at Keresely with the loss of 1,300 jobs, completed in a mere 13 days from the announcement of the decision to the working of the last shift; believes that the pit is not abandoned but mothballed with 40 million tonnes of good quality reserves of medium sulphur content which will be kept on a care and maintenance basis until a link-up is organised by a privatised Daw Mill Colliery should the Government be re-elected; condemns British Coal's refusal to attend two meetings of local authority and parish councillors, local honourable Members of this House and church representatives and notes the absence at the meetings of 24th October and 11th November of the local Tory honourable Members; and calls for a public inquiry into the methods of the closure and the false economics which talk of losses' yet fail to take into account the future cost to public funds of lost production and taxes paid, and of dole and unemployment payments to be made.]
Following a meeting this morning at the Department of Energy, may I ask him to arrange for the Secretary of State to make a statement answering the anger in Coventry, not just about the way in which the pit was closed and the loss of jobs, but the belief that the closure took place to mothball 40 million tonnes of medium sulphur content coal so that, were the Conservatives to be re-elected and the pits privatised, Daw Mill could take that coal out in a UDM pit?
How much further do the Government intend to take their vendetta against members of the NUM?
Mr. MacGregor
I have seen the early-day motion to which the hon. Gentleman refers.
He will know that decisions on individual colliery closures are matters for the British Coal Corporation.
I understand that the closure of the colliery in question has been due to heavy losses resulting from continued failure to meet operating targets.
Sir Robert Rhodes James (Cambridge)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that many people inside and outside the House, while recognising that it is important to spend two days debating the future of Europe, wonder why the House is not debating, even for a short time, the fact that a war is raging in a European country — Yugoslavia?
Will he consider having a debate on the situation there?
Mr. MacGregor
I have noted my hon. Friend's remarks.
My problem is that a great deal of business needs to be done, and I have to try to accommodate that business as well.
Mr. Thomas Graham (Renfrew, West and Inverclyde)
Will the right hon. Gentleman arrange for the Secretary of State for Defence to make a statement about the way in which contractors are paid £10 an hour for security guards at some of our vital establishments when security guards in my constituency are being paid £1.80 an hour?
Do I see the Leader of the House smiling at that?
Is he aware that the nation's security establishments are being guarded by people who are paid £1.80 an hour?
It is a lamentable state of affairs.
The Secretary of State should make a statement about private security firms guarding the nation's military establishments.
Mr. MacGregor
I assure the hon. Gentleman that the smile was not about the issue he was raising.
I do not think it would be appropriate for a statement, but I shall draw his comments to the attention of my right hon. Friend.
Mr. David Porter (Waveney)
Will my right hon. Friend undertake to arrange a debate before Christmas, or at least before the December Council of Ministers meeting on fishing, so that we may have our annual chance to discuss the state of the fishing industry in England and elsewhere in the kingdom?
Mr. MacGregor
I appreciate my hon. Friend's concern, and particularly his constituency concern about that issue.
I promise him that I am endeavouring to find time for a debate.
Mrs. Margaret Ewing (Moray)
May we have a statement about whether the Government intend to implement a European directive — it should have come into effect this weekend — by which local authorities will be informed when nuclear waste is being transported through their areas?
This is a vital issue.
Is he aware that from Brunswick in Germany tomorrow a nuclear waste consignment will be arriving at Dover?
It will be stored over the weekend at Winfrith and on Tuesday will arrive at Dounreay for reprocessing.
Not one authority has been advised about that.
It is wrong that we should have to reply on voluntary information in such an extremely important matter.
Mr. MacGregor
I shall look into the point with my right hon. Friends and endeavour to get a response to the hon. Lady.
Mr. David Shaw (Dover)
Is my right hon. Friend aware that Dover port has special facilities for the safe transport of nuclear waste and is leading the country in making sure that the nuclear industry safety standards are fully adopted?
Is he further aware that the port and officials at Dover make a major contribution to safety in this area?
Will he, if he thinks it necessary, arrange for a debate on the matter?
Mr. MacGregor
My hon. Friend has made the point clearly and I am grateful to him for doing so, in view of which I do not think a debate is necessary.
Mr. Harry Ewing (Falkirk, East)
I urge the Leader of the House to reconsider the answer he gave to the shadow Leader of the House about the possibility of a statement being made by the Home Secretary next week on the Brixton prison break-out.
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that two allegations were made in the programme in question?
One was about the alleged involvement of the special branch.
The other — equally damaging and important — was the allegation that the Home Office knew about the police involvement.
The right hon. Gentleman seems to be saying that, as we would expect of the British police, when a serious allegation is made, the chief constable of one force arranges for a senior officer of another to investigate the allegations, and everything about that investigation is laid bare for the public to see.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
The hon. Gentleman should ask a question.
Mr. Ewing
Just as the Home Secretary used the prison officers as a scapegoat for the break-out —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is a matter for debate; it is not a question.
Mr. MacGregor
I have nothing to add to the point that I made about the statement.
The hon. Gentleman's allegation about my right hon. Friend is absurd and wrong.
Mr. Robin Maxwell-Hyslop (Tiverton)
As returning stolen goods is different from aid, will my right hon. Friend ensure that, when the Foreign Secretary makes a statement on the return of the gold stolen by the Labour Government with the assistance of the then leaders of the Liberal party and is replaced in the Bank of England to the order of the Governments of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, that statement is not confused with an agreement on giving aid, which is a wholly different matter?
Mr. MacGregor
My right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary is sitting beside me and has heard my hon. Friend's question.
Mr. John P. Smith (Vale of Glamorgan)
I draw the attention of the Leader of the House to early-day motion 220.
[That this House is dismayed at the failure of Her Majesty's Customs and Excise to provide adequate services at Cardiff-Wales Airport; considers it to be an absolute dereliction of duty to fail to provide continuous customs monitoring of international flights into the airport; notes that travellers are advised to ring the Customs Office at Barry Maritime Docks in the event of their having anything to declare; and, given the potential danger of terrorist activity, drug smuggling and other illegal activities, demands the immediate restoration of a full customs service forthwith.]
May we have an early debate on the restructuring that is taking place in Her Majesty's Customs and Excise which has left Wales's international airport without customs and passport control?
With regular flights arriving from Amsterdam, Miami and Cyprus, it raises serious questions about increases in terrorist activity, drug smuggling and other illegal activities.
That will worry hon. Members on both sides of the House, and we should discuss it at the earliest opportunity.
Mr. MacGregor
I assure the hon. Gentleman that Customs continues to monitor international flights into the airport.
Customs staff will continue to attend and challenge passengers on the basis of the assessed risks of illegal importations of, for example, drugs, obscene material and the instruments of terrorism to which he referred.
Mr. Ivan Lawrence (Burton)
Although we are a parliamentary democracy and would expect to take nearly every final decision in this place, is there not a body of respectable constitutional opinion that says that, if we propose to transfer the democratic accountability from a Westminster Parliament to an unelected European Commission, or even an elected European Parliament, the British people are entitled to take a view on the matter?
Furthermore, is my right hon. Friend aware that we are unable to vote on that matter —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is a question of debate.
The hon. and learned Gentleman must not make a speech that he might make if I were to call him.
Mr. Lawrence
I do not think that I shall be called, Mr. Speaker.
Moreover, even if I were called, there is no opportunity to vote on the issue.
May we have a debate next week or as soon as possible to consider whether we should have a referendum at any stage and in what circumstances?
Mr. MacGregor
Those are obviously matters that can be discussed in today's debate, so I see no need for a further debate.
I entirely share the views which my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister expressed this afternoon.
Dr. Kim Howells (Pontypridd)
Will the Leader of the House consider allocating time to look at planning requirements as they affect former nationalised industries such as the regional electricity boards, which continue to behave as though they were not in business for profit?
They position their pylons anywhere they choose and act as though they were still the strategic industry that they were once defined as.
Mr. MacGregor
The hon. Gentleman must use the time available to him in the normal way to debate that matter.
I see no opportunity to debate it in Government time.
Mr. Richard Tracey (Surbiton)
The hon. Member for Copeland (Dr.
Cunningham) asked about the economy of London.
May I draw the attention of my right hon. Friend the Leader of the House to the further deterioration in the state of local government in the London borough of Lambeth?
A
Labour woman councillor has suddenly resigned in mysterious circumstances in St. Martin's ward and the council is now seeking to block information to the public.
Will my right hon. Friend ask the Secretary of State for the Environment to investigate the matter and make a statement to the House about the deepening trough of local government in Labour-controlled parts of London?
Mr. MacGregor
I shall certainly draw my hon. Friend's point to the attention of my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
May we have a statement next week on the working of the Crossbows Act 1987, which was enacted after a number of serious incidents?
The Act limits the possession of crossbows to those over the age of 17.
In view of the serious incident that took place last night in Bradford, may we have a statement on the working of the Act to examine the possibility of a licensing system to curb even further the possession of such potentially highly dangerous weapons and to prevent a repetition of last night's attack?
Mr. MacGregor
I cannot promise a statement, but the hon. Gentleman knows that it will be possible for him to raise the matter at other times, such as on the Adjournment.
I shall draw his remarks to the attention of my right hon. Friend.
Maastricht
Mr. Gerald Kaufman (Manchester, Gorton)
A debate such as this imposes a special obligation on those who take part in it.
We must define not simply the position that the Government should take at Maastricht and not simply the outcome that we want.
We must define the Europe that we want to see far beyond Maastricht and how we believe that the Maastricht summit can assist in achieving that Europe.
Let us be clear that we should not think merely of the Europe of the Twelve.
Twenty years ago, the European Economic Community was the Six.
With the adhesion of the United Kingdom, Denmark and Ireland, it became the Nine.
Since then, three further countries have joined.
Four more have applied to join, including Sweden and Austria.
Their membership, which cannot and should not be long delayed, will surely be followed by that of the remaining European Free Trade Association countries.
By the middle of this decade, the European Community may be 18.
It could soon afterwards be 20 or more.
The narrow European Economic Community of the 1960s is developing into a wider European Community which could eventually stretch from the Atlantic to the Urals, from the Arctic Circle to the Bosphorus.
It will be a wider Europe that is a community of sovereign states not artificially welded into a super-state.
It will be a wider Europe that is a social Europe, with the protections of the social charter.
It will be a Europe that recognises that transnational commerce and industry, with all their powers, are tolerable only if there are effective mechanisms to safeguard employed people — men and women, their families and retired people — who might otherwise have no defence against the demands and requirements of vast corporations operating on a continental scale.
That wider European Community will be a different Community from the one that we know today.
Even if it is desirable, it will not be possible to hold it together through the tight control of a bureaucratic Commission.
National sovereignty and popular sovereignty in a Europe so wide will require not only more effective national Parliaments but Europewide instruments to express and administer Europe.
Such a Europe will require more deeply entrenched and pervasive democracy at both national and European levels.
That is what the participants at Maastricht ought to think about and what the House should direct the Government to think about.
Mr. Jonathan Sayeed (Bristol, East)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Kaufman
I will give way in a moment.
How can an unprecedented association of nations which come together voluntarily govern itself effectively, responsibly and responsively?
Mr. Sayeed
The right hon. Gentleman will be aware that the agenda of the United Kingdom civil service is set by Ministers of the Crown, whereas the European Commission has the sole right of initiative.
In other words, an unelected body decides what it will consider.
Does the right hon. Gentleman consider that acceptable or democratic?
If not, what would the Opposition do?
Mr. Kaufman
It is neither acceptable nor democratic.
In a moment I shall say what the Opposition propose.
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for intervening on that point.
Mr. Tony Marlow (Northampton, North)
I should be grateful for some clarification.
I have been looking at the Opposition amendment.
I have had a little difficulty with it.
It is probably my fault.
There are 31 lines in it, which makes it somewhat longer than the Government motion, which the right hon. Gentleman criticised.
The Opposition amendment talks about achieving a single currency as an essential foundation.
Does that mean that every Opposition Member who supports the amendment tonight is fully in favour of a single currency?
Mr. Kaufman
If the hon. Gentleman would be good enough to read the amendment carefully, he might conceivably understand it.
If he does not understand it, I guarantee that if my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) catches the eye of the Chair, even the hon. Gentleman will be fully educated on the matter.
We say that a wider Europe must be a more democratic Europe.
It must be more democratic at every level.
On agreed and worked-out policies, one country in the ministerial Council should not be able to hold up the progress of the European Community as a whole.
Mr. Tony Favell (Stockport)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Kaufman
I will proceed for a moment.
If I am not held up too much, I will gladly give way to the hon. Gentleman.
On social and environmental matters, the Labour party believes that there should be qualified majority voting in the ministerial Council, which is composed of a group of men and women already democratically accountable to their national Parliaments.
Mr. Favell
The right hon. Gentleman was a Member of the House in 1975 when the Government, under the leadership of Lord Wilson, recommended a referendum to the people.
Indeed, he probably even helped to draft the document’ Britain's New Deal in Europe’.
I believe that at one time he was the Prime Minister's press officer and, indeed, worked in his office.
In the document under the heading’ Will Parliament lose its power?’—
Hon. Members
Reading.
Madam Deputy Speaker (Miss Betty Boothroyd)
Order.
The hon. Gentleman is making an intervention.
I hope that he will be speedy with it so that we can make progress and that he will not read from the document before him.
Mr. Favell
The document says that no important new policy will be made without the consent of a Minister answerable to the House.
Mr. D. N. Campbell-Savours (Workington)
The hon. Gentleman is misquoting.
Mr. Favell
I am not misquoting.
The Labour party now departs from that.
Is not it right that that departure should be put to the people?
Why does his party object to a referendum now, when the right hon. Gentleman supported it then?
Mr. Kaufman
The hon. Gentleman's memory of history is wrong.
At that time I was a Member of Parliament.
I was a junior Minister and I took advantage of the dispensation which enabled me to vote no in that referendum.
But, unlike the hon. Gentleman, I accepted the outcome of the referendum.
I voted and expressed my view.
The result went against the way in which I cast my vote.
As a democrat, I accepted the outcome of the referendum and I see no reason for another.
Mr. Budgen
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Kaufman
No.
The scope of the ministerial Council should be extended.
That is why the Labour party believes that common foreign and security policies should be developed.
On an ad hoc basis, the Community is already feeling its way towards such common policies.
There has been a common approach to South Africa, the middle east and the Salman Rushdie death sentence.
Those are contributions towards a common foreign policy.
Admirable, if so far unavailing, efforts have been made to end the conflict in Yugoslavia.
That approach is an element in the development of a common security policy.
It will take some time to work out comprehensive and coherent common foreign and security policies.
At that stage, we can consider qualified majority voting on those matters.
The scope of the ministerial Council should not go beyond what is appropriate to the role of the Community and should not usurp the satisfactory work of organisations which already exist.
That is why the Labour party opposes a defence role for the Community.
First, Europe's defence needs are already satisfactorily met by the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation, which is inherently more effective than any alternative because it includes the transatlantic nations.
Secondly, some members of the Community and some applicants — Ireland and Sweden, for example— would find difficulty in being members of a Community with a defence role.
Thirdly, a really effective and comprehensive defence structure for the European Community would be viable outside NATO only if it inevitably involved aspirations for a nuclear capacity.
The Labour party is opposed absolutely to the creation of a new nuclear power, especially one with 12 or more fingers on the nuclear trigger.
In response to the intervention by the hon. Member for Bristol, East (Mr. Sayeed), a more democratic Europe cannot continue to accommodate a non-democratic Commission.
That is why we want to make the Commission democratically accountable.
Since it cannot be accountable to national Parliaments, it ought to be accountable to the European Parliament.
It might be appropriate to give the European Parliament rights of confirmation for Commissioners, and it could be worth considering giving the Parliament rights of recall of Commissioners as well.
The European Parliament should be given further additional powers: powers to initiate proposals for legislation, which would be considered by the Commission and the Council of Ministers; powers of second reading on social and environmental decisions by the Council of Ministers.
Mr. David Ashby (Leicestershire, North-West) rose
Mr. Kaufman
I shall not give way, as I have already done so several times.
Mr. Speaker has announced how many hon. Members wish to take part in the debate.
The proposals for the Council of Ministers, the Commission and the Parliament should be part of the negotiating brief for United Kingdom Ministers at Maastricht, as should proposals on economic and monetary union, to which my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Monklands, East (Mr. Smith) hopes to refer later in the debate.
Not only are the proposals right in themselves, but many of them might win support at Maastricht.
A positive United Kingdom approach — good for Britain and good for Europe — could win us partners and allies at Maastricht who could support Britain's positive proposals, could associate themselves with us on proposals by others that we oppose, and could be counterparts in the give and take involved in any negotiation.
Mr. William Cash (Stafford) rose
Mr. Kaufman
I shall give way because I need a drink of water.
Mr. Cash
The right hon. Gentleman said that, when he went to the European Parliament in 1987, he was, to say the least, a reluctant European.
Could he explain how, in the following five or six years, he has made such a massive transformation?
Is it because he is hoping that there will be a socialist Europe?
Mr. Kaufman
It is because I accept democratic change.
Whether or not I like Acts passed by this Parliament, if it passes them I accept them.
The right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), in her wisdom, guillotined the Single European Act through the House and it became an Act of Parliament.
I accept the law.
That is the reason why I have accepted the changes that have taken place.
Our charge against the Government is that they have next to no positive proposals for Maastricht on the subjects that I have mentioned or on any other subjects.
Yesterday, the Prime Minister started his speech by announcing that he would specify’ what we can accept’at Maastricht.
That is not what the United Kingdom will propose, with the intention of winning acceptance from others, but what we will accept, as proposed by others.
He then went on to provide a long list, not of items that we could accept, but of items that we could not accept.
His speech was a litany of’ we will not accept’and’we will not agree’.
He used that phraseology over and over again.
The hon. Member for Ruislip-Northwood (Mr. Wilkinson) intervened in the Prime Minister's speech and asked him to specify the Government's aims and objectives at Maastricht.
The Prime Minister evaded the question and never replied to it.
We still do not know what the Government's aims and objectives at Maastricht are.
What about the word’ federal’?
At Luxembourg in June, the Foreign Secretary got upset when that word was mooted.
He said:’ We've got real problems with this.’
Last month he changed his attitude.
In his offhand way he dismissed’ federal’as’only a word’.
Recently it seems to have been bringing him out in anxiety attacks once again.
He skirted warily around it today.
He should have seen the face of his right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley when he evaded answering a question about the word’ federal’.
After three ministerial speeches, we still do not know whether the Government would veto a treaty at Maastricht that contained the word’ federal’.
I take it that the Foreign Secretary will give me an answer to that question.
Mr. Hurd
That question has been answered three days running.
It was certainly answered by me to the Select Committee, as the right hon. Gentleman, who attended the Committee, will know.
It was answered by the Prime Minister yesterday and by me again today.
We could not accept a treaty that contained either a commitment at the beginning to a federal vocation or a review clause at the end — this is the question I have just answered — which implied or stated that the result of the review must be a movement towards federalism.
It is perfectly clear.
Mr. Kaufman
We still have not heard from the right hon. Gentleman —
Mr. Ian Bruce (Dorset, South) rose
Mr. Kaufman
No, for the moment they are the Government and they will be at Maastricht, so let us find out what they will do in three weeks.
The Minister of State, Foreign and Commonwealth Office (Mr. Tristan Garel-Jones)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way
Mr. Kaufman
No, I am dealing with the Foreign Secretary, who gave me a circumlocutory reply to a question that I did not ask him.
Will the Government veto a draft treaty
Hon. Members
Would you?
Mr. Kaufman
This is the Government for the time being.
At Maastricht, will the Government veto a treaty that contains the word’ federal’, yes or no?
Mr. Hurd
We have said yes three times now.
The word occurs twice in the present draft and I have explained in some detail why it is not acceptable on either occasion.
What would the right hon. Gentleman do in those circumstances?
It seemed to be implicit in the speech by the Leader of the Opposition yesterday that the federal vocation is no obstacle to him.
Is that true?
Mr. Kaufman
I am not talking about the phrase,’ federal vocation’.
What I asked the right hon. Gentleman — and what he has still not answered — is, would the Government veto a treaty with the word’ federal’in it?
Mr. Garel-Jones
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Kaufman
No.
Mr. Garel-Jones rose
Mr. Kaufman
No — not the office boy.
There have been three interventions —
Several Hon. Members
Give way.
Madam Deputy Speaker: Order.
Mr. Kaufman
There have been three interventions on this matter but the Foreign Secretary has not said yes or no to the question.
Mr. Garel-Jones rose
Mr. Kaufman
No.
Mrs. Edwina Currie (Derbyshire, South)
On a point of order, Madam Deputy Speaker.
Surely we should check the microphone system in the House.
I do not know what the right hon. Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) heard, but I distinctly heard the Foreign Secretary answer yes on several occasions.
Madam Deputy Speaker: That is barely a point of order for me.
I can hear most people in the House, including the hon. Lady.
Mr. Kaufman rose
Mr. Garel-Jones rose
Mr. Kaufman rose
Several Hon. Members
Give way.
Mr. Kaufman
If the Foreign Secretary is ready to say that he will veto such a treaty, I shall give way to let him do so.
The Minister of State is not yet the Foreign Secretary and there is little time left for him to become Foreign Secretary.
Then there is the problem of qualified majority voting on foreign policy issues.
In June, the Foreign Secretary told the House that the Government opposed all extensions of qualified majority voting.
In his speech in the debate on the Gracious Speech three weeks ago, he changed his tune.
He spoke about not liking majority voting on foreign policy’ matters of substance’and on’substantial decisions’in foreign policy.
He did not completely rule out qualified majority voting on foreign policy issues.
The right hon. Member for Finchley was right yesterday to express concern from her point of view that the Foreign Secretary was a bit wobbly on majority voting.
After his speech today, we still do not know where he stands on that matter — not on the draft to which he was referring but on the principle of extended majority voting.
It is ironic that the right hon. Member for Finchley was pitched out of office a year ago today as a direct consequence of that’ no, no, no’with which she infuriated the right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe).
Yet under her successor, the Government have not advanced beyond no, no, no.
The negative approach of a year ago is unchanged.
The Government have made little progress beyond the position that the right hon. Lady set out.
But there is one basic difference.
The right hon. Lady said no, no, no out of firm conviction.
She said it because she believed it.
She challenged everyone — the Community, Parliament and her own party.
It may have been war, but in a way it was magnificent.
The present Prime Minister says no, no, no, not out of conviction or courage.
He says it not because, like the right hon. Lady, he challenges his party, but because he is afraid of his party — and one could never accuse the right hon. Lady of that.
The motion that the Prime Minister has proposed for decision by the House tonight is intended to be so meaningless that any Tory Member can vote for it while interpreting it to suit himself or herself.
The right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) can vote for it because he is opposed to a single currency, and the right hon. Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath) can vote for it while advocating a single currency.
The right hon. Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) can vote for it while being reluctant to concede any more sovereignty to the Community, and the right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East can vote for it because he is in favour of conceding more sovereignty to the Community.
It is ironic that those two Members were allies in forcing the Madrid conditions on the exchange rate mechanism on the right hon. Lady and they are now at odds over further developments in the Community, but they can still both vote for this meaningless motion.
Sir Teddy Taylor rose
Mr. Kaufman
The chairman of the Conservative party can vote for the motion because he is opposed to a referendum, and the right hon. Lady can vote for it because she advocates a referendum.
At Question Time today, the Prime Minister, in ruling out a referendum, boasted that the right hon. Lady in her speech yesterday had promised him her full support.
After what he has now said about a referendum, he had better watch out.
Not only may she offer him her full support, she may say he is unassailable.
The right hon. and learned Member for Surrey, East said yesterday that he would vote for the Government because the Prime Minister was clearly determined to follow a path that the right hon. and learned Gentleman favoured.
The right hon. Member for Finchley said yesterday that she would vote for the Government because they were following a path that she favoured — in precisely the opposite direction.
This is not a clear path to Maastricht that the Prime Minister has set out.
It is a maze in which Tory Members wander blindly, from time to time colliding with each other.
When tonight those Tory MPs have all voted for the Prime Minister's motion — for different and often conflicting reasons — the Prime Minister will claim that his motion has given him a mandate for Maastricht, when he stands for nothing at all.
It is as though the Prime Minister is trying to paint a canvas in the style of Georges Seurat, if I may be forgiven for referring to a continental artist.
It will be recalled that Seurat was a pointillist who filled his canvas with dots.
When he stood back, he could see that he had created a superb landscape with figures.
The Prime Minister fills his canvas with dots all right, but when he stands back, all he sees is a mass of dots.
The Prime Minister dare not present a clear picture, because such a picture would annoy some group or other in the Tory party.
He cannot look our European partners in the face, because he is preoccupied with looking over his shoulder at his own party.
His negotiation at Maastricht is not with fellow members of the Community but with fellow members of the Tory party.
The deal he seeks to make at Maastricht is not with the Twelve but with the 1922 Committee.
The right.
hon. Member for Blaby blurted out the truth on television on Sunday when he said that what the Government were aiming for was’ what the Conservative party would accept.’
Mr. Nigel Lawson (Blaby)
Characteristically, the right hon. Gentleman has totally misquoted what I said.
I said I was confident that the Government would come back from Maastricht with something that was acceptable to the Conservative party.
Interruption
Mr. Kaufman
Not only has the right hon. Gentleman made an idiot of himself by that intervention, but he has achieved the interesting feat of misquoting himself.
The words I quoted —’ what the Conservative party would accept’— come not only from the transcript of’On the Record’but from even holier writ, The Daily Telegraph, on Monday.
The Prime Minister claims that he wants to be at the heart of Europe, but his real objective is a bypass operation.
The Prime Minister will brandish his meaningless majority after the Division tonight and claim it as a mandate for Maastricht.
But this is a Prime Minister uniquely without a mandate.
He is Prime Minister not by the vote of the people but by the votes of 185 Tory Members.
I saw yesterday how the Prime Minister winced when the right hon. Member for Finchley said:’ our authority comes from the ballot box.’
Not only have the people never voted for the Prime Minister at the ballot box: they have consistently and persistently voted against him at the ballot box.
The Prime Minister has the worst by-election record in British political history.
He is the only Prime Minister in the history of the United Kingdom to have lost every by-election during the period of his premiership.
Even the right hon. Member for Finchley did better than that.
The Prime Minister goes to Maastricht without a mandate or an agenda.
He goes there talking about paper sovereignty, when the country's real sovereignty is increasingly dependent on the actions of our European Community partners.
He proclaims a determination to defend our national currency.
Yesterday, the Chancellor of the Exchequer had the cheek to intervene in the speech of my right hon. Friend the Leader of the Opposition on the national currency, when this week has shown that the Prime Minister and the Chancellor are powerless to defend our national currency against movements in the markets in Community countries and elsewhere.
Mr. Anthony Coombs (Wyre Forest)
Will the right hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Kaufman
No, I shall not give way.
Yesterday's Financial Times reported:’ An additional factor deterring international investors from becoming involved in UK markets was the perceived disarray in the Conservative party ahead of today's two day Commons debate on Europe’.
Successive Chancellors have had to acknowledge that, too often, the parity of the pound and the level of interest rates are determined not in the Treasury or even the Bank of England, but in the Bundesbank.
What kind of sovereignty is that?
That is the reality of Europe.
We in Europe are all increasingly interdependent, and our sovereignty depends not on empty phrases and petty posturing but on recognition of that interdependent relationship and the part that we play in it.
To fail to play a positive part in the deliberations at Maastricht is to surrender Britain's true interests.
It is to let others make the decisions while pretending that we are free to stand apart, unscathed and unaffected, when every decision taken without our full participation will affect our country's future, perhaps for generations.
Because the Prime Minister did not have the backbone to call a general election this month, Labour will be absent from Maastricht — That is the only reason.
The Prime Minister did not call an election on 7 November, because he knew that he would lose it then.
Some time in the first six months of next year, an election must take place.
Even this dithering Prime Minister cannot evade it.
Interruption
A Labour Government will be able, therefore, to play some part in the meetings in Portugal between January and June and they will take the chair at the meetings in the United Kingdom from 1 July onwards.
By fighting for the ideal of a strong Britain in a wider, deeper and more democratic European Community, that Labour Government will be fighting for a true and meaningful British sovereignty.
Mr. Edward Heath (Old Bexley and Sidcup)
The House may think that my views are already well known.
If so, it enables me to speak briefly in this great debate and it will avoid the interventions of so many of those who are opposed to me; they already know my views.
When the Prime Minister said, on his appointment, that he wanted Britain to be at the heart of Europe, my heart leaped with joy.
That joy was echoed right across Europe.
Other European countries said that the new British Government would be positive and co-operative and would put forward proposals for bringing about the completion of the European Community, for which they had been working for the past 40 years.
I believe that that is the Prime Minister's intention, which is why I shall strongly support him tonight.
I also believe that at the conference he will use all his persuasiveness to enable the European Community to move ahead.
I have no desire to smear or jeer at the Opposition and the fact that they have now declared themselves fully in support of the Community, because that is a matter of intense pleasure to me.
They recognise full well that, if that had happened in the 1950s, 1960s or 1970s, the story of this country in Europe and of the Community would have been different.
However, that is history.
Today we must welcome the fact that the three major parties in this country all agree about the importance of the Community.
I regard it from the point of view of the importance to our people, our country and Europe as a whole.
I confess that I sometimes wonder whether the thought of Europe as a whole is in some people's minds, particularly when we discuss our friends in the Community and their actions.
Some of them do not always stick to the regulations as we should like.
Although we are better than most, we are not entirely immune to that accusation.
No development is helped by accusations and counter accusations between members of the Community.
Mr. Giles Radice (Durham, North)
And Albania.
Mr. Rees
He was there too, but he behaved extraordinarily bravely during the Yugoslavian campaign.
Most hon. Members would not appreciate that.
The Germans, with their long-term policy in favour of Croatia and Slovenia, had to have seven divisions in Yugoslavia to hold them down.
I played a small part in the air war.
Anybody who believes that Yugoslavia could be dealt with as Saddam Hussein's Iraq was dealt with had better look at the terrain.
The Serbs, with whom the right hon. Gentleman was fighting, who were fighting in the mountains, held up seven German divisions.
The Italians were involved in a divided-up Croatia.
The EC was romancing when it talked about dealing with the Yugoslav problem.
There is no way of dealing with that country unless one redraws the boundaries, and that would be a difficult task.
It is not enough just to have a common foreign policy.
A common foreign policy means nothing if it cannot be implemented.
On defence, if America is not involved, Germany or France will become the main nuclear power in Europe.
It is important to remember that.
There could not be a European defence force that was not a nuclear power.
I would prefer America rather than France, Germany or ourselves to be the nuclear power.
That raises other issues.
The political side also relates to defence.
The first time that I heard of Maastricht was on 12 May 1940, when the RAF was shot out of the sky and knocked on the ground.
Fairey Battle squadrons went in to attack bridges over the canal at Maastricht.
They were massacred.
Politicians of all parties should realise how foolish they can be.
Two young men won the Victoria cross at that time.
They deserved the VC.
The then politicians led them into battle without the right equipment and without a proper defence agreement.
Of course, there was a defence agreement with the French, but what it added up to was mere chat.
If there is to be a defence agreement, it must be in terms of integration of weaponry, what the targets are, and the supply of equipment.
The day after the Maastricht massacre, the French general commanding the arme e de l'air said, that he was sorry, but they were the wrong targets; that was not where the Germans were.
By the time they were located, the Germans were into France.
It is not enough to have a political policy, and it is not enough to have a defence policy just to give it a name.
It will not happen that way.
Therefore, we must watch matters very carefully.
The decisions will be taken in the next Parliament, when I will not be here.
Nor will 60, 70 or even more hon. Members when they lose their seats, plus another 100 or so who will retire.
It is not the place of this House to take final decisions.
It is up to the new Parliament to take final decisions.
We are simply conducting a holding operation.
My hon. Friend the Member for Newham, South (Mr. Spearing) advises me, as he always does, that a Bill amending the treaty will be before the House.
It is important that we do not hand to our successors decisions made at the end of a dying Parliament; we should leave them to take the decisions in future.
We should take it easy and not be led by the nose by the Commission or by the Council of Foreign Ministers.
Let us not always be looking for great change.
Let us see how it goes.
Important changes will also take place in economic affairs, but it is the next Parliament that will matter.
I have tried to end my speech before 7 o'clock, because many other right hon. and hon. Members want to contribute.
I will finish by looking back — which, at my age, I do far too often.
I have taken my children to the battlefields of north-east France as a result of which their grandfather died because of the foolishness of politicians.
We must judge the second world war differently, but let us make sure that we do not repeat the mistakes that so many politicians thoughout Europe made over the past 100 years.
They made elementary mistakes for which young men died.
We must think hard.
Just after the war, I taught in a grammar school, and one day the French assistante said to me,’ This school will clap itself to death.’
I begin to believe that the House will clap itself to death one day.
We think that we are so good and do everything absolutely correctly, but of course we do not.
We sneer at the European Parliament, but it is time that we looked at Europe in other than a partisan way —’ Ha ha, ha.
Did you hear what happened?
Did you hear what he said?
Wasn't that funny?’
We should look to the future, and if we make mistakes young men and women will die.
I do not want my grandchildren to do what their grandfather did, or even marginally what I had to do.
Several Hon. Members rose
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Sir Paul Dean)
Order.
I remind the House that the 10-minute limit on speeches is now in effect.
Sir Geoffrey Finsberg (Hampstead and Highgate)
I agreed with much of what the right hon. Member for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees) said at the beginning of his speech, but I did not go along with his closing remarks.
I want to make one comment about the referendum before dealing with the main subject of my speech.
I won a marginal seat and have held it on five successive occasions.
I believe that real democracy is allowing voters to decide in a general election and not in a referendum, which is a totally different thing, and one that is alien to my concept of democracy.
My party is a broad church, with room for many shades of opinion.
I urge my right hon. and hon. Friends — be they pro or anti-European fanatics — to remember that voters will not support a party that is riven by doubts or dissent.
The voters will write off the Opposition, whose policies are now purely hypocritical and do not matter.
I appeal to my right hon. and hon. Friends to realise that elections are lost by a party that is divided.
I turn to defence and security issues, and speak as the leader of the United Kingdom delegation to the Western European Union and to the Council of Europe.
I much regretted the dismissive attitude taken by my right hon. Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath), who has clearly totally forgotten that the Western European Union was revitalised, added Spain and Portugal to its ranks, and produced the Hague platform — which provided for the WEU's nine members to defend their borders, with nuclear weapons if need be.
It undertook out-of-area activities in respect of minesweeping in the Iran-Iraq war, and of the sanction stopping of ships during the Gulf war.
My right hon. Friend cannot write off the WEU as simply and as simplistically as he did.
Recently, both the Franco-German and Italian-British defence proposals were presented, followed by the valuable NATO conclusions.
Again, I disagree with my right hon. Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup in his comments on NATO, which were so childish as to be not worth considering.
I will inform the House of the conclusions of the parliamentary assembly of the Western European Union, which comprises elected members from the Parliaments of France, Germany, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Luxembourg, Belgium, Holland, and the United Kingdom.
In December 1990, the parliamentary assembly’ adopted a position opposed to certain proposals for WEU to be integrated in the European Community, Its view was that, if implemented, these proposals would weaken the Atlantic Alliance and also Europe's ability to play a useful role on the world stage.
The Assembly therefore recommended that the Council pursue the reactivation of WEU in order to allow Europe to play a more effective part in NATO.’
That decision was carried overwhelmingly, with the support of all four of the political parties represented in the WEU.
Subsequently, the presidential committee, which runs the WEU between assemblies, decided to offer advice to both the Council of Ministers and the intergovernmental conference.
I was given the task of preparing a document, which was adopted without opposition in March 1991 by all nine nations and all four political parties.
I will quote from it, because it is important to do so in the context of the reasons that have been given for not giving the WEU control of defence.
’ WEU could establish a link between a Europe in the process of unification and an Atlantic Alliance in the process of transformation and thus provide the vehicle for a stronger Europe to contribute more to joint security WEU must be at one and the same time the means of allowing Europe to make its voice heard in a Euro-American dialogue’— it must never be forgotten that Europe must always have an input into that dialogue —’of which the Atlantic Alliance is the institutional framework and the instrument for making the most of the European contribution to the defence of the West This contribution of Europe is the more essential in that the American military presence on the continent of Europe, reduced since the war in the Gulf, will remain below what it was in the past Defence policy should continue to be made in the organisations which assure collective defence, NATO, and WEU.
It should be a task of the European Council to reach conclusions on common foreign and security policy.
These would serve as a guideline for co-operation within WEU on defence matters’— not control, but guidelines.
A linked theme, to which my right hon. Friend the Member for Blaby (Mr. Lawson) and others referred is the position of the members of the former Warsaw pact, who desperately want to be accepted and acknowledged as democratic.
I had the privilege of leading two teams of Council of Europe observers to elections in east Germany and, recently, Poland, and I have spoken to Bulgarians, Hungarians, and Czechs — the last two are now full members of the Council of Europe.
They realise that their route to the Community can be opened only if their countries are practising real democracy in respect of human rights, and multi-party Parliaments — although I said to my Polish friends,’ You can go a bit too far.’
More importantly, in the light of the events in Yugoslavia, whose guest membership of the Council of Europe is likely to be suspended, those countries must provide proper protection for minorities.
The question of protecting minorities is one that will pose a real danger to Europe in the next five years.
It is simplistic to say that one should recognise Slovenia or Croatia.
If one did so now, that would unleash some of the most horrible massacres in the other states of what was Yugoslavia.
However, I acknowledge the tragedy of not recognising those two states.
I do not propose at this stage to try to provide an answer.
I only say that it is the route of the Council of Europe that has been recognised by the Community as leading to Community membership itself.
That cannot be bypassed, because one cannot have in Community membership countries that do not follow the concepts of democracy and human rights.
I address a final word to my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister and to my hon. Friend the Financial Secretary.
When they go to Maastricht, they will face difficult choices and tasks.
They should remind their opposite numbers that their own parliamentarians — the French, Germans, and Italians — all subscribed to the view that the defence issue to which I referred should not be brought within the European Community.
The Prime Ministers and Foreign Secretaries of France, Germany, Italy, the Benelux or wherever should be reminded that they will have to account to their own Parliament.
I advise the right hon. Member for Morley and Leeds, South that the advantage of organisations such as the Council of Europe and the Western European Union is that they are composed of Members of their own national Parliaments who have roots inside democracies, and that those parliamentarians have spoken and have said no to the inclusion of defence in the competence of the European Community.
I hope that that will be of some help to my right hon. and hon. Friends.
It is something on which they can rely and something that their colleagues in other countries will find difficult to deny.
Mr. Giles Radice (Durham, North)
The European Community is one of the great success stories of the post-war world.
As the Soviet Union collapses, the European Community, which is a union of free peoples, gathers strength.
It is already a community of 12 members, and it could be a community of 20 by the beginning off the next century.
It is the world's greatest trading bloc and, with economic and monetary union, it could have the world's strongest currency.
As the Foreign Secretary pointed out this afternoon, it increasingly takes a co-ordinated view of foreign policy issues.
It is inconceivable that, by the end of the century, it will not also have a common defence identity.
Whatever we do, the nation states of Europe wil increasingly combine.
They will do so of their own volition, which makes the analogy with the Soviet Union or Yugoslavia patently false.
The form that that closer union takes will be sui generis.
It will be partly federal and partly confederal, but whatever form it takes, go ahead it will, whether we like it or not.
The question for the nation and this House is whether we participate in the process of union or stand aside.
I agree with the Prime Minister that we must be at the heart of Europe, working with our partners to build Europe's future.
For too long, the British have been reluctant Europeans — for understandable reasons, because our strong sense of national identity has been shaped by our exceptional history.
Unlike the other 11 members of the EC, Britain has not experienced serious military defeat, occupation, civil war or revolution for at least 200 years.
At the end of the war, as one of the victors, we still believed in the absolute viability of the independent nation state.
Our parliamentary tradition and constitutional development and our system of law have set us apart from the continent.
I agree with my right hon. Friend the Member for Morley and Leeds, South (Mr. Rees) that, because of our world empire, we looked outwards, across the Atlantic, rather than to the mainland of Europe.
However, since 1945, our past has proved a poor guide.
In the post-war world, our power has been reduced.
We are now no more and no less than a medium-sized European power.
Sadly, a whole generation of political leaders — and even some of their successors today, if what we have heard in the past two days is right — have failed to face up to that fact.
When our decline in influence and shift in interest argued strongly for participation in Europe, they remained ambivalent about those whom they thought of as’ unreliable continentals’.
We have heard some of that from the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit).
As a consequence, Britain squandered crucial opportunities over the Schuman plan in 1950, over the common market in 1955 and 1957, and over British entry into the European monetary system in the late 1970s and 1980s.
In the end, after allowing those proposals to go forward without us, we were forced to join after the terms had been fixed.
It was a classic failure of political leadership.
We must not make the same mistake again.
Therefore, it is the Government's duty to explain why Britain has to be involved in the process of economic and political union which will be launched at Maastricht.
Geographically, Britain is a group of islands off the mainland of Europe.
Historically and culturally, it has always been linked to the continent.
Strategically, what happens there has always been and is bound to be of vital interest to Britain.
Economically, we cannot afford to be excluded from a group that includes most of our main trading partners, including our biggest partner of all, the Federal Republic of Germany.
I believe that the Government understand those inescapable facts.
They know perfectly well that we cannot afford to be left out.
They know that, if Britain is really to remain at the heart of Europe, we must sign — if not at Maastricht, then soon after.
The Government should tell the House the truth about that.
They should stop pretending that they are in a position — that the country is in a position — to refuse to sign the treaties.
They should stop portraying themselves as doughty defenders of a Britain that is besieged by marauding continentals.
That was always the portrait that was painted by the right hon. Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) and I am afraid that that is occasionally true of the present Prime Minister also.
That may go down well with some Euro-sceptics among Conservative Members, but it infuriates our partners and reduces our influence in the Community, as I know only too well.
Equally vitally, the Government are failing to make a positive case for European integration.
Listening to the Prime Minister, one gets little idea that a single European currency would end transaction costs for business and tourists; eliminate exchange rate instability; provide a stable environment for growth and be the most powerful currency in the world.
One certainly would not understand that the real choice was between de facto membership of a deutschmark zone in which we would have no influence and membership of a single currency system in which we would have a stake.
Above all, the Government have failed to point out that the doctrine of sovereignty, so frequently espoused by the right hon. Member for Finchley, is totally out of date.
The British concept of parliamentary sovereignty is basically a hangover from Tudor despotism, with little relevance today.
It fails to comprehend the weakness of the House of Commons when the Government have a majority.
It fails to guarantee civil rights, as our lamentable record at the European Court of Human Rights shows.
It underwrites the British state, which is the most centralised in the whole of the European Community.
Equally important, it does not correspond to the facts of the modern world.
For over 40 years, we have shared sovereignty in NATO, as the right hon. Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath) rightly pointed out.
For the past 20 years, developments in the capital and financial markets have drastically reduced our autonomy in economic management.
Since we joined the EC in 1973, we have lost sovereignty in the areas of trade and agriculture.
Later, with the Single European Act and British membership of the exchange rate mechanism — the right hon. Member for Finchley took us into that — our sovereignty was further eroded.
For a medium-sized power such as Britain, the best way to maximise our influence is to pool sovereignty by combining with others.
Most European nations understand that, which is why they want to be active members of the European Community.
The fact is that there is no alternative to working with our partners in the EC.
That point has been reinforced in this debate by the total failure of the Euro-sceptics to come forward with any positive idea about Britain's role.
We have not heard a single word.
They have made interesting and occasionally convincing criticisms, but they have totally failed to suggest an alternative future for this country.
I congratulate my right hon. and hon. Friends on the positive case that they have made on behalf of the Labour party, especially for common environmental policies and for minimum social standards as proposed by the social charter, which has been agreed by 11 other countries.
My right hon. and hon. Friends have also rightly emphasised that, if one intends to make Community institutions more accountable, one must increase the powers of the European Parliament.
They are right to say that.
Labour's positive agenda opens up the prospect for the first time since we joined the Community in 1973 of Britain participating constructively in the European Community.
That is the only way of securing the future of the British people.
Mr. Norman Tebbit (Chingford)
I shall not take up the argument of the hon. Member for Durham, North (Mr. Radice); it would be unwise to do so.
This is a strange debate because, although the motions on the Order Paper tabled by both the Government and the official Opposition parties are long on words, they are short on relevance to the vital questions raised by the draft treaties which will be discussed at Maastricht.
The real issue was put in possibly the best speech that I have heard in this place by the right hon. Member for Chesterfield (Mr. Benn) last night.
The question that he put is the right question: are the British people to be governed by those who are accountable to them, or those who are unaccountable or accountable to others?
That question is not on the Order Paper.
That is why tonight's vote will be interesting but irrelevant.
In a short speech, I shall not attempt to make again the points made so tellingly by others, not least my right hon. Friends the Members for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher), for Shropshire, North (Mr. Biffen), for Cirencester and Tewkesbury (Mr. Ridley), the right hon. Members for Bethnal Green and Stepney (Mr. Shore) and for Plymouth, Devonport (Dr. Owen) and my hon. Friend the Member for Stafford (Mr. Cash).
In his speech, the Prime Minister set out the weak position from which he negotiates on economic and monetary union.
He told us that he would not accept a treaty that was not in Britain's interest.
I am sure that that is so, but he also reminded us that, if he vetoed the draft treaty, the 11 other member states would go outside the treaty of Rome and sign a currency agreement of their own, leaving us out.
Bonne chance, say I, as did my right hon. Friend the Member for Cirencester and Tewkesbury.
But the Prime Minister has declared that that would be unacceptably damaging to us.
Indeed, my right hon. and learned Friend the Member for Surrey, East (Sir G. Howe), in a speech right out of the defeatist book which is kept at the Foreign Office, seemed to declare that a nation with its own currency could not survive in the days of the ecu.
Tell that to the marines, and especially the Japanese marines.
If the Prime Minister is convinced that we cannot be excluded from the single currency, he cannot afford not to sign the treaty.
If that is so, he is not negotiating but pleading for terms.
The Prime Minister says that signing the treaty is merely taking an option on the right to join.
But the option has two costs.
First, whether in or out, we would bear the cost of supporting the economies which had been made non-viable by the single currency.
That is the price of regional aid or structural spending.
Secondly, we should have made a moral commitment to the single currency.
Why pass enabling legislation to do what most Members of the House and most voters do not want to do?
Why get engaged if we do not truly intend to marry?
I remind the House that couples in the intimate atmosphere of engagement sometimes find that pregnancy arises and the shotgun marriage follows.
Leaving aside the issue of sovereignty — not of the House but of the people to self-government — the devil of the single currency is not merely that the economies of the Community are simply not convergent and would be prevented from converging by a single currency, but that they are not all at the same point in their economic cycles.
The exchange rate mechanism is a voluntary prototype for a single currency.
That is why, when the French economy was screaming for lower interest rates, President Mitterrand increased them the other day.
The German economy and the Bundesbank — independent, I am told — are screaming for higher interest rates.
But interest rates are not raised.
It would be madness indeed if the ERM was allowed to force an interest rate rise in Britain.
I suspect that there is a deal, spoken or unspoken, which further undermines the Prime Minister's negotiating position.
I think Chancellor Kohl has indicated that he knows the risk to the Government's chances of re-election if interest rates have to be raised in Britain.
He may have said that there will be no increase in German rates before Maastricht — indeed, hopefully, so long as the treaty is signed, not before our general election.
’ That, John,’says Helmut,’is what European solidarity is about.’
But what chance of help if the Prime Minister vetoes the treaty?
After all, thinks Helmut, if interest rates rise, perhaps Labour will come in, which is a soft touch not only on the single currency but on political union.
I am glad that the right hon. Member for Islwyn (Mr. Kinnock) follows the joke.
It is the only thing that he has followed so far in the debate.
Interruption
There is only one way for the Prime Minister to strengthen his hand.
He should legislate now for a referendum to be held once the negotiations at Maastricht are complete.
It should put simple yes or no questions on whether the European monetary treaty — and, if there is one, the political treaty — should be accepted.
He should say,’ It is not me you must persuade, Helmut, but the British people.
In Britain it is they who are sovereign.’
In the final minutes available to me, I turn to the proposals for political union.
On that matter I stand where my right hon. Friend the Member for Old Bexley and Sidcup (Mr. Heath) stood on 24 May 1971.
He said:’ There are certain administrative arrangements which are handled by the Commission and which are clearly defined in the Treaty of Rome, and they cannot go beyond their powers.
But our view is that it is the Council of Ministers, representing member countries, who must take the decisions.’
He went on to emphasise the importance of the national veto and said:’ When I urged that there should be democratic control, I had in mind that Ministers are the representatives of their Governments and they are the ones who take the decisions.
They are responsible to their own democracies.’
Amen to that, say I. I have not changed my mind, even if my right hon. Friend has changed his.
A week or so ago I heard — others may have done so, too — Lord Cockfield assert that’ the British people had no moral right and probably no legal right’to resist the demands of a federal Europe.
We can argue about what’ federal’means, but Chancellor Kohl knows that he is head of a federal state.
All the important issues, such as the economy, foreign affairs, defence, immigration and social affairs, are dealt with in Bonn.
The rest is left to the provinces.
In a federal Europe, that would be the pattern.
With England, Scotland, Wales and Ulster seen as provinces like Saxony or Aquitaine, what role would there be for the Government or Parliament of the United Kingdom?
Not only must federalism be stopped in its tracks.
The treaty of Rome should be amended to uphold the union of nation state and exclude a federal destiny.
In the words of Winston Churchill, who has been much quoted already in the debate:’ We are with Europe but not of it.
We are linked but not comprised.
We are interested and associated but not absorbed and should European statesmen address us in the words which were used of old — Shall we speak for thee to the king or captain of the host?'— we should reply, Nay sir, for we dwell among our own people'’.
That remains my view today.
I repeat that the question on the Order Paper tonight is irrelevant to the question before the House and the country.
We might be asked just as well to vote on any three pages picked at random out of’ Alice in Wonderland’as on the motions before the House tonight.
How can one vote in such circumstances?
My right hon. Friend the Foreign Secretary recently came out of his negotiations with, among others, our French partners, and, in his diplomatic way, observed that, like Waterloo, it had been hard pounding.
I yield to no one in my admiration for the great Iron Duke himself, but my favourite general of the Napoleonic wars was General Kutuzov.
I shall follow his example.
Mr. Nigel Spearing (Newham, South)
I have disagreed with the political views of the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit) on many occasions, but he has just highlighted what might be called self-government and he rightly pointed out —
Interruption
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Sir Paul Dean)
Order.
Will hon. Members who are leaving the Chamber please do so quietly?
Mr. Spearing
The right hon. Gentleman said that the self-government of this country is in peril and, while I disagree with his domestic politics, he is right to point that out.
My hon. Friend the Member for Durham, North (Mr. Radice) has a vision of an international society, but the treaty before us — including the treaty of Rome — is not an international treaty.
That is why many Opposition Members have consistently and persistently been against it.
Mr. Brian Sedgemore (Hackney, South and Shoreditch)
Right on cue, a convert rises.
Undoubtedly, the people in this country who are the most excited about Maastricht are the young.
Well they might be, because they have most to gain from the creation of a single European currency and political union.
I outlined my views on both those subjects on 15 June 1990 in a 40-minute speech.
I shall not attempt to repeat what I said then, for repetition makes bores of us all in the House; I am glad, however, that the scepticism that greeted what I had to say about the benefits of a single European currency has since been replaced by understanding and support in several quarters.
The translucent message from the corridors of power, in Europe and in Whitehall, is that a single currency will be established, and that we shall be part of it.
The point of no return has been passed.
I consider the idea that the issue should be decided by a referendum nothing short of bizarre.
In the run-up to such a referendum, do the Government really intend to put through the letterboxes of Britain 17 million textbooks entitled’ Fixed Exchange Rates and the Economic Consequences of EMU, by John Major’?
Judging by the speech that the Prime Minister made yesterday, he is as capable of writing seriously about such matters as was Don Giovanni of writing a book entitled’ Everything You Wanted To Know About Celibacy’.
Speaking more generally, I suppose that I could sum up the Prime Minister's speech — without rancour — as timid, devoid of national purpose and lacking in inspiration.
As he spoke, I asked myself whether the next 100 years of British history were to reflect the barren nature of his personality: the answer must be never, never, never.
In my view, the creation of a single currency will be a major determinant of the course of British history during the next 100 years.
I do not think that we should either underestimate or understate the magnitude of its consequences.
I believe that monetary union is political union, and that the creation of a single currency is federalism.
Indeed, the creation of a single currency is federalism without democracy.
That is why the treaty on political union at Maastricht cannot be seen as some troublesome adjunct to the treaty on monetary union.
The treaty on political union must begin to supply the democratic foundations of a devolved democratic federal system of government, without which monetary union will never survive.
The one is inconceivable and unworkable without the other.
Recently, an ambassador told me that issues such as defence and foreign policy were surely on a different plane from economic issues, involving as they did considerations of history, culture and identity.
That is a plausible thesis; certainly, foreign policy and defence complicate the issue of political union and the directon of federalism.
Let us consider this, however.
One does not need to be an economic genius to understand that, when a country goes to war, the value of its currency is threatened, often decimated.
Does any hon. Member seriously think that, after Britain has signed up for a single currency, we could go to war on our own and expect the 11 countries who share the same currency to stand idly by and see the value of their currency wrecked, for ever depreciating, just because Britain was in one of its periodic warmongering fits?
Of course not.
With a single currency in place, that could no more happen than the Government of the United Kingdom could today allow Wales or Scotland to go off and fight a war of its own.
With a single currency, a common defence and foreign policy becomes inevitable and inexorable.
One of our tasks in the House is to explain that honestly to the public.
I am, of course, conscious that, as a convert to some important aspects of European integration, I risk being impeached for a lack of consistency; however, I am always happy to recall the words of Ralph Emerson, who said:’ A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored by little statemen and philosophers and divines.’
That brings me naturally to the scribblings of the right hon. Member for Chingford (Mr. Tebbit).
He provides the intellectual thrust and gravitas of the arguments of those who oppose monetary and political union.
He set out his views in May 1990 in that weighty political magazine — I have a copy — The Field.
His article is illustrated with huge colour photographs of the white cliffs of Dover in case the alligazoos who read it were tempted to miss the point.
The right hon. Member for Chingford said that he cannot go along with the negotiations at Maastricht because he wants to protect Britain from’ rabid dogs and dictators’— some might say from himself.
He said:’ Sterling looks set to be masticated by EMUs, ERMs and ECUs before being made fodder for that monetary successor to the Panzer, the Deutsches Bundesbank.’
Have you noticed, Mr. Speaker, how the right hon. Gentleman is moderating language and style in his old age?
There is no mention of U-boats or the Luftwaffe.
In his ignorance, the right hon. Member for Chingford — I have given him notice of this — sees British history as a continuum stretching back to the dawn of time.
He is quite unable to understand that the political settlement of 1688 had little in common with what went before, that the post-1832 settlement had little in common with the 1688 settlement and that the political situation today has virtually nothing in common with the post-1832 settlement.
Resolved, That this House, believing it is in Britain's interests to continue to be at the heart of the European Community and able to shape its future and that of Europe as a whole, endorses the constructive negotiating approach adopted by Her Majesty's Government in the Inter-Governmental Conferences on Economic and Monetary Union and on Political Union; and urges them to work for an agreement at the forthcoming European Council at Maastricht which avoids the development of a federal Europe, enables this country to exert the greatest influence on the economic evolution of the Community while preserving the right of Parliament to decide at a future date whether to adopt a single currency, on issues of Community competence concentrates the development of action on those issues which cannot be handled more effectively at national level and, in particular, avoids intrusive Community measures in social areas which are matters for national decision, devlops a European security policy compatible with NATO and co-operation in foreign policy which safeguards this country's national interests, increases the accountability of the Commission, enhances the rule of law in the Community including improved implementation, enforcement and compliance with Community legislation, improves co-operation between European governments in the fight against drugs, terrorism and cross-border crime, and through these policies secures the long-term interests of the United Kingdom.
Accommodation and Works
Ordered, That Mr. Patrick Cormack, Mr. Geraint Howells, Dame Jill Knight, Mr. David Lightbown, Mr. Geoffrey Lofthouse, Mr. Ray Powell and Mr. Donald Thompson be members of the Accommodation and Works Committee.
Administration
Ordered, That Mr. Jacques Arnold, Sir Charles Irving, Mr. Allen McKay, Mr. Stanley Orme, Mrs. Marion Roe, Mr. William Ross and Mr. Tom Sackville be members of the Administration Committee.
Catering
Ordered, That Mrs. Irene Adams, Mr. Don Dixon, Mr. Alan Haselhurst, Mr. Michael J. Martin, Mr. Colin Shepherd, Mr. Anthony Steen and Mr. John Townend be members of the Catering Committee.
Information
Ordered, That Mr. Spencer Batiste, Mr. Andrew F. Bennett, Mr. Huw Edwards, Sir Ian Lloyd, Mr. John McFall, Sir Fergus Montgomery and Mr. Gary Waller be members of the Information Committee.
Adult Education (Croydon)
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Mr. Humfrey Malins (Croydon, North-West)
I am delighted to have the opportunity to raise on the Adjournment the question of adult education in Croydon, and to see you, Mr. Speaker, in the Chair, because you and I are privileged to represent constituencies in Croydon.
It is an area of great variety.
It is renowned as a business and commercial centre.
In Croydon, a large number of people from different ethnic backgrounds live and work happily side by side.
In many ways, it is a thriving area, although it is not without its pockets of deprivation.
It is certainly an area where a variety of different needs and different expectations exist.
For many years, we have been fortunate in the excellence of the Croydon borough council, and nowhere is this more true than in its education department.
In my time, I have known two outstanding directors of education, Donald Naismith and Paul Benians; and two very fine chairmen of education, Councillor Derek Loughborough and Councillor Andrew Pelling.
Members of the education department and councillors alike have constantly striven to provide a high standard of education for as rich and diverse a society as one can imagine.
Nowhere is this more true than in adult education.
In Croydon, the continuing education and training service is a free-standing adult education service, with a history of providing an important access point for those with needs for basic skills.
It provides English for speakers of other languages, training for employment, accreditation and qualifications, as well as many opportunities for those who wish to follow a variety of general adult education courses.
The large programme is planned on a borough-wide basis, and delivered locally in 11 centres.
Three of these are full time, day and evening, and are used exclusively by adults: Coombe Cliff, South Norwood — in your constituency, Mr. Speaker — and Smitham.
Last year, there were some 42,000 enrolements, representing 28,000 individual students.
Some 60 per cent.
of enrolments are for vocational courses and 40 per cent.
are for leisure courses.
I know that you, Mr. Speaker, recently visited the South Norwood centre, and that you were mightily impressed by everything that you saw.
I, too, was privileged to visit that centre and the one at Coombe Cliff, in the company of Margaret Davey, the head of continuing education and training service, and of Barbara Holland, who looks after South Norwood.
What we both saw was impressive: adults of all ages atending a wide variety of courses.
Keep fit was taking place alongside book-keeping; languages and embroidery were next to jobsearch; cookery and pottery were adjoining computer studies; upholstery was alongside management training and business start-up.
The atmosphere was friendly.
It was informal and, above all, accessible — evidence, no doubt, of the absence of entry requirements and the availability of fee concessions for those most in need.
In the centres, the general public as well as students are made to feel welcome, and the atmosphere is overwhelmingly adult.
I can well understand that many older and less confident people feel comfortable and unthreatened in such places.
Such a service is unique in the way in which it works through and with other partners, in both the voluntary and statutory sectors.
Voluntary organisations have a key role in the total range of provision for adults and are strongly supported in Croydon.
Three examples are the university of the third age, the south London refugee project, and the Croydon action group for the unemployed, where aspects of specialist work are undertaken, with the support of the adult service.
Croydon's free-standing and continuing education and training service is cost-effective, vigorous and efficient.
The net cost per student hour is about half what it is in the local colleges.
It has a distinctive role in Croydon, quite separate from the large further and higher education college and yet there is still considerable collaboration with many joint projects and attention to progress routes into further education and beyond.
I have a concern — the Government have sought to divide courses at centres into vocational on the one hand and leisure on the other.
The implication is that responsibility for running vocational courses will rest with colleges, who will themselves apply to the funding council for money to run such vocational courses.
So-called leisure courses will be left with the local authority in the adult education centres.
Mr. Harry Greenway (Ealing, North)
As chairman of the all-party adult education committee, I congratulate my hon. Friend on this most important debate.
Does he agree that there is another worry about separating vocational from non-vocational adult education?
If one separates them, it may be assumed that vocational courses are more valid than non-vocational, but nothing could be further from the truth.
Mr. Malins
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for that intervention, because his expertise on this subject is well known, as is his general understanding of the problems involved.
I hope to touch on the subject that he mentioned shortly.
In Croydon dividing courses could have a number of damaging effects.
Great damage could be caused to the prospects of the adult education centres, where currently vocational and so-called leisure courses exist happily side by side.
The centres might have to go cap in hand to the Croydon college and the two sixth-form colleges in the borough asking their governing bodies to apply to the funding council for funds for vocational courses, in the hope that funds would be obtained on behalf of the adult education centres.
A large part of their excellent work might disappear.
There is a strong link between so-called vocational and so-called leisure courses.
The person, for example, who is nervous or diffident or who has, or might have, unhappy memories of school, may initially have the courage to join a pottery or dancing class.
Having plucked up the courage, he or she will find perhaps in the next room a course in Spanish or computer studies.
He or she may well progress from one to the other.
Surely that is to the general good.
The Bengali lady who enrolled in an English cookery class, so that she could provide English food for some of her son's chums at school, is likely next to take a GCSE in English and help prepare herself for a job that may be just around the corner.
The hesitant middle-aged gentleman who was brave enough to join a keep fit class later found himself confident enough to join the neighbouring management training and business start-up class, and grew in confidence and ability to the extent that he opened up a new business.
Such is the inextricable link and the social cohesion brought about by a variety of classes under the same roof.
My concern is that the criteria for college eligible for funding, through the new funding council, will exclude a clearly successful service and a supportive authority such as that found in Croydon.
The result could surely be a damaging split between the different types of courses, with responsibility for the eligible areas potentially fragmented between the further education college, sixth form colleges and the remainder.
The so-called leisure and recreation programmes would be the responsibility of the local authority and might become too small to be financially, organisationally or educationally viable.
If they went, what a loss it would be.
Is there not a strong argument for the free-standing services such as Croydon's continuing education and training service to be able to bid direct to the funding council rather than through the new sector colleges?
Another concern relates to premises.
The three buildings in Croydon which are exclusively dedicated to the education of adults are intensively used as an important access point for people following general non-vocational, basic skills, accredited and work training programmes.
They are used to capacity — daily, at weekends and holidays — and they are a valuable resource used by the voluntary sector.
If the new sector colleges were able to apply for the use of those premises it could jeopardise the adult ethos and character of the provision and would subsequently deny many adults their first step back into education.
I am not exaggerating when I say that I was inspired by all I saw at the adult education centres in Croydon.
I dare say that you too, Mr. Speaker, were inspired by all you saw, and of course you have visited them all over the years and have great experience of this subject.
For that reason, I am desperately concerned for their long-term well being, and I know that that sentiment is shared by you, Mr. Speaker, and by many thousands in Croydon, including my right hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, South (Sir.
W. Clark) who I am delighted to see in his place for this debate — I welcome his support — and by my right hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, Central (Mr. Moore).
I cannot end this short debate without paying tribute to the Government, who have without doubt recognised that adult education is vital — that adults are an important client group who have education and training needs well worthy of Government interest and support.
That is well recognised by the Government, to whom much credit is due.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Alan Howarth)
I am grateful, as is the House, to my hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, North-West (Mr. Malins) for providing us with this opportunity to consider education for adults in Croydon.
The House always appreciates the close interest which you, Mr. Speaker, take in Adjournment debates initiated by hon. Members on the Back Benches, but you will have an even greater personal interest than usual in this debate.
Croydon is indeed a borough fortunate in its parliamentary representation.
We also have present my right hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, South (Sir W. Clark), so there is powerful representation in the House tonight in the interests of adult education in Croydon.
I am grateful to my hon. Friend the Member for Croydon, North-West for two reasons.
First, I am pleased that by means of this debate, we are able to look closely at one particular education service for adults.
Secondly, I am glad to have the opportunity of relating the framework of our Further and Higher Education Bill, which has today been debated in another place, to the education for adults as it take place on the ground.
The importance that we attach to the further education of adults will be clearly demonstrated through this debate.
My hon. Friend has vividly described the features of the Croydon education and training service, which is one of the largest services for adults in the London area.
It has an impressive enrolment count and a strong place in the local community.
It establishes this place through a dispersed service which is accessible to the community at large, using a mix of dedicated facilities and the premises of schools and colleges.
My hon. Friend demonstrated his close knowledge of the service in Croydon and made clear his commitment, and that of his hon. and right hon. Friends who represent Croydon constituencies, to the provision of a diverse and consistently high-quality service.
Much of the provision in Croydon falls within those areas of priority which the Government have identified in the legislation — that is, courses leading to qualifications, basic skills courses, courses in English as a second language and access courses.
The community is served in the widest sense through an open access policy which welcomes adults at whatever educational stage they have reached.
It is also served by the good links which the service has established with the local training and enterprise council and with industry.
I welcome the partnership it has established with voluntary organisations.
Those are considerable strengths.
Our policy on the further education of adults will pose no threat to them.
Indeed, it will enable the Croydon education and training service, along with all others, to preserve the characteristics of their provision, including their community role, and to build on their strengths.
I am grateful to my hon. Friend for his recognition of our firm commitment to the further education of adults.
As he will know, our reforms for further education as a whole are designed to provide enhanced opportunities for both young people and adults and to provide a further stimulus to increased participation.
We have provided for the transfer of further education and sixth form colleges to a new sector, which will be funded directly by new further education funding councils in England and Wales.
We believe that the new funding regime will give colleges an even greater incentive to recruit additional students and to expand participation accordingly.
For students — young people and adults alike — it will mean more opportunities to gain new skills, obtain qualifications and develop fully the roles that they need to fulfil themselves at work and as citizens.
Our proposals, as set out in the White Paper’ Education and Training for the 21st Century’, have been generally welcomed.
But my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science and I were aware of some uncertainty about the place of adults within the new policy framework and the arrangements that would apply to them.
We clarified a number of points before the legislation was introduced.
The Bill addresses other concerns in a way that serves to underline our firm commitment to all kinds of further education for adults.
Few of the provisions of the Bill belong uniquely to the 16-19 age group, but some have a very special application to the provision of further education for adults.
I shall describe those provisions and how they will work for the adult sector at large, including the Croydon education and training service.
The Bill provides a clear duty for the provision of all kinds of further education for adults.
The whole scope of the present duty set out in the Education Act 1944 as amended is retained.
We intend that, in future, it should be divided between the funding councils and LEAs.
Within their respective duties, the councils and LEAs will each be required to take account of students with special educational needs.
The funding councils' duty will embrace courses leading to academic and vocational qualifications; access to higher education courses; courses that provide access to qualification-bearing courses and higher education courses; basic skills courses; courses in English for speakers of other languages and, in Wales, courses leading to proficiency in Welsh.
Those are the Government's priorities.
They will be secured by the funding councils working through the colleges within the new sector.
They cover courses which the Government believe should be secured at national level because of their national significance.
The second strand of the duty to provide further education for adults falls to the local education authorities.
Their duty covers all kinds of further education for adults that do not come within the scope of the funding councils' duty.
By contrast with the duty placed upon the councils, the LEAs' duty can be characterised as being generally of a more local nature and best catered for locally.
It is a duty that goes very wide.
It covers the provision of courses that meet the leisure interests of adults, but also many other important interests.
Courses coming within the remit of the LEAs' duty can help people progress to more advanced courses — my hon. Friend made that important point — help them in their jobs and prepare them for various roles, such as good parenthood, or for responsible functions within the wider community.
They can make a significant contribution to the general health and well-being of individuals and local communities.
The whole scope of the duty to secure provision for adults as it will be divided between the funding councils and LEAs will continue to be supported from public funds.
My right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Education and Science made clear on 24
September that, in calculating the transfer of funds from local authorities to the funding councils in recognition of their new responsibilities, the resources attributable to those courses for which the LEAs will continue to be responsible will be left within local authorities' standard spending assessments.
That means that there will be no question of our reforms causing fees to rise.
LEAs will continue to be able, as now, to respond flexibly to local demand and to the needs and circumstances of their local communities, taking account of the ability of students to pay fees.
My hon. Friends the Members for Croydon, North-West and for Ealing, North (Mr. Greenway) have referred to a vocational/non-vocational divide within our proposals.
I hope I can reassure my hon. Friends that the framework of duties within the Bill does not create such a divide.
The provision for which the funding councils will be responsible goes well beyond the purely vocational.
Similarly, the duty upon LEAs can lead to provision which serves ends useful to the individual within his work, such as foreign language classes.
The arguments which have been advanced that our proposals create a distinction between two types of provision is not borne out either in terms of the legislation or in practical terms.
It is important to underline the role of access and progression within the proposed framework.
My hon. Friend has mentioned the strong link between provision which falls respectively to the duties of funding councils and LEAs.
We attach great importance to widening access as is evident from the Bill.
Certain kinds of access have been given priority and fall to the duty of the funding councils, but progression routes from LEA sector provision to more formal qualification-bearing courses are also important.
Mr. Douglas
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for his courtesy in giving way.
If I understand him correctly, he is proceeding to make an argument for putting Polaris and its equipment into a bargaining regime with the Soviet Union.
How was it possible in the late 1980s to put Trident into a bargaining regime, when we will not possess it until late 1994?
Will he explain that?
Mr. O'Neill
The hon. Gentleman and I may have some disagreements, but I have respect for his command of basic arithmetic.
We were endeavouring to develop the policy that would become the programme of a Labour Government who would take power in about 1990-91 and remain in office until about 1995-96, by which time we would have the beginnings of the Trident programme.
Both the Trident and Polaris systems, whether clapped out or in embryo, were legitimate areas of concern for negotiation at that time.
We saw a case for considering what our nuclear arsenal would be and whether it was completely necessary.
I shall answer the hon. Gentleman's question about Trident in a couple of minutes.
Mr. Wilkinson
I am trying hard to follow the hon. Gentleman's logic.
In what sense would it be a wise policy for the United Kingdom to consider putting forward Polaris or, ultimately, Trident for negotiation with the Soviets on nuclear capabilities?
Even if we were to obtain substantial concessions and eliminate all our strategic nuclear weapons, we could not eliminate all theirs, so we would merely leave them with a residual capability which would be overwhelming and a continual menace to ourselves.
How is that good for the security of the British people?
Mr. O'Neill
Obviously, the hon. Gentleman has not grasped what I implied.
I said that the Soviet Union was not interested in doing a bilateral deal.
The Soviet Union was indifferent to that.
What was important was that in the event of a START treaty marking the end of the START process — the discussion on nuclear disarmament between the main nuclear powers — the secondary nuclear powers, such as ourselves, France and China, should try to retain, maintain or, indeed, establish a dialogue with the Soviet Union.
That was the context of our policy in 1989.
I freely admit that things have changed since, but that was part of the argument.
We wanted to retain what the Soviets had called a process.
We wanted that process to continue.
We were fearful that a halt or a delay would result in other unfortunate occurrences in the Soviet Union.
When my right hon. Friend the Member for Manchester, Gorton (Mr. Kaufman) and I visited some European capitals and Washington, it was clear to us that the whole character of the theory of nuclear strategy was under review.
Germans of all parties were resistant to further deployments of short and medium-range forces.
The Soviets were willing to reduce those forces.
There was the prospect of eliminating the disparity between the Warsaw pact and NATO conventional forces and of short-range nuclear forces filling that gap.
The traditional justification for short-range nuclear forces was that, as we did not have the number of forces to match those of the Soviet Union, we would use our short-range nuclear forces as a potential deterrent.
There were increasing public expressions of scepticism about arguments such as the’ use them or lose them’theory for tactical nuclear weapons.
The argument goes that if we had short-range nuclear weapons at the front, in the event of a rapid advance there would always be the danger that a commander would have no choice but to use those weapons, either because he could not get rid of them back to headquarters, or perhaps to start a nuclear conflagration.
At that time, it was becoming increasingly clear in discussions of nuclear strategy that strong voices were in favour of NATO moving towards a commitment of no first use of nuclear weapons.
Labour unveiled its policy on defence and disarmament in May 1989 — after all the public expressions of the shadow Cabinet that the Secretary of State quoted today.
If he looks at the dates of all those expressions, he will see that we published our statement in May, even after my hon. Friend the Member for Dagenham (Mr. Gould) had made his remarks.
Mr. Tom King
What about the hon. Member for Barking (Ms.
Richardson)?
Mr. O'Neill
My hon. Friend was not quoted.
Mr. King
I thought that the hon. Lady was there, too.
Mr. O'Neill
My hon. Friend was a member of the committee.
Our policy was clear.
We were committed to the continuance of Britain's nuclear programme.
The British Polaris submarines would stay on patrol and the Trident programme would proceed.
We felt, however, that the accuracy of the new system, the flexibility of use that the extended range afforded and the improved refit and maintenance arrangements all meant that it would be easier to have at least one boat available at all times, although we were to have only three.
Since then the increase in warning time has merely served to reinforce the view.
That view is not the preserve of the Labour party.
A number of naval and maritime strategists have questioned the need for a fourth boat.
James Eberle, for example, the former head of Chatham House and former chief of naval operations in the Atlantic, has supported it.
As the Secretary of State said, the tendering process for the fourth boat has started.
Should it be completed before the next election, the Labour Government will be in a position to examine the full costs of cancellation.
It has been suggested that the contracts for the earlier boats in the programme have entailed penal cancellation charges.
I say,’ It has been suggested’, because, for sound commercial reasons, the Government never make such information available.
The possibility of penal cancellation charges in the public domain is a rumour; I put it no more strongly than that.
If that were carried forward, the termination of the contract for the fourth boat could be more costly than its completion and subsequent deployment.
The Secretary of State shakes his head.
Perhaps he would care to tell the House the status of cancellation clauses, what the penalties would be and what that would mean for a future Government — Conservative or Labour — who decided to cancel.
That would be a major breakthrough and would certainly assist us in formulating our policy as we move towards government.
Mr. Tom King
The hon. Gentleman certainly needs assistance.
I have never heard a more hesitant and pathetic approach to the problem.
The hon. Gentleman must first decide where his responsibility lies.
Does he believe that a fourth boat is needed?
That is the point: is a fourth boat needed to maintain our deterrent?
If the hon. Gentleman thinks that it is not, why does not he have the courage to stand up and say so?
Whatever stage we have reached and whatever the problems with cancellation charges, given the running costs of the fourth Trident submarine, we are bound to save money in the long run.
One cannot duck the issue by pretending that the decision will depend on the date of the election and on which bills have or have not arrived from VSEL or other contractors.
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for trying to answer the question, but can he improve on that answer and tell the House clearly whether a Labour Government would or would not have the fourth boat?
Mr. O'Neill
The position is as I have stated and I will repeat it for the benefit of the right hon. Gentleman.
I do not personally consider that there is a need for a fourth boat.
In 1964, it was argued that we could not provide an adequate deterrent without five boats, but we took the decision to proceed with only four and we carried it through.
On the question of cancellation charges and other matters, the Minister has made it clear that he is not prepared to talk in terms of sums.
I do not think that even the right hon. Gentleman would be prepared to say that every programme remains the same, irrespective of costs.
Mr. John McWilliam (Blaydon)
Perhaps I may assist my hon. Friend.
The Secretary of State was being totally disingenuous because, if the cancellation cost of the fourth boat is the same as the cost of cancelling the first boat would have been, it would be cheaper to build the thing — so saving on the unemployment benefit that would otherwise be payable to the constituents of the hon. Member for Barrow and Furness (Mr. Franks)— and not deploy it.
Mr. Deputy Speaker (Mr. Harold Walker)
Order.
The Minister cannnot intervene in an intervention.
Mr. O'Neill
I am grateful for the intervention by my hon. Friend the Member for Blaydon (Mr. McWilliam), but I realise that the Minister responsible now wishes to intervene.
Mr. Alan Clark
The hon. Gentleman said that he personally does not want a fourth boat.
Can he say whether it is the Labour party's policy to have a fourth boat or not?
That was the question that he was asked by my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State.
Mr. O'Neill
The Labour policy is clear.
I am sorry if the Minister finds it difficult to understand that, when I say’ personally’in this respect, I mean that I am expressing my view and the view of my party.
Mr. Alan Clark
Ah!
Mr. O'Neill
I am glad that we have cleared the matter up.
Mr. Douglas
Have we?
Mr. O'Neill
May I ask you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to ask the clype behind me to be quiet?
If we are to have a serious debate, we can do without the barracking that passes as comment from the hon. Member for Dunfermline, West.
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
Mr. O'Neill
In the Labour party's view, the Government have not advanced an adequately forceful strategic case for a fourth boat.
We have made that clear ever since 1989 when we issued our policy statement.
We believe that the country can be adequately defended by three Trident boats.
If we find, on reaching office, that the programme is sufficiently far advanced to render it foolhardy to go back on it, we shall review the matter carefully.
We have said that consistently.
Mr. Franks
The hon. Gentleman will appreciate that what he is saying is crucial to the livelihood of thousands of people in my constituency.
I want to be absolutely clear precisely what he is saying.
I shall repeat it and, if I have it wrong, I trust that he will correct me.
As I understand it, he is saying that it is the official policy of the Labour party not to build the fourth boat and that his only reservation arises from the fact that certain clauses in the contract might make cancellation commercially prohibitive.
The hon. Gentleman is speaking from the Front Bench on behalf of his party.
I assume, therefore, that what he has said represents the majority view within his party.
Mr. O'Neill
It is the policy of the Labour party.
The hon. Gentleman can make whatever he wants of it, but it will still not save his seat.
Mr. Bruce George (Walsall, South)
Before the hon. Member for Barrow and Furness (Mr. Franks) gets on his high horse, perhaps he would care to consider the devastating consequences for his constituents — and any constituents involved in the manufacturing of submarines — as a result of the collapse of submarine orders.
Those who may at some stage look at VSEL's order books may care to consider that, even if the fourth submarine is constructed, the consequences for employment in such constituencies will remain severe because of what the Government have done in relation to naval and submarine construction.
Mr. O'Neill
The sea-launched ballistic missile system that we have been discussing does not account for all our nuclear arsenal and we must look at what is left.
Over the past 40 years, there have been shifts in nuclear strategy and changes in technology and in the appreciation of the perceived threat.
When all that was available was the free-fall bomb, air-delivered systems were essential to the deterrent, but, once the first land and sea-launched ballistic missiles were to hand, it was possible to have weapons systems that operated from comparatively safe sanctuaries and, in the case of Polaris, from the virtually impenetrable depths of the sea.
The introduction of MIRVing further improved the lethality and accuracy of the weapons.
Miniaturisation enabled small nuclear artillery shells to be produced and that, in its turn, made way for the development of the theory that we now call flexible response.
My right hon. Friend the Member for Leeds, East (Mr. Healey) was one of the main authors of that doctrine in the 1960s and today it enjoys some credibility due to the efforts of the present Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Defence, who has argued clearly for the theory of flexible response in a series of public lectures and articles.
Despite the quality of the logic, such theories are, in my view, based upon the flawed assumption that it would always be possible to deter the enemy by the controlled use of nuclear weapons of increasing size and on the assumption that nuclear war fighting could be discrete and managed.
But in battle as in life, as Robert Burns said:’ The best laid schemes o' mice an' men Gang aft a-gley’.
Certainly, many serious military men have always been fearful of the use or implied threat of short-range nuclear forces.
Many will be relieved at the announcement by the Secretary of State this morning that many of these weapons will no longer be available.
Nevertheless, we continue to be faced with a large empire whose structure is creaking and whose nationalities, after decades of Soviet subjugation and, in some cases, centuries of Russian imperialism, are seeking independence.
That third-world economy with a super-power arsenal could be in terminal decline.
The command and control systems for its nuclear arsenal may still be intact, but it is not clear whether the terms and conditions of the draft treaty will be adhered to.
It is not certain who wants to own which system.
We know that Russia would like to assume responsibility for the arsenal within its borders.
The positions of Byelorussia and Kazakhstan are less clear, while the Ukraine, with the nightmare of Chernobyl etched on its consciousness, wants to rid itself of those weapons.
We must help to clear up the confusion, dismantle — where appropriate — the weapons and assist in the disposal of the fissile material.
Until that capability is brought under systematic control, although the threat may have changed, it will still exist in some shape or form.
Ms. Joyce Quin (Gateshead, East)
On a point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
Have you received a request from the Department of Trade and Industry to make a statement on the sale of the Export Credits Guarantee Department?
We have heard that, far from realising the £100 million which was originally talked of, the sale may now fetch as little as £6 million.
That would be an appalling way to dispose of a valuable public asset.
Has there been a request for a statement on that subject?
Mr. Deputy Speaker
No, there has been no request to make a statement.
Doubtless, the hon. Lady's request will have been heard.
Mr. Cryer
Further to that point of order, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
I wonder whether the Treasury Minister has applied to make such a statement, because this concerns the Treasury as well as the Department of Trade and Industry?
Yet again, a piece of the family silver is being sold off at rock-bottom price, at great —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
I cannot add to what I have already said.
Mr. O'Neill
As I said, the Soviet nuclear capability needs to be brought under systematic control.
There is no division in the House on that matter.
It is fair to say that the problems created by those developments can be handled.
However, the uncertainty of the minor and near-nuclear powers remains — India and Pakistan are two obvious contenders.
The changes in American foreign policy may present grounds for optimism on that subject.
America's new attitude towards India may result in its having a great influence over that country in its relations with the United States' old ally, Pakistan.
I am not sure whether it is possible to have the same optimism about Israel in the middle east.
Indeed, it is most unlikely that Israel will give up its nuclear capability in the foreseeable future, so long as it foresees a threat to its land from its neighbour.
Mr. Andrew F. Bennett
Will my hon. Friend give way?
Mr. O'Neill
No, I should like to develop my argument.
I have allowed several interruptions and, although I do not wish to be discourteous, I should get on.
The problems of Iraq are well known.
We have seen that the inspection facilities of the International Atomic Energy Agency are completely inadequate.
Worthy though that organisation's aims may be, it has neither the resources nor the authority to undertake the vital work which the United Nations has given it.
Therefore, it must be incumbent on the Government of this country, as one of the Permanent Five and one of the main sponsors of the United Nations, to give a clear lead in seeking greater authority, support and resources for the IAEA.
In some countries, the prospect of inspection, verification and access is not as great.
I refer in particular to North Korea.
If there is one country that we would have difficulty in isolating, it is North Korea.
How can we isolate a pariah and a country which, by its own admission, does not wish to deal with most of the world?
The parts of the world with which it deals would probably not be too critical about its nuclear development anyway.
That is the most difficult and persistent area of non-proliferation.
There are grounds for qualified optimism because in the past 18 months South Africa has renounced its nuclear ambition, no longer considering that there is a regional threat to the authority of its state.
Argentina and Brazil have also decided that they will no longer pursue military nuclear development.
That have concluded that the differences between two democracies in South America are not great enough to warrant arming themselves to the teeth.
We must build on the experience of regional disputes which shows that there can be a role for international law, the United Nations and, above all, the permanent five of the Security Council.
That is where Britain, China, France, the United States and the components of what was the Soviet Union have a clear responsibility.
They must show potential proliferators that they are prepared to secure further reductions in their nuclear arsenals.
It has already been accepted that it is possible to de-MIRV ballistic missiles.
We must consider whether it would be desirable or possible to do so to sea-launched ballistic missiles.
It is often said that the quantitative increase in Trident firepower is to accommodate, or seek to pierce, the anti-ballistic missile defences that have been established in the Soviet Union.
The Secretary of State advanced that argument this morning when he was asked about the increase in the size of the Trident arsenal.
However, the Minister of State for the Armed Forces said, in answer to a question from my hon. Friend the Member for Western Isles (Mr. Macdonald):’ Under the 1972 United States-Soviet ABM treaty and subsequent protocols, the Soviet Union is limited to a maximum of 100 ABM launchers located within a radius of 150 km around either the national capital or one area containing silo fields.
Future Soviet ABM deployments are similarly expected to conform to the 1972 treaty and its protocols or any future renegotiations of the agreement.’
It may be helpful if, before the end of today's debate, the Secretary of State and his colleagues could get together to explain what they mean by the enhancement in the anti-ballistic missile capability of the Soviet Union which requires us to make a quantum leap in the warhead capability of the Trident programme.
If we could have an agreement on reductions in the number of warheads, it would show clearly that although we possess nuclear weapons, their scale does not have to be as great as we considered in the recent past.
There is still work to be done on maritime arms control.
Those hon. Members who take an interest in such matters will know that it is a hobby horse of mine.
However, as long as there is a Soviet nuclear presence in the Kola peninsula and Soviet forces in the numbers presently there, we shall continue to have a threat to our continent and to Norway, a state which we, more than any other country in NATO, are obliged to support.
Therefore, it is in our interests to address the problem of maritime arms control, to secure reductions in the size of the Soviet fleet and to reach agreement on the Greenland-Iceland-United Kingdom gap area.
Finally, we must work hard to convince our NATO colleagues that we do not desire the continued presence of short-range and tactical nuclear forces on the continent of Europe.
In short, we should be arguing for a third zero within NATO.
That is not to say that the Labour party would not have signed last week's communique — we would have.
We are democrats and accept that until we have convinced people by the force of our argument, we should go along with the view of the majority of the organisations of which we are a member.
We are not talking about jumping off or about creating unnecessary trouble, but we consider that that is a legitimate concern for a British Government —
Mr. Tom King rose
Mr. O'Neill
I shall give way to the Secretary of State in a minute.
He is entitled to have an opinion.
More than any others in the alliance, we have stated our willingness to host and to accept our nuclear responsibilities during the years that such forces have been present in Europe.
Mr. Tom King
I am grateful to the hon. Member for giving way.
He has made his position clear.
He is saying that he is not in favour of NATO's present policy of maintaining adequate sub-strategic forces based in Europe and of ensuring that they are maintained and kept up to date.
Although he has said that he is not in favour of that, he would nevertheless still keep them if that was NATO's decision.
The Labour party would make its contribution and support the sub-strategic nuclear weapons in Europe.
I take it that that is his view.
Mr. O'Neill
That is correct.
To make it perfectly clear, I repeat that we are not saying that Britain should acquire a subsequent follow-on generation of weapons to replace the free-fall bombs that are nearing the end of their useful life.
Mr. Wilkinson
That is an incredible contribution.
Mr. O'Neill
No.
On that issue, there is little enthusiasm in other parts of Europe for air-launched systems.
There is little requirement from other European members for Britain either to have or not to have such weapons.
At the moment, the moratorium that the United States has announced on the development of its tactical air-to-surface missile programme means that we would have great difficulty getting a credible system from the United States if we wanted one.
If we had to go to France, that would create other questions which may or may not be quite as acceptable to some of the hon. Friends of the Member for Ruislip-Northwood (Mr. Wilkinson), whose suspicion of things European have been evidenced — Not necessarily the Conservative Members who are present, but other Tory Members probably would not be quite so keen on — as they would see it — mortgaging their nuclear future to the French.
Interruption
Our view is that the maintenance, deployment and continued support for the sea-launched ballistic missile programmes of both Polaris and Trident would be sufficient for us to make a contribution to the defence of the west and of these islands.
Mr. Douglas
No.
Mr. Campbell
With the possible exception of the Scottish National party.
It will undoubtedly want to tell us why, in its new internationalism, it wishes to withdraw from NATO.
On the assumption that most parties in the House wish to remain in NATO, why is it necessary for the United Kingdom to have a capability of this kind, in addition to the United States capability?
If there is to be more defence co-operation in Europe, why is it necessary for Britain to have its own capability, in addition to that of France?
It is notable that in recent weeks distinguished former senior military commanders in the United Kingdom have questioned the need for the deployment of TASM.
I am thinking of General Sir John MacMillan and my distinguished constituent, General Sir David Young, with whom the Secretary of State has had many contacts in his present and previous responsibilities.
It may be argued that they had a particular point to make about regiments and an anxiety to see funds spent not in one direction, but another.
Nevertheless, the fact that senior commanders of such stature feel it possible to question something which, until now, has been an unchallenged assumption, should give the Government cause for concern.
I shall now say a word or two about what we should do, not just nationally, but internationally.
We should do our best to extend nuclear arms reduction beyond the United States and the Soviet Union.
We need a more comprehensive strategic arms reduction programme.
We need a programme that involves all five permanent members of the Security Council and those Russian republics to which the Secretary of State rightly referred in his opening remarks.
It is absolutely essential to ensure that, so long as the possibility of control or influence over the Russian republics remains, steps are taken to bring about a strategic arms reduction.
One has only to envisage circumstances in which all those upon whose territory strategic arms are stationed are required to come to the negotiating table to consider such a proposition to realise how much more difficult it would be if all, rather than a limited number, were participating.
We must also pursue a comprehensive test ban treaty.
We should respond favourably to Mr. Gorbachev's proposals for a moratorium on testing.
There seems to be a notable division of opinion in the United States.
The State Department appears to be in favour of that proposition, whereas the Defence Department is against it.
Meanwhile, in Congress, a number of Democrats have introduced a nuclear testing moratorium Bill.
I believe that it is in the interests not only of the United Kingdom but of the whole world that we should seek to pursue much more vigorously the possibility of a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing.
We must also pursue nuclear non-proliferation as vigorously as we can.
Reference has already been made to the alarming evidence obtained by United Nations investigators in Iraq.
The Secretary of State put before us a whole catalogue of countries that have ballistic missile capability, and a substantial number of them appear to have embarked on a nuclear weapons programme.
All that argues for the vigorous pursuit of nuclear non-proliferation.
It would be a strange irony indeed if, as Europe left behind it the threat of nuclear war, that threat were found to be arising elsewhere in the world.
In Europe, we want to create circumstances in which nuclear deterrence becomes less and less significant as the principles of common security are accepted and applied.
Equally, however, it is in our interests to persuade the rest of the world that it does not need to acquire nuclear weapons to achieve peace.
We shall best persuade it by the example that we set ourselves.
Mr. David Atkinson (Bournemouth, East)
The debate is timely for two reasons.
First, it enables us to take stock of the further dramatic proposals to reduce the nuclear threat between east and west since the START agreement in July.
Secondly, it enables us to take account of the knowledge that, as my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State said, had Saddam Hussein not allowed his greed to overcome his stealth by invading Kuwait last year, he would almost certainly have developed a nuclear weapon by the end of 1993.
Our priority must now be to consider anew not only the proliferation of nuclear weapons but how we can reverse that trend, which is so at odds with the end of the cold war.
Since 1987, the litany of successful treaties and agreements between east and west has been impressive.
In addition, precipitated by the failure of the Kremlin coup, the Bush Administration, fully supported by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, have made significant additional unilateral reductions, all of which have been met by similar unilateral cuts by President Gorbachev and accompanied by the promise of further bilateral reductions to come.
In Rome last month, the NATO summit agreed that the possibility of a nuclear war was now so remote that further substantial reductions in nuclear stockpiles can now be embarked upon.
The logical conclusion of all this is that there can no longer be a justification for the massive nuclear arsenals held by both sides, that only the absolute minimum of nuclear defence is required and that, because President Yeltsin, too, now has his finger on the nuclear button, we should now be doing business with him on this issue as on so many others.
As long as nuclear weapons exist, European security will not be complete, for any country, nuclear or otherwise, without the most foolproof means of defence against their delivery.
That is why it is essential that we should continue to develop the space-based defence, which was once called the strategic defence initiative or SDI and is now referred to as’ brilliant pebbles’.
President Reagan's 1983 offer to share SDI technology with the Soviet Union contained great foresight.
It should now be renewed, perhaps within NATO's proposed North Atlantic Co-operation Council, with central and eastern Europe and what is now the Union of Sovereign States — formerly the Soviet Union.
It would develop a Europewide shield to protect against attack from within and without as an essential piece of confidence building on our continent.
Although a nuclear threat seems inconceivable in this post-Communist, new world order of today, Saddam Hussein reminds us that, as my right hon. Friend the Member for Finchley (Mrs. Thatcher) said in the United States last week, human nature does not change.
Thus, it remains essential to maintain adequate defences against such dictators and to prevent the further proliferation of nuclear arms.
That is why I support the call of several hon. Members who have taken part in this debate for new consideration of how to make the 1968 nuclear non-proliferation treaty more effective.
For nearly half a century, the world has learnt to live with the bomb.
While the secret lay within the grasp of a few, there was never a great danger of a nuclear exchange — except for an accidental one.
Both super-powers shared the instinct for self-preservation and negotiated continuously in search of credible systems of nuclear deterrents.
Therefore, multilateral negotiations commenced to prevent the proliferation of non-civilian nuclear technology, and the culmination of those negotiations was the NPT.
The reality is that the NPT is not working.
In addition to the five nations that admitted, under the treaty, to the possession of nuclear weapons, no fewer than 10 others have developed or are developing the bomb, and five of those are signatories to the NPT.
Since the exposure of Iraq as having consistently, to quote United Nations' reports,’ obstructed and cheated on’divulging information on its nuclear programme, North Korea is now giving rise to the greatest concern, as the hon. Member for Clackmannan (Mr. O'Neill) said.
As an NPT signatory, North Korea continues to violate flagrantly the IAEA safeguards by repeatedly denying inspectors access to its nuclear facilities.
Recently, a high-ranking defector from North Korea informed western intelligence that his country is a mere 12 months away from producing a functional nuclear weapon.
Despite the imminent withdrawal of American nuclear weapons from South Korea, which fulfils the principal North Korean demand for the unobstructed inspection of its facilities, North Korea appears to remain committed to developing a weapon of its own.
In so doing, it threatens to ignite a nuclear arms race in Asia that could prompt South Korea, Taiwan and Japan to develop nuclear arsenals.
It was reported in yesterday's press, however, that North Korea has now agreed to the principle of the nuclear-free Korean peninsula, although it has yet to confirm that it will open up its nuclear installations at Yongbyon and any underground sites to inspection.
The deputy Foreign Minister of Iran recently went to Paris to negotiate the transfer of enriched uranium from France.
The Iranian Government — a signatory to the treaty — also seeks to acquire illegally nuclear technology from China.
This month it was reported that Chinese officials and technicians are equipping an Iranian nuclear facility near the southern Iran-Iraq border in Khuzestan, with uranium-enriching technology.
While there is no conclusive evidence to suggest that Syria has been attempting to develop nuclear devices, it continues to purchase large quantities of heavy weapons and missiles from China and has illegally proscribed certain areas in Syria from IAEA inspection.
Other nations, which are not signatories to the treaty, are understood to be developing nuclear weapons.
Therefore, they remain outside the treaty's remit and safeguards, weak though they may be.
India and Pakistan continue to develop their non-civilian nuclear capabilities, ignoring calls for their signatures to the NPT.
India, which tested a weapon in 1974, continues to receive substantial foreign aid and has recently negotiated a loan from the International Monetary Fund.
Perhaps western Governments should take a lead from the United States of America, which terminated its aid programme to Pakistan on the ground that it refuses to desist from non-civilian nuclear development.
Israel's nuclear policy poses a major dilemma for the process of non-proliferation.
Because Israel did not detonate a weapon prior to 1967, but currently possesses nuclear weapons, it would be in violation of the treaty if it were a signatory to it and would be legally obliged to destroy its stockpile and to end its nuclear programme.
Without selective disincentives such as the termination of foreign aid and trade concessions, Israel will not sign the NPT.
Such disincentives should be applied if Israel's position does not change.
To allow it to maintain the 300 nuclear weapons that it is currently estimated to hold — including 100 tactical weapons — can only provoke and encourage the Arab states' determination to obtain nuclear arsenals.
For many years the People's Republic of China has been one of the world's leading conventional arms and nuclear technology exporters.
It has proliferated nuclear weapon technologies and heavy weaponry to Algeria, Syria, Iraq, Pakistan and now to Iran.
However, China has recently pledged to accede to the NPT and that must represent a welcome breakthrough, if it is serious.
Another welcome breakthrough is France's decision to sign the NPT last June.
The Mitterrand Government also announced their plans for worldwide disarmament initiatives covering nuclear, chemical and biological weapons.
However, France continues to conduct above-ground nuclear testing in the Pacific and remains the only nation to do so.
That behaviour can no longer be acceptable.
The failure of IAEA safeguards, including twice-yearly inspections in Iraq for the pasts 15 years, must lead to the conclusion that the NPT has acted like a cloak of respectability to certain nations which have signed it.
Instead of preventing proliferation, it has promoted it by allowing nations to protest innocence while violating the treaty's inadequate provisions.
There can be no alternative now but to press for guaranteed and unrestricted verifications, backed up by tougher international penalties against violators and greater pressure on all nations to accede to the treaty.
There is probably a case for a fundamental review of the IAEA, with a change of venue from its Vienna headquarters.
Perhaps the most appropriate nation that we could ask to accept the new headquarters of a strengthened and reformed IAEA is Japan, the one nation to have experienced a wartime nuclear attack.
Such an initiative would complement the United Nations arms register called for by my right hon. Friend the Prime Minister, and such an international responsibility is one that I believe Japan would willingly accept, which is why I commend it to my right hon. and hon. Friends.
Mr. Bob Cryer (Bradford, South)
I shall be brief, because many hon. Members want to join in the debate.
It was interesting yesterday, listening to the debate on the EEC, to hear many Conservative Members talking about eastern European countries joining the EEC, even though those Members belong to a party that is pointing missiles at those selfsame countries.
It seems strange to extend the hand of friendship and economic co-operation to the same countries that we are threatening with mass extermination.
The hon. Member for Barrow and Furness (Mr. Franks) in the course of an extremely lengthy spech did not answer the question asked by my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, North (Mr. Corbyn) about fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh and eighth Trident nuclear submarines, which only points up the fact that this nation needs a programme of conversion from arms manufacture to material for peaceful purposes.
The Secretary of State helpfully reminded us of the enormous changes and potential changes in the Soviet Union.
I only wish that the House had listened to the present Minister of State, the right hon. Member for Plymouth, Sutton (Mr. Clark) 10 years ago when, in March 1981, in a highly prophetic speech against the views of his Tory colleagues, he said that far from being strong and a threat to the world, the Soviet Union was in the process of retreat and disintegration.
It is a pity that I cannot read out that speech because time is so short.
If the hon. Gentleman's attitude had been noted and acted on, we should not have got on the treadmill of nuclear arms escalation for the following 10 years.
We could have reduced nuclear weaponry then, had we seen the Soviet Union in those terms.
The Secretary of State's worries about the control of Soviet nuclear weapons, given the potential breakdown of the Soviet Union, would not then have been based on such mind-boggling perceived dangers.
During 1991 and after 10 years of negotiations, the START treaty was signed, and in itself it is indeed only a start as it still leaves enormous stockpiles of delivery systems and nuclear warheads, enough to reduce most of our planet to a radioactive cinder heap.
So we cannot become complacent or leave START to do the job alone, because it is not enough by itself.
The Secretary of State mentioned that the number of sub-strategic nuclear weapons — START is concerned only with strategic nuclear weapons — are being reduced by NATO.
That is a good step as we emerge from the cold war, but it is not enough.
We must move on towards eradication.
The Secretary of State said that Trident was the ultimate guarantee of our security.
It is worth remembering that only one boat in the tottering Polaris fleet is working; serious cracks in the cooling systems of the other boats are necessitating a great deal of expenditure and causing much anxiety to the Ministry of Defence.
None the less, each Polaris boat carries more fire power than was used by both sides in the 1939-45 war.
That shows how much damage could be wrought on parts of the planet.
The Secretary of State repeated several times that we need such a scale of weaponry to provide what he calls a credible deterrent.
Whether Polaris is credible is a moot point, but we are now going ahead with the expenditure of £10,000 million on Trident.
I am one of those in the Labour party — I do not know whether I am in the majority in the parliamentary Labour party — who believe in unilateral disarmament.
When the Secretary of State was enjoying himself for about 10 minutes claiming that a large number of us supported CND, he offered some rays of hope and sunshine that I had not seen for some months.
I enjoyed that bit of his speech best of all, although I am not sure that that was what the right hon. Gentleman intended.
My views have not changed and I shall continue to attempt to persuade the majority of the Labour party to reassert its policy of unilateral nuclear disarmament.
I know that some of my hon. Friends here are pleased at the policy change and, if it were changed back, they would use the democratic channels of the Labour party to argue their case.
The Labour party is a democratic one and I shall exert my influence, such as it is, to maintain the case that we do not need Trident.
However, against the demagoguery of the hon. Member for Barrow and Furness, it is important for us to make it clear that we do not intend creating unemployment through a change of policy, which means a more peaceful role for our Government.
We are not the Government who have put 2 million people on the dole from our manufacturing industries in the past 10 years.
We shall develop a phased and planned programme for the conversion of the means of war manufacture to peaceful production.
It will mean changing swords into ploughshares.
We will use the enormous reservoir of equipment and talent to provide the goods and services that the people of the world need and want.
One thing is absolutely certain — no one needs the Trident system to be put into use.
The hon. Member for Bournemouth, East (Mr. Atkinson) referred to the United Nations non-proliferation treaty.
The Labour party strongly endorses that treaty.
The Government are a signatory and supporter of that treaty, as will be the next Labour Government.
That means that if they continue with Trident they, too, would be in breach of clauses 1 and 6 of that treaty.
Some signatories have breached that contract, one notorious example is Iraq.
Everyone is extremely pleased at the scrupulous way in which inspection is being carried out in Iraq to reveal the scale of the investment in nuclear weapons.
No one dissents from the purpose of that inspection.
At several review conferences the 138 non-nuclear signatories to the UN non-proliferation treaty have always made the point that the nuclear signatories, particularly the United Kingdom, are in breach of that treaty.
They tell us that we should not manufacture and deploy nuclear weapons.
We have signed a treaty to agree to that, but we have not just retained Polaris, with its enormous fire-power; we have now decided to go on to Trident that has even greater firepower than Polaris.
It is hardly surprising that a tiny minority of the signatories are now beginning to say,’ We will not do what the treaty calls upon us to do; we will do what the United Kingdom does.’
We pay lip service to that treaty and breach it by spending £10,000 million on Trident nuclear submarines that carry nuclear weapons.
It is difficult for the Government to criticise those signatories.
I hope that the verification procedures under the UN non-proliferation treaty will be improved so that inspectors will come here and point out how the United Kingdom Government are breaching that treaty.
We should be told that we must stop the Trident programme, because that is the proper way of doing things.
Only yesterday a delegation from the Manufacturing Science Finance Union, MSF, came to the House to express its concern about big organisations, such as GEC, which have significant defence contracts.
My hon Friend for Motherwell, North (Dr. Reid) was there.
The shop stewards said that, as a result of the rundown in defence expenditure, they were concerned that there would be redundancies under the Government's existing programme.
That re-emphasises the fact that we cannot simply talk about cancelling Trident.
We are not talking only about Trident, but about a whole range of defence activities that are being curtailed and on which expenditure is being cut.
We must have a planned programme of conversion.
The Minister of State, the right hon. Member for Sutton, is present on the Treasury Bench.
I am reminded that when I suggested that the £7 billion of expenditure on the European fighter aircraft might be better spent — it seems dodgy anyhow — or used for civilian aircraft, his contribution to planned change was to suggest that nobody wants single-seater civilian aircraft flying at 750 mph.
A few Tory Members laughed heartily at the right hon. Gentleman's contribution to our understanding, but the reality is that if the European fighter aircraft programme falls through, there will be redundancies among the most skilled sector of our manufacturing work force.
The Government must face that reality.
A planned conversion programme is vital.
Finally, behind all the arguments about tactics and the programme for the deployment of Trident lies the issue of the morality of the possession of nuclear weapons.
Mercifully, the vast majority of the world's nations have said no to nuclear weapons.
In so doing, they have decided not to spend massive resources on the production of those weapons of fearsome levels of extermination.
The Brandt commission’ Programme for Survival — North versus South’produced figures in 1980 showing that just half a day's military expenditure would suffice to finance the World Health Organisation's malaria eradication programme.
Even less money would be needed to counter river blindness, which is still the scourge of millions.
The cost of one jet fighter, which was then $20 million would set up about 40,000 village pharmacists.
One half of 1 per cent.
of one year's world military expenditure would pay for all the farm equipment needed to increase food production and to approach self-sufficiency in the food-deficit, low-income countries by 1990.
That opportunity has passed.
The figures are out of date, but the example is telling.
We should be using the £10,000 million that is spent on Trident to create jobs in the United Kingdom and to improve our national health service.
However, we could also improve the lives of the people of the poorest countries where life expectancy is only 25 to 40 years.
Morally, that is a vastly superior case to the one produced by the Government — and, alas, supported to some degree by the Opposition Front Bench — who say that we should fritter our resources so massively on something that we could never use.
Indeed, if we were to use it, we would destroy our planet.
We should note the example of the vast majority of nations, including Canada, which has a Conservative regime, but which has said no to nuclear weapons.
Why can we not go down the same road?
Mr. Bruce George (Walsall, South)
I am delighted to participate in today's debate on nuclear weapons policy, but am saddened to see that the so-called’ party of defence’, the party of government, can muster only one noble Member to speak.
The hon. Member for Bournemouth, West (Mr. Atkinson) must have stumbled into the debate without having been nobbled by his Whips, because he gave a reasonable, rational and consensus-seeking speech, unlike the hon. Member for Barrow and Furness (Mr. Franks), who gave the House his next election address for 37 minutes, but then proceeded to disappear, as though he is the only hon. Member with a constituency outside central London.
Many hon. Members who are now in the Chamber have longer distances to travel.
As I said, it is a pleasure to speak in the debate, despite the rhetoric and the attempt to whip up the masses outside the House by saying that the Labour party comprises anti-patriotic pacifists.
No doubt one could find some of that ilk in the Labour party, but I am sorry to tell Ministers, who greatly outnumber their indians seated behind them, that defence will not figure prominently in the next general election.
Labour is not presenting itself for slaughter, as it did in 1983 and to a lesser extent in 1987.
Those drawers in Conservative party headquarters marked’ Labour and defence’will be opened and their contents taken out to try to undermine Labour at the next general election, but such aspirations will remain unrealised.
Labour has learnt the lessons of the past.
They are that the public expect Britain to be defended and want Labour to be what it has been for most of its history — a party prepared to provide resources commensurate with defending this country.
When Clement Attlee became Prime Minister in 1945, he was no enthusiast of atomic weapons, but that programme proceeded.
When Harold Wilson came to office, one Polaris submarine was cancelled, but the programme continued and Labour sought a consensus with other political parties and played an enormous role in NATO.
Between 1980 and 1987-88, there was a rapid flight from consensus to the outer shores of realism, but it has still prevailed — not just for electoral purposes, but because the world has changed.
Most of the people responsible for Labour's policies acknowledge that those which may have been relevant in the 1980s were disastrous and should be consigned to the rubbish heap.
My hon. Friend the Member for Bradford, South (Mr. Cryer) said that he is in the minority.
I was once in that position, together with my former colleague the hon. Member for Dunfermline, West (Mr. Douglas), who is now a member of the Scottish National party.
In those days he earnestly supported nuclear weapons.
The people who were once a minority in the Labour party now represent the views of the majority.
The hon. Member for Barrow and Furness did not answer my question about what would be left to build in Barrow if the fourth Trident submarine were taken away.
Perhaps he will tell his constituents and Government that the submarine-building programme is near to collapse.
An innocent bystander listening to the speeches of the hon. Member for Barrow and Furness and others might imagine that the Conservatives are the exponents of the Royal Navy.
I have with me the defence White Paper produced by the Labour Government in 1979.
The section on frigates and destroyers put their number at 65.
The present Government promised about 50, which we all took to mean 46 or 47.
A year ago, we were told that the number would be 40, which we all know meant 36 or 37 frigates and destroyers, or even fewer.
How can the Conservatives make such eloquent speeches about the Royal Navy when, in their 13 years in office, they have, according to their own planning, halved that part of its fleet?
Government Members argue that today's Royal Navy is more modern than in 1978 or 1979.
A recent parliamentary answer that drew on the Government's own resources revealed that the Royal Navy was more modern in 1979 than it is in 1991.
We should dispel the myth that the Conservative party is the party of defence and that Labour is the party of surrender — as shown on a brilliant poster in the 1987 general election campaign which depicted Labour's defence policy as a soldier with his hands in the air in surrender.
There is no need for Labour to be ashamed of its defence record, although the Conservative document’ Britain's Defence: Unsafe in Labour's hands’gives the impression that a Labour Government would destroy the Navy, devastate the Army and demolish the Royal Air Force.
As reports from the Select Committee on Defence have made clear over the past few years, defence cuts are proceeding at such a pace that, if a future Labour Government continued in the same way, we would be left with Securicor and Group 4 to defend our shores and a steamship company to provide us with a substitute for the Royal Navy.
This scurrilous Tory document — approved by the Secretary of State — talks of Labour's contempt for defence, and its’ inherent aversion to strong defence’.
FURTHER AND HIGHER EDUCATION (SCOTLAND) BILL
Ordered, That the Further and Higher Education (Scotland) Bill may be proceeded with as if it had been certified by Mr. Speaker as relating exclusively to Scotland.
EUROPEAN STANDING COMMITTEES
Ordered, That the unnumbered explanatory memorandum submitted by H.M.
Treasury on 12th July 1991, relating to the preliminary draft general budget of the European Communities for 1992, European Community Documents Nos. 7731/91, relating to the draft general budget of the European Communities for 1992, 7368/91, relating to the letter of amendment No.1/1992 to the preliminary draft general budget of the European Communities for 1992, and 8719/91, relating to the revision of the financial perspective for 1992, and the unnumbered explanatory memorandum submitted by H.M. Treasury on 4th November 1991, relating to the European Parliament's proposed amendments and modifications to the draft general budget of the European Communities for 1992, shall not stand referred to European Standing Committee B.
WELSH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BILL
Ordered, That, in respect of the Welsh Development Agency Bill, notices of Amendments, new Clauses and new Schedules to be moved in Committee may be accepted by the Clerks at the Table before the Bill has been read a second time.
WELSH DEVELOPMENT AGENCY BILL
Ordered, That, if the Welsh Development Agency Bill be committed to a Committee of the whole House, further proceedings on the Bill shall stand postponed and that as soon as the proceedings on any Resolution come to by the House on Welsh Development Agency Bill [Money]have been concluded, this House will immediately resolve itself into a Committee on the Bill.
Gateshead Students
Motion made, and Question proposed, That this House do now adjourn.
Ms. Joyce Quin (Gateshead, East)
I am grateful for the opportunity to speak on the motion for the Adjournment of the House in order to raise a matter that is causing me great concern — the number of cases in my constituency of considerable financial hardship being experienced by full-time and part-time students.
I believe that these instances of hardship arise as a direct consequence of a range of Government policies such as the introduction of the student loan scheme, the decision to exclude students from various social security benefits — for example, housing and unemployment benefits — the Government's attitude towards local authority financing with particular reference to local authority discretionary educational awards, the level of access funds that educational establishments have at their disposal and the problems relating to schemes such at the Government's career development loan scheme.
Many of the constituency cases with which I have dealt in recent months have especially worried me because they seem to show that the financial hardship now experienced by many students is especially severe for those who come from low-income families.
That has led me to conclude that higher and further education no longer provide a pathway out of poverty towards educational achievement and self-fulfilment, because students from poor backgrounds may be forced to give up studying and never achieve the educational qualifications that they seek.
Furthermore, there is great danger that people from such backgrounds will be deterred from applying for educational courses in the future.
Having spoken to many of my parliamentary colleagues and having listened to debates and questions in the House, I believe that my experience in Gateshead is part of a national pattern.
I remind the Minister that Gateshead is far from being one of Britain's most prosperous towns.
It has high unemployment and considerable long-term unemployment.
In many ways families have never recovered from the earlier recession of the 1980s, let alone the current recession.
Many young people in Gateshead have grown up in families in which it is very rare for someone to have a full-time, decent and well-paid job.
Gateshead has a large number of low-income families and has traditionally had a poor participation rate in further and higher education.
That has improved in recent years and I congratulate the local authority and the local schools and colleges on that.
Nevertheless, many people who might otherwise have gone on to Government employment schemes have been deterred from doing so because of the difficulty in finding jobs as a result of going on those schemes.
They have then concluded that going on to further education or staying at school are better options.
To illustrate my point about student financial hardship in Gateshead, I shall refer to some specific cases, but in such a way as to protect the identity of my constituents.
I shall refer to the first case as Mr. A. He wrote to me in March saying:
’ I am writing in the hope that you may be able to give me some positive information regarding the money I am supposed to live on.
I am a male of 49 years living on my own in rented accommodation, I spent a year on E.T.
at the Gateshead National Garden Festival from 1989 to 1990 that was alright, then last September 1990 and with the end of the festival in site I had a dread of going back on the dole as I already spent seven years on the dole previously through no-fault of my own.
Any-way in September 1990 I decided to further my career in Horticulture and started a college course full time at Houghall College, County Durham, which meant having to live on a Educational-grant My expenses weekly are £29 rent, bus fares to college £25, HP £10, electric £5 total £69 weekly this is without food.
My grant allows me £60 weekly a difference of £9, I am now getting deeply in debt with my rent.
I cannot get any help from Social Security or Rent Rebate.
How am I supposed to live on this grant’.
I sent the letter to the Department of Employment, among others, and received a reply from the Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State, suggesting that my constituent should take out a career development loan.
My constituent was reluctant to do that because he thought he would get further into debt.
At that point he was already in dept.
However, he made inquiries and was told by his bank that he was not eligible for such a loan because in the past he had received a Government grant.
I forwarded that letter to the Department of Employment and got the unsatisfactory answer that it fully understood my constituent's position and his reluctance to consider a bank loan at this time, but was’ sorry in this instance not to be able to offer an alternative suggestion.’
The conclusion of the story is even sadder.
This week I spoke to my constituent.
Having completed his course, he found that there were few vacancies for horticulturists and he is once again on the dole.
The next constituent case concerns Ms. B. She sent me a letter in September which she described as’ a heartfelt plea for fair dealing.’
She commenced a two-year nursery nurse examination board course at Tyneside college in Wallsend.
She was 27 at the time and not residing with her parents.
She applied to Newcastle council for a grant as she was living in the Newcastle area.
She was awarded £670 a year.
That had to cover everything — all living and personal expenses, all college equipment and all travel expenses.
She is living with a friendly family that she knows.
Otherwise, her position would be impossible.
Although the local authority was sympathetic to her problem, the sum of money available to it for discretionary grants had been severely cut in recent years, so it could not see its way to helping her further.
The next case concerns Mrs. C. She wrote to me about her student son and was greatly concerned about the plight of all students this summer due to the Government's changes in social security rules.
She rightly notes that students are not entitled to any income support from the Department of Social Security during the summer vacation and she points to the real problems that exist in areas of high unemployment, such as Gateshead and on Tyneside in general, where students, whom the Government urge to take on part-time or full-time jobs during their vacation, simply do not find those jobs available.
According to my constituent, simply applying for extra amounts in loans, either under the Government's student loans scheme or from the bank, defeats the object, because the students then get themselves further into debt.
My constituent concludes:’ The present government wants education standards to be improved but in the case of students, it will only result again in the rich' families being able to afford to send their children on to further education.
There will certainly be a choice but that choice will be money' — an elitist society.
It will certainly not be a classless one.’
The next case concerns a constituent whom I will call Mrs. D, who wrote to me about her two daughters, both of whom were studying in London — not entirely out of choice.
One had come to London university to do a postgraduate music diploma because it was the most appropriate place for her to study.
As we know, students in London have particular problems because of the high cost of accommodation.
Students in London have suffered particularly badly because of the Government's decision to make students ineligible for housing benefit.
My constituent felt strongly that neither the amount on offer from the student loans scheme nor the money available from the postgraduate access fund would be enough to compensate for the loss of housing benefit to her undergraduate daughter or to her elder daughter, who was on the postgraduate music course.
I have since asked my constituent for an update of the position and she has confirmed that the family has had to put in a good deal more extra money to finance both daughters than it had previously expected.
Fortunately, that family was able to put in extra money — although it meant some sacrifices, such as doing without holidays and so on— but I contend that if those two girls had come from a less fortunate background, they simply would not have been able to continue their courses in current circumstances.
My final case relates to two girls who live in a hostel that manages beds for single homeless girls, many of whom come there because of family breakdown or abuse.
During the summer, both girls decided that they wanted to go to college to get some qualifications.
One intended to go to Gateshead college full time for a year to do five GCSEs, but was unable to get a grant or income support because she did not qualify under the 22-hour rule and so reluctantly decided to attend part time instead.
The other was doing a BTEC first diploma at Newcastle college.
She could not get a grant or income support and had no option of going part time.
Consequently, she had to exist on an average income of £26 per week from an evening waitressing job.
According to the letter that I received, both girls have to find money for books, stationery and examination fees out of their meagre income.
The letter concludes:’ it seems very unjust that young people who are determined to improve things for themselves after a bad start in life should be faced with such an uphill struggle.’
Those are the only examples that I have time to cite today, but I could give several more from my constituency files.
I believe that those cases represent the local tip of a large national iceberg.
The Minister may be tempted to respond, as the Secretary of State did during education questions a week ago, by dismissing such allegations of hardship.
I have received earlier dismissive replies from his Department and from the Departments of Employment and of Social Security.
I hope, however, that I am wrong, and that the Minister's response to these specific cases will represent a considerable change of heart.
The Minister will no doubt refer to the availability of loans, and may well repeat the claim made in a letter by his predecessor:’ there is no evidence that a loan scheme has in practice had the effect of reducing participation by lower socio-economic groups.’
Such evidence is now beginning to appear and I believe that my hon. Friends and I will be proved to have been right all along in our predictions of the effect of the student loan scheme.
The Minister may also refer to the discretionary grants from local education authorities.
When I approached the Newcastle local education authority about one of the constituents to whom I have referred, I was told that the city council's budget for discretionary awards had been severely cut in recent years.
I believe what the Newcastle local authority tells me, because I know only too well how Gateshead has been affected by Government cuts which the local authority has been forced to implement.
The Minister will probably also refer to availability to colleges and educational establishments of access funds to alleviate instances of hardship.
This week I contacted Gateshead college and was told that the pressure on the access fund was such that the college could have spent its yearly entitlement by the end of the first week of the academic year.
The college has had the heart-rending task of choosing between applications from equally deserving cases.
I am worried that many students may convert to being part time rather than full time, simply because they cannot afford to be full-time students.
Like many other colleges and educational establishments, Gateshead college is worried about that trend and thinks that it will increase in the future, particularly if nothing is done.
I hope that the Minister will accept that the case studies to which I referred highlight a serious problem.
I hope that he will not take refuge in bland, average, countrywide statistics but will appreciate the painful reality behind those statistics.
The National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux has asked the Government to undertake an urgent review of the situation.
It is in an excellent position to understand the hardship experienced by many students and the gravity of the problem.
Although the Minister's Department has refused to countenance such a review in the past, I beg him to think again and announce today that the Government will undertake the urgent review called for by the NACAB and many hon. Members.
Unless action is taken to give colleges and local education authorities more funds and to channel Government money to hard-pressed students, the prospect for many students, not only in Gateshead but nationally, will be very bleak.
Moreover, the Government will end their period of office with many blighted futures on their conscience.
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Education and Science (Mr. Alan Howarth)
I am grateful to the hon. Member for Gateshead, East (Ms. Quin) for providing the House with the opportunity to debate student support.
She recently wrote to me and I am glad to be able to respond more fully now than was possible in correspondence.
Many of her remarks today were about her constituents in Gateshead, but she also referred to the national picture.
There is an important distinction to be drawn at the outset in the support arrangements for students in further and higher education.
In general, students who embark on full-time and sandwich courses at degree level are entitled to a mandatory award from their local education authority and can apply to the Student Loans Company for loans.
All other students — those in further education, most of those on part-time courses in higher education and most postgraduate students — do not have that entitlement.
They can, however, apply for a discretionary award from their local education authority.
Let me deal first with students in full-time higher education.
I believe that the Government have a good story to tell.
We have made substantially more money available in maintenance support for students in higher education.
The full-year loan and grant are now over 30 per cent.
higher than the grant alone was two years ago.
That is a generous increase by any standards.
The increase for the current year has been 6 per cent.
That compares very well with the current rate of inflation, which is now below 4 per cent.
We have just announced that we will increase student support by 4 per cent.
for the 1992-93 academic year, thereby at least maintaining its value in real terms.
Additional help is available from the access funds for those facing particular difficulties.
Higher education students have the lion's share of the access funds, which are worth in total nearly £26 million this year.
Our restructuring of the support arrangements also means that students' maintenance costs are now shared more fairly between the students themselves, their parents and the taxpayer.
Parents are paying less — their assessed contribution is frozen in cash terms if their income rises in line with average earnings.
The same freezing of their assessed contribution benefits students' spouses, too.
Student loans are available to all eligible students who apply for them.
The student loans scheme has proved a success.
In its first year, more than 180,000 students took out loans worth some £70 million.
The take-up is likely to be even higher this year; more than 83,000 students have already applied.
The claim that loans would deter students from enrolling in higher education — also made by the hon. Lady — have proved misplaced.
Quite the reverse is true — participation is increasing rapidly.
Ten years ago, only one young person in eight entered higher education.
It is now one in five.
We expect it to be one in three by the year 2000.
Students have always looked for vacation work.
While I accept that there may have been a little less temporary employment available during this summer than in previous years, there is no doubt that many students still found temporary jobs in the long vacation.
There may also have been opportunities for paid work experience.
Ms. Quin
Has the Minister undertaken a regional survey of the number of students who managed to obtain temporary work during the summer?
I am sure that there must be great variations not only from one part of the country to another, but from one town to another, because of the high levels of unemployment in certain places.
Mr. Howarth
I accept what the hon. Lady suggests, because clearly there have been regional differences in economic conditions.
I hope that, in time, we shall be able to monitor what has actually been happening.
We shall certainly try to monitor it with the best precision that we can but, at this stage, we do not have firm figures.
As we have heard, it has been claimed that there has been widespread hardship among students this summer.
No one wants to see students forced to abandon their studies for financial reasons and no one wants to see students in hardship, but I do not believe that students are abandoning their studies for financial reasons.
Preliminary reports from local education authorities do not suggest that students have abandoned their courses as a result of the changes that we have made.
Last year the majority of students did not take up their loan facility.
It was their decision to forgo that extra, publicly provided support.
There have been reports from the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders and from the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux — the hon. Lady referred to the latter — but neither was convincing.
The NACAB report involved only a small number of students who approached only one of about 60 bureaux.
It was not clear from the report whether they had even applied for the available student loan or help from their college's access fund.
The access funds supplement the main package of student support and allow universities, polytechnics and colleges to give discretionary support where access to higher education might be inhibited by financial considerations or where they consider that students face real financial difficulties.
The sum available for further and higher education students — nearly £26 million this year — is a substantial extra amount and, if allocations are properly targeted by institutions, should be adequate for its purpose.
In general, they should not go to students who have not explored all other reasonable sources of finance.
Institutions administer the access funds under general guidelines provided by the Department.
In the summer, we issued further guidance designed to improve the targeting of the funds.
I hope that institutions have found the guidance useful this year.
Earlier we dropped the requirement that up to 85 per cent.
of the funds should be disbursed before the end of the financial year.
For the long vacation we told institutions that they could anticipate up to 10 per cent.
of this year's allocation if they wished to do so.
We have made it as easy as possible for institutions to help students in genuine financial need within the resources available to them.
Most institutions are also able to draw on hardship funds of their own, of course.
It is important to understand — this is too often misunderstood — that access funds are not intended to be a replacement for the social security benefits to which most students are no longer entitled.
Some play has been made of the fact that the Government withdrew the right to claim social security benefits from most full-time students.
The House discussed that in an Adjournment debate last week.
Our reforms have ended most students' need to rely on benefits, and it is better that that should be so.
The extra resources available from the uprated grant and loan more than compensate for what the majority of students could have claimed.
In fact, many students claimed no benefits and, as I have already mentioned, the access funds enable institutions to provide discretionary support for those in need.
I should emphasise that vulnerable groups of students, such as the disabled and lone parents, remain eligible for benefits.
Students aged under 19 in further education have retained their entitlement to housing benefit in term-time if they are living away from their parents.
Ms. Quin
Does the Minister doubt the cases of hardship that I have quoted?
What, if anything, can he do about them?
Mr. Howarth
I want to continue to develop my argument.
I remind the hon. Lady that we are making more public support available to many more students than ever before.
As I explained, we have increased publicly provided support for students in higher education by 30 per cent.
compared to the period before the loans scheme was introduced.
The fact that growing numbers of students are making the personal decision to go into higher education each year suggests strongly that our system of student support, far from providing a deterrent, is encouraging more people to go into higher education, who perhaps would not have had the confidence to do so or the belief that it is appropriate for them.
I have been most concerned by reports that some students may have been in temporary difficulty at the start of the current term because their grant cheques have not arrived from certain authorities.
My Department has vigorously pursued reported delays with the authorities concerned.
We have pressed them to make provisional payments where necessary, to ensure that students do not suffer hardship.
I hope that local education authorities will have learnt some valuable lessons from this year's experience and that they will take great care to consider what contingency plans are needed to avoid being caught napping again by a late rush of applicants.
Without wishing to understate what was surely a trying time for some students, I shall make two further points.
First, reports reaching me indicate that many of those LEAs that were not coping have now cleared their backlogs.
Secondly, most LEAs, including Gateshead, coped well with the record number of applications they received.
That fact should not go unremarked.
I have dealt at some length with the arrangements for mandatory support because they have been in the limelight recently and because they are the direct responsibility of my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State.
As to the arrangements for discretionary support, they are essentially for the 116 local education authorities in England and Wales to decide.
They have discretionary power to support students in further or higher education, including those who study part time.
The Education Act 1962 currently limits mandatory grant support to full-time first degree and comparable courses.
We could put primary legislation before Parliament to change that, of course, but we would need to consider the substantial cost to the taxpayer.
We could extend student loans to part timers in higher education without primary legislation and have not ruled out doing so, but again, cost is a factor.
The available figures do not suggest that either part-time students in higher education or full-time ones in further education are deterred by lack of mandatory funding; on the contrary, demand is buoyant.
It is also worth bearing it in mind that, under the so-called 21-hour rule, young people can study part time for up to 21 hours a week without affecting their entitlement to social security benefits.
The rule is designed to help the genuinely unemployed to use their time constructively.
It is not intended as a source of support for the committed student.
In order to qualify, therefore, the young person must be prepared to give up his course if a suitable job opportunity is offered.
Press reports that local education authorities have cut back drastically on, or have even stopped making, discretionary awards have rather exaggerated the position.
Certain LEAs do indeed seem to have reduced their overall awards budgets this year, but most are continuing to grant awards at about the same levels as in previous years.
Hon. Members must recall that these are, after all, discretionary awards.
Ministers do not seek to influence LEAs' decisions or policies on them: they would cease to be discretionary if we did.
Within the national funding framework, it is for each local education authority to set its own education budget, and to decide how to allocate it between the various elements of the service, including discretionary awards.
If particular LEAs see fit to alter their priorities and redeploy funds from one area to another, that is their decision.
There is undoubtedly room to make savings and improve efficiency within education spending, and we are anxious that LEAs should do so.
But in considering where economies may best be made, they must, of course, take account of the likely effect on pupils and students.
A policy of’ no awards come what may’is not a reasonable policy — it is something which no reasonable LEA would do.
Nor should there be any need for such a policy in any properly managed authority.
It has been suggested that, in some way, Government funding — or the lack of it — has forced LEAs to cut back drastically.
I cannot accept that.
The 1991-92 local authority finance settlement allowed for authorities in England to spend almost £17.5 billion on education, which is a 16 per cent.
increase over the 1990-91 settlement.
This is a very considerable increase, well in excess of the rate of inflation.
The motion having been made after half-past Two o'clock and the debate having continued for half an hour, Mr. Deputy Speaker — adjourned the House without Question put, pursuant to the Standing Order.
Adjourned at one minute past Three o'clock.
Points of Order
Mr. Bernie Grant (Tottenham)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
In view of today's decision by the Court of Appeal to allow the appeal by Winston Silcott, may I ask whether you have received a request by the Home Secretary to make a statement on that matter?
If you have not, will you use your good offices to nudge the Home Secretary in that direction so that he apologises to Winston Silcott and his family?
We need also to know the position of the police officers who forged Winston Silcott's confessions.
Mr. Speaker
I have had no request for a statement, but that is a matter for the Government.
The Leader of the House is on the Government Front Bench, and I am sure that he has heard the hon. Gentleman's point.
Rev. Martin Smyth (Belfast, South)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I am aware that the Secretary of State for Northern Ireland is in the Chamber.
Have you had any request, Sir from the Northern Ireland Office to make a statement on last evening's incidents at Crumlin Road prison?
It is the Government's duty to protect prisoners.
I appreciate that there are segregation problems, but we have asked the Government to do more about separating prisoners for safety purposes and they have ignored our advice.
Mr. Speaker
Again, I have had no request for a statement.
I shall give the hon. Member the same reply that I gave previously: this is a matter for the Leader of the House, who is in the Chamber.
Mr. Clive Soley (Hammersmith)
On a point of order, Mr. Speaker.
I should welcome your guidance on the use of private notice questions.
I do not wish in any way to criticise you, and I appreciate that I applied today to ask such a question —
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is just it.
I am afraid that we do not discuss in the Chamber applications for private notice questions.
If the hon. Member would like to see me privately, I shall give him more information.
Mr. Jeremy Corbyn (Islington, North)
Further to the point of order, Mr. Speaker, raised by my hon. Friend the Member for Tottenham (Mr. Grant).
I am sure that you will agree that there should be a debate on the Court of Appeal system now that three major cases have been overturned in two years after substantial campaigns.
That clearly underlines the need for a change in the appeal court system to allow people to have their cases brought before the court without the necessity of a five-year campaign by friends and families.
Those people have stood up for justice, despite the abuse that they received from the public.
Mr. Speaker
Order.
That is not a matter of order in the Chamber.
The Leader of the House is here and will have heard what has been said.
Orders of the Day
Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill
Order for Second Reading read.
Mr. Speaker
I have selected the reasoned amendment in the name of the Leader of the Opposition.
The Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. David Hunt)
I beg to move, That the Bill be now read a Second time.
The Bill will authorise the construction of a barrage and associated works across the estuaries of the Rivers Taff and Ely in Cardiff bay.
It provides for the acquisition of land and rights associated with these main works.
There is also provision for the necessary framework to enable the barrage to be operated in an appropriate manner with regard to water quality, flooding, the protection of fish, and for the management of the lake so created.
The scheme embodied in the Bill is absolutely vital for the future of Cardiff.
It provides an opportunity for the docklands to be redeveloped as a high quality, high density part of the city itself.
It will permit the development of a city waterfront that would be an asset to a major city anywhere in the world.
It will create an environment in which housing and jobs will be created on a scale which could not be achieved in any other way.
Before I describe the detailed provisions of the Bill, I would like to remind the House of the background to the scheme and why, sadly, the very many benefits which would arise from the construction of the barrage have, so far, been denied to the people of Cardiff.
Seldom can the provisions of a Bill coming before this House for a Second Reading have been so thoroughly debated and examined already on the Floor of the House, in Committee and in another place.
Many hon. Members will remember that we last debated the provisions of a Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill on 16 April this year.
That was a private Bill promoted jointly by the Cardiff Bay development corporation and South Glamorgan county council.
It had completed its passage through another place.
It had undergone detailed and lengthy examination by a Select Committee of this House.
Sadly, however, a few Opposition Members sought to block the Bill as it neared the end of its passage through Parliament.
For our part, the Government were just not prepared to stand by and see our capital city and its people denied the benefits of this imaginative project.
That is why, on 16 April, my right hon. Friend the Lord President of the Council immediately announced that we would introduce a Government Bill to achieve the main objectives of the private Bill.
This Bill fulfils the commitment given by my right hon. Friend.
Of course, the Cardiff bay barrage proposal goes back much further than that.
In November 1985 the then Secretary of State for Wales, Nicholas Edwards, now Lord Crickhowell, commissioned studies into the feasibility, costs and benefits of a barrage between Penarth dock and Cardiff docks.
In parallel with the technical feasibility studies, an investment appraisal study was also commissioned.
These reports, published in June 1986, suggested that a barrage would not only be technically feasible but would be likely to create significant new development opportunities in the Cardiff waterfront area and beyond.
Further studies on engineering aspects, conservation and investment potential were also commissioned.
In December 1986 Lord Crickhowell announced that the plans to transform the Cardiff docklands would be taken forward by an urban development corporation — Cardiff Bay development corporation — established specifically for that task.
The corporation was set up in that far-sighted move to stimulate and control the regeneration of the docklands area.
In particular, it was to carry forward the engineering and financial planning of a barrage between Penarth head and Queen Alexandra dock.
Following its formal establishment in April 1987, the development corporation commissioned detailed studies of all aspects of the barrage, including environmental and conservation implications.
Together with South Glamorgan county council, it introduced a private Bill into this place in November 1987.
This was subsequently withdrawn in order to incorporate provisions enabling the construction of alternative feeding grounds for birds displaced once the barrage was constructed.
A new private Bill was introduced in November 1988.
It completed its passage through another place with very little amendment.
Progress through this House took far longer.
It was debated no fewer than five times on the Floor of the House and was given long and detailed scrutiny by a Select Committee over 26 days.
The Committee heard a great deal of expert evidence from the promoters and petitioners.
Local residents were given an opportunity to present evidence at first hand when the Committee sat in Cardiff.
The Committee concluded that, subject to some important amendments and undertakings relating to groundwater, the Bill should be allowed to proceed.
Unfortunately, a small minority disagreed.
It is against that background that the Government are introducing the Bill.
It falls into five main parts supplemented by seven schedules.
Part I provides the necessary powers for the construction of the barrage and associated works.
Part II deals with the acquisition of land.
Part III deals with the operation of the barrage and the management of the inland bay, the outer harbour and the lagoon which would serve as an alternative feeding ground for wading birds.
Part IV makes provision for a scheme of groundwater damage protection, the details of which are set out in schedule 7 to the Bill.
Finally, part V covers a range of miscellaneous items.
The proposed line of the barrage was one of several options considered in the early feasibility studies.
It provides the greatest area of enclosed water, retains the operational use of Cardiff dock and provides the greatest opportunity for waterside development and water-related recreational uses.
It is a fundamental principle that the design of the barrage authorised by the Bill should impound the estuaries of the Taff and Ely.
In doing so, it should not impound the entrance to the operational Cardiff dock, but should enclose the Penarth marina.
The tidal lagoon would provide alternative feeding grounds for birds displaced from the bay by the impounded lake.
It would cover an area of 23 hectares and provide mudflats similar to those which would be permanently covered within the bay area.
Discussions with the Countryside Council for Wales and other conservation bodies about the best method of achieving wildlife measures are continuing.
The Bill requires the development corporation to operate the barrage so that the water immediately behind it should be maintained at a level between 4 m and 4.5 m above ordnance datum except in certain circumstances defined in the Bill.
That is consistent with the provisions of the former private Bill and with the views of the Select Committee, which recommended that the water level should not go below 4 m.
It is a fundamental principle of the Bill that the impounded lake should permanently cover the existing mudflats.
We believe that the proposed water level as set out in the Bill strikes an appropriate balance between development needs and the practical considerations after impoundment.
It would provide the maximum area of water within the engineering constraints and would be broadly equivalent to mean high water mark.
As I have already said, the Government believe that the economic case for the barrage is very strong.
The attractive new environment created by the barrage will result in 25,000 direct and 7,500 indirect jobs.
Private sector investment of well over £1 billion will be attracted into the area and 4,800 homes will be built, of which a quarter will be low-cost social housing.
Against that background, it is regrettable that the Opposition intend to move to deny the Bill a Second Reading this evening.
I very much hope that they will consider their position.
I have studied the reasoned amendment carefully and, as far as I can see, all the points covered would be more relevant for discussion in Committee.
There are answers to all the points.
I have just met some colleagues in the House — and I do not dare to name the Opposition Members — who asked me questions about the amendment because there were points that they could not understand or that they had not seen before.
I do not know why the amendment has been tabled.
Parts of it were not raised with me before today's debate.
Somebody quite disgracefully suggested that the amendment was just a fictitious fig leaf which was designed to cover the cracks in the Labour party!
I very much hope that the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside (Mr. Jones) will be courageous this afternoon.
I urge him to stop any move to allow the barrage project to continue to be used as a party political football.
I believe that the project is so exciting, innovative and imaginative that it should be approached on an all-party basis.
I invite the hon. Gentleman to consider that and to endorse the Bill.
I invite him to join me in welcoming this magnificent project, which will do so much for Wales.
Mr. Ted Rowlands (Merthyr Tydfil and Rhymney)
For a moment I thought that the Secretary of State had reached his peroration.
Will the right hon. Gentleman deal with the financial consequences of the Bill?
Mr. Hunt
First, I shall deal with the environmental sensitivities of the project, because, when considering the economic benefits of the project, the Government were fully aware of those sensitivities.
The Institute of Terrestrial Ecology was commissioned by the Welsh Office to assess the affects of the project on over-wintering shore birds.
That study and other environmental studies commissioned by the Cardiff Bay development corporation and South Glamorgan county council were brought together in a detailed environmental impact assessment by Liverpool university.
The House will know that a new Standing Order came into force at the start of this parliamentary Session.
It requires Bills authorising certain works to be accompanied by an environmental statement.
This Bill is the first to meet that requirement.
The environmental assessment prepared for the private Bill has been updated so as to comply with the new Standing Order.
Copies of the environmental statement and a non-technical summary of it have been placed in the Vote Office.
The House will wish to satisfy itself that any decision to enact the Bill is taken on the basis of a full consideration of that assessment of the Bill's environmental effects.
Mr. Rhodri Morgan (Cardiff, West)
Is the right hon. Gentleman aware that environmental assessments, or statements, that accompany private or hybrid Bills may take two forms?
Annex 1 environmental impact assessments must be referred to the appropriate regulatory agency, such as the National Rivers Authority should it deal with water quality or, especially in this case, the local environmental health office of the city council in respect of water use.
The other type of assessment may comply with schedule 2 to the original environmental impact assessment directive from the European Community and it does not have to be referred to the appropriate regulatory agency.
The environmental impact assessment prepared for the Bill is an example of the latter type as no reference has been made to the NRA or to the environmental health department of Cardiff city council.
Why did the right hon. Gentleman not decide to have a higher grade environmental impact assessment?
Mr. Hunt
I do not know whether the hon. Gentleman has had an opportunity to get a copy of the environmental impact assessment from the Vote Office and to read it.
I am advised that it more than fulfils the requirements of the Standing Order, which is the basis on which I have proposed that the environmental impact assessment should proceed.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will make some further reference to that assessment in his speech, and I look forward to that.
The guidance on the production of environmental assessments says that the promoters should consult those bodies with relevant information before preparing their statement.
I understand that Cardiff Bay development corporation and my officials have consulted a wide range of interested bodies, including the NRA, Cardiff city council and the Countryside Council for Wales.
It would have been a pointless duplication for the authors of the environmental statement to have consulted separately.
Mr. Ron Davies (Caerphilly)
The problem is that the Secretary of State second-guesses the advice that he receives from his advisers.
Will he confirm that the Government's statutory adviser on nature conservation is the Countryside Council for Wales?.
Will he also confirm that it recommended that Cardiff bay should be included in the Severn estuary special protection area?
Will he tell the House why he decided to override that advice?
Mr. Hunt
I have placed in the Library a copy of the letter that I wrote explaining the issues in great detail.
An inevitable and regrettable consequence of the Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill is the loss of the Taff-Ely site of special scientific interest.
We have never denied that there would be environmental costs — I hope that the hon. Member for Caerphilly (Mr. Davies) recognises that.
Those costs had to be weighed against the economic, environmental and other benefits.
Clearly, the barrage and the type of development associated with it would be incompatible with the SSSI.
It is a fundamental principle of the Bill that it would enable the impoundment of a fresh water lake in place of the existing salt water tidal area.
It follows that the existing site of special scientific interest could no longer be sustained.
From earlier debates, the House will know that the Nature Conservancy Council had proposed that the lower Severn estuary, of which Cardiff bay is a part, should be a special protection area under the European Community directive on the conservation of wild birds.
On 1 November, my right hon. Friend the Secretary of State for the Environment and I announced our decision — to which the hon. Member for Caerphilly referred — to exclude the area of the inland bay as defined in the Bill from further consideration as part of the area proposed as a special protection area.
The reasons underlying that decision and the factors that my right hon. Friend and I took into account are fully set out in the letter of 1 November to the chairman of the Countryside Council for Wales, copies of which have been placed in the Library.
There have been understandable worries about the possible effects on houses of rises in groundwater levels once the barrage is built.
The former private Bill contained detailed protective provisions in respect of groundwater.
I should like to make it clear that the provisions of the Government Bill will provide householders with the same level of protection as that which existed under the private Bill, and they are set out fully in schedule 7.
I have done my best to understand and respond to the desire of people in Cardiff that the scheme should be set out in the Bill so that Parliament can consider it.
However, by its very nature, the scheme is complex, and we cannot guarantee that minor difficulties may not emerge when we put it into practice.
Therefore, the Bill contains a power for the Secretary of State to make regulations to amend the scheme of protection.
The reasoned amendment tabled by the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside (Mr. Jones) and other Opposition Members seeks to make the point that the provisions would enable the Secretary of State to weaken the protection, which, I suppose, goes alongside the need for provisions to strengthen the protection.
I wish to make it clear that I have no intention of using that power at present, but I would be prepared to use it if it emerged that individuals' interests were not being properly protected by the scheme in practice.
If I decided to act in that way, any regulation to amend the scheme would be subject to the affirmative resolution procedure.
Therefore, the House would have the opportunity of debating any proposed changes to the scheme.
An enormous amount of detailed technical evidence on groundwater was presented during consideration of the earlier Bill.
The Select Committee that examined the Bill took a very close interest in and sought several undertakings about groundwater.
One such was that further detailed studies of the possible effects should be undertaken over a 12-month period.
The results of those studies were published on 25 September, and on the same day I announced the start of a three-month public consultation period during which interested parties could make written representations to me on the contents of the reports produced by Hydrotechnica.
The public consultation exercise ends on 31 December.
The documents are technical, and I have arranged for them to be placed in all public libraries in Cardiff, and notices to that effect have been placed in local newspapers.
I gave the Select Committee an undertaking that I would consider the Hydrotechnica studies and the commentary produced by Cardiff Bay development corporation, and I shall do so.
I shall also consider any representations received during the consultation period.
I have appointed an eminent expert, Mr. Roy Stoner, the director of the Institute of Irrigation Studies at Southampton university, as my specialist groundwater adviser.
Once the consultation period is over, I shall consider all the evidence.
Only if I am satisfied that the economic, safety and technical criteria relating to groundwater can be met will public funding be made available for construction of the barrage.
That is the undertaking that I gave to the Select Committee.
Subject to that undertaking, I am pleased to announce today that I have increased the funding planned by the corporation by £22 million, bringing provision for the next three years to £130 million.
I do that in the context of the proposals in the Bill, which I believe are vital for the future of Cardiff.
Accordingly, I commend the Bill to the House.
Mr. Barry Jones (Alyn and Deeside)
I beg to move, to leave out from’ That’to the end of the Question, and to add instead thereof: this House declines to give a Second Reading to the Cardiff Bay Barrage Bill because of the inadequacy of the groundwater protection provisions in that the powers granted to the Secretary of State in the Bill would enable him to weaken the protections specified in the schedule, because the public consultation on the Hydrotechnica report is not yet concluded, because that consultation process has allowed no mechanism for public discussion of the report, and because the Bill makes no provision for an independent final arbiter on matters concerning the quality of the water environment in the inland bay.
There can be no doubt about the need for urban regeneration in the Cardiff docklands.
The docks of Cardiff were at the centre of the coal-based prosperity of south Wales.
Coal from the valleys of south Wales made Cardiff the world's leading coal-exporting port.
The decline of the docks has mirrored the decline of the south Wales coal industry.
Now, with fewer than 2,000 workers in our pits, Cardiff docklands must find a new identity and a new prosperity.
Cardiff has already begun a brighter future.
South Glamorgan county council and Cardiff city council have sought to bring new industries and new jobs to the area.
Like other responsible, Labour-controlled local authorities in Wales, they have worked in partnership with the Welsh Office, the Welsh Development Agency, the European Commission and in this case the development corporation.
Our criticism is not of the economic regeneration.
Our criticism of the Bill rests on some of the ways in which the Government have approached the project, or failed to provide adequate safeguards.
Indeed, the Government tried to rush a Bill through in July of this year, but the Select Committee on Procedure said no.
I have been unable to find anyone who wishes to praise the private Bill procedure; it is an anachronism.
Indeed, the Transport and Works Bill which will come before the House next week reflects anxiety about the operation of the private Bill system.
Our reasoned amendment centres on three clear propositions.
Each relates to safeguards and protections on issues which we all agree are serious for the project.
The first is groundwater.
The groundwater protection provisions are inadequate in that the powers granted to the Secretary of State in the Bill would enable him to weaken the protections specified in the schedule.
I refer to clause 21, which is supposed to be about reassurance.
What reassurance does it give to people who might suffer damage due to a change in groundwater level when the Bill permits the Secretary of State to weaken the groundwater provisions?
The Bill gives protection with one hand and takes it away with the other.
We welcome the fact that provisions have been put in the Bill.
In July it was intended that they should be contained in regulations.
By agreeing to their inclusion in the Bill the Secretary of State has responded to the anxieties of my hon. Friends the Members for Cardiff, West (Mr. Morgan) and for Cardiff, South and Penarth (Mr. Michael), and of South Glamorgan county council, Cardiff city council and many other bodies.
However, by retaining his flexibility of action the Secretary of State has drafted the Bill so as to allow him to weaken the necessary protections.
That is unacceptable; we detect the Treasury's fingerprints in this.
That is why we ask the right hon. Gentleman to give a categorical assurance to the House that at some later date cash limits will not be imposed on deserving claims for compensation.
As the legislation stands and under the powers contained in clause 21(2), the Secretary of State could alter the rights of householders to cover only compensation instead of remedial work, as specified in schedule 7.
He could also shorten the period in which residents could make a claim for compensation and alter the cost of a survey of buildings outside the protected property area.
These are not peripheral issues; they are key issues to individuals, families and local communities.
Public consultation is our second major point of contention.
On the results of the Hydrotechnica report
Mr. Chris Butler (Warrington, South)
The hon. Gentleman supported the previous private Bill.
Does he want a Cardiff bay barrage to be built?
Why is he trying to stop this Bill instead of amending it in Committee?
Mr. Jones
I shall state my position and that of the Opposition in my speech.
Perhaps the hon. Gentleman will find my remarks persuasive.
He should not put words in my mouth, however, or make false assumptions.
I know that his intervention was well meant and had not a whit of political mischief about it.
Knowing him very well, I know that he would not rise just to dissemble.
As for public consultation
The Parliamentary Under-Secretary of State for Wales (Mr. Nicholas Bennett) rose —
Mr. Jones
I want to get on.
The Under-Secretary will have a chance to catch Mr. Speaker's eye later, no doubt.
I was saying that the second major point of contention has to do with public consultation on the results of the Hydrotechnica report.
As we debate the Bill, the period of public consultation is only halfway through.
Surely arrangements should have been made to allow the Secretary of State to report to the House on the outcome of the consultations and on the advice of his expert, Mr. Roy Stoner of Southampton university, about the objections voiced during the consultation period.
The consultation period ends on 31 December and only then will the Secretary of State's consultant start to prepare his final report.
We do not even know whether the Stoner report will be available to the Select Committee when it begins to sit.
In any event, it is surely wrong, for the sake of a few weeks, to decide on the principle of the Bill by giving it a Second Reading while hon. Members still do not have the Stoner report.
There has been concern about and criticism of the manner in which public consultation has been undertaken.
It has not allowed for public discussion or exchanges in which people can ask questions and receive answers from those who undertook the research.
I agree with the Secretary of State that the matters involved are highly technical and that the Hydrotechnica report deals with matters that have been at the heart of the controversy.
People want a chance to discuss the report, and the lack of debate is a serious flaw in the procedures that have been followed.
The third major element of our amendment relates to the quality of the water environment in the inland bay.
Many points made during the passage of the previous, private Bill require to be considered.
Not least are the problems of sewage discharge, the pollution of rivers flowing into the bay, leachate from the Ferry road tip, algal growth and fish protection.
We have real reservations about the role of the Secretary of State for Wales as the final arbiter in any dispute between the National Rivers Authority and the development corporation.
In that context I refer to clause 12.
The corporation may argue that a direction given to it by the National Rivers Authority to improve water is unreasonable.
If that happens, the Secretary of State will be called on to adjudicate, and there is a suspicion that he would be inclined to side with the development corporation which, of course, is his creation, his creature.
Dr. Kim Howells (Pontypridd)
The rivers that are to be dammed, the Taff and the Ely, flow through my constituency.
My hon. Friend knows that the NRA has done sterling work to clean up those rivers.
However, its task is made much more difficult by the fact that derogations granted to the Welsh water authority allow it to pump raw sewage into both those rivers.
If a lake is built behind the barrage, it will be nothing more than a sewage pit.
How does the Secretary of State propose to tackle that problem?
Mr. Jones
My hon. Friend's point is central to the debate and I am sure that the matter will be pressed hard in Committee.
It would be unwise to allow even the possibility of criticism on a matter as important as adjudication.
Therefore, there should be expert, independent adjudication in any such dispute, either by arbitration or by an appropriate expert body.
That would mean that even if the final decision rested with the Secretary of State he would be seen by all concerned parties to be basing his judgment on neutral, expert scientific advice.
Not only is there a lack of independence in determining the quality of the water environment but the Bill ignores the statutory role of Cardiff city council as public health authority or port health authority.
Clause 70 of the previous Bill required the undertakers to install monitoring apparatus to monitor water level and quality for infectious diseases.
All records were to be available to Cardiff city council to allow it to discharge its statutory responsibilities.
The Bill disregards the statutory role of local authorities with regard to impounded water and that can only be to the detriment of local people.
Not the least of our criticisms of the Government's approach relates to the Cardiff Bay development corporation, which is unelected and unaccountable and has too often been insensitive to the concerns of local communities.
It is a creature of the Secretary of State for Wales and the right hon. Gentleman has shown that its first responsibility is to him and not to the local community.
We saw that only a few months ago when the right hon. Gentleman vetoed the appointment of a Labour city councillor in favour of the appointment of his Tory placeman.
The imposition of councillor Jeff Sainsbury says much about the right hon. Gentleman and about the unrepresentative character of the development corporation.
The appointment also says much about quango politics in Conservative Wales.
A man who knows more than most about quangos is the chairman of the development corporation.
It is surely unique in Britain for a failed Conservative candidate to be chairman of not one but two quangos.
I do not blame those involved in the development corporation, particularly the five council members who are in a minority on the board.
At least they have won an election for their seats on the council.
The development corporation is a creature of the Conservative Government, who clearly do not trust democracy in operation in Wales.
They claim to support democracy in other parts of the world, but in Wales local communities cannot choose how best to regenerate their local economies.
That there was no need for this artificial regeneration is shown by the successful regenerations of central Cardiff, spearheaded by Cardiff city council, and of the Atlantic wharf area, spearheaded by South Glamorgan county council.
Both were achieved in partnership with other public agencies and the public itself.
Mr. David Hunt
I sensed that the hon. Gentleman was coming to the conclusion of his speech.
He has not yet come off the fence and told us whether he supports the barrage project.
Mr. Jones
The detail of my speech made it far more informative than that of the Secretary of State.
The right hon. Gentleman is in a feeble position.
He has had to come to the House with the Bill because he was unable to deliver.
I understand that he wrote to all members of the Cabinet asking them to turn up and support him in the votes after previous debates on this project.
However, he was not able to get enough Cabinet members to support him.
He has a lot of ground to make up before he can criticise the Opposition.
The Opposition always deal with the arguments.
We shall press to a vote our reasoned amendment, which will redress three important issues.
I urge the Secretary of State to accept the validity of the argument set out in the amendment.
Dr. Kim Howells (Pontypridd)
Like my hon. Friend the Member for Cardiff, South and Penarth (Mr. Michael), I support the redevelopment of Cardiff docks.
The area has made a unique contribution to Welsh commerce and to Welsh culture, not least because it produced Shirley Bassey, among others.
It would be churlish if I or anyone else were to say that the area should not receive whatever funds are needed to redevelop it.
We are, however, debating the wisdom of building a barrage.
I do not think that there is anyone in the Chamber who would deny that the area of Cardiff docks needs redevelopment; the question is whether there should be redevelopment by means of impounding the Rivers Taff and Ely.
Cardiff bay has a great deal to offer Wales in the way of prestige projects, for example.
It is directly to the south of the hub of administrative Wales — the capital city of the Principality.
There are already several institutions of which we can be proud, and I understand that Cardiff may have a centre for the performing arts in the form of a new opera house.
I am sure that we would all be proud of that.
I hope that such a project will be a centre for other arts, too.
At Pierhead there is a science centre called Techniquest, which attracts about 100,000 people a year.
Those who are involved with it want to move to larger premises.
They have plans to incorporate a science park in an area of about 135,000 sq ft.
We have seen Welsh industry change.
There has been a transformation in the economy of Wales, which is now as much electronics and science based as it is steel and coal based.
The science project to which I have referred could be a great flagship for Welsh industry, for Welsh commerce and for British science generally.
Why does not the Secretary of State for Wales wave the flag for Pierhead and say that the new project could become a great science centre?
I understand that others will try to grab it.
Apparently Bradford is interested in having it and Bristol has also made noises about it.
There is already a wonderful location for a new science centre to be developed.
I should like to see the new Techniquest look out across a natural estuary that has seen the tide rise and fall for a million years.
I should like to see the rivers that flow into the estuary — and indeed the entire Bristol channel — cleaned.
Those are monumental tasks, but they are imaginative ones.
It seems that we would be much better off if we spent money not on constructing a barrage but on cleaning up the various sewage works that I have castigated over the years.
It would be well worth spending money on such a project.
We would be giving future generations an inheritance of which we could be proud, and which we would surely be proud to pass on.
I am worried that, instead, we shall be handing over a barrage that will do little apart from create what is hoped to be an aesthetically pleasing impounded area of water.
Such projects were popular constructions in the late 1970s and early 1980s, and I am worried that once again the Welsh Office is trying to catch up with a fashion or a phase that has passed.
Instead, we should be in tune with what is happening environmentally in the most progressive countries in Europe and throughout the world.
We should give thought to cleaning up the environment generally.
We could be proud of such an achievement because the tide could flow in and out, the natural environment would be enhanced, and the flora and fauna would flourish close to the heart of our great capital city.
Instead, it seems that money is to be spent in an almost futile attempt to attract to the bay, at a time of recession, companies and start-up projects that, by rights, should be located elsewhere.
I refer, for example, to the Welsh health common services authority which, under the leadership of Brigadier Peter Crawley, decided that it would locate in the bay rather than at Merthyr Tydfil or some other place along the A470 — or even at the refurbished BBC studios building at Gabalfa, which is where we all thought that authority would go.
Instead, there was an announcement, accompanied by a great hoo-hah, that the authority and its 800 jobs would be moving to the bay.
I am not saying that that had anything to do with the fact that Brigadier Crawley was in the same regiment as Lieutenant-Colonel Inkin, who is the chairman of the Cardiff Bay development corporation.
On inquiring about the matter, I was told that the health common services authority had decided to move to the bay because it had been told by an independent property consultancy that it was a much better choice of location than anywhere else.
It turns out that the independent property consultancy was none other than a subsidiary of the national ports authority, which is a major shareholder in the Cardiff Bay development corporation.
The Secretary of State has a duty to tell the House why that decision was made.
Did it come as a sudden revelation and a flash of light to Brigadier Crawley, or was it that the development corporation, with its vast capital expenditure, needed a prestige project to give it credence in the eyes of the commercial world?
This is not the politics of jealousy from those of us who worry about such matters.
We are glad to see the bay being redeveloped, and hope that it will be a great success.
Mr. Gwilym Jones (Cardiff, North)
Before the hon. Gentleman moves on from his point about the proposal to locate the health common services authority in the old BBC offices at Gabalfa, perhaps I may take some credit for that not having come to pass.
There was great resentment among my constituents on the Three Horseshoes estate at that suggestion, which they feared would dramatically worsen the quality of their lives.
Apart from the traffic implications in grid-locking the roads of Caerphilly, up Manor way, it might even have had repercussions for the hon. Gentleman's constituents.
I certainly lobbied against the authority making that move, and if I played any part in influencing its choice of the bay instead, I am very pleased at that outcome.
Dr. Howells
I thank the hon. Gentleman for his helpful intervention.
I am sure that that proposal would have affected the lives of my constituents.
More of them would have obtained jobs.
There is still planning permission for the Gabalfa office development, so someone will move there.
It would have been nice if the health common services authority had sone so — and created 800 jobs.
I would rather have seen it move to Merthyr Tydfil, Brecon, or anywhere else, because it is an authority for Wales.
According to the Secretary of State, companies are queuing up to move to the bay, but there seems to be no proof of that.
I concede that the current recession and the Government's mismanagement of the economy have a part to play in the fact that prestige projects are not lining up to locate in the bay.
My concern is why the health common services authority, with its 800 valuable jobs, should suddenly decide to change direction and head for the bay.
That seems to be a face-saving exercise rather than one that makes any sense in administrative or traffic terms — as the hon. Member for Cardiff, North (Mr. Jones) said.
As that hon. Gentleman knows, journeying to and from the bay at the moment is appalling.
One has to travel through the middle of Cardiff, or through a curious maze that takes one off the western approaches, along the new dockland link road.
It may be that in future the bay area's traffic needs will be better served.
I have no doubt that they will.
I also hope that the hon. Gentleman will press for better traffic arrangements for the rest of us, on the A470 and everywhere else.
Mr. Rowlands
I had not realised that other sites had been considered, including Merthyr.
Does my hon. Friend know the comparative costs involved?
Dr. Howells
As most Cardiff property developers know, in the docklands the average annual rent is about £14.50 per sq ft, while it is under £10 in Merthyr.
I am worried about other costs, such as the cost of fitting out offices.
Whence came the inducements for the move down to the docks?
I fear that they will eventually prove to have come from the Welsh Office, via the Cardiff Bay development corporation.
Who will provide the £1 million or £2 million for the offices to be fitted out?
I understand that they have not even been built yet.
Many of us are keen for the bay to be redeveloped, and are glad to note that low-cost housing is being provided there.
We are still worried about the groundwater mystery, however.
I shall not attempt to express an opinion, but I well remember a very good party that was held in our front room in Portmanmoor road, Splott, back in 1970.
About 50 paisley-shirted individuals suddenly found themselves up to their knees in wet mud.
The floor had collapsed — people danced a good deal harder in those days, as the Secretary of State will no doubt remember.
Cardiff was, of course, built on mud flats, and nature takes a long time to change.
Problems will be caused by sewage flowing down the Taff and the Ely into the bay.
At least I know something about such problems; they were my original reason for opposing the scheme, and I have not changed my mind in the slightest.
Ultimately, the people of Cardiff must decide, but they have good representatives in the House who are capable of making the right decision.
Many of us who represent the valleys would like the same amount of money to be spent on matters other than the bay, which has no God-given right to it.
Although I am pleased to note that the money is designed to prime the pump of private capital, I see no evidence of that as yet.
I hope that the House will support the reasoned amendment, and that the whole project can be examined properly and thoroughly.
Mr. Rhodri Morgan (Cardiff, West)
As the Secretary of State has said, today's debate is to some extent a re-run of the debate that took place on 16 April, and we shall be deploying some of the same arguments.
As on 16 April, we shall be voting at 7 o'clock, but this time it will be 7 pm rather than 7 am.
This could be described as a hybrid Bill and, in a sense, we are considering two questions at the same time.
The first is whether the barrage should be given funds, and the second is whether, if someone else's money and ideas were involved, the development should be given permission to proceed.
If the decisions were being made by a planning inquiry and we were the planning inspectors, would we give permission for the spending of someone else's money on such as project?
Has it proved itself sufficiently?
We shall vote against the Government's proposals.
Our reason for doing that is stated in the amendment: there are still a large number of unanswered questions.
It is difficult for Opposition Members to say that there is no problem and that money can be spent because the general tide of expert opinion is in the Government's favour.
In fact, the general tide of expert opinion is deeply divided.
Geologists and civil engineers who have worked for the Cardiff Bay development corporation as consultants have in general been willing to give the green light to the package.
We do not know, however, what other experts will say.
They have not yet reported.
The Secretary of State's own consultant, Mr. Roy Stoner, the head of the Institute of Irrigation Studies at Southampton university, has not yet reported and we do not know what he will say.
I noted that the Secretary of State omitted to refer to the date when he will be able to tell the House about Mr. Stoner's opinion.
I had imagined that if the Secretary of State was interested in doing his job properly he would have said to us,’ Mr. Stoner's opinion will be made available to the first meeting of the Select Committee.’
I do not know whether the Under-Secretary of State for Wales will tell us when Mr. Stoner's report will be made available.
There are also the geologists and civil engineers who gave evidence for Cardiff residents against the barrage during the Select Committee stage of the proceedings on the private Bill in February, April and May of last year.
One of them — Dr. John Miles from the civil engineering department of the University college Cardiff — stated that there was a danger that parts of low-lying Cardiff could be turned into an urban slum.
That somewhat chilling prediction was made in the presence of the hon. Member for Cornwall, North (Sir G. Neale), who was here to listen to the opening speeches but who is not here now.
When a highly qualified professional makes such a dire prediction, one has to sit up and take notice.
If the geologists are divided, it is not surprising that the politicians will also be divided.
Mr. Michael
If the hon. Gentleman reads the speech by the Secretary of State's predecessor, he will find that he promised that five places would be set aside to be decided by the local authorities.
Those local authorities contain the number of Labour members that serve on them due to the choice of the electorate.
Again I suggest that this line of argument is unsound.
The hon. Gentleman is not helping his right hon. Friend: he is making matters worse.
Mr. Jones
I do not accept that line of argument from the hon. Gentleman.
My right hon. Friend can choose to appoint whomsoever he thinks fit.
Naturally, he listens to recommendations from the local councils, as he clearly did on this occasion, but he was absolutely right not to adopt all their suggestions.
The hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside cited the example of Cardiff city centre's redevelopment around the St. David's centre.
He mentioned that as an example of partnership.
The person who should be given the credit as the father of the redevelopment of the city centre and of the fine St. David's centre was the late councillor Ron Watkiss.
It was his place on the development corporation that fell vacant because of his untimely death before the local elections, and the appointment of the lord mayor followed on naturally from that.
The advantages accruing from the redevelopment of the city centre, as cited by the hon. Member for Alyn and Deeside, have been maintained by upholding councillor Watkiss' guiding spirit.
Mr. Michael
In that case, will the hon. Gentleman tell us whether the occupancy of the development corporation board place will change when the occupancy of the lord mayor's seat changes?
Mr. Jones
That will depend on what happens when the incumbent's term expires — as the hon. Gentleman knows full well.
Mr. Rogers
Should not the more important issue of the large salaries being paid to these local authority members be looked at?
Does not the hon. Gentleman think it wrong in principle that elected councillors should be paid such salaries on these corporation bodies?
These duties are merely an extension of their usual council duties.
It is fair enough for the councillors to claim the normal allowances, but the hon. Gentleman's proposition would give them a biased view of what is in the interests of their citizens.
If they are receiving thousands of pounds as members of Cardiff Bay development corporation, they are unlikely to look dispassionately at the interests of their wards.
In all fairness, they would be under a great deal of pressure.
Main Question put forthwith, pursuant to Standing Order No. 60 (Amendment on Second or Third Reading), and agreed to.
Bill accordingly read a Second time.
Ordered, That the Bill be committed to a Select Committee of seven Members, four to be nominated by the House and three by the Committee of Selection.
That there shall stand referred to the Select Committee
a) any Petition against the Bill presented by being deposited in the Private Bill Office at any time not later than the fourteenth day after this day, and
b) any Petition which has been presented by being deposited in the Private Bill Office and in which the Petitioners complain of any amendment as proposed in the filled-up Bill or of any matter which has arisen during the progress of the Bill before the Select Committee, being a Petition in which the Petitioners pray to be heard by themselves, their Counsel or Agents.
That if no such Petition as is mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) above is presented, or if all such Petitions are withdrawn before the meeting of the Select Committee, the order for the committal of the Bill to a Select Committee shall be discharged and the Bill shall be committed to a Standing Committee.
That any Petitioner whose Petition stands referred to the Select Committee shall, subject to the Rules and Orders of the House and to the Prayer of his Petition, be entitled to be heard by himself, his Counsel or Agents upon his Petition provided that it is prepared and signed in conformity with the Rules and Orders of the House, and the Member in charge of the Bill shall be entitled to be heard by his Counsel or Agents in favour of the Bill against that Petition.
That the Select Committee have power to sit notwithstanding any adjournment of the House, to adjourn from place to place within the United Kingdom and to report from day to day the Minutes of Evidence taken before it.
That three be the Quorum of the Select Committee.
King's Cross Railways Bill
Motion made, and Question proposed, That the Promoters of the King's Cross Railways Bill may, notwithstanding anything in the Standing Orders or practice of this House, proceed with the Bill in the present Session; and the Petition for the Bill shall be deemed to have been deposited and all Standing Orders applicable thereto shall be deemed to have been complied with;
That the Bill shall be presented to the House not later than the seventh day after this day;
That there shall be deposited with the Bill a declaration signed by the Agents for the Bill, stating that the Bill is the same, in every respect, as the Bill at the last stage of its proceedings in this House in the last Session;
That the Bill shall be laid upon the Table of the House by one of the Clerks in the Private Bill Office on the next meeting of the House after the day on which the Bill has been presented and, when so laid, shall be read the first and second time (and shall be recorded in the Journal of this House as having been so read) and, having been amended by the Committee in the last Session, shall be ordered to lie upon the Table.
That no further Fees shall be charged in respect of any proceedings on the Bill in respect of which Fees have already been incurred during the last Session.
Mr. Gary Waller (Keighley)
The House will recall that the Bill seeks powers for works in the area of King's Cross and St. Pancras stations to increase capacity for British Rail and, indeed, for underground customers and to provide new rail services across London using Thameslink.
It will also give London its second international station for trains via the channel tunnel, whether they finish their journey in London or continue to the midlands, to the north of England or to Scotland.
There have been some important developments since the Bill was last debated in the House almost a year ago.
Provided that the motion is passed tonight, there will, I hope, be a further opportunity to debate the scheme in more detail before long.
Mr. Tim Devlin (Stockton, South)
Is my hon. Friend worried — as I am — that the Bill will perhaps not get through to the next stage given the fact that this morning the Northern Region Councils Association — a Labour-dominated body — wrote to every Member of Parliament in the northern region asking them to be present for this important debate?
As he can see, I am the only Member of Parliament from the northern region who is here apart from, I think, one Labour Member of Parliament who is a Whip.
Is not that a disgraceful state of affairs?
Mr. Waller
It demonstrates how assiduously my hon. Friend serves his constituents, and I am delighted to see him here.
He is a most welcome supporter of the Bill It would be helpful if I brought the House up to date on what has happened during the past year, so that hon. Members can take recent developments into account when making up their minds if and when they vote later.
On 8 May this year the Committee debating the Bill met for the 53rd and final day under the chairmanship — on that occasion — of my hon. Friend the Member for Chelmsford (Mr. Burns).
It was to examine the amendments and the additional provisions that were required in the Committee's report which, the House will recall, was published in June of last year.
The provisions were accepted and the Bill has returned to the House for consideration.
Concern has been expressed about the letter sent to my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State for Transport by Senor Carlo Ripa di Meana.
The letter refers to King's Cross and the channel tunnel rail link.
It is essentially a matter for the Government and I believe that they will be able to demonstrate that the Town and Country Planning (Assessment of Environmental Effects)
Regulations 1988, which, it will be recalled, they introduced to meet European Community directive No. 85337, conform to that requirement.
I also believe that the manner of Senor di Meana's intervention demonstrated to the full that the Government are right to stress the principle of subsidiarity which holds that the Commission should not become involved in matters that can more effectively be dealt with by member states.
However, I do not wish to stray too far from the motion.
The last time the Bill was debated in the House I assured the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith)— whom I am delighted to see here — that a revised environmental statement on the project proposals would be available before the Bill was debated again.
That environmental statement has now been published to conform to the Committee's requirements.
Also, in May this year, British Rail submitted to the Secretary of State for his approval route proposals for a high-speed link from the channel tunnel to central London and a comparative analysis of other routes.
After careful deliberation my right hon. and learned Friend made a statement on 9 October to the effect that he intended to ask British Rail to refine Ove Arup's proposed eastern approach to London sufficiently to allow public consultation to take place on that route and, indeed, for it to be safeguarded.
At the time of that announcement, the Secretary of State also made clear his support for a King's Cross terminal, which he described as’ essential not only to meet the need of the travellers within London, but also crucial to serve the requirements of those who live elsewhere in Britain’.
We come back to that point again and again.
The new King's Cross scheme is vital as a national project, and for commuters and people living in the capital.
Dr. Keith Hampson (Leeds, North-West)
I am sure that my hon. Friend accepts that there is no mutual inconsistency in the two schemes.
I fear that people in the north have been somewhat misled by the Yorkshire Post and by others.
It has been suggested that the decision to go east of London to Stratford will be detrimental to people in the north.
Far from being the case, that scheme is vital for freight traffic and the King's Cross delevopment links intimately and properly into that scheme.
Mr. Waller
My hon. Friend is right.
There has been some misunderstanding about the position.
From the words of my right hon. and learned Friend the Secretary of State, it is clear that he regards it as vital that King's Cross should go ahead as an essential part of the entire project.
It would be wrong not to move in that direction.
Mr. William O'Brien (Normanton)
It is important for the north of England that King's Cross is allowed to proceed.
One of the concerns of people in the north is whether sufficient finances will be provided to ensure that the project about which the Secretary of State spoke a few months ago will be allowed to continue.
Can the hon. Gentleman prevail on his right hon. and learned Friend to give us the assurance that there will be funds — public funds if necessary — to ensure that the King's Cross scheme goes ahead?
Mr. Waller
My hon. Friend the Minister for Public Transport may say a few words about funding if he feels that it is appropriate.
I stress that King's Cross would offer advantages even if no rail link were built.
It will offer advantages to international and to domestic travellers.
When we debated the matter last year, some hon. Members opposed the Bill on the ground that they opposed the then route for the rail link.
The fact that we are here again, just as keen to see the King's Cross project coming into being, demonstrates clearly that the two schemes are and always have been separate.
As long as the Bill goes through Committee and receives a Third Reading, the King's Cross project will go ahead regardless of the timing of the link between the channel tunnel and London.
It stands independently as a valuable scheme.
Mr. Frank Dobson (Holborn and St. Pancras)
Will the hon. Gentleman confirm that since the decision by the Secretary of State on the channel tunnel route to London, British Rail has appointed consultants to advise on the possibility of building the Eurostation above ground, rather than building it underground as proposed in the Bill?
Mr. Waller
Is the hon. Gentleman thinking about the Alan Baxter scheme?
British Rail did not appoint Alan Baxter to advise on that matter; the company was a consultant to British Rail on a different matter.
British Rail had no knowledge that the company would produce an alternative scheme for an international terminal above ground.
I will come to that matter a little later, as the hon. Gentleman will hear.
Mr. Dobson
It would help other hon. Members to know whether British Rail has asked consultants to advise on whether it would be possible to build a satisfactory station above ground rather than underground, as proposed in the Bill.
Mr. Waller
To the best of my knowledge, there has been no such request by British Rail.
I am sure that British Rail has considered all the options and it may have asked the consultants to study alternatives.
I am clear that the proposal that we are discussing, which involves a two-level station, is the best for Londoners and the best for travellers, whether international or domestic.
Let there be no mistake about that.
The needs of international and of domestic travellers dovetail at King's Cross.
It is easily accessible by train, by tube, by bus and by taxi.
As a result, most passengers arriving for international trains are expected to do so by public transport rather than by car, thus avoiding congestion on local roads.
I know that such congestion has been a major concern among hon. Members.
The changes include longer platforms so that longer trains can be run, offering more capacity, and a new passenger concourse building to link the two stations.
The other significant development is the new connections and platforms for Thameslink, allowing Network SouthEast to introduce trains from Peterborough and Cambridge across London to Gatwick airport, to Kent and to Sussex.
That will give London its first express route across the capital and it will be a boon to many travellers.
From the north of England and Scotland, the proposals provide for through and connecting international trains.
They will also cut journey times to Gatwick and to the south coast.
A first-class interchange at King's Cross is also important for passengers from the west midlands, from the north-west of England, from north Wales and from the west of Scotland using existing rail services at Euston.
British Rail has decided to have a dedicated, high-quality link between the stations and is examining a number of options effectively to make Euston part of the international terminal complex.
Mr. Dobson
Exactly how will British Rail connect Euston and King's Cross stations?
The British Library sinks seven storeys below ground on the other side of St. Pancras station.
How can British Rail have an adequate link?
During the previous debate, it was said that trains would be able to proceed from the north-west, with a bit of dodging about in Hampstead, to King's Cross.
An arrangement allegedly involving Euston, King's Cross and St. Pancras was not mentioned.
The stations are a long way apart.
Mr. Waller
I will come to the hon. Gentleman's final point shortly.
All that I can say on the fixed link between Euston and the new complex — because I mentioned that a number of options are still being considered — is that it will be a dedicated link.
Some of the roads in the vicinity which are owned by British Rail, for example, may be used and a bus may travel on a dedicated route or on a dedicated track.
At this stage, I cannot say what the link will be, although I can say that it will be a dedicated, high-quality link.
Mr. Dobson
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Waller
I ask the hon. Gentleman to let me continue at this stage.
I am sure that he will seek to make his own speech in the debate.
I will respond to the hon. Gentleman's other point.
Interchange by the Euston-King's Cross link will complement the through international train services that British Rail plans to run from the north-west and the west midlands to Paris and Brussels.
Initially, the services will operate through existing routes through west London.
They will be diverted to run through the King's Cross low-level station when it opens using the proposed West Hampstead chord line for which British Rail seeks powers in the British Railways (No. 3) Bill.
A recent development that the House will wish to take into account is represented by the publication last month of a so-called’ alternative strategy’document produced by consulting civil and structural engineers Alan Baxter and Associates.
It might be considered surprising that the firm refused to supply British Rail with a copy of its report prior to publication, even though much of the information it used was obtained in its capacity as consulting engineers to the BR board in relation to a planning appeal for a location to the north end of the King's Cross site.
One may ask what account the firm took of the duties it owed of confidentiality and good faith, bearing in mind that, far from inquiring whether the BR board would object, it did not even say what it was doing.
A detailed study of the strategic document reveals why it is not difficult to understand that there was some unwillingness to have it subjected to detailed transport analysis.
If hon. Members plan to refer to that document, it would be helpful if they addressed its basic flaws.
Unfortunately, they were neglected, except in passing, in the full-page feature article in The Independent by Gavin Stamp and Jonathan Glancey on 20 November.
Those journalists may know something about environmental issues, but if they understand transport issues, they were jolly well doing their best to conceal the fact.
An overwhelming difficulty with the Baxter proposals for King's Cross is that they make no provision for any improvement to Network SouthEast's Thameslink cross-London services, which is an essential element of the British Rail plan.
The position for the international station chosen by Baxter would make it impossible to provide any route between Thameslink and the east coast main line.
It is only by placing the new station beneath the existing one that all the required rail connections can be made.
Baxter, rather weakly, tried to find a virtue in separating the express and local services.
In truth the main justification for the scheme is utterly dissipated.
The Baxter plan does not permit the operation of international trains to King's Cross before the completion of a new rail link from the channel tunnel.
The completion date for the rail link is uncertain.
Therefore, it is obvious that one of the most important features of the scheme — the fact that the rail link and the international station can be considered independently — would be lost.
The disruption of train services during the work would be on a much greater scale than under the British Rail plan.
Major problems would also be caused to the high proportion of international passengers at King's Cross — perhaps they would represent as many as three quarters of the total of such passengers.
They would be expected to interchange at King's Cross with London Underground and other BR services.
However, the need for some form of travolator or form of fixed link would involve an extra change, which is avoidable and would be provided at the expense of convenience and journey time.
Mr. Andrew Rowe (Mid-Kent)
There is a risk of a misleading illusion being formed and I know that my hon. Friend would wish to avoid that.
My hon. Friend said that the Baxter station would prevent the arrival of international trains at King's Cross before the creation of a rail link.
He then said that about three quarters of all international passengers will end up at King's Cross.
However, are we not talking about two propositions divided by a considerable number of years?
Mr. Waller
It is impossible to know.
However, my hon. Friend may have misunderstood me.
I said that three quarters of the total number of international passengers are expected to interchange at King's Cross with London Underground and other BR services.
Mr. O'Brien
Reference has been made to services to King's Cross for passengers who will travel from the north and other parts of England and from the continent.
There is no InterCity link between London King's Cross and the Stratford terminal.
Therefore, the link between Stratford and King's Cross is of great importance.
Will the hon. Gentleman persuade the Secretary of State of the necessity of that InterCity link going ahead, because it is important to the entire system?
If the proposed scheme is to succeed, we must have that InterCity link.
Mr. Waller
My right hon. and learned Friend has said as clearly as possible that he regards the second London terminal at King's Cross as an intrinsic part of the scheme.
It may be of significance to hon. Members with constituencies in the King's Cross vicinity that, at the very least, the alternative Baxter scheme will be no less disruptive to homes, highways and places of work than the BR proposals.
It is clear from an examination of the Baxter proposals in depth that many of the disadvantages have not been addressed seriously.
I shall be interested to hear any arguments in favour of that proposal, for it would be easy to knock them down.
I do not regard the Baxter alternative as a serious proposition.
Mr. Dobson
I understand from the hon. Gentleman that the station provided for in the Bill is intended to serve trains coming initially along a different route — not from Stratford — to the Euroterminal.
Will that station then be fit, without any redesign or rejigging, to take trains that have come via Stratford?
Mr. Waller
That is an important question.
The alignment of the station does not have to change at all to take account of the new east route into London in favour of which my right hon. and learned Friend has declared himself.
There should be no misunderstanding about that.
On previous occasions, hon. Members have opposed the Bill for that very reason, as they thought that, by bringing the Bill forward, it represented a commitment to the southern approach to London.
That is not the case.
The Bill has been before the House for three Sessions.
It has been debated on several occasions and it had its Second Reading in May 1989 when it was introduced by my hon. Friend the Member for Ealing, Acton (Sir G. Young).
In two previous debates similar to this one, it has enjoyed a substantial majority in support.
The Select Committee, under the expert chairmanship of my hon. Friend the Member for Tatton (Mr. Hamilton), considered the proposals in detail over 53 days.
That was the longest time given to any private Bill since the Great Western Railway Bill of 1835.
The scheme is of strategic, national importance.
The House has given a great deal of detailed attention to the Bill, and the promoters and the petitioners have devoted a great deal of time and effort to the case.
Surely it would be right for the House to consider the Committee's amendments as soon as possible in this Session.
That requires the Bill to be revived tonight so that it can continue its progress.
I commend the motion.
Mr. Chris Smith (Islington, South and Finsbury)
I oppose the carry-over motion for the Bill, as I did when we debated it a year ago.
The hon. Member for Keighley (Mr. Waller) referred to the length of time and the detailed scrutiny that the Committee gave to the Bill.
The Committee gave British Rail a ferocious roasting over the way in which it had introduced the Bill and prosecuted its case.
I am sure that the hon. Gentleman will understand if some of us treat with a certain amount of scepticism some of the assurances that BR has subsequently given.
Perhaps it is worth reminding ourselves what this Bill does.
It gobbles up 17 acres of land and property in my constituency and that of my hon. Friend the Member for Holborn and St. Pancras (Mr. Dobson) to create a low-level box that will include platforms and railway lines serving the channel tunnel traffic, Thameslink and other commuter traffic.
It involves the loss of 83 homes and the displacement of 326 residents, the demolition of four listed buildings and the loss of 168 work places providing 1,620 jobs.
It will mean the loss of 58 shops, 38 of which provide key services to local people.
It will result in the destruction of Camley street natural park, which is used by thousands of local school children.
It will necessitate six years of construction work for 24 hours, seven days a week, which will render many of the homes in that district uninhabitable for substantial periods.
It will also mean the diversion of two major traffic arteries over temporary roadways for three years.
Therefore, in the light of those consequences, it behoves the House to assure itself that there is no conceivable alternative to the British Rail proposals and that they will achieve the aim that we all want — the ability of channel tunnel traffic to serve the whole country, not just London.
I do not believe that British Rail has got it right.
I argue the same case this year as I did last year, but with greater justification.
A number of factors relating to the King's Cross proposals have changed.
Last Wednesday the London Underground (King's Cross) Bill received its Third Reading.
That Bill extracted from the King's Cross Railways Bill those items of work relating to safety improvements at the London underground station at King's Cross following the Fennell report on the King's Cross fire.
London Underground correctly realised that it would be better for it to make its proposals as a separate Bill, which it has done, and the Bill has now passed through the House.
Therefore, that section of the King's Cross Railways Bill relating to those works is effectively redundant and the relevant clauses will have to be removed.
In addition, the Secretary of State has recently made an announcement on the decision to bring the high-speed link in from the east via Stratford rather than from the south.
It is extremely important to the case for assessing whether we should proceed with the King's Cross proposals as currently enshrined in the Bill.
The European Commissioner for the environment has said that he believes that there has been a failure to carry out a proper environmental impact assessment.
That is also important.
Mr. O'Brien
I am following my hon. Friend's contribution closely and I appreciate his concern as a constituency Member.
He referred to the European Commissioner's comments on the environmental assessment.
Is the environmental assessment to which my hon. Friend referred the same one as that referred to by the hon. Member for Keighley (Mr. Waller) who I understood to mean the King's Cross project, while my hon. Friend was referring to the high-speed link?
Will my hon. Friend clarify that?
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friend has identified an extremely important point.
The European Commission's principal complaint is that, in order to be properly conducted, an environmental assessment should consider not only the station, but the high-speed link — the two should be considered together.
British Rail has so far totally failed to do so.
There has also been a High Court decision on the rights of the trustees of St. Bartholomew's hospital in relation to a substantial portion of British Rail land at King's Cross.
That decision found in favour of St. Bartholomew's and against British Rail, and has thrown some of British Rail's funding calculations into a degree of confusion.
In addition to all those new factors, several alternative proposals — including some involving King's Cross — have emerged.
The hon. Member for Keighley mentioned the Baxter scheme.
I hold no specific brief for the Baxter scheme, but it has attempted to demonstrate that alternative schemes could be produced that would retain the Government's proposal for a terminus — an interchange — at King's Cross, but states that the plan would be more satisfactory if it were achieved without creating an enormous hole in the ground which British Rail proposes, with all the consequent destruction of homes, jobs and local neighbourhood.
My argument remains principally that King's Cross cannot cope with the proposed doubling of passengers at peak hours.
Even if the Government and Opposition spokesmen are wedded to the idea of having King's Cross as an interchange for the channel tunnel, they do not have to use the scheme proposed in the Bill.
I believe that we should not proceed with the Bill.
British Rail should go back to the drawing board, look at the line and the station together, and produce a new, properly worked out Bill that addresses both the line and the station.
In his article 169 letter, the European Commissioner stated that it was important that the rail link and the station should be considered together in terms of the environmental impact assessment if the European Community directive, signed by the Government and agreed to by this country, were to be met.
One of my constituents was in touch with my colleague, the European Member of Parliament, Ken Collins, who chairs the European Parliament's Committee on the Environment, Public Health and Consumer Protection, to seek his advice on what the European Commissioner had done and the reasons behind his action.
Mr. Collins's letter to my constituent, which is extremely clear, states:’ In the case of the rail link, there would have been no proposal to build a terminal, were it not for the need to provide one for the Channel Tunnel rail link.
The Commission is of the view that by dividing the project into two, the requirements of the directive are circumvented there will be no environmental impact assessment of the project as a whole, taking into account the direct and indirect effects of the rail link and terminal.’
The letter stresses that we breach the European directive in that we fail to consider the environmental impact of the station and the high-speed link together, as a whole, with all the direct and indirect consequences.
Mr. O'Brien
We could be accused of confusing the issue of environmental assessments.
Such assessments must follow the planning application.
As there are two separate applications — one for the King's Cross project and one for the high-speed link — it is difficult to see how the two environmental assessments can be taken together.
My hon. Friend should consider that point carefully because people may be misled, as his constituent was.
Mr. Smith
The problem is precisely that the two applications, which will be the subject of two separate Bills, are being considered separately.
It has long been my view, and I have argued consistently, that the two applications should be considered together.
That would be preferable to the ridiculous procedure of considering a station in one Bill and a high-speed link in another.
The sensible thing would be to examine the project in its entirety.
If we did that, there would be much less of a problem and we would not be in such deep water with the European Commission.
Mr. Peter Snape (West Bromwich, East) rose
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friend is dying to intervene.
Mr. Snape
I merely seek clarification.
I am following carefully what my hon. Friend says and, like my hon. Friend the Member for Normanton (Mr. O'Brien), I am aware of the deep personal and constituency interest that he has in the matter.
How would it be possible to take the two applications together when, thanks to the Government's incompetence, there is not yet a scheme to run trains to King's Cross?
All that the Government have decided so far is to cancel the scheme which British Rail spent hundreds of millions of pounds of our money developing.
Returning to the point made by my hon. Friend the Member for Normanton, those of us who have constituencies north of London are anxious to ensure that when the channel tunnel opens in 1993 — that is the only certainty in the project — at least some attempt has been made to provide the essential services without which areas north of London will receive no benefit from this enormous project.
Mr. Smith
My hon. Friend identifies precisely the problem with which we have been landed by the Government and British Rail.
They have made proposals for a station which are unattached to any proposals for a means of getting there.
I should have thought that it was much more sensible to make proposals from the start for both a station and a link.
If we allow the King's Cross Railways Bill to proceed and in the end no high-speed link or underground link between Stratford and King's Cross is built, we shall be left with an enormous white elephant at King's Cross with no means of getting to it from the channel tunnel.
It is important to consider the link and the station together, and British Rail and the Government should have done so from the word go.
Mr. Snape
There is a small matter which I should draw to my hon. Friend's attention.
I am sure that he saw the depressing report in The Sunday Telegraph that, with its customary foresight and thoughtfulness, the Treasury had decided to reject the Thameslink project.
However, if that project goes ahead, we shall have some way, if not a particularly adequate one, of getting trains from the midlands and the north of England to the south of England, provided that the Hampstead chord line is also built.
Temporarily for a few years trains could use that Thameslink line.
Mr. Smith
In theory my hon. Friend is correct.
The same could be said of the routes around the west of London.
Through trains from the north could be taken round that way.
I shall come to through services in a moment.
My hon. Friend must also recognise that the Thameslink lines under central London would not be capable of taking the proposed high-speed trains which will come across from the channel tunnel.
The environmental impact assessment has earned the ire of the European Commissioner because it divorces the station from the link.
But we must also recognise that the assessment which British Rail has carried out is deeply inadequate.
There was no contact or consultation with local residents who would be affected.
In assessing the impact on homes, British Rail completely missed out an entire family whose home in Caledonian road would be destroyed.
It carried out a survey of the noise and vibration likely to be caused by the construction of the project and concluded that noise and vibration would be’ unlikely to have a major impact.’
Yet British Rail says that it will have to offer temporary rehousing for an extended period to many people who will be next door to the works because of the extent and nature of the noise and vibration that they will experience.
How can an environmental impact assessment state that there will be no likely impact when British Rail has to admit that people will have to be temporarily rehoused?
That demonstrates the inadequacy of the environmental impact work that has been done so far.
The first principal reason for not proceeding with the Bill at this stage is that the European Commissioner rightly identified serious failures in the environmental impact assessment work which should have been carried out.
The second principal reason is that the Government's announcement of the route from the east via Stratford throws the scheme into question.
British Rail asserts, and the hon. Member for Keighley said so again tonight, that in physical terms the planned exit of the lines from King's Cross at the south-eastern corner of the new proposed station is such that lines could go to Stratford just as easily as they could have gone southwards.
I remain to be convinced.
Let us remember that that assurance comes from British Rail, who, it was discovered in Committee proceedings on the Bill, designed platforms that were too short to take the trains that would come in to them.
I wait to see conclusive proof that it is possible in physical and geographical terms to bring the lines from Stratford into the proposed station at King's Cross without making any changes whatever to the Bill.
I will believe it when I see it.
Perhaps more importantly, the Stratford decision must throw the entire financing of the King's Cross station completely out of kilter.
Neither the Government nor British Rail have told us exactly what the status of the Stratford station will be.
Will it be a major interchange?
How many passengers is it envisaged will get on or off the trains at Stratford?
The answers to those questions are crucial to King's Cross.
If passengers join or leave the trains at Stratford rather than King's Cross, fewer passengers will use the King's Cross interchange than was previously anticipated, so the cost per passenger that British Rail will have to pay to construct the station at King's Cross will increase.
Mr. Gerald Bowden (Dulwich)
I am grateful to the hon. Gentleman for giving way, particularly because I was not here at the beginning of his speech.
Those of us who live in south-east London not three miles from King's Cross know that if we were taking our children to meet a continental train, or if we were taking elderly parents or grandparents to meet the train, we would not take them to King's Cross, because we could not park there or get them near the platforms.
We would look for a station where we could park, say goodbye and then go home.
King's Cross is not the right place for that sort of departure.
Mr. Smith
The hon. Gentleman is right, and for once he is on all fours with British Rail.
British Rail has long argued that most passengers travelling to and from King's Cross will do so by public transport.
That is an important point in respect of the public transport congestion that will ensue around King's Cross.
The hon. Gentleman's point was valid; many people will choose to use Stratford in preference to King's Cross.
That in turn will have an impact on the financial calculations that British Rail will need to do for the construction of the new station at King's Cross.
Mr. Gordon McMaster (Paisley, South)
It is.
Mr. Wilson
My hon. Friend is in the same party as I am, as far as I understand.
No other Scottish party is represented on Conservative or on Opposition Benches.
I am delighted to be joined by my hon. Friend the Member for Paisley, South (Mr. McMaster).
The project is of immense importance to Scotland.
If one looks across the channel, as some of us have, and sees the way in which the matter is approached there, it is humiliating to consider what has gone on in Britain over the past few years.
Around Calais, construction work will create a massive new rail terminal and a road system to lead to the tunnel at Calais.
Where is the comparative development in Britain?
Huge development is taking place in the centre of Lille to create a rail hub for the whole of northern Europe.
Where is the comparative thinking in Britain?
We are struggling tonight to achieve the first tentative step in Britain's planning, not for two or three years hence, but for the better part of a decade hence, and to achieve at King's Cross the equivalent of what has been under construction for several years at Lille.
We are struggling for a terminal at which trains can come in from all parts of the country, at which there can be an interchange for the continent and at which people can move on relatively quickly.
As my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) has said, it would be better to have more direct trains to the continent.
I hope that that will evolve in the fullness of time, but it will do so only when the electrification programme is extended to all parts of the country.
For many years to come, there will be greater dependence on a good interchange than there can be on the prospect of direct services between Scotland, the north of England and Wales, and the channel tunnel and beyond.
We must have the interchange.
As my hon. Friend the Member for West Bromwich, East (Mr. Snape) said, it is true that better schemes may be available.
The King's Cross scheme may not be perfect and I respect the views of local Members who say that it is far from perfect.
However, it is the only scheme on the table.
If the project does not get into gear now and if we go back to the drawing board, it will be decades before we get another scheme that is worked through to the present level.
In the meantime, all the benefits of the channel tunnel will be lost to my part of the country and to many others.
Let us get on with the scheme because there is no reason for further delay.
My hon Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury, when he argues against the disruption of his own constituency, is on stronger ground than when he tries to prove that King's Cross is not the best available option for an interchange.
I will elaborate on the point that I made about the disruption that may be caused when additional tens of thousands of people are brought into the area, if the development at King's Cross goes ahead.
Surely the best answer is to get most of them out again as quickly as possible.
My hon. Friend conjured up images of people coming out of taxis and meeting friends.
The best alternative is for people to cross the platform and to get away to where they want.
That is the most efficient way.
I am not prepared to accept for the rest of the country the idea that, from now until the year dot, either everyone will have to struggle across London to get to Waterloo, which is how things will start, or worse, under the new madness that has been conjured up, everyone will have to struggle out to Stratford to catch the connections for the continent.
Where is Stratford?
That is an unreasonable expectation.
I regret that the link will not come through south London.
I have no wish to tread on the toes of colleagues who have legitimate local interests, but from the national standpoint, I think that it is regrettable that the link will not take that route.
Half the decision has already been taken and it seems that the link will come to Stratford.
The moment that that was decided, however, the fear was that we would never hear anything again about the link between Stratford and King's Cross.
That would be a disaster for the rest of the country.
That must not be allowed to happen.
We must have this Bill as it is the only one before us.
It is absurd that we have to be tied up in private Bill procedure in order to allow railway developments of the type that we are discussing tonight.
If the Government want such a project, they should be able to make a strategic, infrastructural decision.
They should not have to rely upon the private Bill procedure, because the issue is too important.
The whole thing is anachronistic.
If the channel tunnel is ever to be a genuine national undertaking that brings benefit to all parts of the United Kingdom, and if that is to be achieved within our lifetime, it is important that the Bill goes ahead.
I hope that the first step towards that will be taken tonight.
Mr. Roger Gale (Thanet, North)
I will be brief, but I must take issue with the hon. Member for Cunninghame, North (Mr. Wilson).
A comparison between the north part of the Calais region and central London is ludicrous.
If the hon. Gentleman had ever been there, he would know that the Calais region is like the surface of the moon.
One could build not only a railway terminal there, but the fifth London airport and no one would notice.
We are talking about a terminus in the heart of a great city and some proper consideration should be given to that.
Mr. Wilson rose
Mr. Gale
No, I will not give way.
The hon. Gentleman and his hon. Friend the Member for West Bromwich, East (Mr. Snape) suggested that, because this is the only Bill on the table, we should settle for it or we will not get anything.
That is an equally ludicrous suggestion.
I listened with great care to the lengthy argument put forward by the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith).
I do not rebuke the hon. Gentleman for the length of his speech, as he is defending and promoting the interests of his constituents fiercely and properly.
The environmental arguments that the hon. Gentleman has set out are also extremely valid.
I not only listened to the hon. Gentleman's arguments tonight, but I have read the other speeches that he has made throughout the passage of the Bill.
I studied his arguments at great length over the weekend and I have come to the conclusion that much of the hon. Gentleman's argument is extremely valid and needs a great deal of further consideration.
I shall not cover the ground already dealt with by the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury; instead, I shall consider the credibility of the promoter of the Bill, British Rail.
The House will recall that during the passage of the Channel Tunnel Act 1987, British Rail stated that there was no need for a high-speed line.
Apparently it was convenient for BR to say that, because, had there been such a high-speed line included in the Channel Tunnel Bill, it is possible that that Bill would have fallen.
Now we are told that BR must have a high-speed line.
Those of us who serve Kent constituencies agree with that.
I believe that a London terminus of the right kind must be established to provide the right links to the north and the rest of England.
Above all, it must be built in the right place.
On Second Reading on 8 May 1989, at column 617, my hon. Friend the Member for Ealing, Acton (Sir G. Young) was asked why British Rail had changed its mind about the need for a high-speed rail link.
He said simply:’ Forecasts have been revised’.
Tonight we are entitled to ask how many more times those forecasts will be revised and in which direction.
It has already been suggested that if a terminus were built at Stratford East, it would have a major impact on the financial viability of the terminus at King's Cross.
I want to know the answers to the questions.
It is not good enough for my hon. Friend the Member for Keighley (Mr. Waller), who is the sponsor of the Bill, to come here without those answers.
That has continually happened when other hon. Members have sought to move the carry-over motion.
The most recent edition of the Kent county council's’ Railing Update’ran the headline’KCC to help sort out shambles’.
The first line of the article stated:’ Kent County Council has pledged to help sort out the shambles surrounding the International Rail Link.’
The leader of the county council, Tony Hart, is reported as saying:’ at the moment it appears to be little more than a line on the map, and a pretty thick and crude one.’
If that is true, further consideration needs to be given to precisely where the London terminus will be located.
In an earlier debate, the hon. Member for Newham, North-West (Mr. Banks) suggested that if the terminus were built at Stratford, East, it could save as much as £1 billion on the project.
I hope that you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will consider it in order if I state precisely what that £1 billion could mean to those or us who live in the Network SouthEast region.
We are continually being told by British Rail that how it spends its money depends on priorities.
The priority for those of us who live along and use the north Kent line is that line itself, and the £1 billion saved on the project would go a devil of a long way to sorting out the line.
I have a piece of paper listing one traveller's journeys during the first fortnight of this month.
Of the 20 trains travelled on from north-east Kent — Herne Bay, in my constituency to Cannon Street — two arrived on time, 17 were late and one was cancelled because no crew were available due to a clerical error in the rostering.
That shows the standard of the management that we are being asked to endorse if we pass the Bill.
I do not believe that the current management at British Rail is capable of building the project, although I believe that it needs building.
We have a right to say that, if such a major project is to go ahead, we should not — as the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East (Mr. Snape) said earlier — settle for whatever is on the table, but should ensure that it is the right project and that the correct amount of money and no more should be spent on it.
The rest of the money that British Rail has available should be spent on projects that are desperately needed to provide jam today, not tomorrow, for the commuters who are paying British Rail for the services it offers today.
Mr. Snape
The hon. Gentleman has for some time been against the original fast rail link through Kent and south London, and we have learnt tonight that he is against the current project, apparently because he believes that all British Rail's money should be spent on saving his neck by improving the lousy commuter service that his constituents have had to tolerate for 13 years of Tory misrule — to use a well-known phrase from a couple of decades back.
Which projects should British Rail propose and where will it find the money to pay for them?
Mr. Deputy Speaker
I hope that the hon. Member for Thanet, North (Mr. Gale) will resist the temptation to depart from the Bill under discussion.
Mr. Gale
I certainly will, but I shall correct one error of fact in the statement of the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East.
I have never opposed the fast link from Kent, which does not run through my constituency.
Those of us who live in north-east Kent have always believed that there should be a fast link, and we have been perfectly happy for it to go through south London, to where our constituents who will benefit from the link wish to travel.
I am on record as having said that on many occasions in the House — If the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East spent more time listening and less time intervening from a sedentary position, he might hear what Conservative Members have to say, some of which is not entirely contradictory to what he wants.
Interruption
I want the link to be built and the priorities to be right.
A couple of years ago, British Rail spent millions of pounds building a link between London and Stansted airport that currently carries virtually no passengers.
I am not saying that that link is not necessary or will not be necessary at some time in the future, but the priority must be to serve the passengers who are paying now.
I believe that the money should be spent now on the services used now, and we must ensure that the planning is right so that the terminus is built in the right place.
If that place proves to be Stratford East, that is where the terminus should go.
But it should not be built somewhere simply because a Bill is lying on the table.
The arguments of the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury carry much weight and the hon. Member for West Bromwich, East would do well to give them slightly more attention.
Mr. William O'Brien (Normanton)
The hon. Member for Thanet, North (Mr. Gale) referred to the issue of management and targeted his criticism at the management of British Rail.
I am not in a position to defend British Rail, but when we analyse the problems with commuter services in the south-east and the problems that British Rail faces in general, we must remember that they are caused because the Government will not allow British Rail to introduce the schemes that it wants, including electrification of other lines, in order to improve services.
The position with the Bill is similar.
One of the reasons why I pressed the Minister to give an assurance about the link between Stratford and King's Cross is that it is feared that money will not be available to build the link.
Several hon. Members have said that £1.25 billion has to be found for the King's Cross development and that other resources must be found for other British Rail projects connected with the channel tunnel.
When we examine cost, I remind the House that it is not 12 months since we heard a statement from the Dispatch Box that the Government had found £4.5 billion to prop them up on the poll tax.
So money can be found when the Government feel that it is necessary for them to sustain their vote throughout the country.
If the Government are sincere about the Bill, they should not hesitate to give assurances to the House and the country that the money will be found to ensure that a link will be provided and that services will be available to the communities in the regions, and particularly the north, from the channel tunnel.
When the Secretary of State announced in August this year the route that would be followed by the high-speed link, it was a tremendous disappointment to the local authorities and consortiums in the north of England that the link would come from the east through Stratford to King's Cross.
That decision created tremendous doubt about whether facilities will be made available to service the regions north of London.
Such doubts exist in Yorkshire and Humberside, which I know best, and in other northern and western areas.
I do not apologise for raising the matter on more than one occasion in interventions and again in my own speech.
We want assurances from the Government.
I said earlier that the debate seemed to be developing into a north-south divide.
I understand why my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) made the comments that he did.
The Bill affects many of his constituents.
Other hon. Members intervened and I thought that the debate was developing along’ them and us’or north-south lines.
I hope that the decision taken tonight will be to the benefit of the whole nation.
In the north we consider that King's Cross is needed nationally.
It is an important facility for international passenger services to the north of England and the other regions beyond London.
I sometimes feel that north of Watford does not matter in debates in the House.
Several hon. Members from the north have stressed tonight, with all the determination that we can bring to bear, the need for the northern region to be considered in this development.
The Bill should be accepted by the House because King's Cross will be the key terminal linking the north of England with the channel tunnel.
We would prefer, of course, a direct link from the towns and cities of the north straight through to the channel tunnel, but that cannot be achieved.
The best alternative is the King's Cross terminal.
We plead with the House to allow the Bill to take its course and reach the statute book.
It would allow international trains to run directly into the key main lines beyond London.
We are pleased with the services from west Yorkshire and south Yorkshire which terminate at King's Cross.
This Bill will directly link such services to the channel tunnel and on to Europe.
The development at King's Cross will provide an excellent interchange for passengers from the north and the regions beyond London.
The north of England, the midlands, Scotland, Wales and Ireland will be served well by the facilities at the new interchange.
We want a fast link between the north and south of this country.
If the construction at King's Cross goes ahead with the fast lines from the north meeting the high-speed link to the channel tunnel, that will be ideal.
Given a fair wind the development could go ahead with minimum delay.
The powers allowing the construction are being dealt with already and, as I have said, King's Cross will provide excellent access to London.
I offer my wholehearted support to the desire of my hon. Friend the Member for Islington, South and Finsbury for accuratge environmental assessments.
They must be correct down to the last detail, in the interests of those who will be affected and in the interests of the project.
People need to be satisfied that the environmental assessments for King's Cross and the high-speed link are accurate.
Mr. Gale
The hon. Gentleman said that he suppports the wish of the hon. Member for Islington, South and Finsbury (Mr. Smith) for a good environmental assessment.
If such an assessment demonstrates that the site is not suitable, will he still support his hon. Friend?
Mr. O'Brien
The environmental assessment will be submitted along with the planning application.
It is up to the people considering the planning application to deliver a judgment on the assessment.
I consider the hon. Gentleman's remarks a little premature.
He may oppose this measure but he should not pre-empt the results of the environmental assessment.
Environmental assessments are important and they should be truthful and comprehensive.
I feel sure that we shall get such an assessment.
The Government must be pressed to accept the British Rail view that the link is needed within the next six or seven years.
The Government's announcement suggested a possible date beyond 2000 and said that it could be delayed up to 2005.
That is totally unsatisfactory.
The Government must co-operate with British Rail and should give the programme full support because it is important to every region in the country.
Given the right resources and planning, the King's Cross project in association with Thameslink 2000 will improve rail links between Kent, Sussex and Hampshire and the north-east of England and will allow travellers from one region to visit the other with only a single change at King's Cross.
The development will allow passengers from Yorkshire, Humberside, the north-east and Scotland to travel to the south-east and to Europe with one change at King's Cross.
Because of its importance for passenger services and the economic development of the northern region, we ask the House to support the project.
Mr. Kenneth Hind (Lancashire, West)
I support the motion and I bring to the House the support of the North-West Channel Tunnel Group, which consists of a vast range of north-west commercial interests, and of the North of England Regional Consortium, which consists of many local authorities from the north of England.
We say that the proposed second international passenger terminal at King's Cross is essential to the development of the north-west of England.
It avoids peripherality and is essential for major passenger contact with the mainland of Europe.
I agree with the hon. Member for Normanton (Mr. O'Brien) that if the fast link goes through the east of Kent it should not finish at Stratford; it must come to King's Cross.
Through services must be provided via King's Cross to the west coast main line to serve the north-west of England.
In that way fast passenger links to the north-west will be available shortly after the tunnel is opened.
We look forward to the arrival of trains from Europe which will stop at King's Cross and then travel to termini in the north-west at Manchester or Liverpool.
Those trains will travel on to Glasgow and, we hope, beyond.
I strongly emphasise the importance of the scheme to people in the north-west.
I have pressed for better freight links, which is another argument, but we must start with a reasonably fast passenger link to Europe.
The rival proposals for Stratford are totally unacceptable.
The first problem is that Stratford is totally dependent upon the construction of the fast link to the tunnel via the east coast and Kent.
If that is not built, Stratford will be useless.
In the short term, King's Cross is already there and the links to it exist so that, from the start of the operation of the tunnel, people from the north can go into Europe, stopping at King's Cross, changing trains without difficulty.
Stratford is also badly connected to the United Kingdom's railway geography, with inferior capability for through international trains to the north-west and other regions beyond London.
It has no existing direct links to the tunnel and could not function until a high-speed rail link was built, and that could be as late as the next century.
Stratford is a total non-starter.
Mr. Dobson
Is it not the case that the connections to the tunnel will be in existence long before the scheme before the House can be completed or, knowing the way British Rail manages to cock things up, probably before it starts digging any of the soil?
Mr. Hind
I take the hon. Gentleman's point.
He must bear in mind that, for the north-west, the interim proposal of Waterloo is not acceptable either.
The sooner that the terminal at King's Cross is built, the better for the north-west.
Even before the main fast link to the tunnel, via Stratford has been built, the proposals in the Bill will have been implemented.
The Stratford terminal serves London poorly.
King's Cross is in a central position with easy access to the centre of London.
People from Europe will want to come directly to the centre, so King's Cross would bring greater benefits from tourism.
I commend the Bill to the House.
It will bring the north-west of England major advantages.
We must have the proposals in it, so I hope that all my hon. Friends will support the motion.
Mr. David Tredinnick (Bosworth)
I support the carry-over motion, as does the midland main line consortium, which is made up of Derbyshire, Leicestershire, Northamptonshire, Nottinghamshire county councils and Sheffield city council.
They believe, as I believe, that if the Bill goes ahead, it will give much stronger grounds for electrification.
That is why my hon. Friend the Member for Harborough (Sir J. Farr) and I tabled an amendment linking the motion to the electrification of the main line from St. Pancras to Sheffield.
My short contribution will centre on the spur link set out as work No. 5 of schedule 1, between the midland main line and the old Great Northern line, and on the importance of speedy electrification of that line.
The evidence from the consortium that supports the Bill is that electrification would meet the 8 per cent.
return on investment requirement of British Rail immediately.
Given the importance to the region of such a project, and the facts that 90 per cent.
of businesses in the region use the line and that it would take seven years to electrify from the date of commitment, it is essential that this project is linked into the Bill.
I thank my hon. Friend the Minister for his hint of a commitment to electrify the line within the next 10 years.
I draw his attention to the fact that a private consortium, the Central Railway Group, is proposing to build a private line on the old great central railway from the channel tunnel up through Buckinghamshire to Leicester.
If it can raise a vast amount of capital — £1.8 billion — and believes that it is worth while to do so, surely it is possible for British Rail to commit the £100 million that is needed to electrify the main line.
I say to my hon. Friend —
Mr. Deputy Speaker
Order.
I know that the hon. Member is trying to keep in order, but he must direct his remarks to the Bill and the revival motion.
Mr. Tredinnick
I am grateful to you, Mr. Deputy Speaker.
The last thing that I want to do is stray out of order.
May I draw your attention, however, to work No. 5, which is about’ a railway commencing in the London borough of Islington by a junction with the Great Northern Railway at a point immediately below the southern portal of the western bore of Copenhagen tunnel’?
That is the very point to which I am referring.
If electrification is linked to the spur line, it will not be necessary for me to do what my right hon. Friend the Member for Castle Point (Sir B. Braine) had to do only recently, which was to get the chairman of British Rail to attend another terminus in London and to make quite a row in order for some action to be taken.
I am beginning to wonder whether it will be necessary to get the chairman to come to St. Pancras before we can elicit the funds for the project.
A few days after the action that was taken by my right hon. Friend, a magic wand was waved and somehow money was found to improve the Southend line.
Finally, I draw the attention of the House to the arguments that have been deployed against the reopening of the Snow Hill tunnel.
That is the Thameslink line, which is a part of the Bill and which has been referred to this evening.
British Rail argued long and hard that it was not possible to open it.
When it was opened, British Rail argued that it was important because it would not be necessary to improve the lines around London.
British Rail should consider again the arguments for electrification of the midland main line.
If it goes ahead with the project, it will find that it has a reward for the investment that exceeds its wildest dreams.
Mr. Waller
With the leave of the House, I wish to say a few words in reply.
I have listened carefully to the arguments that have been advanced both for and against the revival of the Bill.
Despite the length of one or two of the contributions of Labour Members, I do not think that they matched the significance of other speeches.
I have heard strong arguments from hon. Members on both sides of the House for continuing with the Bill, in the interests of Londoners and in the national interest.
If we are talking about a rail infrastructure that is suitable for the next century, we must have in mind the sort of measure that is the subject of the debate.
I am confident that the House will support the motion.
I ask it to do so to enable the Bill to be revived in the form —
Mr. Dobson
Will the hon. Gentleman give way?
Mr. Waller
No, I shall not give way to the hon. Gentleman.
I ask the House to support the motion.
Mr. Dobson
I had not intended to contribute to the debate but the hon. Member for Keighley (Mr. Waller), who introduced the motion, was asked several questions during his introductory speech and he failed stoically to produce any answers.
We wanted to know —
Mr. Waller rose in his place and claimed to move, That the Question be now put.
Question, That the Question be now put, put and agreed to.
Question put accordingly and agreed to.
Mr. George Walden (Buckingham)
I am always happy to work myself up into a great cultural stew, given half the chance.
I listened carefully to my right hon. Friend the Minister, hoping that he would give me a chance.
I am afraid that I could not find anything objectionable in his speech or in the regulations.
Being a fair-minded person and still hoping that I had a chance to get a cultural stew going, I listened carefully to the hon. Member for Stoke-on-Trent, Central (Mr. Fisher), but he did not give me a chance either.
I am a little stuck.
All that I can do is to agree with my hon. Friend the Minister about the regulations and add some comments.