

CITIZEN ZERO TOL.
AWARD
WOMEN'S CAMPAIGN RECEIVES AWARD
THE National Association of Public Service Advertisers has given an award to Edinburgh's Zero Tolerance Campaign.
Begun in November 1992, the campaign was a first of its kind in the UK.
The awards are jointly sponsored by Northcliffe Newspapers Ltd. and the NAPSA authority.
The theme of the award —‘Local Government and the local press working together’ is for the best advertising campaign which is of benefit to the community.
A survey conducted in three Edinburgh secondary schools revealed that a high percentage of boys who were interviewed thought that levels of violence perpetrated against women were acceptable.
That survey inspired Edinburgh District Council's Women's Committee to organise a pioneering campaign which aimed to raise male awareness of the problem of crimes of violence against women.
A series of different posters, which strongly illustrated the plight of women in potential danger, regardless of age or social class, created enormous press and public interest over the months of the campaign.
The press coverage in turn has resulted in many other local authorities becoming interested in taking up the idea and pursuing their own campaigns.
COSLA, the Convention of Scottish Local Authorities, has called on the government and the Scottish Crime Prevention council to cooperate in the expansion of the Edinburgh-based initiative.
The Zero Tolerance Campaign has met with considerable success and its effectiveness can be judged by its winning of this special.
award.
A second phase of the successful campaign is planned by Edinburgh District Council's Women's Committee to be launched in September of this year.
ACTION ON AGE
DID you know 1993 is the European Year of Older People?
All across Europe various events, exhibitions, meetings and discussions are being held which highlight the varying lifestyles of older people today.
From July 19–29, the Assembly Rooms will be the main venue for a number of events for ‘Edinburgh and Lothian Action on Age’.
In a joint programme organised by Edinburgh District Council and Lothian Regional Council, older people living in Edinburgh will have the opportunity to say what improvements they would like made to local services.
As well as suggesting possible improvements, older people may also identify gaps in their local council services.
Six main categories have been suggested by local older people's groups for discussion.
These are:—
i.
i.
Growing old in Edinburgh — Keeping in touch
ii.
ii.
Carers
iii
iii.
Employment for the over 50's
iv.
iv.
Older women
v.
v. Older people with disabilities
vi.
vi.
Older people in minority ethnic communities.
Invited speakers will present views on the main topics followed by open discussions and workshops.
Although the events may be of most interest to people over 50, views and ideas from everyone will be welcomed.
‘It is important to hear from local people about their hopes and needs for their community,’ explained district council leader .
‘The opinions expressed during the ‘Action on Age Consultation Programme’ may heavily influence future council planning.
I hope as many older people as possible will come along and make their views heard.’
In addition to the consultation workshops a number of other events are planned.
‘Obviously Obsolete’ is an exhibition which highlights the rapidly changing world — from fashion to technology and employment.
‘European Attitudes to Old Age’ is a photographic display illustrating the cultural differences shown by European countries to older people.
Meadowbank Sports Centre is the venue for an ‘Activity Day for 50+’ offering a choice of organised activities ranging from indoor bowls to fencing to yoga.
The splendour of the Georgian ballroom in the Assembly Room can be experienced by all taking part in the tea dance.
Craft fairs, local events, bands and art exhibitions will all be on offer.
For a full programme of events please contact Sarah on  or Linda on 
Citizen 10 — Training Award
EDINBURGH District Council's Construction Skills Training programme has won the first UK award for the use of new technology in training.
The unique programme offers the very best in quality training and the award recognises the council's use of new technology in that programme.
The council won the ‘use of new technology’ section of the first national New Learning Opportunities Awards organised by the Cambridge-based National Extension College.
The district council was the only local authority to enter the award scheme and was one of only six winners out of a total of 170 entries from private and public sector training agencies and groups.
Chief Executive of the SCET, the Scottish Council for Educational Technology, presented the UK award to Councillor , convener of the council's personnel committee.
He also handed over a cheque for £500 to be used for technological development in the programme.
said: ‘The judges were impressed by the flexibility and adaptability of the programme.
‘It started in a small way but has kept on growing.
The award recognises the innovative use of technology in the programme and also marks the success of the programme which offers a genuine educational qualification recognised by the building industry.
‘The judges were also impressed by the fact that 75 per cent of people who complete the programme find jobs when they have finished it, which is an astonishingly high success rate.’
Councillor  paid tribute to the Personnel Department and particularly the staff of the Construction Skills Training Centre.
‘This award is a well-deserved tribute to the staff,’ he said.
‘Their enthusiasm and commitment is simply tremendous and they have helped many people to find a new start in life.’
The Construction Skills Training Programme is based at  in a purpose-built centre that can provide facilities for all aspects of training for the construction industry.
The excellence of the programme has been recognised by the European Community which aids the project through the European Social Fund, and staff at the Centre share their expertise with colleagues in training centres in Ireland and the Netherlands.
NEAR in the city
HRH The Prince of Wales visited a major new urban renewal project in the north of the city on Wednesday (June 30).
Set up to tackle problems faced by local communities in north west Edinburgh, the NEAR (Northwest Edinburgh Area Renewal) project is made up of a number of organisations committed to working together.
A variety of major improvements will be carried out in the West Granton, Pilton, Muirhouse and Pennywell areas involving local residents.
Prince Charles has expressed his interest and support in schemes to improve inner city areas.
A lot of recent urban renewal developments have failed to produce areas where people enjoy living, working and spending their leisure time.
A main reason for this has been that developments have concentrated on creating ‘single-purpose’ areas, for example only office blocks, shopping areas or housing estates rather than a mixture.
The four partners of the NEAR Project are Edinburgh District Council, Lothian Regional Council, Scottish Homes and Lothian and Edinburgh Enterprise Limited.
There is no limit to the range of improvements the project will be involved with.
In addition to modernising existing housing and creating new homes, the communities will also benefit from education support, improving the environment and some economic development.
‘What is most exciting about this project is that the people in the communities will have the major say in what will be done,’ said , NEAR Project Manager.
‘Everyone living or working in the area will not only have the opportunity to say what improvements they want but will also be able to participate in planning discussions’.
Anyone wishing to know more about NEAR can visit the project team office at  or telephone 
AWARD OF THE EDINBURGH MEDAL
Prominent Scientist Comes Out of Hiding to Receive Award.
THE internationally renowned Kenyan environmentalist, has been awarded the fifth Edinburgh Medal at a special ceremony.
The medal is traditionally presented at the end of the city's annual Science Festival to a scientist who has made a particular contribution to science and society.
was the founder of the African ‘Green Belt’ movement, which began in 1977 and involved 50,000 women in planting ten million trees.
Only a few short weeks before she was due to come to Edinburgh and receive the medal, she was forced to go into hiding in her own country.
Her concerns for the environment have occasionally led her into conflict with government bodies.
But even physical and administrative attacks have not prevented her and her colleagues from continuing to campaign for a better world.
When knowledge of her plight reached the UK, Edinburgh District Council sent a message to Kenyan President , requesting that  be permitted safe passage to Edinburgh to receive her award and also her safe return to Kenya.
Amnesty International also intervened on her behalf and only days before she was due to leave, she was given a passport.
Arriving after a gruelling 13 hour flight, appeared bright and full of energy, almost immediately giving a press conference where she expressed her fears for the future of peace and democracy in her country.
She then went on to appear before a packed lecture theatre at the Physicians Hall to receive her award and the Edinburgh Medal from the Lord Provost and to deliver the traditional Edinburgh Medal Address.
Her theme for the address on science and society was based on her work and experiences with the Green Belt Movement.
She hoped to raise people's awareness of the potential disasters facing the environment and particularly to encourage improvement in the lives of the rural women in East Africa.
BUSINESS AND DISABLED PEOPLE
A NEW appeal to local businesses for assistance in improving leisure and commercial facilities for disabled people in Edinburgh is under way.
The ‘Business and Disabled Project’, launched by Edinburgh Junior Chamber of Commerce with support from Clydesdale Bank plc and Edinburgh District Council, aims to increase the awareness of the needs of disabled people and to encourage businesses to take part in projects leading to improvements and additions to existing facilities.
Edinburgh's business community can help the project by providing financial assistance, seconding staff or sharing other resources.
Councillor , Convener of Edinburgh District Council's disability sub committee, welcomes this new initiative.
‘Developments which improve the quality of life of disabled people should be encouraged.
This project aims to create positive changes which will benefit not only disabled people, but also the wider community.’
The Royal Botanic Garden is an excellent example of a popular attraction which has made special improvements to allow thousands of disabled people to enjoy its beauty each year.
Special facilities include a lift to all floors in Inverleith House Gallery and a trail for the visually impaired.
A special four wheeled vehicle, donated by a Huddersfield company, is also being used by disabled visitors to travel around the garden.
Are there any places you want to praise for their special facilities?
Perhaps you would like to see some improvements made to some shops, museums, galleries or sports centres?
Write to ‘Citizen Disabled Appeal’, Public Relations Division, and we will pass on your views.
PRINCE will play to 27,000 people at Meadowbank this summer.
Regular Music is delighted to return to the Commonwealth Games Stadium, Meadowbank with one of the world's biggest stars.
Meadowbank, which has not been used for a concert since 1989, will host the return of the Prince of Pop and his band, the New Power Generation, who last year sold out Glasgow's Celtic Park.
The Prince circus of over 20 articulated trucks of steel and lights and giant video screens will begin to roll into Meadowbank one week ahead of the show on Thursday July 29.
The stage will be built facing the main stand and will be flanked by giant video screens.
A backstage complex with six dressing rooms will be built for the band — there will be a large wardrobe room for Prince's personal wardrobe which fills two articulated lorries.
He has three seamstresses on tour with him to run up new outfits.
Personal caterers also travel on the tour to feed the band and crew of over 500 people.
Extra safety barriers and ramps will be installed at Meadowbank and a special platform will be built for the disabled.
Extra toilets will be installed and catering outfits brought in to meet the demands of the expected 27,000 people in attendance.
There are tickets still available for Edinburgh to see Prince ‘LIVE’.
Whats On — June–September 1993
THE KING'S THEATRE
THE ROYAL LYCEUM THEATRE
THE TRAVERSE THEATRE
THE USHER HALL
EXHIBITIONS
CITY ART CENTRE, Market Street
Until July 3 Light of the North An exhibition which marks the 900th anniversary of the death of Saint Margaret
Until July 24 Intimate Lifes Historical and contemporary works by eight internationally renowned photographers.
July 17–Sept 18 Happy Birthday Peter Rabbit:One hundred years of Beatrix Potter's Peter Rabbit
Aug 7–Oct 2 The Waking Dream Photography's First Century.
Aug 14–Oct 16 Golden Warriors of the Steppes An exhibition of gold antiquities from the National Museum of Ukraine.
CENTRAL LIBRARY, George IV Bridge
July 6–30 More Impressions: Paintings and Drawings by  
August Artwork by  
SUMMER PLAYHOUSE AT THE KING'S
THE ever popular Summer Playhouse series of murder mystery plays will be running at the King's Theatre again this year.
Each play runs for one week and the series opens on June 28 with Peril at End House , an Agatha Christie play starring her famous detective Hercule Poirot.
Hercule Poirot is staying at the Majestic Hotel in St Loo, Cornwall.
While there he is introduced to Frances Rice, a charming and attractive girl, wearing an even more attractive sun hat.
But why is there a bullet hole in the brim?
She invites Hercule Poirot and his assistant Captain Hasting to visit her home, End House and there the mystery begins.
What on earth is happening in this mysterious house?
The second play in the series is A Touch of Danger by Frances Durbridge and this is followed by Janet Green's Murder Mistaken .
The series finishes with a clever thriller by Bernard Slade.
Fatal Attraction has many surprises in store.
Blair is a famous actress about to be divorced from her second husband Morgan.
He calls at Blair's hideaway beach-house to collect some of his paintings.
There he is murdered.
Lieutenant Guss Braden is called in to unravel the mysterious death and finds himself becoming more than professionally interested in Blair.
The Colin MacIntyre Repertory Company performs the Summer Playhouse at the King's Theatre from June 28 to July 24.
All seats are £5 (half price for Saturday matinees) and if you book for three shows you get the fourth one free.
KINGS THEATRE — BUDDY CONTEST
FOLLOWING its highly successful run at the King's last year ‘Buddy ‘,The Buddy Holly Story will be returning to the theatre this summer.
Last year the musical had the audience dancing in the aisles so tickets are selling fast.
Buddy is running from July 27 to August 12 and Citizen has six pairs of tickets for the show.
To win tickets send your answers to the following questions on a postcard or on the back of a sealed down envelope to Buddy Competition, PR Division, by Friday July 16.
1.
1.
What was Buddy Holly's real name?
2.
2.
In what year did he die in a plane crash?
3.
3.
Name the two famous rock stars who died in the crash with Buddy.
4.
4.
Where was Buddy born?
5.
5.
In what year did Buddy visit England?
CONGRATULATIONS to  which recently celebrated its first birthday.
also celebrated birthdays on May 17 and were encouraged to join in the celebrations with a free swim courtesy of 
Scotmid’ helped  celebrate with a large birthday cake which was accepted by  from Craighall Day Centre for people with special needs.
who suffers from osteoarthritis and diabetes recently cast aside her wheelchair of seven years.
Attending aquafit sessions at Waterworld gave her motivation that enabled her to stick to a diet, lose weight and get her walking again…a great achievement.
The centre has been a great success since opening its doors a year ago and looks forward to celebrating many more birthdays.
THIS year's recipient of the  Memorial Trophy is  a young boxer who is coached at Meadowbank Boxing Club.
joined the staff at Meadowbank Sports Centre in 1970 as assistant manager, becoming manager in 1975.
After his tragic early death last year, staff at the centre held a collection to raise money for a memorial trophy in recognition of his work with young people at the centre.
The trophy is presented annually to the most promising young sportsperson who receives training at Meadowbank.
The coaching staff at Meadowbank are asked to nominate members of their club for the award.
was put forward by his coach in recognition of the success he has achieved over the past year.
(15) was both District and Scottish Boxing Champion in 1992, winning 16 out of his 18 bouts He received his trophy earlier this month from  mother
DID you know that Warrender Sports Centre had a fitness room?
A Citizen reporter cornered , soldier and body builder for advice on pumping iron.
‘Warrender display a few guidelines which I always follow,’ said .
check with your doctor before training
always warm-up with stretch & tone exercises
begin with lighter weights
keep movements controlled
cool down
‘It's important not to overdo it,’ says , ‘increase weights gradually when you're more experienced.
It's also important to rest your muscles after training.
I work my upper body, arms, chest and back one day and move onto my lower body, thighs, calfs and lower stomach the next.
Muscles also need to be nourished.
That's why I eat a balanced protein diet.
‘My body feels good and looks good,’ continued .
This Citizen reporter had to agree.
‘It's better to train with a partner, it gives encouragement and of course there's the friendly competition element attached.’
Using fitness equipment incorrectly can be harmful to your body.
Warrender Sports Centre runs induction classes for newcomers to the fitness room.
A qualified instructor will demonstrate how to use equipment properly, how to get the best from your body and enjoy it at the same time.
WARRENDER fitness instructor, gives Citizen readers a few tips on how to trim up for the summer.
These exercises should be done three or four times a week.
Start by doing ten of each exercise and gradually increasing to suit.
Inside Leg — Hands under the buttocks to support lower back.
The emphasis is on opening and closing legs rather than a bend and straightening of the legs.
Ankles remain together at all times and feet should be over the knees.
The exercise should be performed slowly.
Tummy — Small of the back on the floor (tilting of pelvis into the floor).
Feet shoulder width apart.
Cup the head with one hand to support it — do not pull on head to lift upper body.
Pushing second hand forward.
Contract tummy muscles before coming up in a controlled manner, exhaling as effort is made.
Do not hold breathe.
Buttocks — On knees and elbows.
Back should remain flat and straight.
Very controlled taking the leg straight with flexed foot across the supporting leg.
Ensuring the back does not twist.
Anyone for Tennis…
DO you need to improve that backhand or volley?
Then Saughton Sports Centre is offering an ace opportunity you can't turn down.
A professional tennis coach will be on hand at the complex to give sound advice, training and technique skills to beginners and improvers.
For enrolment details see advertisement.
On Your Marks, Get Set, Go
LADIES, have you ever fancied taking up jogging but get puggled running for the bus?
Why not come along to Saughton Sports Centre where the ladies running club meets every Tuesday from 7–8 pm.
A professional running coach will be on hand to put you through your paces but will make sure you're not overdoing it.
Gradually, you will build up your distance, get your breathing right and eventually you'll be hooked.
First the Edinburgh Mile, next the London Marathon.
Kicking into Action
HEART of Midlothian Football Club in conjunction with Saughton Sports Centre are running football coaching sessions in the summer for school age boys and girls.
The sessions will include all the usual techniques like running with the ball, passing, defending, shooting and more.
There will also be practice football matches where students will be able to put their talents to practise.
If the training schedule of the Hearts players is not too strenuous then one or two might put in an surprise appearance?
LONG gone are the days where grannies sat in the rocking chair by the fire knitting.
Modern grandparents are active and outgoing as Citizen found out when Edinburgh District Council's Sports Resource Team and Bingham Older People's Project organised a Health and Fitness Open Day for the over 50s, over 60s and over 70s at the Jack Kane Centre.
The day started off with a breathing techniques class to help relieve the stress of everyday life and was followed by a Yoga class.
Things really got going after lunch when those brave enough took part in one of the three fitness classes accompanied by some traditional charleston style music where some of the more experienced feet could be seen ‘cutting a rug’.
The highlight of the afternoon was a keep fit demonstration by the ‘Lothian Allsorts’ who inspired enthusiastic onlookers with their polished routine and most of all their zest for life.
The average age of the ‘Allsorts’ was 75 years.
Throughout the day a group of professionals tested the health of our over 50s.
Everything from size and weight to blood pressure was recorded in a 20 minute session which included some sound advice for healthy living.
All interviews were confidential and the results posted out to participants.
‘The aim of the day was to encourage older people to undertake regular health and fitness related activities and opportunities,’ said  from the Sports Resource Team.
‘The day was a great success.’
is an action man — both at work and at play.
During the day he is a lifeguard at Warrender Swim Centre.
But he spends most of his free time jumping off mountains paragliding.
He flies at heights of 6000 ft above ground level and loves every minute of it.
Paragliding is a sport most of us would consider dangerous, not so according to as long as you don't fly outwith your limitations.
Safety is also uppermost in  mind as he works as a lifeguard.
He is committed to making sure swimmers don't get out of their depth.
Dedicated to making the water a safe environment, he trains swimmers to pass the bronze medallion, the qualification needed to work in a swimming pool.
By the end of the training  students will be able to control and organise risky situations and save endangered lives.
believes lifeguards should never have to save lives — if they are doing their job properly.
‘Lifeguards should be observant and stop risky situations before they start,’ he explained.
Warrender Swim Centre holds classes for people who wish to obtain the bronze medallion.
They run for 10 weeks.
For further information contact the centre direct.
LEISURE ACCESS COMPETITION
THE Leisure Access Scheme is one of the most popular and exciting leisure clubs in the country with some 30,000 members.
Thousands of individuals are being attracted to this scheme by the wide range of benefits being offered ie, cheaper prices, advance bookings, discount theatre tickets for certain performances at council-managed theatres, plus 5% discount off sportswear at Sports Warehouse.
People in full-time employment can join this scheme for just £15, students, senior citizens, UB40- holders and people with disabilities can join the Leisure Access Supercard Scheme for £1.00.
Cards are valid for one year except those issued to over 60 year olds (who are not in full time employment) which are valid for life.
Group Issue is on offer to organisations with changing populations ie, hospitals, day care centres etc.
The cost of one card is £15 which will admit up to 12 people.
To apply for this card, applications should be made to the Director of Recreation,.
Corporate membership is aimed towards companies within Edinburgh District who, depending on how many employees are joining the scheme, can make a saving of between 10% and 50% off the cost of their cards.
Citizen have three Leisure Access Cards to give away.
All you have to do is answer the 10 questions below.
The answers can be found within advertisements throughout the newspaper.
THE OTHER SIDE OF THE RCP JUDO CLUB
TWO dozen people are grunting, straining and tearing away at heads and arms — watched by another member of the Judo Club.
‘A friendly sport’ says the logo on her tee shirt!
It may seem strange that trying hard to slam a partner bodily into the ground is a good way of making friends, but it's true.
And there are 150 members of the Royal Commonwealth Pool's own judo club to back up that claim.
The club is one of the largest, and one of the friendliest, in Scotland.
Members aged from five to fifty meet up to three times a week to practise their judo moves together.
There are different classes to suit different ages and abilities and that's not all.
‘Off the mat’ the club is involved in other activities, such as fitness weekend camps where the rule is to get as muddy as possible.
It makes a good contrast to all those clean white jackets on normal club nights.
Some of the stunts are even more crazy, such as moonlight hill walks and dawn barbecues.
The occasional pint of beer at skittles night is allowed too.
So why all this information about the club and nothing about judo?
Well, for one thing, because of the Eastern origins of the sport it is all in Japanese and a bit hard to explain on paper.
It is much easier just to come along one night and do what everyone else does.
You will certainly get thrown You might also get hooked.
Many of the current members joined up after catching one of the club's many demonstrations, or parents came to the Royal Commonwealth Pool to see what their kids were actually up to— and stayed.
Judo Club members have gone on to achieve competition success at Scottish national level, and even further afield.
Boys and girls under 16 are regularly bringing back medals from hard fought local contests.
Scottish University championships and other national competitions have also provided trophies for club members to display proudly.
‘We have medallists at every level,’ said senior coach .
‘But above all judo must be FUN.’
‘You don't have to be fit to start judo, but the sport is an excellent way of getting — and staying — fit.
That's one of its attractions for adults.’
For kids, the chance to have an organised rough and tumble is what keeps them going.
Learning the moves and warming up at the start of each judo session is hard work.
But the reward comes at the end of the evening when ‘randori’(there's the first Japanese word creeping in) gives the players a chance to show what they can do.
Unlike many clubs, the RCP judo players are always on show, as anyone who has dropped into the new Cafe Aqua on a club night will see.
The idea is to throw an opponent so that they land on their back, fairly hard.
If that doesn't score highly enough to win a contest the next stage is to grapple on the ground until one player wins by holding down an opponent for 30 seconds.
The practice in the club eventually leads on to grading competitions where new players try to lose their white belts and progress up through the colours until, usually as young adults, they experience the magical moment of putting on that black belt for the first time.
Coaches, certainly the good ones, find that as the judo improves so does the self-assurance and the self-discipline of the young players.
‘Now there's an attraction for parents,’ said , club coach, secretary and a qualified referee.
GB v USA
FANCY an evening of world class athletics…on your own doorstep!
Edinburgh's Meadowbank Sports Centre will once again be the focus for the world of athletics when two of the ‘superpowers’ in the sport come to do battle.
Yes, the TSB Challenge will see the cream of Great Britain going head-to-head with the best from the United States.
Spearheading the British challenge will be Scotland's indoor world champions, and .
So come and cheer them on.
The predictions are that some records will tumble.
The event starts with the hammer at 4 pm and the first track event at 6 pm.
Tickets are available from Meadowbank Sports Centre on  priced £3–£10 with reductions for under 16s and OAPs.
THE Jack Kane Sports Centre was the venue recently for an ‘Open Day’ for physically disabled people living in and around the Greater Craigmillar area of Edinburgh.
The hosts were a local organisation called the ‘Disabled of Craigmillar’ whose aim is to highlight their projects and give help and advice regarding educational opportunities, training or re-training, welfare rights, wheelchair requirements, social activities and — last but not least — integrated sporting and recreational activities.
, co-ordinator of the Open Day has been a user of the Jack Kane Centre since it opened 17 years ago.
‘The centre has good facilities for the disabled, the staff are very friendly and couldn't be more helpful,’ said John, ex-International player and secretary of Thistle Wheelchair Basketball Club who use the Jack Kane Centre for their home games.
As well as promoting wheelchair basketball, John was enthusiastically encouraging others to take part in fencing, tennis, indoor carpet bowls, table tennis, and boccia, all of which were on offer on Saturday.
There was loads of encouragement to all those who attended and took part to take up the sport on a regular basis.
Ranger-Led Events Summer 1993
ALL events listed are led by the Countryside Ranger Service.
Most of the activities are routed through woodland and as some of the pathways can be rough outdoor footwear is recommended.
Walkers should also be prepared for inclement weather.
Most events take about two hours and are normally limited to 20 places, so booking in advance is essential.
Unless otherwise stated book your place in advance by phoning .
SUNDAY RAMBLES
Sun July 18 at 2 pm Highways & byways meet Pavilion, Allison Park, Kirkliston
Sun Aug 22 at 2 pm Conserving The Countryside meet Hermitage House
Sun Sept 19 at 11 am & 2 pm Cammo/River Almond/Cramond all day excursion.
Walk leaves The Maltings, Cramond Foreshore at 11 am.
Return journey leaves Cammo Lodge at 2 pm.
EVENING STROLLS
Fri July 9 at 6 pm Blackford & the Braids.meet Blackford Pond, Charterhall Road
Fri Aug 13 at 7 pm Historical Happenings meet Cammo Lodge
WALKS FOR WOMEN
Wed Aug 11 at 9.30 am Beneath The Burn meet Hermitage House
Wed Aug 25 at 7 pm Historical Highlights The Maltings, Cramond Foreshore
Wed Sept 8 at 9.30 am Spectacular September meet Cammo Lodge
NIGHT HIKES
Walks which explore wildlife on the night shift
Fri July 30 at 9 pm — meet Clermiston Road North Car Park, Corstorphine Hill
Fri Aug 27 at 8 pm — meet Cammo Lodge
GO WILD IN THE CITY
For children ages 5–12 years.
Booking is essential — contact centre/library listed for details of costs, times and bookings.
Thurs July 1 Go Wild In The Hermitage contact Hermitage House .
Tues July 6 Go Wild In Kirkliston. contact Hermitage House .
Thurs July 8 Go Wild In Craiglockhart contact Craiglockhart Sports Centre .
Tues July 13 Go Wild In Cammo contact Cammo Lodge .
Wed July 14 Go Wild In Craigmillar contact Jack Kane Centre .
Thurs July 15 Go Wild In Meadowbank contact Meadowbank Sports Centre .
Tues July 20 Go Wild In Corstorphine contact Hermitage House .
Wed July 21 Go Wild In Currie/Animal Magic contact Currie Library .
Tues July 27 Go Wild In Colinton/Animal Magic contact Colinton Library .
Thurs July 29 Go Wild In Cramond contact Hermitage House .
Tues Aug 3 Go Wild In Muirhouse/Animal Magic contact Muirhouse Library .
Thurs Aug 5 Go Wild In Gracemount contact Gracemount Leisure Centre .
ALL DAY EXCURSION
Sat Sept 4 From Source To Sea 10 am–5 pm Meet at Braid Road entrance to Hermitage of Braid.
Follow the Braidburn from Pentland Hills to Portobello with Ranger services from Edinburgh District & pentland Hills.
Minibuses will provide transportation where walking route is impracticable or inaccessible.
Expansion of Countryside Ranger Service
NOW that the summer is upon us why not get out and explore Edinburgh's countryside areas.
You don't even have to leave the city to reach them as there is between 600 and 700 acres of countryside areas within the city boundaries.
And to help you appreciate the surroundings — and to protect and conserve them — the council has expanded its Countryside Ranger Service.
There are now four full time countryside rangers and two seasonal rangers during the summer months.
Rangers will be working at Corstorphine Hill, Cammo and Hermitage of Braid every week day and will also be organising activities throughout the city.
There are visitor centres at Cammo and the Hermitage.
But what do the rangers actually do?
You may have seen them walking through the woods and thought that they have a nice easy job.
But there is more to their work than meets the eye.
Countryside rangers do everything from educating the public to planting trees and plants to heavy work like repairing pathways.
And when the rangers are out on the patrol they are constantly looking around to see what has been happening around them as the seasons change and what work needs to be done.
The rangers' knowledge of the areas is extensive and they can identify most of the wildlife in the area — indeed if they see a new plant or insect which they do not recognise they normally check through their reference library when they get back to base to find out what it is.
The rangers are always happy to answer queries or give advice about the best walks and trails to follow when you are out and about so please feel free to approach them and ask for their help.
The Countryside Ranger service runs a very popular educational programme.
Last year 2,000 children visited the countryside rangers.
The majority were from primary schools but the rangers can arrange educational activities for everyone from nursery school children through to college students.
One area which has proved very popular have been the walks and activities for children and young people with disabilities.
But just because the ranger service has expanded it does not necessarily mean there will be similar increase in the number of school visits or guided walks.
The Rangers Service has to carry out a fine balancing act — too many visitors could destroy the very habitat the rangers are trying to conserve.
This summer they will be holding 48 events throughout the city which members of the public can join in.
As well as their popular guided walks and rambles, the rangers have organised a special series of ‘Go Wild In The City’ days for children.
These will be taking place throughout the city and should be booked in advance as they will be very popular.
For further information and to book any of the events contact the Countryside Ranger Service at the Hermitage of Braid on .
Gimme an E, Gimme an A, Gimme an G!
Do YOU have what it takes to be a cheerleader?
American Football Team, Edinburgh Eagles is looking for girls to join its squad of cheerleaders.
No experience is necessary and all dance routines will be taught by the club's choreographer.
Girls must be 16 years or over.
Edinburgh Eagles, formerly Edinburgh Phoenix, have been together since January this year.
The team is always on the look-out for new players, supporters, first aiders and people to help run the club.
The Eagles are currently well placed in the premier division of the British National Grid Iron League and favourites to beat the Granite City Oilers for a place in the British Champion play offs.
The team uses Saughton Sports Complex as its home ground and for practice sessions.
‘The astro-turf at Saughton is great,’ said ex-super league player and club chairman.
‘It gives us an advantage over our competitors who are not used to playing on astro-turf.
It also means we do not have to cancel any matches because of the all weather surface.’
All matches are played on Sundays.
A small entry fee is charged for home games at Saughton which enables the club to pay for equipment, medical supplies, kits and the general running of the club.
For further information call chairman  on  or for details on home matches Saughton Sports Centre on..