

The Game was the Real Winner
It was a match in which there were no losers and golf was the only winner.
During an enthralling series of Singles matches there were more fluctuations than on an average day on Wall Street.
At 3.30 in the afternoon the visiting American side had won one match, were ahead in eight others and seemed to have the famous golden chalice in the big bag.
But less than an hour later the situation had been transformed.
One by one some of Europe's more unfancied golfers began to eat into the U.S. lead, courtesy of some dreadful American blunders on the final hole which brought back memories of the match at Muirfield Village two years before.
In the end it was left to Jose-Maria Canizares, the oldest man in either side, to secure the point which assured Europe of a tie, before the final four Americans on the course won their matches to produce just the second stalemate in a series stretching back to 1927, and the first for 20 years.
 "I just can't believe it," said a drained Raymond Floyd, the U.S. Captain, during the aftermath of the match.
"An hour ago I thought we had gone.
There were a lot of peaks and valleys out there.
At one time I thought we were going to overwhelm the Europeans.
Then I thought we'd lost.
In the end I suppose a tie is just about right.
 "We're not really happy with a tie" , he continued,"because we all felt sure we would win.
However we're going home with fond memories of a marvellous competition.
All along I've said that the winner must be the game of golf and it was.
It's a triumph for integrity.
It's marvellous for all of us.
I would have hated to have gone home on Concorde as a loser.
We might not have won but a tie is a whole lot better than defeat."
In his post match press conference Tony Jacklin also chose to stress the marvellous atmosphere the match had been held in before going on to reiterate that he wouldn't be serving a fifth term as Captain.
"It's a tie.
We've still got the Ryder Cup on this side of the Atlantic which is what we set out to do,"the Captain said as he arrived in the interview area alongside all of the side which had served him so well.
"It's hard to come to conclusions at the moment.
But overall, when we get away from here and are able to digest what has happened, we will probably decide that a tie was a fair result.
I'm just delighted to have been part of it all.
 "Of course the result is important," he continued.
"But one of my lasting memories of this match will be the spirit in which it was held.
Neither side wanted to give an inch but there was no unpleasantness either.
I would also have to say that it was he behaviour of the galleries which stands out.
Over the past 12 months just about every interview I've done has included questions about potential problems with the crowd.
I never thought there would be a problem and I was right.
It was wonderful.
The crowd were a credit to the game of golf.
It was all absolutely as it should be.
 "I said before the match that this would be my last as Captain and I have no reason to change my mind," he added to a chorus of protest from his side.
"I was delighted to be part of it.
I have some wonderful memories which I will always cherish but it is time for someone else to take over.
Someone who is closer to the players.
You have got to know when to quit."
Jacklin himself might be able to quit for a well deserved rest but that is something which his side most certainly didn't want to do.
On a final afternoon in which lesser mortals might have wanted to run for cover the European team fought on even though at times its causes seemed hopeless.
With due respect to the galleries it will be the counter attack which the Europeans mounted on the final afternoon which will linger in this mind the longest.
One by one Europe's heroes began to climb off the floor and mount a furious offensive which for a time at least threatened to overpower their rivals.
To describe the situation fully needs recourse to the clock.
Europe's problems began to surface at 2.30 pm precisely when the unfortunate Howard Clark, one of the heroes of the evening before, was thrashed to the tune of 8 & 7 by Tom Kite.
Kite was six under par when he inflicted on Clark the worst defeat in Ryder Cup singles history and in the process handed his side the initiative which for a time seemed it wouldn't relinquish.
The situation was to deteriorate further in the space of an hour when first Bernhard Langer and then Seve Ballesteros lost out to Chip Beck and Paul Azinger respectively.
The European team had lost its precious overnight lead and had fallen one point behind.
Worse than that the home team was behind in all but three of the matches on the course when a dramatic change in fortune occurred which completely transformed the match.
In the past it was invariably the leading Americans who seemed to have more grit or nerve when it came to the closing stretch.
That reputation was dented at Muirfield Village in 1987.
It was almost destroyed in the space of 30 minutes at The Belfry when some of the leading stars from the land of Uncle Sam drowned in the water which guards The Belfry's fearsome closing hole.
As a precursor to the mayhem which was about to follow at 3.35 pm Mark James had put the Europeans back on level terms when he defeated Mark O'Meara 3 & 2.
Even then the European cause deemed hopeless.
but that was before the sound of constant splashing started to emanate from alongside the closing hole.
Quite why some of the leading golfers in the world started to behave like 18 handicap amateurs can only be attributed to the special pressures which the Ryder Cup produces.
Whatever the reason, three of the strongest members of the U.S. side were to find water off the tee at the last.
The first culprit had been Paul Azinger an hour or so before but his slip had gone unpunished when Seve Ballesteros did the same with his approach to the green.
Neither Mark Calcavecchia nor Payne Stewart were so fortunate when like lemmings they followed Azinger in.
Steward needed three shots to escape his watery grave and had a drenched set of waterproofs to prove it.
Calcavecchia hit his tee shot into the lake and then did the same with his second.
In both instances the result was identical with the U.S. P.G.A.
champion losing out to Jose Maria Olazabal and the Open champion to Roman Rafferty.
Rafferty was making his third appearance in what was his first Ryder Cup.
On both his opening outings in the Foursomes he had lost but in the singles like Christy O'Connor Jnr and Jose Maria Canizares behind him he was to produce the goods.
In a market contrast to what had gone before in the Singles, it was some of the unsung members of the European side who came up with most of the points to secure the tie.
Over the first two days most of the home points had been garnered by the Big Four comprising Seve Ballesteros, Jose Maria Olazabal, Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam but in the end it was the third Spaniard and the middle-aged Irishman who rose to the occasion when their contribution was needed most.
O'Connor consumed by emotion, burst into tears in front of thousands of  delirious supporters when he consolidated his marvellous recovery against Freddie Couples with a No. 2 iron to five feet at the last.
Then it was the turn of Canizares to fall into the arms of his colleagues after holing a 38 inch putt to secure the vital point.
It didn't see to matter that the match was still in progress and was to end up even when Tom Watson, Mark McCumber, Lanny Wadkins and Curtis Strange beat Sam Torrance, Gordon Brand Jnr, Nick Faldo and Ian Woosnam.
Bedlam ensued and continued long into the night.
the supporters who had exercised such decorum for so long at last gave vent to their true feelings.
The match had been billed in the American press as the Battle at the Belfry and so it turned out.
But not for the reasons some had feared.
All week long the behaviour of the crowd had been impeccable.
There was scarcely any unsavoury incident and certainly nothing on the scale of the problems at the same venue four years before when the American wives were hissed and cheers greeted almost all of their husbands unsuccessful shots.
Under the circumstances it was almost unbelievable that there were do few problems given the fact that ticket holders could see so little of the action.
Decent vantage points were at a premium even for those human beasts of burden who brought beer crates, stools and ladders with them.
Watching the golf was an ordeal which cramped the muscles and stretched the ingenuity of the masses to the limit.
As one observer suggested the watchers deserved medals for their patience and not insults for their insularity.
The Americans arrived on Concorde at the start of the week desperate to make amends for two successive defeats which had stung their national pride.
Raymond Floyd might have suggested that the match was all about sportsmanship and camaraderie but there was no disguising the feeling in the American camp when someone as eloquent as Tom Watson could state that he was "over here to kick some butt" .
In the opening Foursomes series Watson and his colleagues were as good as their word.
Four years before the Americans had won three games to one on the first morning.
This time round the result was the same and might have been even more decisive had Ian Woosnam and Nick Faldo not come from behind to salvage a halved match against Curtis Strange and Tom Kite.
Elsewhere Mark James and Howard Clark lost out on the final green to Lanny Wadkins and Payne Stewart and Bernhard Langer and Ronan Rafferty were overwhelmed by Mark Calcavecchia and Ken Green.
That left seve Ballesteros and Jose Maria Olazabal to produce Europe's other half point in a match against Tom Watson and Chip Beck in which no less than 11 holes changed hands.
When the Spaniards produced an eagle on the 10th to go three holes ahead there were some who felt that the Americans, chance had gone.
But four bogies over the closing seven holes cost the Spaniard dear and let the Americans back into the match.
During the interval it was a chastened but not dispirited European team which lunched together in the solitude of the team H.Q. We will never learn what was discussed but there is no doubt that it had the desired effect.
In the afternoon it was the same two Spaniards who led the home team to a whitewash over the visitors.
It was a repeat of the result of the first Fourball series at Muirfield village two years ago but only the second time that the Americans had been shut out since the fourball format was introduced at Atlanta in 1963.
In the morning Ballesteros and Olazabal could have been cast as villains but after lunch they were to produce some irrepressible form.
Out in two under par 34 and three up Ballesteros himself put together an eagle (2), birdie (3), birdie (2), Birdie (3) burst to close out Tom Watson and Mark O'Meara 6 & 5.
The result tied the record for the worst drubbing an American pair had ever received in Ryder Cup Fourballs and also sent Olazabal into raptures about his senior partner.
"When Seve gets his Porsche going not even san Pedro (St Peter) in heaven could stop him.
"He's a fantastic partner because he scores so many birdies.
That means so much because it helps to take the pressure off."
The Spaniards were seven under par when the match came to an abrupt end on the 13th.
Elsewhere Sam Torrance and Gordon Brand Jnr were six under in beating Curtis Strange and Paul Azinger on the final green, Ian Woosnam and Nick Faldo were five under in overcoming Mark Calcavecchia and Mark McCumber on the same hole and Mark James and Howard Clark were three under in dispatching Lanny Wadkins and Freddie Couples 3 & 2.
In contrast the American pairings were a mere nine under par between them, albeit on an afternoon when the wind was swirling around the course causing all sorts of problems with club selection.
Come nightfall Tony Jacklin was in an expansive mood about the performance of his side.
 "At lunch we were all a bit subdued," he said.
"It was so tight we felt it could have gone either way.
"We were disappointed but we weren't too despondent.
We knew what had happened at Muirfield Village in 1987 could happen again,"he added in reference to the earlier whitewash.
"We discussed the chances of it occurring again.
Five hours later it had.
"I have to say that I'm proud of the manner in which my side put this morning's results behind them.
I'm looking forward to tomorrow but it's not won yet.
One could get terribly ecstatic but that would be a dangerous thing to do.
No wise man counts his chickens…"
Twenty-four hours later it would still have required access to a crystal ball to predict the result after some of the most enthralling encounters seen on a golf course since man first put club to ball.
In the end the European side went into the 12 singles matches with a two point lead (9-7) but only after two Yorkshiremen had produced a rearguard action at the end of the day which even General Custer would have been proud of.
In the morning the two sides shared the four Foursomes matches but therein hides a tale of powerful enough to displace Neighbours at the top of the TV ratings.
In the middle two matches Chip Beck and Paul Azinger and Mark Calavecchia and Ken Green were always in charge against Gordon Brand Jnr and Sam Torrance and Christy O'Connor Jnr.
and Ronan Rafferty winning 4 & 3 and 3 & 2 respectively which left all of Europe's hopes resting on the top and bottom matches.
Fortunately those games brought together Europe's Big Four who between them were to win six points out of the nine which Europe had accumulated at the end of the first two days.
Neither Ian Woosnam and Nick Faldo nor Seve Ballesteros and Jose-Marie Olazabal let the home fans down despite suffering numerous anxious moments at the hands of Lanny Wadkins and Payne Stewart and Tom Kite and Curtis Strange.
Woosnam and Faldo won their match against Wadkins and Stewart around the turn when in the space of nine holes from the 6th they conspired to produce eight 3s.
It was more than enough to end the U.S. challenge the end coming on the 16th where a par secured a 3 & 2 result.
The last match featuring Ballesteros and Olazabal against Strange and Kite produced an altogether different scenario.
As much as three up after 11 holes the Spaniards lost both the 12th and 13th to pars but held themselves together coming down the stretch to win a priceless point.
History will also record that Europe also shared the second series of Fourballs but only after the Americans came within a whisker of obliterating their lead altogether.
Less than an hour before the end Europe's chances of retaining an outright lead were judged to be somewhere between slim and nil but that was before Mark James and Howard Clark made their massive contribution.
Already trailing two matches to one in the series the situation was dire when the English duo stepped onto the 16th tee one down to an American duo comprising the U.S. Open Champion, Curtis Strange, and the U.S. P.G.A.
champion, Payne Stewart.
It was relieved a bit when Clark squared the match with a birdie on the 16th and transformed altogether when the Americans both pushed their approaches to the long 17th hole to lose that as well.
Memories of the last will linger for a long time to come.
Both Yorkshiremen played the hole like Superstars to hold onto their precious advantage.
James, in particular, deserved all the accolades he received for securing his par.
Despite being more nervous than he'd ever been in his life he hit a 3-iron from the edge of the fairway bunker to within 20 feet of the flag.
It was a shot which had to be hit with one hundred percent precision and which will be recalled alongside Sandy Lyle's approach from the sand to the final green in the 1988 Masters as a shot of genuine class.
It was also a shot which sets us up for the glorious conclusion to the match in the Singles the following day.
Now it's time to retire as Captain
I'm absolutely delighted that we achieved what we set out to do at the beginning of the week, which was to ensure that the Ryder Cup stayed on this side of the Atlantic.
It would have been lovely to have won, but overall the matches were so close every dat that I think, once we have had time to digest what went on, we will agree that the draw was a fair result.
You can always look back and say "What if" , but we must remember that we got ourselves out of a couple of scrapes on last two days and for a time we looked absolutely terrible, but we turned it around and could have won.
I have decided that now is the time to retire as Captain and that someone else should take the helm.
I've had a wonderful run, and I've enjoyed it hugely and I just can't say what it has meant to me over the past four marvellous Ryder Cups.
I think we need someone who is closer to the playing side of the game.
I've been retired from playing for five years, although this season I messed about a bit just to keep in touch with what was going on, and I really do think that someone else should have the honour of captaining the team.
Anyhow I just couldn't take another week like this again.
I shall always want to be a part of the event in some form or another — as a committee man or hanger — on but as far as captaincy is concerned this is definitely it.
You have got to know when to quit and now is the time for me.
I have to say that the galleries were the thing which stood out for me this week, apart from the fine golf played.
Over the past year just about every interview I have done has included a question about the galleries but I never thought there would be a problem.
As it turned out I was right and it was just wonderful.
It could not have been better and it was a credit to the game of golf the way that the spectators reacted to both sides.
It was absolutely as it should be.
They cheered for every good shot.
They cheered a little louder for the home side but there is nothing wrong with that and I was just delighted to be a part of it all.
The play fluctuated wildly throughout the three days of the event.
At lunch time on the first day, when we had lost the Foursomes 3-1, I wouldn't say we were down but we were a bit subdued.
The series was tight and there were many close matches which could have gone either way but they eventually went in the American's favour.
Over lunch we decided that we could repeat what we had done at Muirfield Village and take all Four fourballs and five hours later it was done.
That was a sensational afternoon and was helped by Seve and Jose-Maria going five up after five holes.
That was just unbelievable and to win 6 & 5 in a fourball is a big margin.
At the end of the day that wonderful 4 which Gordon Brand Jnr made on the 18th to clinch the last point of the afternoon was simply superb.
The bump shot from the bunker at the edge of the green was a masterpiece.
It is the singular most difficult shot in golf — he must have been 50 yards from the pin with a soft lie and he had all the trap to clear.
He hit a pitching wedge, ball first, he didn't touch the sand.
It was such a difficult thing to do in those circumstances.
It was interesting in the situation that he and Sam Torrance found themselves, as after Sam had hit his chip past and had the honour Gordon could have putted first.
I actually ran onto the green and asked if they realised this, but they said they had talked about it but rejected the idea.
It was also a terribly brave putt for Gordon to hole under all that pressure and I was proud of him and the rest of the team that afternoon.
It completed the 4-0 sweep and proved to be one of the key moments of the whole match.
Earlier, that same hole, Sam Torrance had hit the longest drive I think I have ever seen in competitive golf.
He hit the ball 80 yards past Curtis Strange's and 30 yards past Gordon's and they had middled theirs.
Many of the players were playing up in front of the water but Sam was through the green with a 2-iron.
At that stage it would have been easy to have got carried away and think that the Cup was won but I made a point of saying that "A wise man doesn't count his chickens" and we didn't do that.
I tried to work out why we have more success in the Fourballs than the Foursomes, but I couldn't come up with a solution.
I wish I knew what it was.
Foursomes is a difficult sort of golf and there are so many things to think about.
Some of the players enjoy the format and some don't.
I think it helps if you have a chum out there.
Trying to work it all out was the fun of the thing.
If I could have answered all the questions it wouldn't have been any fun at all.
The second day was just great.
Throughout the week you come upon games which you see as vital and by the end of the week you have had so many vital games that you have forgotten some of them but one which definitely stood out was the fourball between Howard Clark and Mark James and Curtis Strange and Payne Stewart.
The turnabout Howard and Mark conjured up was more than I could have expected.
One down with three to play in a fourball is tough, but Howard made a sensational birdie on the 16th and the Americans made two bad seconds at the 17th.
It must have been pressure.
I think in that situation the home crowd's support was of great value to the team.
Then what the guys did going down the 18th was incredible.
Howard's huge drive and Mark's incredibly difficult 3-iron from the edge of the bunker sealed it for us.
It never ceases to amaze me what human beings can do when they have to dig deep.
In that same series Nick and Woosie ran into some incredible golf from Chip Beck and Paul Azinger.
The Americans were 11 under par when it finished they had also been six under in the Foursomes when they beat Gordon Brand and Sam Torrance.
In that situation all you can do is put out your hand and say "Well played men" .
It s very difficult to beat that sort of golf.
Beck and Azinger birdied just about every hole and the fourball betterball for the match was 14 under par for 17 holes.
I made a point of playing all my players in the first two days.
Christy O'Connor Jnr played on the second morning and Jose Maria Canizares in the afternoon and although they didn't give me any points I felt it was important that they got a chance to taste the atmosphere and feel a part of the proceedings, as I thought that it would help them going into the singles.
As it turned out it proved to be one of my better decisions!
Seve, Nick, Jose-Maria and Woosie are all superstars although Josie-Maria and Ian haven't proved it yet it terms of Majors and I looked upon them as bankers on the first two days.
They were exhausted going into the singles and I hated banging them in there for every match.
In the four Ryder Cups in which I've been the Captain Seve has played in every round and I'm grateful to him for that.
He hinted to me the week before the event that he wouldn't mind a rest one day and I thought about that and thought about it again when we got to The Belfry.
Then I said, "Seve, were you really serious about wanting a rest?" 
He said, "Well Jose is a bit better player than he was two years ago and he can carry me a bit" .
I took that as an indication that I could play him every match.
You just can't simulate the kind of pressure the guys were under, particularly on the final day.
I stood on the final tee with Ken Schofield and imagined the kind of pressure build-up the players were feeling.
I don't know of any other event where you get that kind of pressure and you just can't simulate that.
It's great to see them perform in those kinds of circumstances.
I was particularly thrilled with the guys who scored the points for us on the final day, Mark James, Jose-Maria Olazabal, Jose-Maria Canizares, Ronan Rafferty and Christy O'Connor Jnr., because in the case of Canizares, Ronan and Christy they hadn't scored a point in the games they played and it was nice for them to take some of the glory.
Christy's two shots to the last were something special, and that was a wonderful two putt from Jose-Maria at the last to score the important point.
Those are just some of the memories I will take with me from this year's Ryder Cup to join those I have of my previous three captaincies and I wish the next Ryder Cup Captain as much joy and success as I've been lucky enough to experience.
Why the BBC need Ryder Cup re-think
For drama and excitement the Ryder Cup proved once again that it is the ultimate golfing event, and for me it was a privilege to witness the finest players in the world performing under the most intense pressure.
As usual the singles on the final day produced a thrilling climax and this time it had everything.
It looked as though the Americans were going to sweep us aside in the early part of the afternoon at one point we had lost the match and were down in eight and up in only one.
But, we fought back, showing true fighting spirit, and looked as though we were set to win by a couple of points before the Americans rallied, salvaged some pride and squared the match.
I think the result was fair in the end.
It would have been a shame if one mistake had cost the match and although the Cup remains on this side of the Atlantic the Americans must be pleased to have stopped their losing run and to fly home with their honour intact.
I must take the opportunity of saying what a marvellous job I thought both Captains did.
Tony Jacklin has been immense in creating a fine team spirit within the European team while I thought Raymond Floyd was a star, an absolute "toff" .
He conducted himself impeccably, he was open and honest and had to put up with a lot from the press and media.
What I thought was interesting was that the vital points at the end of the day were supplied by some of the unheralded members of the team.
Jose-Maria Canizares was the man who provided the point which ensured we couldn't be beaten, while Ronan Rafferty and Christy O'Connor Jnr., who didn't play particularly well in their previous matches, became heroes, just as Eamonn Darcy did two year's ago at Muirfield Village.
I must admit I was surprised to see so many of the players finding the water on the 18th hole but that just shows how much pressure there is even for players who have won Major Championships and who have earned millions of dollars and pounds from their ability.
In fact, three of this year's Major winners, Nick Faldo, Mark Calcavecchia and Payne Stewart went into the water, while Seve Ballesteros followed Paul Azinger in when all he had to do was find the green.
He was the last player I thought would succumb as he did.
You must also take your hat off to Curtis Strange who had not played well during the week but who birdied the final four holes — no mean feat — to ensure that his country wasn't beaten.
The Belfry came in for criticism with some newspapers saying it was no place to stage a match of this importance.
One article in particular, from a writer I've never heard of before, stated that the course was dull and boring and that there was no great degree of difficulty.
Try telling that to some of the players.
The course provided tremendous excitement and thanks largely to the 18th hole I doubt whether it could have been topped by any course in the country.
The thing is that many people are anti-Belfry, but we shouldn't be too thin-skinned because nowadays everything gets criticised.
You've only got to look at Wimbledon.
It gets the same with people saying the grass should be dug up.
People must realise that the Ryder Cup has grown enormously and that so many more things must be considered.
There is the tented village, which was the largest ever, and, of course, access is very, very important and in those regards The Belfry was ideal.
From a staging point of view the PGA and the Tour, working together in a very  harmonious way, should be delighted with the way it all worked out.
The crowds came and were very well behaved and it appears that the decision to make the event all-ticket was the correct one.
There wasn't any trouble from ticket touts which was a cause for concern.
I did hear of some people who had trouble getting tickets and that there was a delay in receiving them — some apparently not arriving until the week or even the day before the start but that is the sort of thing which can be learnt from and things will improve on future all-ticket matches.
From a television point of view I was slightly disappointed that not enough importance was attached to the match.
When you consider that the event is only played on this side of the Atlantic once every four years I don't think that the decision-makers at the BBC did the event justice, particularly with all the hype which went before it.
For example, the morning play on the Saturday was condensed into a half hour package and there was some great stuff in the morning.
I would have thought that a decision to allocate more time to showing the event could have been taken, particularly in view of our previous successes.
I know we see hours of golf during the season but we also see hours of cricket.
It can't be stressed enough that the event is only held here every four years.
The powers-that-be at the BBC really need to have a rethink.
I keep sending memos urging them to make a decision now regarding the next one in four year's time and asking that BBC2 be set aside on the appointed dates for Ryder Cup coverage.
Getting back to the golf itself I thought the dovetailing of Seve Ballesteros and Jose-Maria Olazabal during the first two days was absolutely wonderful to see and the David and Goliath partnership of Ian Woosnam and Nick Faldo was superb.
I have to say that the pace of play was abysmal.
It was exciting but the last match on the Saturday with Clark and James and Strange and Stewart taking five hours and 15 minutes to go round in a fourball was a joke.
No wonder they looked tired at the end.
I was very surprised to see Strange play that awful shot at the 17th.
I had built him up to play it right to the heart of the green but he played it like a nervous three handicapper.
It surprised me but it could easily have been tiredness from being out so long.
I think it was significant that we were able to do well without Sandy Lyle and without Bernard Langer contributing a point — Ballesteros, Woosnam and Faldo also failed to score on the last day.
It reflects well on the growing strength in depth of the European Tour.
So here's to both teams and I hope the match in two year's time is just as good as this was.
Ryder Cup Round Up
Someone walked the Irish flag to the first tee as Christy O'Connor Jnr was led through the ropes, amid emotional scenes to face Fred Couples in a match that would mean so much…
Given little chance, the grey-haired father gave everything and hit the shot of his life across the water at that last hole for the greatest triumph of his life.
And then there was another old-timer, Jose-Maria Canizares and there was the water, something the British have always used to defend themselves from invaders…
Walt Disney couldn't have staged a better aqua show with Azinger hooking into water, and opponent Ballesteros topping it in there after him — and failing, despite a 40-foot putt.
Then there was Payne Stewart in waterproofs and also in water, playing splash shots like a rabbit.
And Open Champion Mark Calcavecchia losing two balls, and his match.
Each year police divers go in there, searching.
After this, they'll make a haul!
So we had heroes in the Fourball, Howard Clark and Mark James, followed by more good stuff from James but a shattering singles defeat by Clark who reached the turn in 39 to Tom Kite's 31.
Then we almost enjoyed the Great Escape from Seve Ballesteros who followed Paul Azinger into the Mickey Mouse blue-dyed water which made this the greatest spectator show on earth…
For the contestants, the Ryder Cup, nothing to do with prize-money, is an examination of character, pride and courage played before TV cameras and an extraordinary gallery like no other.
While some associated with it tend to pose in sunglasses or growl into walkie-talkies and get totally caught up in the three-day whirl that has nothing to do with the real world, the contest, over the years, has given joy, drama and emotion.
And yet insiders think this may have been the last match of its kind, the end of an era.
Says Peter Alliss: "The Open championship is always special, but there is really nothing quite like the Ryder Cup." 
But other seniors like Fred Daley, Christy O'Connor Snr, Neil Coles and Eddie Whitcombe are well aware that many say future matches must go to Spain, maybe offer prize-money given by the sponsor and be taken over, fully, by the PGA Tour.
Either way, it is a smash hit and mustn't be meddled with.
It attracted followers from all over the world.
Aylwin Tai, manager of Chung Shan Golf Club, in the People's Republic of China, said: "I came to see, and learn.
All is well at home in China and our student golfers are getting better.
But we've nothing like this, yet…"
But mounting pressure to take the matches away from the British Isles will probably fail.
A United States PGA official pointed out that golf crowds in Spain and France were still too small to provide a meaningful income.
Official starter Ivor Robson seldom makes mistakes but had to admit to an enforced one in the first match when instructed to let Ian Woosnam take the honour with partner Nick Faldo, playing against Curtis Strange in the opening Foursomes.
Comedy of errors may be historic
Ivor thought it odd defending champions Europe should go first because tradition, and courtesy, normally allows the visitors the honour.
But the official startsheet, given to him by the PGA, was quite clear.
The mistake, quickly spotted, was corrected in subsequent matches.
The comedy of errors continued in this particular opening clash when Faldo, going for the green with a 3-wood across a strong wind at the shortened 10th hole, followed Strange into high trees.
The ball was then mishit by Woosnam into water dyed for TV.
Faldo dropped a new ball on the other side of the bank and then knocked that one — into more water.
Result: two lost balls at one hole for a possible all-time Ryder Cup record.
The two Britishers, however, fought back from two down, to square the match.
Playing in the afternoon, Seve Ballesteros and Jose-Maria Olazaball showed how the watery "spectator" hole can be conquered.
Olazabal pumped his teeshot 10-feet from the hole but it was showman Ballesteros who rolled in a 20-footer for a 2 which had supporters leaping with delight.
The weird hole, which boasts a rockery, a semi-hidden rowing boat, a grotto but no garden gnome, collected several shots.
It measured just 233 yards for Ryder Cup week and was described by some as either the best, or worst hole, on the course.
Anyone selling aluminium step ladders outside the Belfry could have made a fortune because after the first few minutes of the match, newcomers realised they couldn't see the action on a flat course, unsympathetic to any onlooker less than six feet in height.
Diminutive veteran Brian Huggett, a spectator and former Ryder Cup player, suggested tree-climbing for a view!
Selling a bird's eye view
To allow VIP's, press and cameramen a view, a double line of ropes had been erected in certain areas to allow the chosen few a front row.
Cash-paying customers, unable to see more than a backswing, chose to misunderstand the intention of the organisers, and flattened them.
While TV was delighted at  the way they were able to screen matches, players were kept almost literally "in camera" in regard to the press.
Competitors were housed in the Belfry Hotel within the grounds and one frustrated writer described it as fortress Belfry.
The captains, however, did not wish to expose players to the probing questions and endless interviews which were handled, and brilliantly, by the non-playing captains.
Significant quotes from players were passed on to the writers who heard, for example, that the Europeans had a "quiet" lunch after the opening foursomes, that Tony Jacklin didn't sleep too well one night, that Strange and Kite don't hit it as far as some, that the Americans were "stunned" after the first day and that, mostly, players thought the crowds behaved reasonably well.
But old-timers know this match is a PGA gathering, viewed by television.
The exposure it received this year was an all-time record.
Transport officer Brian Foster, with 25 cars and six mini-buses, and a team of attractive girl drivers in uniform, carried thousands of PGA guests and celebrities during a hectic week in which a Birmingham road run didn't help.
Transport
Brian, a golfer from London, acted as an information service from his giant glass office and handled enquiries that included requests for medical preparations of all kinds.
The police, he said, were terrific and quickly found that some non-paying spectators were being smuggled in courtesy buses from the hotels and, in a few cases, hidden in car boots!
Sam Torrance is not in the slightest bothered that his super-long putter which he  wields under his chin makes some describe him as looking like the Dyna-Rod man.
The designers of this anti-twitch device look set to make a handy crust from anyone prepared to part with £75 and also prepared to be unworried by stares.
Either way, the club remains legal and if it brings relief from pain on the greens then, say salesmen, it is worth every penny.
How did Tony Jacklin ( "I'm 100 per cent certain of victory" ) make the pairings for the opening Foursomes?
 "I did them in my leather chair at home, while doodling a couple of weeks ago" .
What about those he left out of the opening shots?
"We're a block; a team.
Nobody is going to be petty.
We're too grown up for that…"
But how about the pre-match banquet when the American team left, possibly earlier than expected?
It happened after captain Floyd, hitting back following over-the-top introductions of European players, simply invited guests to meet the "twelve best players in the world" .
Said Jacklin: "I guess they were empty  words from Ray.
He didn't mean Seve Balesteros is the 13th best player, did he?"
Countered Ray: "My team were thrilled by my words.
I said them for effect.
What's gone on in the media these past six months doesn't mean a thing.
We're here as friends and we leave as friends."
And those who know the game, know that's true.
The Ryder Cup match at The Belfry featured the biggest tented village ever seen at a sporting event in the British Isles.
Tented town
The tented village was far larger than the one assembled for The Open at Troon and stretched over some 10 acres on the site.
The total canvas count was a staggering 350,000 square feet with between 400 and 450 companies represented in 226 hospitality suites.
The contest also created unprecedented interest among the media.
Press accreditation went out to 647 reporters, photographers and radio staff from all around the world.
Before the "off," Nick Faldo watched his practice swing on instant play-back video, while millions of words were still being uttered and written about the "greatest, biggest and most hyped Ryder Cup ever staged" .
Words that went blowing in the wind
Even President George Bush told his team not to come back to the USA if they failed to win back the Cup while one British tabloid quoted our own Peter Alliss on how the matches have moved away from the original concept of GB v USA and goodwill through golf.
Suddenly, says Peter, we have Germany and Spain included and his remarks added extra meaning to the thought that a mainland Europe venue for future matches is now a threat to the Belfry-based PGA who take the profits for a "possible" academy of golf to be built in the English Midlands.
The Belfry PGA officials say profit from the match is around £800,000 although they admit this could have been much more if they had allowed in a greater  volume of spectators for this, the first ever all-ticket clash.
The match kicked off with a parade of golfers, a display from the Red Arrows in the air and the playing of national anthems that included the German, Spanish, British and one for Uncle Sam.
The three-day clash grossed £5 million which mostly came from acres of private hospitality tents.
Gate receipts brought in a further £750,000 and a similar figure was produced through merchandising.
While behind-the-scenes the Americans were discussing remarks alleged to have been said by Gary Player.
Reports had it he thought Ray Floyd had shot the US side in the foot by selecting Tom Watson as a "wild card" choice but the British crowds gave this five-time pen Champion the biggest cheer of any American.
While the pre-match words were quickly lost in a breeze, even severe critics of the Belfry Golf Course, a converted stretch of farmland and duck-ponds, were impressed with the attractive presentation.
 "Perhaps" said Peter Alliss its original designer with Dave Thomas "Someone should give praise where praise is due." 
The American team arrived in the British Isles on September 19 following a three hour flight on a British Airways Concorde specially chartered by Wroe Burton Bennett on behalf of the P.G.A.
of America.
Most of the U.S. team met President George Bush at the White House prior to their departure.
In the heat of the action few players had time to discuss their reactions and were kept clear of the press.
To keep everyone happy press officer David Begg, from Glasgow, recorded immediate reactions.
Sign of the Times
Ronan Rafferty: "I let Christy down on the greens.
It was typical poor foursomes golf.
I would leave Christy 5 feet short.
He would miss.
Then he would leave me 5 feet short and 1 would miss."
Seve Ballesteros: "We knew we had to win.
It would boost the whole team psychologically.
I just had to sink that last putt.
I just had to."
Ken Green: "In perfect weather like this you just want to get out there and see what you are made of.
Mark Calcavecchia and I are a good team; we can relax with each other— that's the key."
Mark Calcavecchia: "We were trying to restore a bit of pride after yesterday afternoon.
By tonight we want to be in a position to win the match in the Singles…"
So why didn't the players attend the usual press conferences at the end of each match?
Said one insider: "We didn't want any International incidents with players who might say something indiscreet to the tabloid press." 
A sign of the times?
Ian Woosnam had to dash thousands of miles around the world to meet up with his team-mates at The Belfry.
Round the world
While the rest of the European team were competing in the Lancome in Paris the Welshman was finishing second in the Sapporo Open in Tokyo.
Woosnam, finished the tournament with a 73 for a four round aggregate of 286, six shots behind Masashi "Jumbo" Ozaki.
It was Ozaki's sixth win on this season's Japanese Tour.
Sam Torrance was at the centre of a health scare just before the start of the Ryder Cup match at The Belfry.
Health scares
Torrance almost had to pull out of the Lancome Trophy at St Nom La Bretesche when a foot disorder he has had for some time flared up during the final round.
Twice he needed to have attention from a doctor on the course but battled on to record a four under par 66 which was good enough to leave him in a tie for 9th place, nine shots behind the winner, Eduardo Romero from the Argentine.
The Scot who holed the winning putt in the match at The Belfry in 1985 laughed off rumours that he would need to pull out of this year's match.
 "I will be there even if I have to have the foot amputated," he said.
 "The Ryder Cup means so much that I'd play on one leg if I had to." 
Torrance has suffered from a complaint called psoriasis in his left foot for some time.
Last season it became so inflamed that he had to pull out of the Carolls Irish Open at Portmarnock.
He wasn't the only member of the European Ryder Cup team to be under the weather in France.
Earlier in the week Bernhard Langer almost had to quit because he was running a high temperature.
A course of antibiotics enabled him to continue and he ended up in a tie for second place alongside Jose Maria Olazabal.
Of the 11 members of the European Ryder Cup team who competed in France — Ian Woosnam was in Japan — only Mark James, Jose-Maria Canizares and Gordon Brand Jnr failed to match par.
American Curtis Strange finished in a tie for 16th place, 11 shots behind the winner.
Over 200 million people around the world were able to watch the B.B.C.'s coverage of the Ryder Cup match at The Belfry.
Mass appeal
The match was seen live in nine European countries and also on cable TV in the States.
Elsewhere highlights were shown in Australasia and South East Asia as well as in the 16 countries serviced by Eurosport.
Payne Stewart, not wearing his usual football colours or his regular cap as he was playing for his country, brought emotion to bear on the contest.
He said he wished his father had lived to see it all.
 "But 1 know he's watching…" 
Holing Out
The three Cups, Curtis, Walker and Ryder were photographed together with the winning captains, Diane Bailey, Geoff Marks and Tony Jacklin.
The historic picture was taken on September 21, 1989 after dozens of requests.
Sam Torrance was promised a bonus of £20,000 had he emulated his feat in 1985 and holed the winning putt at the Ryder Cup.
The offer came from Wilson Sporting Goods who are launching the new Sam Torrance putter later this month (priced at £75 each).
Before the start, Seve Ballesteros had a word to say about the bookmakers tipping USA as winners.
"What do they know about golf?
Europe have the home advantage a better team than ever and the Americans have five new players with no Ryder Cup experience…
"
Oh well.
The PGA neutered the famous par 4 tenth hole of 275 yards.
Some thought it was an attempt to make the long hitters go for the green across the water so they made it twenty-five paces shorter.
Mark Calcavecchia, who says it like it is: "You can bet your ass I'll go for it every time." 
However, the shortening of the hole made more room for the crowds at a bottleneck.
Ian Ross, Johnnie Walker chairman, revealed how involved his company is in golf.
As well as the Ryder Cup sponsorship, they are into the Asian and Australian classics, and the Caribbean Pro-Am as well as many amateur events.
Reports that golf will not be included in the next Olympic Games were denied at a conference staged during a busy week.
Seve Ballesteros has agreed to take part and, the press were told, will do so in the "spirit of international competition." 
Brian Barnes, the man who beat Jack Nicklaus twice in a single day, could introduce a new-look to the Senior's Tour in Britain.
At present some think it weak-kneed through lack of characters but Brian, speaking to us in the Belfry, has been talking to possible sponsors.
"My new idea is very simple.
Senior's should start when they are 45 and not 50.
This way the quality of play would be even better.
 "Some of those guys in America can't wait to get into the Senior's Tour where the money is terrific" says giant 17 stone Barnes heading for the magic 50 himself.
Equip Yourself for Better Golf
As regular readers will know, the core to my teaching is one basic thing; to feel the clubhead through your hands, which in turn means feeling and knowing exactly where the clubhead is throughout the swing.
If you do not have this feel of the clubhead the whole time, then at some point there has to be a "clubhead-feel blind spot" 
When we have a "blind spot" in any part of the swing we are groping in the dark or seeking a way through fog.
Naturally, we get lost — and so does the golf swing.
The clubhead must be felt consciously by the player from start to finish.
Once a beginner has got past the teething part of theory, his mind must be concentrated on the clubhead.
After all that is where he wants the power.
But the weight of the clubhead can only be felt through the hands and fingers since this is the only part of the body in contact with the club.
There is no need to think of the individual movements within a swing.
Try this simple experiment.
Turn the club upside down, holding the head end of the club, and try to swing as usual .
You will have little or no control at all.
Try to hit a daisy or a leaf with the grip end of the club and see if you can do it.
It is almost impossible.
The explanation is that you lack control or feel at the end of the stick, and the reason is that you do not know where the end is.
You have lost feel.
To get the best out of your game, you must play with clubs which suit you best.
There is right equipment for each individual player.
It is important to seek P.G.A.
professional opinion because that will feed your confidence.
It's no use a big and strong man trying to swing a lady's club.
Equally, it is wrong for a slightly-built woman to swing a big, heavy club.
She wouldn't swing it at all.
It would swing her!
A big man using a very light club is in almost the same situation as with the experiment of swinging the stick.
Think about this carefully and you realise that it is essential to be conscious of the clubhead throughout the swing.
Choice of equipment is vital and it is better for a beginner not to buy his clubs before going to a professional for his lessons.
After lending him some clubs for a series of lessons and practice, the professional can successfully advise him what type of shaft, weight, lie, thickness of grip and so forth is appropriate in his case.
Clubs are made to standard size and are suitable for the vast majority of players.
Sometimes, however, it is sensible to think of reducing length for a short player or increasing it for the giant.
THE LENGTH.
Or you may have a man of medium height with relatively short arms.
He needs clubs longer than standard — while standard length for the tall man with extra long arms would do for him.
How the club lies at address is important.
That is, the way the clubhead sits to the ball.
It can be checked quickly.
THE LIE.
Simply waggle the club and set it down in your normal address position.
There is a standard lie for each club, but for a short person it ought to be one or two degrees flatter.
For the tall man, the lie should be one or two degrees more upright.
Again expert advice is required in these circumstances.
For everyone, the lie is too upright if the club rests on the heel with the toe well off the ground.
Ideally, the toe should just clear the ground by about the thickness of a 10p piece for most clubs; a 2p for the short irons.
This is to neutralise the arching of the wrists and the bending forward of the clubshaft when striking the ball.
At this point, the sole of the club will be flat on the ground.
Likewise, the lie will be wrong for you if the toe rests on the ground with the heel clear.
This plays a vital part in achieving results and the weight of clubhead will be relevant to the flexibility of the shaft.
THE SHAFT.
Take a lady of slight build who is not too strong in the hands.
She will find a flexible club shaft advantageous.
The lady of medium build will need the regular ladies' shaft coded "L" , while the more powerful and hard-hitting female could use the same clubs as a slightly-built man.
Most male golfers use medium shaft clubs, with weight of the heads being relative — medium heads on medium shafts and heavier heads on stiff shafts.
Then we come to the tigers — the long-hitting, low handicap amateurs or star tournament professionals.
Some 85 per cent of these use a stiff shaft fitted with clubheads ranging from medium to heavy.
A few touring gorillas use the very stiff "X" shaft.
Give that club to a lady and she could no more control it than the power man could use her club effectively.
If he swings it fast and hard, he would obtain maximum shaft distortion and the ball would travel all over the countryside.
Have you ever noticed how top pros examine new clubs?
They take hold of the club and give it a few waggles.
FEEL.
What they are seeking, to coin a word, is "feelability" .
They are trying through the waggle, which is a swing in miniature, to control or feel the clubhead right through the swing.
If during the waggle the clubhead feels to be not at the end of the shaft but an inch or so up the shaft, in a waggle you would never be able to feel the exact position of the head coming into impact.
If you like swinging in the dark — the club would not allow you to be consistent.
Power and direction would be lost.
The correct shaft makes for a better shot and added length.
So goes the traditional explanation.
I agree, provided that means the right shaft can help the player to know exactly where the clubhead is at any point during his swing.
Although others would dispute this, I believe the shaft cannot help with distance or accuracy; that at impact it doesn't matter what clubshaft you are using.
An expert's clubhead strikes the ball at around 100 mph, which, when using a driver, is a force equalling one ton.
During a proper swing, the clubhead free-wheels through the ball and might as well be disconnected from the shaft at the point of impact.
That is why I say that at impact, during a proper swing, the shaft of a club is doing nothing to help or hinder a shot — and we can have no control over it at this point.
So the most valuable contribution the correct shaft can give is an increased sense of feel throughout the swing, letting you know just where the clubhead is.
Generalising, a thick grip is meant for big hands and a thinner grip for small hands.
THICKNESS OF GRIP.
With the correct grip — size, that is — the top of the two middle fingers should almost touch the fleshy base part of the thumb at address.
A thinner grip makes the club slightly more flexible and lighter, while a thicker than standard grip makes the shaft a little stiffer and heavier and the balance of the club is altered.
This is similar with most manufacturers; 11 degrees for the driver, 16 for the 3-wood, 19 for the 4-wood and 22 for the 5-wood.
The irons range from 18 degrees for the 2-iron up to 58 degrees for the sand-wedge, increasing by four degrees with each club.
There may be some variations but not many.
CLUBHEAD LOFT.
A club can be weighed using scales to give dead weight, but swingweight has to be measured on a special machine.
Mostly a C, D and E code is used.
SWINGWEIGHT.
The recommended swingweight for a lady is from C1 to C8, for the average man it is from C9 to D4, and for the professional from DO to D4.
This is a guide only and each club in the set should have about the same swingweight.
The swingweight of a club is calculated after measuring the length of the club and the weight of the clubhead.
However, let us leave that to the experts.
Here I would suggest that if the beginner does not want to invest in a full set, he should settle for the 3, 5, 7 and 9-irons, sand wedge, plus a 3 and a 5-wood.
The 3-wood serves as a driver and the 5-wood for playing fairway shots.
BUYING CLUBS.
With ladies who are novices, I recommend 4, 6, and 8-irons, plus pitching wedge, and 3 and 5-woods.
The 3-wood is used for driving and the 5-wood for fairway shots.
For the club handicap player, the 1 and 2-irons, and if something has to go from the woods I would leave out either the driver or 2-wood.
That's according to preference.
But I would always include a 5-wood.
There is a lot of anxiety displayed by handicap golfers when they try to use a driver.
I think this is generally because there is so little loft on the clubface and they fear that they will not get the ball into the air.
THE DRIVER.
Also, some think that because they are holding a driver they have to hit the ball much harder.
Most do better with a 3-wood off the tee because the extra loft gives confidence and is more sympathetic to an indifferent strike.
The extra loft reduces sidespin.
Yet, with a driver or 3-wood, everything is in your favour.
It is the only time you can tee a ball up where you like (within the limits of the teeing area), and as high as you like.
In theory, the driver (for the advanced player) should be the easiest club in the bag to use.
The type I recommend for the average player is one that has 12 to 13 degrees of loft, deepish in the face, and toed-in slightly.
Should you have difficulty getting the ball into the air with irons, select a club which has the weight more towards the sole of the clubhead.
CLUBHEAD DESIGN.
The majority will want a club with the weight evenly distributed along the back of the head.
Some experts claim that a heel-and-toe weighted club is more sympathetic to a mishit.
We can buy "woods" with metal, carbon or plastic heads.
They are alleged to send the ball further but I'm not sure that they put even a yard on a shot.
WOODS.
Personally, I prefer the heads on my woods made from seasoned wood.
To me wood is alive, whereas "woods" made of other materials feel dead.
The choice is essentially one for you to make yourself.
You may see 70 lining the rack.
Which one?
Try any you fancy along the carpet or on the putting green.
PUTTER.
I find a centre-shafted type putter helps the performance of an indifferent putter.
Things to look for when choosing a putter are good balance, length of shaft to fit your height and weight of putter (recommended between 15 to 18 ounces).
Again it's all down to feel.
Make sure that your eyes are directly over the ball.
To sum up, when buying clubs it comes down to two things — that you must seek the judgement of a qualified professional golfer you trust, and the clubs have to feel right and look right for you.
Finally, one has to wonder when looking at some of the Tour professionals' clubs.
Some have weight filed off, or weight added.
Some have longer shafts than are standard and some are cut down.
Some heads have been made to lie flatter, or more upright, and so on.
However, that is down to experience.
If you're an average handicap golfer, treat yourself to a matched set like the majority of amateurs and professionals and forget the exceptions.
What a storm Sandy Lyle created by making himself unavailable for the Ryder Cup.
Out of form over a long period, Lyle did not feel that he would be able to stand the pressure.
Tony Jacklin tried to persuade him to reconsider because he knew it was a bad decision.
Can you imagine the effect on a monthly medal field if the members dropped out on the basis that they had not been playing well and they felt they were unable to stand the pressure?
It would certainly be easy to get a starting time.
That is one of the great things about the club golfer he is so stoical and resistant to his own poor play.
If only the pros knew how they suffered.
In the case of my golfing year I play a lot of golf with the handicap golfer and a fair amount with those without handicaps.
It never ceases to amaze me how easily pleased they are.
They will put up with dreadful weather, poor course conditions, quick hooking, three-putting and a bad elbow, and still enter the bar thinking they enjoyed themselves.
When I was in the U.S. recently for the Walker Cup match I had some time to read their golf magazines, watch television golf and talk with some of the golf club members of my father-in-law's country club.
I must say it is quite astonishing how the Ryder Cup has captured the imagination of the U.S. golfing fraternity.
It really does seem to have taken off in the U.S. since its team started losing.
It does give an insight into the nature of the American but also to the value, indeed the commercial value, of head-to-head play.
It is being sold as a war in the U.S. and it has reached an emotional level to equal that of contests of a more  combative nature like boxing or American football.
Such is the association with conflict that U.S. Captain Ray Floyd was depicted as a wartime general in Golf Digest.
I welcome all these moves.
I am all for patriotism and international competition — the more feeling, the better.
There is no country better at patriotism than the U.S. and its treatment of the match should be taken as a compliment to European golf.
I am particularly pleased that the traditional form of golf, matchplay, should be the beneficiary of this new-found enthusiasm.
Perhaps there is still hope that professional golf will move away from the humdrum format of 72-hole medals and the public will realise that these events become viewable only at their conclusion when they turn into match-play.
There was further very interesting reading in the U.S. golfing magazine.
In case anyone is wondering, I read this cover to cover on the flight home, when I am a most captive audience for almost any reading material.
One of the most interesting articles was on the creation of the modern course.
Modern design was starting to become criticised in that each new course was having to resort to greater and greater  gimmickry in order to outdo last week's new creation.
There were illustrations of the most outrageous holes on island greens with bunkers sculptured like jaws, and other features wholly inappropriate to golf and which looked like they should belong in a modern art gallery.
I wonder how the club player can enjoy some of these courses.
It seems that they are designed and marketed to challenge the world's top players to the extreme.
Their creators will often claim that they are also designed to cater for the club player who will play off different tees but, on the more extreme courses, I wonder if this is really true.
On island greens, for example, short of starting the hole with a tee on the island and requiring a long putt for your first stroke, it is simply not possible.
Dramatic scenes seem to be the prerequisite with an eye to how photographs will look in sales material and advertisements.
Wouldn't it be refreshing if a new course were opened which simply claimed to be a lovely place for club players to play but that it wouldn't really test the pros.
Hard to sell maybe, but great for the members.
There are exceptions, of course, in the creation of new courses and in the concept of their designs.
I think a lot of the thoughts of Donald Steel have commonsense logic, and I have been much impressed by the work of Bob Cupp, the designer of East Sussex National and whose new courses, Settindown Creek and Reynolds Plantation, I was able to play during my trip to the U.S. These courses can be long but they are of generous width and, from forward tees, are playable for players of all standards.
I hope the criticism of the new breed of "over the top" courses leads the U.S. to continue its new-found trend into rediscovering the real essence of golf which its interest in the Ryder Cup has rekindled.
We may have to work a bit on Europe after a recent P.G.A.
European Tour release describing the skins match at Walton Heath — its press release described the game as a "traditional" skins match.
I don't think I need say any more.
Launching the Forward Swing
WITHOUT a doubt the most difficult move in golf is the change of direction from backswing to forward swing.
As I've said in the previous articles, some parts of the swing are more difficult to cope with than others.
That does not necessarily mean that one problem will give every player the same degree of difficulty to overcome.
However, the change of direction is not an easy movement for any golfer to master.
Why the change of direction is the most important and difficult move in golf to come to terms with goes much further than many golfers seem to realise.
The position of the legs, body, arms, hands and head at the top of the backswing is totally responsible for the success or otherwise of the forward swing.
I will go one step further and say that without the correct position at the top of the backswing, other parts of the swing cannot function correctly during the forward swing.
The vast majority of golfers have been told at one time or another how important the legs are in the game of golf.
I have also been told the same story time and time again.
Yes, the legs are of great importance, but not as much as many teachers suggest.
At the top of the backswing, deliberately trying to push from the inside of the right foot, and trying to force the hips to drive forward, will lead to a great deal of confusion in your golf swing.
Instead, the legs should form a springboard from which the forward swing can be launched.
The most crucial role the legs and hips play comes during the backswing.
Why?
Simply because, without the correct position at the top of the backswing, the legs cannot co-ordinate with the upper body during the forward swing.
At the top of the backswing it is of great importance for the right knee and toes to be in a straight line.
Your head must also be just inside your right foot.
If this bracing action is not achieved at the top of the backswing, it will be caused either by the right foot folding over on its side during the backswing, or the right knee moving out of alignment with the toes, before or when you arrive at the top of the swing.
In most cases, lack of flexibility is one of the main reasons for this problem during the backswing.
If flexibility is insufficient and the golfer tries to reach the parallel position with the club at the top of the backswing, the body will compensate either by folding the right foot onto its side, which can lead to the collapse of the same knee, or falling into a reverse pivot.
The latter will give you a feeling of comfort on reaching the parallel position, that is until you hit the golf shot and wonder why it keeps finishing in the rough on the right side.
It's not a pretty sight to finish in a classic fire and fall position.
Bracing the right leg and hip during the backswing is absolutely essential.
It is this bracing action which allows the legs to work during the forward swing.
Bracing the right side while turning the shoulders, trunk and hips, creates the coil spring effect at the top of the backswing.
Some players prefer to lift the left heel during the backswing, while more flexible players choose to keep both feet firmly planted throughout the backswing.
However, if your left heel lifts during the backswing or both feet remain firmly planted at the top, bracing the right foot, leg and hip during the backswing remains crucial to the working of the legs during the forward swing.
Bracing the right side gives you the only opportunity to use the left side to start the forward swing smoothly and efficiently.
The start of the forward swing is not initiated by the legs as most golfers have been led to believe, but by the pulling action from the left Latissimus Dorsi, Trapezius and Rear Deltoid.
These are the major muscle groups at work when the transfer from backswing to forward swing starts.
It is this which produces the combined bracing of the right foot, leg and hip which produces the wound-up spring resistance at the top.
The release of power is triggered by (a) keeping the knees and toes aligned throughout the backswing and (b) by keeping your head just inside your right foot to guard against falling into a reverse pivot.
Once this combination has been achieved at the top, the pulling action from the left Latissimus Dorsi, Trapezius and Deltoid starting down will automatically start the transfer of your weight from right to left making it a natural movement for the legs to drive forward.
Only then during the forward swing can the legs and hips begin to work in harmony with the upper body in generating clubhead speed.
The legs and hips begin to work at their maximum power when the club arrives parallel to the ground during the forward swing.
From the parallel position to impact and through, the legs, hips and right side are at their strongest in the golf swing.
So, the legs are responsible for starting the forward swing, but not by forcing them to drive the hips forward, but by creating a solid foundation from which the left side can pull against, compelling the legs to drive forward as the coil spring unwinds.
This drill is one of a series of exercises designed to increase flexibility in the shoulders.
This exercise will increase overall flexibility in this area and will guard against unnecessary shoulder injuries.
Exercise 1
Overhead Side Stretch
(1) Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart and grip the club above your head with your thumbs extended down the club shaft and your palms facing upwards.
Your knees should be straight.
(2) Pull the club across to the left with your left arm ensuring that your arms are extended.
Body and head movement should be minimised throughout.
(3) Return to the starting position and repeat the same movement on the opposite side.
This is a dual purpose exercise which develops the strength in your legs and the flexibility in your shoulders.
Exercise 2
Squat And Stretch
(1) Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart and with your legs straight.
Grip the club so that your thumbs are extended down the shaft and your palms are facing towards your body.
(2) In one smooth movement, raise the club into the overhead position while, at the same time, dropping into the squatting position.
(3) Return to the starting position and repeat.
This drill is designed to increase the flexibility in your shoulders but also serves as an excellent exercise to guard against a flying right elbow.
Exercise 3
Interlock Hands To Elbow
(1) Assume your normal stance.
With your left hand, grasp your right arm just above your elbow as shown.
(2) Swing to the top of the backswing, ensuring that your lefthand grip doesn't loosen.
Note that your right elbow should point directly towards your right hip at the top.
(3) Swing your right hand and arm down as you would during a downswing in golf.
Your left forearm should remain close to your body throughout.
This exercise has been designed with the inflexible golfer in mind.
If your hands and arms aren't strong, it would be a good idea to start with your hand positioned well down the grip of the club so that you are able to retain the necessary angle throughout the movement.
As your hands and arms become stronger you can lengthen the grip accordingly
Exercise 4
Retaining The Angle 1
(1) Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart and grip the club in your left hand so that your thumb is running down the shaft.
Place your right hand behind your back so that it is resting on your left hip.
(2) Starting from the normal address position, cock your wrist as shown in the photograph.
You should ensure that your arm remains straight throughout the movement and that you retain the wrist angle shown.
(3) Pull the club down in one smooth movement retaining as big a wrist angle as possible.
Stop when your club reaches a position parallel to the ground.
(4) Return to the starting position and repeat.
This exercise is also designed to strengthen your hands and arms but is more advanced than the last one.
In an ideal world, your knees should be straight throughout the exercise but, to start with, it might be simpler to bend them a bit.
Exercise 5
Retaining The Angle 2
(1) Assume the starting position as shown.
It is the same as in the last exercise except that you are bent over from the waist.
Remember that your back has to remain flat throughout and that your head has to be up.
If your flexibility is limited, it would be better to stand rather more upright with your knees slightly bent.
(2) Pull the club down slowly, retaining as big a wrist angle as possible.
(3) Retain the angle until the club arrives parallel to the ground.
At this stage, your left hand should be in line with your left foot.
Try not to let the club touch the ground at any time.
(4) Return smoothly to the starting position and repeat the exercise again.
This exercise ties in with the "Retaining The Angle" exercises and also helps to develop the left Latissimus Dorsi, Trapezius and Triceps muscles, which are responsible for starting the downswing.
Exercise 6
Pull And Resist
(1) Stand with your feet about shoulder-width apart and with you legs straight.
Grip the club so that the palm of your left hand is facing downwards and the palm of your right hand is facing upwards The hands should be about shoulder-width apart.
(2) Swing the club back as you would in a golf swing and then start to return to an imaginary ball.
(3) On starting the downswing, pull with your left hand and arm while, at the same time, resisting with your right hand.
Keep your right elbow pointing in the direction of your right hip as shown.
It is important that the entire pulling and resisting movement should be done in one smooth and controlled movement.
(4) Keep pulling with your left hand and resisting with your right until you reach the parallel position as shown.
Note that my right elbow is still pointing towards my hip and that my upper arm is close to my body.
Repeat the exercise again.
Dobson Sweeps The Board
HELEN Dobson, 18, has proved herself not just the player of the year but the player of the decade.
Not since Dinah Henson, nee Oxley, won the British and English Women's Championships in the one season — 1970 — has anyone so dominated the game.
The Seacroft youngster's first win came in the English Women's Championship at Burnham and Berrow where she competed flawlessly all week prior to defeating Simone Morgan in the final.
Next on the list was the British Women's Championship at Hoylake where she defeated Mary McKenna, Aline van der Haegen, Linzi Fletcher, Catriona Lambert and Elaine Farquharson, in that order, after having qualified for the match-play stages with only a shot to spare.
A deal of debate centred around her decision to defend her title in the English Girls' Championship at Edgbaston instead of playing in the British Women's Open at Ferndown.
But not too many of those who reckoned she should be pitting herself alongside the professionals recognised that she was putting herself through a far tougher ordeal by playing in a junior championship where she had everything to lose, nothing to gain.
In truth, her performance in winning at Edgbaston probably told us far more about how she is likely to make out when she tees up as a professional than could ever have been gauged from an isolated week among those playing for pay.
After Edgbaston came the English Stroke-Play Championship at Hollinwell where, as she had feared from the outset, she had to pull out after just the one round because of swollen glands.
She had gone to the doctor after her opening 77 and hoped for some kind of medication which would have allowed her to carry on, but all the medical man would prescribe was a three-day rest.
In fact, she was still sufficiently under the weather the following week to have to pull out of England's Intermediate Championship which was won, at Warrington, by Lora Fairclough.
To her relief, she was back to full fitness in time for the British Stroke-Play at Southerness where a 78 and 77 carved out of near gale-force winds gave her the half-way lead.
With one round to play, she was as many as three shots ahead of Australia's Nadene Hall, a gifted girl playing on a British links for a first time.
Helen had confessed at lunch that she would sooner have been three behind than three in front — and when news came, after the first 10 holes of the fourth round, that she had fallen one to the rear of the Australian, one had the feeling that she was merely paving the way for a last-minute attack.
It began at the 12th, with five successive birdies enabling her to finish two shots ahead of Miss Hall — and that though the Australian had a last round 69.
Almost instinctively, people worried that so outstanding a year might tempt Helen to switch at once to the professional circuit.
However, she is among the best organised of girls and golfers, and there is no danger of her reneging on her original plan.
Namely, one of waiting until she has represented Great Britain and Ireland in the Curtis Cup.
MYRA McKinlay, who won the British Girls' Championship at Carlisle, and Janice Moodie, a losing semi-finalist, are both pupils of Ken Stevely, the professional at Cawder.
Scottish Talent
But, talk to Stevely on the subject of how well he has taught them and this most modest of men will go off at a tangent, drawing attention to the extent to which both girls have been prepared to work.
 "Last winter," he recalls,"Myra would come across from Dunoon for a fortnightly session and the three of us would go out onto the practice ground whatever the weather.
They would be done up in ski-hats and waterproofs and there were never any complaints."
He was impressed with Myra from the first moment he saw her: "She was a tremendous talent with a feel and flair which cannot be taught." 
However, formative years spent trying to knock the ball past all the boys at Blairmore and Strone had contributed to something of a sway.
It was not a sway to worry Stevely, for he has always reckoned that it is very much easier to work on a swaying swing than one which is inhibited.
Where Janice is concerned, Stevely said he had watched, almost spellbound, as she turned, in the space of 12 months, from "a seemingly ordinary nine handicapper" into the Scottish Girls' Champion she is today.
As her swing got better and better, so she revealed an attitude and inner calm which are not given to very many.
At a time when English officialdom has been worrying about the fact that some among their top youngsters are playing more golf than is good for them, Stevely has had the same feelings where his own pupils are concerned.
When, for example, Myra played disappointingly in the Scottish Girls' after having made so big an impact at the Scottish Championship at Lossiemouth, he had to take her on one side and explain that she was far too exhausted, physically, to be able to give of her best: "I told her that she had to learn to pace herself and decide which tournaments she felt to be important." 
Myra, whose ultimate aim is to find a job which will allow her all the time she needs to follow the tournament trail, has one more year at Dunoon Academy.
Janice, for her part, is immersed in the Highers she will need if she is to follow in the footsteps of the former Scottish Champion, Alison Gemmill, and join the police force.
Anyone looking back just five years to 1984, when there were no Scots in the Curtis Cup side, and 1986, when there was just Belle Robertson, cannot but be struck by the healthy state of the game North of the Border at the present time.
In addition to having two such obviously up-and-coming youngsters as Myra and Janice, Scotland contributed four members of the nine-strong Great Britain and Ireland team for the Vagliano Trophy match in Italy, while they also had a representative — namely, Julie Forbes in the British side of four which won the team event at the Canadian National Championship.
All of which suggests that they could have as many as five players in the L.G.U. squad shortly to be nominated for next year's Curtis Cup.
IN spite of all the encouragement handed out by England in the shape of team trips here and there, it goes without saying that there are always individuals who, at the end of the day, will feel that they have not had a fair crack of the whip.
Morley Misses Out
Joanne Morley of Sale is one such player.
The winner of this year's Avia Foursomes and the amateur medal at the British Women's Open at Ferndown, the undeniably gifted Cheshire golfer was distressed to find that she was no better placed than second reserve for England in the Home Internationals and, further, that she was not given a place on the "B" team sent to Italy.
Although Joanne feels sore at the selectors, there are those who believe that she has been more a victim of circumstance than anything else.
For instance, when the selectors were working at their hardest at the English and British Match-Play Championships — Joanne was feeling and playing far below her best because of a species of salmonella food poisoning.
Joanne feels that a points system would be the answer and that that would put an end to all the arguments.
For myself, I doubt it.
I AM indebted to John Moorey from Portsmouth who has been kind enough to fill me in with some of the details of the extraordinary golfing life of Mary Toogood, nee Johnson, who died earlier this year.
Yorkshire Legend
Mary Toogood won the Yorkshire County Championship for a first time in 1932, while she went on to represent her county on no fewer than 99 occasions.
She was the losing finalist in the English Championship both in 1933 and 1934 having, in 1934 at Seacroft, survived a match against the mysterious Gloria Minoprio, the first woman to wear trousers and a player who carried but a single club.
In the first round of the championship, Miss Minoprio had frightened the life out of one, Miss Summerville, who later explained to the press that she had felt as if she were playing "a supernatural being" .
She added that the effect had been enhanced by Miss Minoprio's "curious mannerism of waving the club to and fro above the ball instead of addressing it in the conventional manner" .
Mary Toogood, or Mary Johnson, as she was then, was a fearless soul who refused to be taken in by any of this nonsense.
She defeated Miss Minoprio by 7 and 6, with her overall poise no doubt earning her a bonus point from England's selectors.
She won two of her three matches in the Home Internationals of that year and went on to play for England again in 1935.
In 1936, at a time when she had played for Yorkshire on 62 occasions, Mary married John Toogood, a Yorkshire businessman.
The two had a son, Neville, and it was not until after the war years that she was in a position to resume her golfing career.
Difficult though it was to come back after so long a lay-off, she was the runner-up in the Yorkshire Championship both in 1950 and in 1953.
She brought her haul of county match appearances up to 99, while the number of times she played for her club — she was playing for Ganton up until a few months before her death — must have constituted a record.
 "Mary's outstanding characteristic," wrote John Moorly,"was her modesty…
I played with her several times when she was in her 70s — and she trounced me.
I think she honestly did not know how she played so well.
She never had a formal lesson in her life, while the ancient piece of rusty iron which in her hands became a magic putter, was the one with which she began her golfing career!"
NINE-EIGHTEEN is the name of the Italian company which came to Ferndown for the British Women's Open and sold designer golf shirts and T-shirts such as we have never previously seen, even in the tented village at The Open.
Big Impact
With so many of the competitors and spectators at Ferndown who purchased these designs having since had enquiry after enquiry as to where they came from, herewith the address: David Boccara, 87 Avenue Niel, 75017, Paris.
HAVING had a summer of fair-weather golf, competitors in the British Women's Stroke-Play Championship at Southerness, many of whom had not had to don a sweater in months, were faced with the foulest of conditions over the first two days.
Disasters Abound At Southerness
Although Catriona Lambert, the first round leader, managed an opening 76 which took in two eagles where her ball chased downwind at two of the par-5s, there was many a disaster story.
Julie Hall, the 1987 English Champion who was to finish as high as third, had an opening 82 which took in an 8 at the 12th where her 2-iron second took off in a gust and ended in rough so deep that her third was an air shot.
As for Karen Mitchell, the defending Champion, she returned an 89 in which, at the short 17th, she knocked her tee shot to within 14 feet of the flag, only to hit her first putt through the green.
A feat in much the same league as Catriona Lambert's opening 76 was the second round 74 handed in by Pauline Dobson, no relation to Helen albeit a similarly long hitter.
Pauline, the highlight of whose round was the eagle with which she followed a wind-tossed triple-bogey at the 12th, brought news of how she had been attacked by a couple of bitches.
As one remarked at the time, those who were wondering what women's golf was coming to were relieved to learn that the culprits were a King Charles spaniel and a mongrel she had encountered during the course of the early morning post round she does on the outskirts of Durham.
The animals failed to draw blood but, two weeks later, she was still so worried about getting her fingers bitten that she admitted to finding the whole business of pushing letters through a letter box as nerve-wracking, in its own way, as trying to hole a four footer.
If Helen Dobson's achievement in doing the double of British Match and Stroke-Play titles detracted from everything else, on performance worthy of more than a passing mention was a final day for Julie Hall which took in rounds of 69 and 71.
In 1988, Julie had a year like Helen Dobson's, a year in which she never felt she could lose.
However, in 1989 things started to go all wrong as she developed a hook in the very week before she went to the English at Burnham and Berrow Much of the season, by her high standards, was bitterly disappointing but, by dint of "plugging away" , she began to rediscover her form during the week of the English Intermediate won by Lora Fairclough.
By Southerness, she was back to her considerable best and it goes without saying that it will be interesting to see what this most confirmed of amateurs will make of 1990.
Fascinating though it was to watch how the women coped with bad weather and good at Southerness, spectators could have learned rather more about the players and their golf had there been portable scoreboards with the leaders on, the last day, not to mention a leader-board behind the home green.
All this extra work could have been tackled by youngsters but, unfortunately, the Scottish schools were back and there were no children hanging around looking for something to do.
Luckily, the same will not apply next year, for the championship is to be held in the South and the English have longer holidays.
However, even if the L.G.U. was left wondering if it shouldn't have kept the public better informed, it must have been greatly heartened by the number of spectators who not only came to this out-of-the-way championship but made it abundantly clear that they were greatly taken with the high standard of play.
THE Ladies' Golf Union and the English Ladies' Golf Association are nowadays making the most of the various invitations which come from overseas.
Canada Cup
When, for instance, England was asked to send two players out to the Tournament of Nations, run in conjunction with the Italian Women's Championship, it had no hesitation in dispatching Katie Tebbet and Sarah Palmer, two youngsters who, although they had not done enough to make the Home International team, were clearly worth encouraging.
Again, when the L.G.U. was asked to send a party of four to compete in the team event run in conjunction with the Canadian National Championship, it, too, sent four players showing potential rather than four who had made it.
Its choices were good ones, with Alison Johns, Linzi Fletcher, Julie Forbes and Karen Mitchell picking up the team title, together with a good helping of confidence.
Julie, on her return, had her best finish ever in a British championship when she had closing rounds of 72 and 71 to be fifth in the Stroke-Play at Southerness.
Individual performances from the British  quartet which won the team event at a windswept Canadian National Championship in Newfoundland:
Choosing a Club to do the Job
CHOOSING the right club round the green can take shots off your score.
The temptation which most club golfers seem to face is to take out a wedge regardless of the fact that the shot might be easier using a different club.
Players often ask why teaching professionals are so against using the wedge.
The reason is simple.
Whenever you take a wedge out of the bag the swing has to be comparatively long for the distance you are covering.
If you make any error and mis-strike the ball, the results are usually disastrous.
The golden rule is to get the ball down on the ground as quickly as possible and to run it whenever you can.
If faced with a bank in front of you, whether uphill or downhill, don't assume that you have to loft the ball over it.
The first choice should always be to think of your putter.
Don't think that there is anything amateurish in using a putter, particularly if the lie is bare or the ball is sitting awkwardly.
Look at the ground between you and the green and assess whether the ball will run truly.
If the ground is hard, and even a bit bumpy, the ball will usually bumble its way quite satisfactorily up or down a bank and distance is fairly easy to judge.
The ground doesn't need to be perfectly smooth like a putting surface for a well-hit putt from off the edge of the green to finish very successfully.
And do bear in mind that if you don't hit it 100 per cent, the result is likely to be far better than a less than perfect pitch.
Look in particular at putting a ball up a bank if the pin is positioned close to the edge of the green.
If you try to pitch the ball onto the top, particularly working from a tight lie, you will find it almost impossible to pull the ball up quickly enough.
If you putt the ball, you can hit it firmly to the top of the bank and simply let it roll down to the hole.
Providing you give it enough to reach the top of the slope, the shot is a very safe one.
With more distance between the edge of the green and the flag, the shot does become easier with a lofted club, but even so, look to the putter as your safest route up a slope.
Remember, too, that with a putter you only have to strike the back of the ball.
You don't have to make contact with the ground on which the ball sits, and if the ball does lie in any little depression, an old divot hole or a slightly poor lie, the putter lends itself to sending the ball bobbling on its way.
Now let's assume that the grass is a little thicker and the putter looks an unsuitable club.
Your choice of club for hitting a shot over a bank should now depend on the distance beyond the top of the bank to the flag.
If there really is plenty of space to work with, the sandwedge may be a sound choice.
But if the flag is at all close to the top of the bank, look once again at getting the ball down on the ground as quickly as possible and running it up the bank.
This time move on to a 4 or 5-iron depending on just how low you strike the ball.
Aim at getting it down onto the ground before it reaches the bank, hooding the clubface by setting the hands well forward, to reduce the effective loft of the club.
Keep the weight well towards the left foot and push the ball down low, letting it bobble its way up the bank.
Again, this is an ideal shot when the flag is close to the edge of the green with little room to work with.
Do make sure that you get the ball down quickly enough to run it; avoid jumping bounces that get caught by the slope.
Read the slope of the bank in just the same way as you would with a long putt, and the results can often be very accurate.
Look, in particular, to using a running shot whenever you face a two-tier green and have to get the ball onto the top layer.
Frequently the top layer of this kind of green drains well, posing a difficult problem for stopping the ball with a wedge.
All too often you pitch the ball short, catch the slope and finish back on the lower layer.
Instead, play a punching, running shot, whether 30 yards or as much as 100 yards from the green, and get the ball running up onto the top layer.
Once more the ball is played with the hands forward, delofting the club.
Don't be over-concerned if the ground in front of you doesn't seem perfectly flat.
Most club golfers experimenting with this shot are surprised at just how accurately the ball will roll and soon find it a preferable shot to the wedge.
To cope with a very steep bank, particularly if overhanging trees make a pitch shot impossible, do think of running the ball straight at the bank.
From 10 or 20 yards you can sometimes force the ball directly into the bank, the first jump taking it almost vertically upwards and landing it softly on the edge of the green.
But to do this the bank really does need to be very steep and, being a slightly hit-or-miss approach, is one more suitable to match-play than stroke-play.
But do at least think of the shot and be prepared to experiment.
The Calm After the Storm
 "The time has come when you should see a priest or a psychiatrist." 
Such were the carefully chosen words of Isabella Connachan when suddenly, mid-way through the 1988 season, she realised the extent of the mental problems being experienced by her daughter, Jane.
For Jane's mother, and for everyone else who knew her, it was difficult to appreciate that this traumatised golfer was the same person as the one to whom, in amateur days, everything had come so easily.
Seemingly always perky, the young Jane would swing at the speed of light and win everything on offer.
At 15 she had once to be carted from the links of Gullane having had too much to drink, but she will tell you that that had nothing to do with the pressures of competition, rather that she was merely going through a rebellious streak.
 "I was on teams with older girls and if they drank I would follow suit," she explained.
 "To be honest, even when we had a girls' training week at Inverclyde it was almost on the schedule that everyone would get legless on one of the evenings." 
Although as a legacy of the Gullane incident, she felt that her father never fully trusted her again until his dying day, the shock, allied to the S.L.G.A's threat of a ban, was such that she mended her ways at once.
No more than 14 when she pocketed the Scottish Girls' title and the Scottish Girls' Under-22 Stroke-Play Championship for a first time, Jane became the youngest ever to play for Great Britain and Ireland in the Curtis Cup when she was chosen for the 1980 match at St. Pierre.
That same year, she won the first of two successive British Girls' titles
She did indeed find golf easy.
But, from her earliest competitive rounds at Musselburgh, it was never so with the business of competing.
 "I would go through agony," she remembers, citing the instance of the British Girls' Championship she played at Dunbar when she was no more than 10 years of age.
She had sleepless nights and was sick every morning of that week — and she was sick, too, when she had nothing more than a simple monthly medal on her hands.
 "My one thought," she recalls, "would be" How can I get out of this? "" 
Eventually, her father, Robert, could stand it no longer.
As he watched his gifted little daughter sobbing her heart out prior to taking the tee in the Girls' Championship at Leven in 1975, he told her that she must either play without fuss or stop playing altogether.
Jane could not bear to give up for, although she knew nothing so harrowing as the run-up to a match or a medal, she knew nothing to compare with the excitement which lay on the other side of the 1st tee: "However tight a match, I never believed that anyone was going to beat me.
Not even when Pam Wright went 4-up on me after four holes in the final of the Scottish at Troon did I feel in any danger."
That charmed feeling fuelled her play throughout 1982.
After defeating Pam at the 19th to win the Scottish, she went on to bag the Australian Girls' title and the British Stroke-Play Championship.
She also played in the Curtis Cup for a second time — but that was where the negative thoughts began to rear.
Although Great Britain and Ireland was being hammered on this occasion Jane felt so tight and tense at lunchtime on the second day that she asked if she could stand down.
 "I went for a check-up but, in my heart of hearts, I recognised that it was an attack of panic more than anything else," she remembers.
 "I had chest pains so bad that I knew I would be unable to give 100 per cent." 
The same happened at the Commonwealth Tournament later in the year — and to this day she wonders if this behaviour had something to do with the fact that the selectors did not include her in the 1984 match at Muirfield.
In 1983 she found an answer — albeit the wrong one to all her problems.
She stopped caring.
Six years later she remembers, vividly, a match against Fiona Anderson in the Scottish Championship at North Berwick which was won by Gillian Stewart: "I had been listening to" The Mikado"before I set out and I was humming it in my head all the way round.
Not until I arrived on the 18th tee 1-down did it suddenly occur to me that I was on the point of losing.
I asked myself if I minded and the answer was that I didn't."
She lost, shook hands — and her overriding feeling was one of relief.
 "To this day," she says, "I have never fully recovered." 
She cared, desperately, when the Curtis Cup side was read out at Bissett's Hotel, Gullane, and she was not in the team, but that was more because of wounded pride than anything else, for the match was to be played at Muirfield and she was a native of East Lothian linksland.
But the real on-course caring was not to return fully until she turned professional at the start of 1984.
Eighth on the money list in 1984 with earnings to the tune of £8,957, she won £21,234 in 1985 to finish as high as second behind Laura Davies.
Just as everyone took it for granted that the young Scot was on the point of fulfilling the potential she had shown in the amateur game, so she stopped in her tracks.
In 1986, she finished 18th, in 1987, 9th and in 1988, 16th.
True, she was still making an adequate living from the game, earning in excess of £22,000 both in 1987 and 1988.
But by this time there was something very obviously missing from her play.
Far from being wrapped up in the Tour and excited by it, she looked all the time as if she would sooner be anywhere else.
Even wins, such as those in the Colt Cars Classic in Jersey and the Olivetti at Moor Hall, would leave her cold.
The trouble with winning, she explained, was that it left her with bad memories rather than good.
In winning in Jersey, for example, she had never slept, nor had she managed to keep any food down.
Indeed, her room-mates will testify to the fact that the experience was a nightmare.
When finally she won, she thanked God that it was all over.
Never, for a moment, did she feel there was anything to celebrate.
It was last year in Denmark that she reached her lowest ebb.
All season she had been getting more and more angry with herself when she played badly and there were times, when she was at her most frustrated, that she would savagely scratch the skin from her forehead.
Again, she would clench her fist and ram her knuckles into the face of her driver, 3-wood or whatever.
Her hands were often plastered, while there was one occasion when she made so fiery a contact with a clubface that she punched one of the knuckles out of position.
 "Yes," she acknowledged,"I inflicted some horrific injuries on myself.
But it always seemed better once I had got the anger out of my system."
In Denmark, where she opened with an 84 and ultimately holed a putt across the 18th green to make the half-way cut by a shot, an almost suicidal depression set in.
 "My friends were saying," Well done for making the cut", while I myself saw the next two rounds as some form of punishment.
I managed somehow to contain the tears as I played but, at night, I was crying myself to sleep."
What aggravated the situation were well-meaning comments from acquaintances at home.
Since her earliest golfing days, they had been in the habit of congratulating her on her latest success.
Now they were making it clear that they expected more from her: "If I had done reasonably well, they would say that I should have done better, and if I had done badly, they would ask," What's wrong with you? "" 
Even her mother's "Pull yourself together" remarks began to drag her down as she recognised that that was something she could not do.
But Jane had always been close to her mother and, almost inevitably, there came an evening when Mrs Connachan inadvertently prised open the floodgates.
Although the maternal recommendation was that Jane should see a psychiatrist or a priest, it transpired that Jane felt she had turned the corner simply by spilling out her innermost thoughts to her mother.
And having confided in her, she discussed her troubles with Don Burrell, the Canadian with whom she had stayed when on a school exchange to the States and who had been like a second father since the death of her own.
Don Burrell had long recognised that there were "two Janes" ; the Jane who knew she was too good a player not to win and the Jane who recognised that there was far less pressure attached to doing badly than doing well.
With his help, Jane worked last winter on bringing these two selves together; on stopping the inner conflict.
And as she thought of the good golfing years she had allowed to go to waste, so praying and practice loomed large in the recovery programme she set herself.
This season there have been signs that Jane's early talent is budding anew.
A quiet swear word now serves instead of a punch-up with one of her woods, while she had encouraging finishes such as a fourth equal in the Players' Championship at Tytherington and a fifth place in the recent Gislaved Ladies' Open in Sweden.
Now 25, Jane does not pretend to have reached the point where she is back enjoying her golf.
However, she does concede, "I feel as though I want to enjoy it." 
One Man's Impressions of the U.S. Tour
THE 16th green at Cypress Point is off-limits during the Pebble Beach National Pro-Am to everyone except players, their caddies and any relevant volunteers and officials.
After the contestants hit their tee shots to the splendid par-3 that sits out on a bluff high above the boiling Pacific surf, they take their leave of the gallery until they return to the contiguous United States via Cypress' par-4 17th hole.
Glenn Waggoner did not know this.
The New York-based journalist, who was researching a book about the U.S.P.G.A. Tour, simply stepped under the ropes and trailed the group he was following out onto the peninsula.
No-one stopped him, which is surprising given that he's not the sort who fits into a group of golfers, never mind a crowd.
He's well over six feet tall, sports a rough-and-tumble greying beard and, as a physical specimen, he's around the same mass as, say, Norway.
But out he went and plopped down in the rough surrounding the green until, finally, a marshal suggested that he might be trespassing.
Waggoner quietly got to his feet and walked off down the 17th.
 "And the beauty of it," he says now over a cold beer in a Manhattan restaurant,"was that I didn't know any better.
I inadvertently got the best vantage point on one of the most exciting holes in the world!"
The incident was one of the most memorable from a year that Waggoner spent following the U.S.P.G.A. Tour.
This thoroughly amiable writer had been assigned by Villard Books to present the U.S.P.G.A. Tour through the eyes of someone yet to be afflicted with a hardcore interest in the pro Tours.
Waggoner certainly fits the bill.
A former history professor at the University of Michigan and at Columbia University in New York City, Waggoner traded blackboard for typewriter five years ago and since then his main journalistic beats have been baseball, travel, food and fashion.
The last is a source of amusement for Waggoner's family and friends, who find it delightfully bizarre that a man who weighs around 300 pounds and dresses down with a passion should pen a guide to etiquette and fashion for the vaunted Esquire magazine.
Still, Waggoner manages to shoot in the 90s, describing himself as "an honest 18" , and declares a love for the game tempered by a firm dislike of anything remotely resembling a country club or a length of polyester.
Although before this year he'd been to fewer golf tournaments than we had cold drinks on that hot September afternoon, he still has fond memories of watching Arnold Palmer win the Colonial NIT close to his hometown of Dallas in 1962.
By the time Waggoner begins writing his book he will have traipsed around some 15 U.S.P.G.A. Tour events in America as well as the Dunhill and Ryder Cups across the pond.
His American tour kicked off on day one at the Tournament of Champions in Southern California and has taken him to the two major Pro-Ams — the Bob Hope and the Crosby (aforementioned Pebble Beach National Pro-Am)— a trio of Florida events — Doral, the Honda Classic and the Players' Championship — as well as The Masters, the Colonial, the Memorial, the season-ending Nabisco Championship and a slew of less-hallowed events in between.
If there is something to be said for the project, it's that Waggoner has been doing his homework.
 "Going in I just planned to observe," Waggoner explains, "to experience as much as I could and to watch closely." 
One of the first things he found was that golf is not something that can be watched that closely.
 "As a spectator sport, it's terrible," he says.
"It's not like other sports, in that you can't watch a tournament unfold in front of you.
If you follow the leaders you might miss someone else.
And as a television sport it's also hard because all you see is a ball flying through the air and you have no sense of scale or depth.
As for the golf course, I had no idea how hilly Augusta National was until I went to The Masters, and there must be millions of people who still don't know."
Waggoner eventually concluded that the only way to see a whole tournament is to go to it for the entire week.
"You have to spend some time on the practice tee, and you have to take a different approach every day.
Camp on one hole one day, or in an area from which you can see several holes.
On another day, follow someone whose game you like.
On Sunday, go to the course in the morning, but be sure to go home and watch the final holes on television.
By then you should know the tournament, the course and the shots that will have to be played by the leaders."
Tour pros lead an awkward life.
On the one hand they are praised for succeeding in a sport with absolutely no guarantees — if you crave success, you have to win it.
On the other hand they are criticised for making so much money in a world that pampers them, and for covering themselves in sponsors' deals to the point that the locker-room at the Players' Championship sometimes seems like Gasoline Alley at the Indy 500.
Waggoner supports the first theory, but has little time for the whiners.
 "There's a lot of opportunity out there," he says,"and it's tough to get to the bottom of it all.
Not all the players get courtesy cars.
Some have to pay for their hotel rooms; others don't.
A lot is laid on for a pro golfer, but not as much as is for a team player.
A baseball player doesn't have to pay for transport.
That a golfer has to be an entrepreneur is an absolutely valid theory.
I don't know of any other sport like this.
It's not as bad as they say, but there are a lot of elements of risk in golf.
"True, the guys at the bottom of the money list are making about $100,000 a year, but that's not a lot for professional athletes.
The basic salary for a baseball player is $62,500, but then all his expenses are paid."
When Waggoner talks of the entrepreneurial spirit that exists on the Tour, he always comes back to Buddy Gardner, whom he sees as the typical journeyman pro.
Gardner's been out there for more than a decade, has been back and forth from the Qualifying School three times, has yet to win a tournament, and in a good year can make $150,000.
That's about the going rate for the pros who have yet to crack the top-25 on the money list, wherein lies what is known in these parts as "the long green" (and we mean the colour of dollar bills, not a snake of a putting surface).
 "Look at him," says Waggoner of Gardner.
"He plays 35 times a year and goes six weeks without seeing home.
He's played many good rounds and usually has one bad one per tournament.
But he makes a living.
He's a good ol' boy from Alabama who is unable to go any length of time without touching a golf club.
Take Curtis Strange or Craig Stadler or Tom Watson.
They're not like that."
It is decided that we should talk more about the players.
I fire off the names, Waggoner the answers.
Mark Calcavecchia: "Rough cut.
Enormously exciting.
He looks like he unleashes the force of nature when he swings a club.
He's pretty blunt and pretty direct but is not terribly comfortable talking with people from outside his "fraternity" ."
Curtis Strange: "I find him very funny.
When you've been around those guys a lot, you notice that they're performers and that they perform for you.
But Curtis is remarkably direct.
He says he has a mean spirit on the golf course and he says he is not having fun, but he also says "this is my joy" ."
Craig Stadler: "Very human.
I walked around Augusta National with his wife, Sue.
She is a very strong woman and will talk with Stadler when he's on the course.
Stadler is also very funny.
He can also get really mad, but then he can be wonderful afterwards."
Raymond Floyd: "Some of the older players have a presence, a kind of aura.
Raymond Floyd has that aura."
Greg Norman: "I don't have any negative sense of him, but I have noticed that once he's done with a press conference, he's off.
He's not like Tom Watson, who will continue answering questions as he walks slowly away.
But Norman is very good at public relations."
Steve Jones (he speaks specifically about Jones' zealous christianity): "A lot of people are simply uncomfortable with some people's"  over-religiosity "or whatever you call it.
Steve Jones believes that if you do not believe the way he believes, then you will go to hell.
But basically he is a big, sweet, golf-only kid.
Well, maybe not a kid.
He's 29.
I followed Jones at the Tournament of Champions, which he won, and even predicted victory for him at the Bob Hope, which he also won.
Here's why.
In the second round he muffed a shot about 90 yards and banged his ball against a tree.
But he banged a 3-wood, into the green and two-putted for par.
It was then that the whole idea of "recovery" struck me, even if it should be obvious.
Joe Simpson, his coach from the University of Colorado, describes Steve as a "stepladder" player — he gets better each day.
He did that at the Hope (Close: He improved three times, but would have had to better a 63 to do it every round — 76-68-67-63-69).
Jones also has a very self-deprecating sense of humour.
I asked him why he hit a 3-wood off the tee and he said he had to; when he hits a driver he has absolutely no idea where the ball will go!"
Finally, I ask Waggoner for his most vivid impressions.
He immediately mentions Arnold Palmer's first-round 68 at the U.S. P.G.A.
Championship.
Not an impression, he is told.
 "The thing that impressed me most was seeing the pros in trouble get out of trouble," he says.
The thing that impressed him least, he says, was the weather.
"It was so miserable so many times.
It seemed like every time I went out to walk the course I came back with wet feet."
Waggoner was also singularly unimpressed with the speed of play.
 "There's no excuse for not even thinking about your shot when you're waiting to hit to a green." 
But he was overwhelmed by his simple, beneficial error on the 16th at Cypress Point, and you can rest assured that that, along with Waggoner's other impressions and observations, will make for an interesting read when the book hits the shelves for the 1990 Christmas rush.
Golf's Nomads
THAT golf is now the subject of political interference s common knowledge.
The decision 18 months ago of the Spanish government to impose a ban on South African golfers, in the wake of similar action taken during the decade by Sweden, The Netherlands and Belgium, magnified the plight of those South Africans seeking to ply their trade, and earn a living, on the P.G.A.
European Tour.
The bottom line was that no South African golfer could in 1989 compete in the Tenerife Open at Golf del Sur; the Renault Open de Baleares at Santa Ponsa, Majorca; the Catalan Open in Barcelona; the Cepsa Madrid Open at Puerta de Hierro; the Peugeot Spanish Open at El Saler, Valencia; the Volvo Masters at Valderrama; and the Benson and Hedges Mixed Team Trophy at Aloha, in addition to the Desert Classic in Dubai; the Volvo Belgian Open at Royal Waterloo, Brussels; the KLM Dutch Open at Kennemer, Zaandvoort; the Scandinavian Open at Drottningholm, Stockholm; and the PLM Open at Bokskogens, near Malmo.
That list does not include the P.G.A.
European Qualifying School which is also out-of-bounds to South Africans as it is played at the La Manga Club.
What is more, in 1990, the new American Express Mediterranean Open will be off-limits to the South Africans as that company has chosen southern Spain to stage its inaugural event.
What is more, if the Tunisian Open is revived, then a minimum of 14 tournaments officially linked to the Volvo Order of Merit will automatically be erased from the diary of any South African golfer contemplating playing in Europe.
John Bland, as amiable a sportsman as one would wish to meet, is naturally disturbed and disheartened by the increasing number of tournaments in which he, as a South African, cannot compete.
 "It does niggle me that we cannot play whenever and wherever we like," Bland said.
"You see I could win one week, be at peak form and not be able to compete the next.
What chance have we of topping the Order of Merit?"
Bobby Locke did top the Order of Merit in 1946, 1950 and 1954, and the only other South African to do so was Dale Hayes in 1975.
Bland first visited Britain in 1970.
Then he was free to play where and when he wanted, assuming that he was qualified to do so, although it was not until 1977 that he elected to play on a full-time basis.
 "We were accepted all over that year," Bland said.
 "We played right through the season." 
Bland was encouraged to come to Europe by Gary Player.
The same Gary Player financially assisted a smiling Bantu by the name of Vincent Tshabalala to come over in 1976.
In his second tournament, Tshabalala, whose home was in Soweto, a group of black African townships situated to the south-west of Johannesburg, won the French Open at Le Touquet.
It was, Bland contends, the direct result of a policy implemented by Jimmy Hemphill, then the Executive Director of the South African P.G.A.
in 1971.
 "I remember that year Jimmy telling us that we had black players in South Africa, that they were reasonably good and that he thought they should have the chance to become members," Bland explained.
"There was no problem.
They went to the pre-qualifying and, if they made it, they could play in the tournaments.
And they were treated exactly the same as any other player who came through.
"Everybody agreed with what Jimmy said.
There were no squabbles…as long as they did everything the same as anybody else and paid their fees, which were exactly the same.
I must say that not all of them could afford the fees.
I myself did help with sponsorship.
Gary Player did a lot of sponsorship on the black side because we felt we had to help.
I would have done it for a young white guy if he was from my club and I realised that he did not have enough money to play the Tour."
Bland points to the history of helping black golfers with good reason.
He feels that the South African P.G.A.
has done its utmost actively to encourage the blossoming of black golfers, although apartheid, as it is known, is an official policy of racial segregation practised in the Republic of South Africa with a view to promoting and maintaining white ascendancy.
 "Look, we now have 35 black members," Bland said.
"Ten years ago there were three, including Vincent.
Those 35 were good enough to come through the pre-qualifying system.
We have black runners and black boxers, and they participate with everybody.
How long must our throats be cut?
I feel that South Africa has cleaned its house out but that the rest of the world will not recognise or accept it."
Bland believes that a catastrophic faux pas was made at the start of the 1980s when the Scandinavians introduced the red light against the South African golfers.
 "It was a political decision made by the government and not by the Federation," Bland said.
"The Federation, as far as I can gather, would have allowed us to continue playing.
But the government refused to issue us with visas to play there because of sporting contacts with South Africa.
So we didn't get in.
"As far as I know, Sven Tumba, who organised the Scandinavian Open, and Ken Schofield, as Executive Director of the P.G.A.
European Tour, did their best to try to get us to the 1st tee.
But it was not the Federation's decision.
It was not the European Tour's decision.
It was just a matter of government policy.
"I would stress that, behind the scenes, Ken Schofield has worked very, very hard for us.
Then again maybe we should have visualised the scene in 1980/ 81 and done something about it then.
We should have fought harder to play in the Scandinavian Open.
We should have gone to Ken Schofield and stated that, as members of the P.G.A.
European Tour, we could not accept being banned.
But I suppose we could not see it snowballing the way that it has.
Now if a few more countries ban us, then it will hardly be worth our while coming over because, even though the prize-money is very good, we would be taking too many enforced breaks.
"We were all very inexperienced when the situation arose.
The way I look back on it now, I think we just let it go.
Nobody made a stand.
We thought that if it was only one tournament out of a Tour that was growing so fast it would not matter.
Now 10 years on…"
Ten years on and there is conjecture surrounding the possibility of the government of Sweden, and possibly that of The Netherlands, banning from participation in a sporting event anybody who has been to South Africa.
The Netherlands is a European Community country subject to the E.C.
laws of freedom of movement between workers and Sweden is a member of the Council of Europe.
 "So much for European harmonisation at all levels," says Neil MacFarlane, Sports Minister from 1981 to 1985, Conservative MP for Sutton and Cheam and a Vice-President of the P.G.A.
European Tour.
Bland argues: "There are two rules which apply — one for the South African sportsman, the other for the South African businessman.
All the countries we are talking about do an enormous amount of trade with South Africa.
But we are a few guys, not interested in politics, who will play golf with anybody as 50 per cent individuals and 50 per cent representatives of our country because when you stand on the 1st tee, they call…
"
John Bland from South Africa."
"Yet we cannot get visas and we are such a small drop in the ocean compared with the businessman.
No-one ever approaches them and says: "Stop this" .
We are the ones who are the front line troops, taking the knocks.
We are quite happy to play with any sportsmen from any nation.
Where does it stop?
Who knows.
What more can South Africa do as a country?
I can't talk for other sports but I can stress again that we've got the highest ratio of black members of any golf body in the world.
Higher than America.
I'm talking about players who play our Tour.
Full members.
And they are treated exactly the same as anybody else on the Tour.
"Since the Spanish situation came up I don't think anything has been done.
I think something might now that the cricketers and the rugby players are going to South Africa.
This could help to break the sporting world open.
But we know we can't get into Spain because of the 1992 Olympics."
The trouble is that no-one appears to know what will happen after the Olympics and whether if by then the United Nations' blacklist will preclude British members of the Tour from competing in certain countries.
It would appear, however, that for the moment, the Qualifying School will remain in Spain, so ambitious South African golfers will need to write for invitations to European events, become affiliated members and attempt to win sufficient money from seven events to earn a full member's place on the Tour.
It is a fact that Ken Schofield has spent more hours than he cares to recall on the "South African affair" .
The opinion is that he could not have done more, just as the South African golfers, as stressed by Bland, have done everything to eliminate apartheid from their tournament scene in order that the South African Professional Golfers' Association is respected for placing merit before colour or creed.
 "Where do we go from here?" 
Bland says.
"I think we have to wait and see what happens this winter in South Africa.
But I would say that I think it is only a matter of time before we, as a nation, produce a very good black golfer."
It was at Quinta da Marinha during last year's Portuguese Masters tournament that news broke of Spain's decision, no doubt with the Barcelona Olympics in mind, banning South Africans from participating in sporting events in its country.
The Distaff Side
Ironically, only three weeks earlier in the first event of the season, Laurette Maritz, from Johannesburg, had won the Marbella Open at Los Naranjos.
This was a sparkling Tour debut for the young South African.
In Portugal she won again, making it two out of three, and former British Open Champion, Alison Sheard, her compatriot, suggested that Laurette was the best golfer to emerge from South Africa since Sally Little.
But then the bombshell dropped.
For Sheard, a Tour regular since 1979, and newcomer Maritz, their season had become uncertain.
Like most of the professionals, they believe that sport and politics should not be mixed and that they are victims of a situation over which they have no control.
Prior to the announcement by the Spanish government, the South Africans knew that they were barred from playing in the Dutch Open and two tournaments in Scandinavia.
Now the door had closed on them in three more weeks scheduled for Spain.
This year the situation remains the same.
Maritz, Sheard, Sonja van Wyk and Michelle de Vries, the four South Africans on the Tour, are banned from playing in five of the 21 tournaments.
This no longer affects Rae Hast who was granted British citizenship five years ago.
Sheard, a resident in East Anglia, has lived in England for four years and is awaiting the result of her application for British citizenship, but Maritz believes that her golfing future lies in the United States.
Maritz was last season's "Rookie of the Year" and last year attempted to win her player's card at the L.P.G.A. Qualifying School.
It was a hurried decision made when the previously opened doors in Europe began to close.
Maritz spent four years at university in San Diego.
Inter-collegiate golf had convinced her that, eventually, her future was on the L.P.G.A. Tour.
She won the preliminary qualifying tournament but, surprisingly, failed to gain her card in the all-important final event.
This year Maritz is concentrating her efforts in Europe.
"I enjoy playing in Europe and still feel that I am learning all the time.
Naturally it is disappointing that I am not able to play in some tournaments but there is nothing I can do about that.
There are still enough events for me to make a living,"she explains.
After her first 11 tournaments this year, Maritz was in fourth place on the Woolmark Order of Merit with winnings of almost £26,000.
She finished second in the Tournament Players' Championship at Tytherington, which was her fifth top-10 placing in her first seven tournaments of the year.
Maritz is not returning to the L.P.G.A. She will play in Europe again next season, by which stage she believes that she will have gathered sufficient experience to fix her sights on America.
Maritz, through her outstanding ability, has an escape route from the European situation.
Hast is a British citizen, a status Sheard hopes she will attain.
For van Wyk, de Vries and other young South Africans burning with ambition, the future is uncertain.
As Joe Flanagan, Executive Director of the European Women's Tour, says,"It's a pity these up-and-coming young players are not allowed to show their prowess to the rest of the world.
America and Japan are too difficult to break into and we are the only Tour where they can play."
Murray Wins a Mint
It has taken Andrew Murray a long time to do it.
But he has finally won a mint.
In one of the most enthralling finishes seen at a European Tour event this season, the 33 year-old Mancunian held his game together, coming down the stretch, to record his first Tour triumph in the European Open at Walton Heath.
The win was worth £58,830, or considerably more than he had won in any of his previous 10 seasons on the European Tour.
But more important than that, the title also represented a triumph in the battle against time which he has been waging since he learned that he might soon be forced to quit the Tour.
Coming into the event at Walton Heath, Murray was languishing in 71st place on the Order of Merit, but worse than that, he had also been warned that an arthritic condition called  spondylitis could force him out of the game in little more than a year.
Ironically, it might have been this shadow hanging over him which was responsible for his change in fortunes on the course.
This predicament forced him to examine his goals and to make one last push for the success which had eluded him for so long.
 "Right now I don't really know how to describe the way I feel," said Murray, minutes after holding out to finish one stroke clear of New Zealand's Frank Nobilo and three in front of the rejuvenated Sam Torrance.
"When I holed the putt to win, I couldn't even feel my hands.
I was numb.
"You've just got to savour moments like this.
I'll remember this as long as I live.
 "I suppose it must be how Nick Faldo feels every other week…" 
 "What pleases me most is the manner in which I won the title," he added, once he had regained a degree of composure.
"Leading from start to finish gives it more  credibility .
And I had the TV cameras on me for most of the time.
"Once in a while someone like me jumps out of the woodwork and wins.
It gives all the other strugglers a bit of heart."
Throughout the tournament the popular Murray admitted to feeling enormous tension as he battled to stay ahead of a top-class field, which included eight members of the European Ryder Cup team.
But he held onto his composure on the sunburnt course while others around him failed.
 "On the surface I might have seemed calm," he said after recording opening rounds of 66 and 68 to open a four-shot lead over a group comprising Russell Claydon, Roger Chapman, Peter Senior and Scott Hoch.
"But I can assure you that I wasn't.
"I was a bit like a duck.
On the surface I might have seemed serene.
But underneath I was battling like mad just to stay afloat."
In the end it was a battle he was destined to win, and, in the process, to become the first man since Nick Faldo at this year's P.G.A.
Championship at Wentworth to lead a Tour event from wire to wire.
Murray was the major story to emerge from the tournament at Walton Heath.
But he certainly wasn't the only one, on a composite course which comprised 15 holes from the Old course and three from the New.
For a start the old problem of slow play reared its ugly head once more, causing one member of the field to suggest that he might switch to a more active sport like angling.
During the-first round, some groups in the 144-strong field needed almost five hours to go round.
Paul Way found himself on the receiving end of a £100 fine for a breach of the P.G.A.
European Tour's pace of play regulations but his reaction seemed to suggest that the punishment wouldn't have the desired effect.
Asked what he felt about the nominal fine, he replied, "Not a lot," before heading to the practice ground to repair a swing which has won him just £8,750 this season.
Mark Roe was altogether more scathing about the problem after a first round of 85 which left him in last place in the field.
 "I'm sick and tired of the pace of play on the Tour," said the winner of this year's Catalan Open.
"It's no fun waiting five or ten minutes to play every shot and to find two or three groups waiting on every tee.
It's no fun for the spectators either.
"Our Tour officials just sit back and do nothing while a player is going downhill.
Fining a player £100 is no good.
Penalise them two shots and they'd soon speed up.
"It seems there is nothing I can do except voice my opinion.
But nothing seems to be done and I tire of it.
At the Tour's A.G.M. last year, I asked how many players had been fined that season for slow play.
They said, "two" ."
During the first round, Roe, and his two partners, needed 4 hours and 35 minutes to go round.
Two rounds later, the pace of play was much the same.
despite the fact that the field had been cut to 76 and the competitors were out in twos.
It prompted Ian Woosnam, who was to finish tied for fourth on 281 alongside Craig Parry, to describe the situation as "disgusting" .
On a much more optimistic note, the European Open marked a change in fortunes for Sandy Lyle — he finished tied for 8th place on 284 — and also saw Russell Claydon in fine form on his professional debut in the British Isles.
The former English Amateur Champion, who was one of the heroes in the winning Walker Cup team at Peachtree, missed the cut in his professional debut in the German Masters and won just 1395 in the Swiss Open at Crans-sur-Sierre, but, at Walton Heath, he finished in a tie for sixth place alongside Scotland's Ross Drummond to win £11,375.
Claydon has made no secret of the fact that his immediate goal is to win enough to secure a Tour Card for 1990 without having to go to the Qualifying School at La Manga.
To do so he will need to earn about £18,000 in total, or around £6,500 from the three tournament starts he has left.
It is a tall order for someone so new to the professional ranks, but one which could never be construed as being beyond a competitor who, as an amateur, tied for second place behind Greg Norman in the Australian Masters at Huntingdale at the start of this season and who also finished in the top 10 in the English Open at The Belfry.
 "It is different now because I'm playing for a living," said Claydon at Walton Heath.
"But my attitude hasn't changed.
I just want to do the best I can."
In the end that is the same thing as Andrew Murray has been attempting to do since he joined the Tour in 1979.
It hasn't been easy, but at Walton Heath his dream came true at last.
 "It has taken me a long time to get here," said the jubilant Mancunian as he left the press centre to start his celebrations.
 "But it's been worth all the pain and trouble." 
Letting off Steam
THERE never has been, and never will be, a champion golfer who does not have fire in his belly.
The golfer who does not suffer some degree of disappointment or annoyance when forced to offer his hand to a victorious opponent is the golfer who will always float in a morass of mediocrity.
The trick is preventing the fire in the midriff breaking out into a public conflagration.
It is the high stakes, no doubt, allied to the frustration of failing to achieve personal ambitions, which have led to a number of outbreaks this season on the professional Tours.
They have been little fires, really, quickly doused, but they have been visible enough to consume the Interest of us club golfers, ever on the alert to condemn the game's heroes for walking on feet of clay.
Poor old Ken Brown, frustrated beyond his tolerance level, slid from the pedestal he had been erecting for himself following early and rebellious years, when, during the Murphy Cup at St. Pierre, his driver and a wooden tee box converged at not inconsiderable speed.
The same day another competitor found his driver and another tee box in similar proximity, no doubt the said competitor baffled beyond his wits as much by the intricacies of the Stableford points system as by the game itself.
They were in the wrong, and they admitted it later in the day in one of those special P.G.A.
Tour "confessionals" at which "father" figures like Ken Schofield, Tony Gray, Andy McFee and Mike Stewart occupy the area on the other side of the curtain.
But who are we to criticise?
Who among us, hand on heart, is prepared to say that he has never propelled a club through the air after fluffing a pitch in the weekend medal, or let slip an expression not to be found in the Royal and Ancient's book of etiquette?
You never have committed either of these crimes — never?
Then I have to assume that your name does not appear on the club champion's board.
We were quick to condemn American Open Champion, Curtis Strange, for voicing his opinion of a spectator, a cameraman — whatever it was during this year's U.S.P.G.A. Championship.
His choice of words, perhaps, was unfortunate, especially as they were picked up by a TV microphone and broadcast clearly to the nations.
Eager, mean hands immediately seized the telephone, and Mr Strange was "done" .
Of course he was wrong, and like the Murphy Cup competitors, he admitted it.
Another hero with foot and mouth disease, feet of clay and a mouth less than  squeaky clean.
But, surely, these were not such heinous "crimes" .
No-one else on the course was harmed or hindered, unlike in the infamous case in California some 10 years ago, when one Jim Brown was convicted of beating, then choking, an opponent following an argument over where a ball should be marked on the green.
The point I wish to make is that, while discipline is the rock on which the game of golf is built, with boiling points having to be checked regularly, the occasional letting off of steam is not the most serious of "crimes" .
There are many much worse.
Slow play is at the head of this particular magazine's hit list, and quite rightly so.
Not far behind, however, come the "crimes" of refusing to repair pitch marks on greens, replacing divots and raking bunkers.
The blank and sometimes insolent refusal to allow a quicker group through is another malpractice becoming more prevalent.
In this aggressive and selfish age, some golfers seem determined to operate as they do on the queen's highway, following the "Thou shalt not pass" code of behaviour.
Because of television, club golfers copy professionals in so many ways.
Left-hand gloves are folded neatly over hip pockets, every stricken shot is preceded by at least three practice swings, and plumb bobbing is done on most greens, although, were the players challenged, most would be unable to explain why they were dangling their putter between thumb and index finger, and closing one eye, usually the wrong one.
Why do we not mimic the professionals or their caddies in other areas of the game?
The pros are meticulous on these points, or at least the majority of them are, because others — like them making their living — are coming up behind.
Sadly, it is my experience that the general standard of golf etiquette at club level is deteriorating.
It is doing so because so many people taking up the game are being taught the technicalities of the swing but not the nature of the sport.
Even if I try getting out of bed on the other side tomorrow morning, I am sure I would feel the same way.
The Traumatic 'Eighties
THE '80s have been traumatic years.
The images formed a human kaleidoscope of every emotion that has dulled reactions to crisis, shock, suffering, surprise, success and failure.
We have lived through the world's worst famine for a decade; accepted passively, pictures of Ethiopian toddlers, bloated and matchstick thin; the tragedy at the Heysel Stadium and the Hillsborough disaster, experienced the bitterest industrial dispute in Britain since The War; remember the IRA morning at Brighton that Mrs Thatcher was not meant to see; the mental picture of Mrs Indira Gandhi on her funeral pyre; the young policewoman gunned to death by a Libyan in St. James's Square, London; human barbarities in the South African townships; the earthquake in Mexico City; West Indians savaging England by 5 Tests to 0; the current loss of the Ashes to Australia; Torvill and Dean taking ice dancing to new heights; Britain's Olympic team returning from Los Angeles with five gold medals, 11 silver and 21 bronze; Cambridge cox sinking the boat before the race had started; Boris Becker becoming the youngest, at 17, to win the Wimbledon title; England's  trouncing of Australia 3-1 in the Test series; Bob Geldof transformed from Boomtown Rat to world-famous humanitarian; Sandy Lyle becoming the first Briton since 1969 to win The Open.
It all seems so recent, yet most of the details have gone through the sieve of memory.
The decade is ending with The Open going to America in Calcavecchia's luggage.
It began in similar vein.
Bill Rogers took it back to Texas.
Since that victory, the charismatic young professional has slipped out of contention.
In 1980, the gangling Texan was identified in this country as the unexpected winner of the 1979 Suntory World Match-Play Championship at Wentworth.
In the final he beat Isao Aoki by one hole.
I do not remember much of the actual golf, but what I do recall is an eager young man infectiously happy over his win and sharing the emotion with an appreciative crowd.
It was the same at Sandwich.
His popularity with the galleries was quite remarkable.
It so easily might not have happened.
It was Ben Crenshaw who persuaded him to enter for the 1981 Open.
The trip was educational from a golfing point of view.
He found Royal St. George's unpredictable and demanding.
Placing drives was of paramount importance.
It paid dividends for Rogers, who could not be classed as one of the longest drivers.
His nerve stood the test, particularly on the last afternoon when the lead shrank to one stroke.
All might have collapsed.
Instead, he rallied and won the title in style.
Bill Rogers had rare charisma.
No man could have been more gracious in victory; champagne for the journalists; a special bottle to the sports editor of the Surrey Herald who saved him from being disqualified when he mistook his first round starting-time; personal thanks to the Royal and Ancient Secretary; even a tip at the airport of a new sports shirt because he had spent all his pounds.
From start to finish, Rogers never put a foot wrong.
Sadly that early form has since proved elusive.
In that sense he belongs to the past.
Not so Mark James, who 10 years ago had The Open in his sights, only to tail off.
James is a difficult man to understand.
When things go wrong, he slumps, shoulders droop, he visibly wilts.
The ridiculous part is that in a relaxed mood, James is pleasant and agreeable.
It is so idiotic to adopt a boorish attitude with no charm.
Nobody likes a sulk, certainly not golfing galleries.
Mark James can be as likeable as any of his colleagues.
If only he could unbend and relax, even give a genuine smile or make a pleasantry.
Public reaction would be immediate.
David Graham was similar that year.
Winner of the U.S. Open at Merion, he was another loner.
Everything about him is tightlipped.
First impressions are seldom flattering.
The Australian seems to like a supercilious exterior, yet behind the dour exterior is a friendly individual.
His game reflects an attitude with shots crisp, incisively biting.
You get the feeling that nothing is left to chance.
Everything is clinical.
The attention and respect of galleries are gained, but fall short of warmth and friendliness.
The cause is probably his background.
Graham had a hard life from childhood.
When every simple privilege has to be earned the hard way, the struggle leaves its mark.
It became an aloof, lonely personal fight to make the grade.
His love of golf persisted from childhood and showed its quality by winning the Tasmanian Junior Championship.
At that time, Graham was a left-hander switching to the right hand when he became a professional.
The best thing that happened to him was when he married in Australia at the age of 21.
They moved to Dallas, and Graham has so immersed himself in the American way of life that I am surprised he has not sought American citizenship.
In a way he has moulded himself on the likeness of Ben Hogan.
They have many features in common.
When Ben is with his wife Valerie, he becomes a warm, outgoing individual; the same applies to the Australian when he is with Maureen.
Underneath the hard surface are really nice people.
The trouble is that only a few are privileged to see that side.
In 1980, the American Open at Baltusrol had a hiccup.
Severiano Ballesteros was disqualified for late arrival on the 1st tee.
The Spaniard was upset and stated that he would never play in America again, a statement which delighted many Americans.
The decision was correct.
It is inexplicable how any tournament player can make such a mistake.
The onus is on him.
Officials do not rouse sleepy heads with an early cup of tea.
Instead they give players adequate notice of starting-times.
Ballesteros knew 10 days in advance that he was due on the 1st tee at 9.45 a.m.
He began the two-mile journey from the hotel in a courtesy car at 9.25 a.m.
Even with normal traffic, it was cutting it fine.
Practice shots would have been impossible, but with Open traffic at crawling pace, it was never on.
By the time he reached the tee, his playing partners, Hale Irwin, the defending Champion, and Mark O'Meara, the U.S. Amateur Champion, had reached the green.
That was that.
The following year Ballesteros became involved in an endless, tiresome hassle over appearance money that left him isolated and a stranger on the European Tour.
His visits to America were disastrous and best forgotten.
The ruling to refuse his demands was right.
In no way could the Spaniard justify special treatment.
The hard and expensive lesson he learnt from the sorry business was that the game could do without him.
Nobody commented on his absence.
These headaches seldom arise today, possibly because sponsors have had to accept paying over the odds for players in the headlines.
Slow play is in the news today.
It was no better at the beginning of the '80s.
Ken Brown was then the culprit with a fair quota of fines, but it was his own fault.
It is pointless trying to be the only one in step.
The argument that if you've been born a tortoise, it is difficult to become a hare because some official insists, is flawed, though the imposing of fines must be done in a responsible manner and not by self-appointed officials with heavy-handed habits.
The occasion when a £50 fine was slapped on Nick Faldo, immediately after retaining his P.G.A.
title, was a good example.
Of his playing partners, Greg Norman was fined the same amount, but Ken Brown, who had been punished the day before, had to fork out £100 for a second offence.
The official action was badly timed and over-officious.
It was true that the round had taken 4½ hours, but this included time wasted by crowd interference and inadequate marshalling arrangements.
Galleries had to be cleared 36 times, which must have accounted for some 35 minutes delay.
It was reported that Langer and Fernandez had taken 4 hours 25 minutes; 15 minutes had been lost, a complete hole, on the match in front, yet neither player was disciplined.
Disciplinary action loses its point when imposed in a clumsy, high-handed manner.
Off-the-cuff penalties must take all the facts into consideration.
That lesson has been learnt today.
Early in the decade we welcomed the re-emergence of two favourite professionals after years in the wilderness.
Tony Jacklin's first major win for several years was a tonic.
The Jersey Championship may not be a classic, but it helped Jacklin to regain the old jaunty confidence.
The winner of both The Open and American Open titles was back in business.
Perhaps more satisfying was the victory by Peter Oosterhuis in the Canadian Open Championship, not a local success but a major win against an international entry.
The emergence of near-teenage amateur talent was encouraging.
The most notable were Ronan Rafferty (17); Paul Way (18); Philip Walton (19); Paul Downes (21); David Blakeman (21); Duncan Evans (22); and Roger Chapman (22).
Several others were jostling their way out of school and college to prove themselves.
The amateur game was in a healthy state, much of the credit being due to men like Gerald Micklem and Raymond Oppenheimer, who for years had given encouragement to every movement that stimulated youth to play golf.
In this connection it is pertinent to recall remarks made by Ian Erskine, Secretary to the English Golf Union.
He pointed out that 45 players who had competed in the English Amateur Stroke-Play Championship for the Brabazon Trophy the two previous years had turned professional and tried to get their tournament players' cards in the Algarve.
Only 13 were successful.
He emphasised that there was no guaranteed success in the professional world just because a player had been a top amateur.
Following the sun playing golf and collecting cheques sounds attractive.
The reality is harsher; raising sponsorship; overall cost of travel; making ends meet by living in a caravan instead of luxury hotels; endless pressure; missed putts; loss of income.
Even for those who succeed, it can be a long, even hungry trail.
Erskine's advice is still true.
Would-be professionals should consult the R.& A. and the P.G.A.
about the implications of such an action.
If their application fails, the player has then to decide whether to try for other posts or apply for reinstatement.
That could take up to two years.
If an amateur took a temporary job as a shop assistant, he could be paid without infringing the rules, provided he did not play for prize-money, be paid for lessons, or play golf with anyone for a fee.
Now the Walker Cup match is over, certain players should think hard before chasing a mirage.
Russell Claydon is the obvious exception, but, even in his case, one Australian swallow does not mean that Curtis Strange and his colleagues need have sleepless nights.
Women's golf continued its dignified progress without fuss or squabble.
Belle Robertson, at 45, became the oldest winner of the Ladies' Championship.
Her opponent, Wilma Aitken, was born in the year that Belle first played in the final.
The Ladies' Golf Union conformed with the Royal and Ancient decision that competition in all British open amateur events should use the big ball (1.68 inches), but it did not apply to international team events.
On the subject of money, strikes spread to the caddies of St. Andrews.
Sixty caddies demanded £7 a round against the Links Management Committee rate of £5.
A compromise of £6 was agreed, without intervention by Ron Todd.
The P.G.A.
banned golf salesmen from club professional events unless a minimum of £5,000 a year was spent by their firms on sponsorship.
The move was aimed at sponsors who did not sell through professional shops, but used discount shops and chain-stores.
The message was simple.
If you don't like the ruling, stay away.
Still on finance, Carl Mason discovered that a light-hearted gesture can be expensive.
In the final round of the Sun Alliance P.G.A.
Championship at Hillside, he holed his final putt of less than an inch in snooker-fashion with the grip-end of his putter.
George O'Grady, the Tournament Director, pointed out that Mason's action was in defiance of Rule 19, which states that "the ball shall be struck at the hole with the head of the club and not pushed, scraped or spooned" , in short, not the Steve Davis style.
The result was a fine of £120.
Mason's marker, the South African, Tienie Britz, and fellow competitor, Sandy Lyle, received written reprimands…"for doing nothing to prevent a breach of a basic rule of golf'.
I am sure O'Grady would have made his mark on the Centre Court of Wimbledon.
In case anyone is worried about the cost of holing-in-one, Shuhei Send the Kyoei Fire and Marine Insurance Company in Tokyo, made it possible to insure against over-spending in celebrating such a feat.
They pointed out that the incident could be marked by planting a tree on the course or giving a party.
It was estimated that the average cost ranged from 200,000 to 300,000 yen (£440 to £660) although a few spent as much as one million yen.
The policy ensured that, for an annual rate of 1,900 yen, the cover would be 300,000 yen.
Today inflation would change the sums drastically.
In 1983, membership of the P.G.A.
was just over 2,553.
This included honorary members, plus 971 assistants in registration.
The National Golf Foundation of America produced figures which made the P.G.A.
look small fry.
Two hundred thousand American women took up golf in 1981 bringing the total of female golfers to 3.4 million in the United States.
The U.S.P.G.A. also had a practical method of weeding out would-be Open Champions.
Those who wanted to compete in the qualifying tournament for places on the 1983 Tour had to pay an entry fee of $1,000.
After regional competitions, 200 qualified to play in the decisive event over six rounds on two courses at Sawgrass, Florida.
Any golfer who qualified for the Tour had assuredly earned and paid for the privilege.
In the early '80s, the P.G.A.
became dress conscious.
Rules were laid down as to what was acceptable on the fairways.
Jeans were out, likewise long and untidy hair, while beards were not encouraged.
The image had to be trim, tidy and clean.
On the whole, the attempt succeeded in eliminating some slovenly shufflers.
One feature was exempted.
Moustaches were allowed, not that they did much for a few who grew them.
At least they hid regiments of teeth.
Not to be outdone, Deane Beman, who controls the professionals on the U.S. circuit, caused Tom Weiskopf to lose his beard and appear clean-shaven.
Avia Watches, sponsor of the International Foursomes at Ascot, effected changes in a novel fashion.
Anxious to improve the appearance of the women entrants, they issued all 316 competitors with a set of thermal underwear and a voucher for a free hair-do.
At the time I wondered how any improvements could be visual, when I learnt that players could ignore March winds and appear on the 1st tee in shirt and slacks.
At least that was the idea.
The first round of the 1981 American Open produced a surprise that should be recorded.
The leader, with four-under par was Jim Thorpe, a comparatively unknown black professional, who had made several unsuccessful attempts to qualify for the Championship and was making his first appearance.
The satisfaction of leading the world's finest professionals was short-lived, but Jim Thorpe will never forget that 24 hours.
He was not the first black to play in a tournament sponsored by the American P.G.A.
That occurred some 30 years earlier when the San Diego Open Tournament in California made headline news.
Joe Louis, the world heavyweight boxing champion, and other black players were informed that the "whites only" rule of the United States Golfers' Association precluded their appearance.
Louis protested against the ruling.
The U.S.P.G.A. reconsidered the decision and announced that Louis' entry would be approved as one of the 10 allowed to the local sponsors for invited amateurs.
Joe Louis had broken the colour bar.
The '80s saw the U.S. postal service commemorate the 50th anniversary of Bobby Jones' Grand Slam with the issue of a special stamp showing the famous golfer in plus-fours at the finish of a swing.
Shortly afterwards, another golfing-designed stamp was issued in memory of Mildred "Babe" Zaharias, one of the greatest women golfers the game has known, and a founder/charter member of the American Ladies' Professional Golfing Association.
To mark the victory of Anne Sander in the British Amateur Championship, the winning of the U.S. amateur titles by Anne Quast, Anne Decker and Anne Welts would have had to be commemorated.
All four were the same brilliant golfer.
Royal Aberdeen Golf Club had a more original way of observing its 200 years existence with a Royal Aberdeen Bicentenary Whisky blended for the special birthday occasion.
Not to be outdone, Glasgow Golf Club members had encouragement to plan their own special blend of whisky.
A plaque was found in the clubhouse basement that recorded the club members of 1787.
After that it was up to private enterprise!
NON-PAYING "pirates" , wielding clubs a ruthless manner, are robbing golf clubs near London.
A fortune in unpaid green fees is involved.
Unable to join elite establishments, and keen to avoid paying to play, intruders park cars near the 9th green, slip over the fence during a lull, and start a four-ball — without so much as a blush.
Other players assume they must be guests, or members, or have, at worst, cut in.
Staff don't know everyone and are too shy to challenge with: "Excuse me, are you members?" 
A taxi driver has the solution: "They should treat pirates and dogs on the course the same way," he tells me.
 "Go on," I call, through the glass partition.
 "How?" 
 "All you do," says he, "is post a notice saying that those who don't pay, and dogs as well, are liable to be shot." 
The idea has merit, although hard on dogs.
They can't read warnings, however well intentioned.
•That TV chap, Terry Wogan, must be getting old.
He's been rattling on about people bemoaning the passing of Trevino and Palmer, saying there are no characters left, merely machine-like robots who take five minutes to select a club, 10 minutes to line up a putt, and five-and-a-half hours to complete a round.
And Terry thinks the old implements have lost character.
It's all steel, graphite and boron.
 "And what of the balls?" you cry.
As well you might, he says.
Terry wonders how far Mighty Woosie would hit something made by stuffing boiled chicken or goose-breast feathers into a thick bull-hide cover.
It all went wrong when they discovered something up a gum-tree in Malaysia and called it gutta-percha.
Then they wrapped rubber-bands round the stuff and hey presto! we've got a ball, that even if you top it, runs 120 yards up the fairway.
I'm all for it and I suspect Terry Wogan is, too.
•The tough course at Wentworth (Surrey) used to be called the Burma Road.
It was re-named the West Course because sensitive Japanese visitors did not wish to be reminded of that infamous stretch where thousands of servicemen died.
But a war of sorts, and prejudice lingers on as new owners search for finance — in Japan.
While Lord Young, for the Government, may well favour selling parts of the United Kingdom to Japan ( "They can't take it with them" ) there are many who wish the club to remain part of Britain's heritage.
A new member there tells me that his subscription has suddenly doubled and he now feels he joined without being told the facts.
In the legal profession, he wonders whether such action is fair, and intends to do more than talk about it.
But follow the financial columns and you realise this club will be bought and sold, like any other worthwhile commodity.
Older members claim they weren't given the opportunity to buy.
Club pro Bernard Gallacher told city journalist Matthew Bond: "The special thing about Wentworth is that it is one of Europe's best inland courses.
But members have realised our world championship standard course was not matched by the  facilities inside."
And Managing Director Richard Doyle-Davidson once showed me the ceiling of his office where water was seeping in.
The clubhouse, like so many in our fine old country, was crumbling.
This puzzles the tourist and only delights blinkered nostalgia-lovers.
The plan, if it happens, is for a new clubhouse to be built by Arup Associates, known to me and also to Britain's Sports Council.
I hope Prince Charles approves the plans before a brick is laid!
I suppose nobody can stop the Japanese buying into "our" golf, which was a gift from God, and has not always been looked after properly.
New owners, who bought Wentworth for an almost "give-away" £17 million, instructed a Japanese firm to raise £32 million for a 40 per cent equity, and investors were targeted in Japan, Hong Kong and Sweden.
Because of disquiet among ordinary members there, George Devlin, Vice-Chairman of the company, says that they wish to retain the atmosphere of a private members' club, while delightful Chairman Michael Broke, told me that the plan is to raise standards even higher.
Inevitably this meant a higher subscription.
And if the new owners wish to allow in personal friends as members, why not.
And I see nothing wrong with allowing certain rooms to be used as bedrooms, just as they do at any English Dormy House.
But people complain.
However, the Oriental assault on British clubs goes on.
We behaved this way in days of old empire so it surprises me not at all that Japan may now buy The Belfry, of Ryder Cup fame.
And with tons of topsoil, they could still make it a goodish course.
Meantime Wentworth members try to adjust to new faces and new ideas.
Willie Bauer, once associated with the Savoy Hotel, is now in charge of the clubhouse.
I'd like to think we can have half a shandy together, someday.
•Success is a 300-yard drive, a 9-iron and one putt.
Money doesn't come into it.
Another success is the number of cars in your garage.
Greg Norman, the man who started winning like mad after tossing away The Open at Royal Troon, makes me feel a total failure.
Mr Norman has more than one Ferrari, uses his Aston Martin as often as the Rolls-Royce but admits that Laura, his wife, often goes in the family Range Rover to have her hair done.
You'd have to say Greg Norman has style.
I am reliably informed that the mighty Australian earns 10 million dollars a year and that while he chooses to live in America, he buys his snooker cue and table in England because the English, apparently, still produce the best in that line.
And owning two British cars is quite good at a time when our motor industry is being given away to the Japanese, along with assorted golf courses.
Anyway, Norman, despite all these wheels, spends much of his time in aircraft but tells chum Renton Laidlaw that he has the ability to sleep from Los Angeles to Sydney, at least, for 12 hours of the 14-hour journey.
This is achieved, not by drugs, but by a "minor muscle relaxant" which has nothing to do with one glass of iced champagne.
•You had only to watch Curtis Strange shoot that all-time record 62 at St. Andrews in a Dunhill Cup to realise golf has become a whole new ball game.
And the most dangerous players in the world today are those athletic and financially secure ones who calculate risks with the astuteness of a bank manager, but go for the first prize, if possible, and the subsequent contracts, knowing that if the high-flying fairway wood doesn't clear a ditch at Augusta, they can still enjoy a steak dinner tonight, thanks to a pitch and single putt!
The old axiom that hungry fighters make the best ones is countered by the quote from young, struggling players: "Eat beans, and play like beans…" 
Add to this that today's stars are fit and positive, as well as the thought that they now use almost illegal high-tech equipment and are given every new creation to experiment with, such as metal heads, weird shafts and incredible balls, and it's no wonder they find the perfect combination — for them.
So we are entitled to ask why scores aren't even lower — possibly down in the 50s.
 "I don't," Curtis Strange told me,"think I could get round St. Andrews in 59 or less — I can't visualise such a score.
Others, like Gary Player, can.
Some of us might live to see it.
Either way, the golf boom goes on.
In America the list of those who have not won more than a million seems to dwindle weekly.
In fact, "names" like George Burns, Scott Hoch and Wayne Levi are heading towards earnings of two million, while "Super" names such as Mark Calcavecchia are mentioned in the same breath as European millionaires Seve, Sandy and Nick.
Never before has the attraction of a career in golf been so great.
Quite average players, given good health, dedication and a competitive spirit, can acquire a fortune in a circus atmosphere which attracts additional opportunities galore, thrown up by business brains who exploit cashmere-clad headline snatchers touring the world to romantic places, and surviving an onslaught of dotty hangers-on.
Does the life drive golfers insane?
New Zealand touring pro Greg Turner, a winner of the Singapore Open, maintains many professionals over the age of 45 are brain dead, while veteran Peter Mills, Ryder Cup hero in 1957 at Lindrick, says that any able-bodied person trying to bury a white ball 18 times a day has to be twisted.
The least attractive side for paid golfers must be the continual travel, the airports, the courtesy car that fails to show, the lost baggage, and the certainty that when they get there, they'll see exactly the same faces, talking the same shop, week after week.
Even arranging dinner to avoid dull types, or hangers-on (or even certain press) becomes a major problem.
Many players deliberately eat out to escape international hotels which provide the same menu, worldwide.
Then comes the dreaded five hour pro-am, a pre-tournament warm-up handled well by certain professionals able to "small talk" but handled disastrously by others, more introverted, or sulky — depending on your view, or team score!
These golfing gatherings are followed by the cocktail party where amateurs want to get pleasantly tiddled with Greg Norman who, in turn, intends to remain one-beer sober because he's off at 8.10 a.m. in the main event next day and knows drinking and driving can lead to out-of-bounds at first light.
But because the sponsors insist, the party must go on: "You have such a wonderful life," bellows a huge woman, before sinking into a sofa.
It is at that moment celebrity golfers disappear.
So the pro-am gathering ends with a collection of 18-handicap amateurs discussing the only subject that interests them — their birdie at the 9th.
And, although they don't realise it, nobody is listening except the barman whose only interest is in closing up.
So would you put your son, or daughter, onto this fairway stage, Mr Worthington?
My answer is "Yes" because it's a worthwhile profession that gives fun to millions.
But whether golfers are worth the staggering cash they seem to bank is quite another subject and, before he died, I chose to ask this question of Henry Cotton who, as a young man, won three Open titles, but comparatively small cheques to go with them.
 "If you mean are they worth it compared to contributions made by surgeons and musicians, then of course the answer is" No "," he said.
But other old-timers, still around, point out that professional golfers today spend more hours hitting practice shots, and experimenting with new methods, than they used to.
That is, with the exception of Ben Hogan and Gary Player — two outstanding golfaholics.
And golf officials will tell you that the game provides clean and wholesome fun, and a stimulating outlet in an otherwise rotten world.
So obviously you don't expect me, a devotee for more than 40 years, to knock it.
And neither, I suspect, will you.
•The letters and telephone calls were so numerous that Curtis Strange feels he owes golf fans an apology for an outburst of profanity, inadvertently picked up by a television microphone during an American event this summer.
 "I stopped reading my mail but Sarah (his wife) didn't," Strange said after issuing an apology which said: "I want to express my sincere apologies…no excuse can justify my outburst, and nobody feels as badly as I do." 
And there was more.
Strange said: "Athletes who are in the public eye have a responsibility to conduct themselves in a manner which can set a positive example.
In this instance, I failed."
Strange's outburst was directed at a cameraman who clicked as he addressed the ball, and then as he reached the top of the backswing.
Cameramen never bother me at the top of my swing.
•Readers certainly write strange letters.
Keith Topley and T.W. Preston from Cowes, Isle of Wight, still haven't recovered from the presence of the local sheriff at the dinner following the Walker Cup which saw the Americans beaten, on their home ground.
Sheriffs served writs on the Royal and Ancient and the United States Golf Association and the two letter-writers say that if they are resolved of nothing else in life it is that, even if persuaded that their lavish handicaps would be significantly reduced by using Ping Eye2 clubs, they would never buy a set or play with anyone who has.
The above is an exact quote from their letter to a national newspaper and I find it very interesting, as indeed will those involved in the case.
•Sandy Lyle turned down the invitation to play in the 1989 Ryder Cup.
Captain Tony Jacklin told him he was on the list.
"But I told him I did not feel I should play.
He understands what I have been through…"
Much sadder is the position of Paul Way, winner of the 1987 European Open.
His demise amazes some of us who consider that his swing and mental approach assured him millionaire status.
Recently he was talking about becoming a club pro, or a dustman.
Collecting rubbish, he thought, would remind him of how fortunate he was even to have been on the circuit.
Paul's record in Ryder Cups is brilliant — played nine, won six and halved one.
Scalps include Strange and Floyd, while Ballesteros, they say, wanted Paul Way as a partner.
How high can one get?
Now the bleakness.
There must be a problem somewhere because I cannot believe this young man won't make it, in the end.
World Money List
Curtis Strange tops the list of earners on the final Asahi Glass World Money List for 1989.
The U.S. Open Champion is one of seven golfers who earned in excess of $1 million in the 12 months leading up to the World Series of Golf at the end of August.
A glance at the list reveals that 15 of the top 20 places on the list are occupied by golfers who spend most of their time competing on the U.S.P.G.A. Tour.
Altogether there are just four Europeans in the top 20 on the list and just eight in the top 50.
The top earning European over the 12 months was Seve Ballesteros with $804,356 (in 9th place on the list).
He was followed by Nick Faldo $802,729 (10th), Jose-Maria Olazabal $699,103 (14th), Ian Woosnam $612,696 (20th), Ronan Rafferty $524,548 (24th), Sandy Lyle $505,840 (25th), Bernhard Langer $403,714 (41st) and Mark James $385,470 (44th).
It should be noted that the list counts only official money won during tournament play.
 "I'm not available for a late Ryder Cup call — I'm off to Japan next week." 
Andrew Murray following his win in the European Open and opening 64 which lead the Lancome Trophy.
Quotes of the Month
 "This must be how Nick Faldo fells every week." 
Murray savouring his victory.
 "If I'd wanted to spend over five hours on the golf course I would have become a greenkeeper and not a professional golfer." 
Dale Reid on the pace of play at the Belgian Open at Bercuit.
The average number of strokes taken by a tournament winner on the U.S. Tour is 68,2 per round, with the final round completed in an average of 67.8 strokes.
Stroke Averages
The statistics show that the eventual winner of a tournament normally starts with a round of 68.4 and moves into contention with a second round of 67.9.
The third round is generally regarded as a consolidation round, and this is borne out in the figures with an average of 68.3 before the final charge to victory.
While much of the attention during the weeks leading up to the Ryder Cup was pointed at the race to clinch places and the relative form of the players involved, one man, unconcerned with the battle of The Belfry, was playing better golf than anyone.
Man to Watch
Craig Parry, the 23 year-old chunky Australian, was deprived of last year's Rookie of the Year title on a Tour ruling — a player had not to be a member of another Tour — having finished in 24th place on the Order of Merit from only 14 starts, but this year his form has been even more impressive.
He didn't arrive on Tour until the Italian Open in May but almost immediately made an impression.
He almost won the Volvo P.G.A.
Championship at Wentworth, finishing third, won the Wang Four Stars, tied for second in the English Open, won the German Open and finished second in the European Masters-Swiss Open.
In his first 13 tournaments — up until the Swiss Open — he had only slipped over par in one event — the French Open where he missed his only cut — and he had seven top-10 finishes.
He had accumulated over £200,000, lay fourth on the Order of Merit and was 90 shots under-par for the 50 rounds he had played, while in the last two tournaments, in Germany and Switzerland, he was a massive 38-under par.
He boasted a stroke average of 69.28 to join last season's average which was also under the magic 70 mark.
In total, taking both seasons together, he has had 13 top-10 finishes from 27 starts and has only missed three cuts.
Seve Ballesteros is designing a new 18-hole course at Los Arqueros in Spain.
The course will nestle among hills and will boast some of the finest scenery in the country coupled with some ideal golf terrain long flat stretches to hilly parts and natural lakes which could come into play on some holes.
Greg Norman regained his position at the top of the Sony Rankings when he won the International at Castle Pines in Colorado.
During the season he has won twice in Australia, once in Japan and now once in the States.
Also he was beaten in the play-off for the Open at Troon by Mark Calcavecchia.
The Glenlivet European Trophy — a winter four-ball event for 300 selected clubs throughout the country — has been launched, with the final to be played at the Old Course in May next year.
Glenlivet European Trophy
 "Although sponsored club competitions are prolific in the U.K., I felt that this opportunity was quite different, offering club golfers the chance to participate in a national tournament during the winter," said Ivan Straker, Chairman of Seagram Distillers.
The U.K. event is only part of the Glenlivet European Trophy, which began for the other European branches of Seagram in 1988.
The leading two pairs at St. Andrews will go on to represent Great Britain in the European final against national teams from Spain, Italy, Portugal, Holland and Belgium.
The venue for the 1990 European Final will be Valderrama G.C., home of the Volvo Masters.
Martell Cognac is to sponsor the Scottish Club Championship from next year and it will be known as the Martell Cognac Scottish Club Championship.
In addition, the company will sponsor the winning team from the 1989 championship which will travel to the European Club Championship in Spain in November.
The event was founded in '84 and is a national scratch stroke-play team event for male members of Scottish course-owning clubs.
English Blind Golf has now been granted official charity status.
The new Trustees include national coach, Patrick Tallack, and blind golfer, Ron Tomlinson, who is also the Chairman of the movement.
The G.A.
Champions' Challenge prior to the Panasonic European Open at Walton Heath saw some spectacular golf and some equally spectacular scoring — not least from Nick Faldo, who aced his 6-iron tee shot at the 9th.
General Accident Skins Game
A total of £33,500 was raised by the four players, Faldo, Sandy Lyle, Ian Woosnam and American Scott Hoch, with a further £10,000 being donated to the P.G.A.
European Tour Benevolent Trust by General Accident, which sponsored the event.
Faldo's ace was the fourth of his career, and each resulted from a blow with his 6-iron.
His last hole-in-one was 11 years ago, also at Walton Heath.
The breakdown of the prize-money for the event was £1,000 per hole for the first nine holes and £2,000 for the second nine holes, plus £250 for every birdie and £500 for every eagle.
Faldo won £18,250, Lyle £7,000, Woosnam £6,250 and Hoch £2,000.
Hoch, in fact, came within a couple of inches of adding £10,000 to his haul on the par-3 17th.
A bonus of £10,000 was available at the hole for a hole-in-one and the American's tee shot landed a foot beyond the hole and spun back to a foot short of the hole.
Faldo's money is destined for Capital Radio's Help A London Child; Lyle's for Great Ormond Street Hospital; Woosnam's for the Oswestry branch of the N.S.P.C.C. and Hoch's to the Arnold Palmer Hospital in Orlando, Florida.
Seve Ballesteros has officially opened Westerwood Golf Club, at Cumbernauld, Scotland, the course he designed in conjunction with Dave Thomas and which marked his first venture into course design in the Home of Golf.
Ballesteros Opens New Course
To mark the opening, Seve played a hole with selected partners, many of whom had donated sums of money to charity for the privilege.
It was hoped that over £100,000 would have been raised through the day's efforts.
Seve, who had made four trips to the course during its construction, completed the tough par-73 course in 75 but announced himself satisfied with the lay-out.
"The greens as yet are slow but in two years' time they will be difficult but a very good test of touch and eye.
The entire course, and not least the tees, naturally still need time to settle but I can see the day coming when Westerwood could even stage the Scottish Open,"said Steve.
Graham Lowson has won the inaugural J & B Scottish Golfer of the Year award.
The 25 year-old from Auchterarder amassed a total of 422.5 points after scoring in seven of the 12 events.
He finished almost 50 points ahead of Keith Hird in second place.
Lowson made his debut in the Home Internationals at Ganton.
Gordon Brand Jnr.
clinched the Ritz Club European Golfer of the Month awarded by the Association of Golf Writers and the P.G.A.
European Tour thanks to his gutsy win in the Benson and Hedges International which confirmed his Ryder Cup place.
The Murphy's Cup, the Stableford event which saw its debut as a European Tour special event at St. Pierre this season, has been awarded full status on the Tour will be played at Fulford in August, 1990.
The Murphy's Cup
The field for the event will consist of 105 "stars" , 10 "legends" and five "rookies" , and the prize fund will be £250,000, with the winner receiving £41,660.
 "We are delighted to have been awarded full Order off Merit status on the European Tour, and the fact that we are coming to Fulford and thereby preserving an unbroken record of 20 years championship golf in this region, is equally pleasing," said Paul Vaughan, Sponsorship Director of Whitbread & Company.
 "I believe the unique format and atmosphere of The Murphy's Cup will endear itself to the galleries here." 
Four of the victorious Walker Cup side qualified for the match-play stages of the U.S. Amateur at Merion.
U.S. Amateur
Eoghan O'Connell compiled a three-under par total of 137 with a 68 followed by a 69 to take the medal as leading qualifier, while Andrew Hare qualified on 148.
Jim Milligan and Neil Roderick also made it, both making birdie at the first play-off hole, after being tied on 149, to make the final 64.
Darren Prosser with 153 and British Amateur Champion, Stephen Dodd, on 154, failed to progress.
Craig Cassells, withdrew without explanation before the second qualifying round.
Unfortunately the exertions of Peachtree proved too much for the four and they were all defeated by the quarter-final stage.
Indeed, neither team was to prove a serious contender for the title with Jay Sigel, who played in the singles match against Jim Milligan, going the furthest — being knocked out at the 19th in the quarter-finals.
The title eventually went to Chris Patton who defeated Danny Green 3 & 1 in the final.
Longer putters, such as the one used by 1989 U.S. Seniors' Open Champion, Orville Moody, conform to the Rules of Golf.
Putters Given Longer Lives
The United States Golf Association's Equipment Committee considered a proposal limiting the length of a conventional putter, but decided that longer putters are not detrimental to the game.
In fact, they may enable some people to play who may not otherwise be able to do so.
 "The Equipment Standards Committee felt — and the Executive Committee agreed — that the use of longer putters introduces a new element but does not change the essential nature of the game," said Stuart Bloch, Chairman of the Equipment Standards Committee and a Vice-President of the U.S.G.A.
Bloch indicated that the committee had considered whether the long putters now in vogue conform to the stipulation that clubs be "traditional" in style.
Long putters were introduced as an idea more than 30 years ago, most notably by Paul Runyan, a past P.G.A.
Champion, who was known for his chipping and putting and who was a noted teacher of the game.
 "If long putters enable more people to play without jeopardising the integrity of the game, we think they ought to continue to be used," Bloch said.
 "Also, very tall people would be penalised by a length limitation." 
 "Putting is a very individual art form," said David Fay, the U.S.G.A.'s Executive Director.
 "To inhibit a golfer's individual style would take some of the fun out of the game and that's not why we make rules." 
Peter Alliss might have given up competitive golf in the early 1970s but he still a formidable force out on the course.
The Grand Match
Golf's leading TV commentator and raconteur was in tremendous form as he led his team of former Ryder Cuppers to victory over the former Walker Cuppers in The Grand Match at Deal.
Alliss, in foursomes partnership with Peter Dawson (morning) and Bernard Hunt (afternoon), contributed two points in his team's 8½ to 3½ triumph over Bruce Critchley's Players.
It helped his team to edge 3 matches to 2 ahead in the series hosted by John Laing plc.
In the morning foursomes Alliss and Dawson were level par for 17 holes in defeating Bruce Critchley and Warren Humphreys on the 18th green, the only blemish on their card coming in the shape of a 7 on the 7th hole.
Alliss himself brought the match to an abrupt end holing from 10 feet at the last in a manner which suggested that he might soon be trading in the personalised number plates on his car (PUT 3).
Throughout the round Alliss hit the ball almost as well as he did during a competitive career in which he won 23 Tour titles and represented Britain and Ireland eight times in the Ryder Cup.
On the 15th he hit his drive such a prodigious distance that the one wag among the gallery suggested that drugs testing should be introduced at subsequent Matches.
At a time when Slow Play is beginning to become more and more of a scourge, it is also worth noting that the golfers needed just two hours and 45 minutes to go round, which included a break for as glass or two of Bollinger at the turn.
The Alliss match was one of the highlights of an occasion which, since it started in 1985, has developed into one of the finest events on the golfing calendar.
Around 500 lovers of nostalgia descended on Deal for the contest and were treated to some excellent golf on the course where the greens were in marvellous condition despite the recent drought.
One of the features of the morning foursomes was that no less than five out of the six matches went to the 18th green, or beyond, before the professionals emerged with a 4 to 2 lead.
(The matches go down the 19th but are then declared tied if square after that).
Hugh Stuart, now 47 and a member of the winning Walker Cup Team at St. Andrews in 1971, and Joe Carr, one of the great post-war amateurs and now, at 67, using one of the new extended putters, defeated Bernard Hunt and Peter Mills by 3 & 2 but that was the players' only success.
Peter Hedges and Geoff Godwin and Geoff Marks and Peter Debble earned halves against Peter Butler and Lionel Platts and Norman Wood and Geoff Hunt, but the match swung when the groups comprising Brian Chapman and Michael Lunt and Charlie Green and David Sheehan lost out to Guy Hunt and Ken Bousfield and Clive Clark and John Garner over the closing stretch.
In the afternoon the professionals continued to dominate the proceedings, winning the second series 4½ to 1½.
Bruce Critchley and David Sheehan gave the amateurs some hope when they ran out as comfortable 5 & 3 winners over Ken Bousfield and Geoff Hunt, while Warren Humphreys and Michael Lunt fought out a halved match with Peter Butler and Peter Mills but elsewhere there were wins for Alliss and Hunt (4 & 3), Dawson and Platts (4 & 3), Clark and Guy Hunt (1 hole) and Wood and Garner (3 & 2).
In the end, the dominance of the professionals can be seen by the fact that five of their number emerged with two wins out of two (Alliss, Clark, Garner, Dawson and Guy Hunt) compared to none from the amateur side.
It prompted one of the losing side to rue the fact that, "We lost to the older side." 
Sam Torrance joined the elite band of Euro-millionaires when he finished third in the Panasonic European Open at Walton Heath.
Sixth Millionaire
It pushed the Scot's earnings from his 19 years as a professional through the £1 million mark to join the five other golfing millionaires on this side of the Atlantic.
With earnings of £1,010,113, he followed Seve Ballesteros, Sandy Lyle, Nick Faldo, Ian Woosnam and Bernhard Langer.
The Largs-based professional slumped to 51st on the Order of Merit last season but, thanks to his new extra long putter, he has solved his short game problems and gone from strength to strength.
He has won 12 times on the European Tour and 17 times in all during his career and will always be remembered as the man who holed the putt to win the Ryder Cup at the Belfry in 1985.
Almost 800 schools throughout Great Britain and Ireland will have their sights set on a visit to St. Andrews in May for the International final of the Golf Foundation Team Championship for schools.
Schools' Final
The final will be contested over the New Course on May 14 and 15, when it is hoped that at least 11 countries will compete for the R.& A. Trophy, which was won by Sweden at St. Andrews earlier this year.
The largest entry is again from England with nearly 400 schools competing at 26 venues.
Approximately 200 Irish schools will take part in their eight qualifying rounds with almost 150 Scottish and 58 Welsh schools playing.
The national finals will be played in April next year at Robin Hood in England, Kilmarnock (Barassie) G.C. in Scotland, Lahinch G.C. in Wales.
A gaze into a crystal ball showed that the Europeans would out-drive the Americans, would make more greens in regulation but were prone to be wild off the tee.
Philips Statistics
Obviously reality would no doubt have been slightly different but this was the conclusion of the Philips Statistics which assessed the relative form of the Ryder Cup competitors.
One of the more obvious facts to jump out of the statistics published prior to the Match was the uniformity of the U.S. side, particularly in their short games.
The team's putting averages and sand save percentages hardly vary at all between all 12 members.
As has been evident from the previous two matches, the European team will bring the stronger hitters in the match, being an average of nine yards a man longer off the tee and hitting one green in regulation more per round.
It is also evident from the available statistics that Sandy Lyle has been completely out of sorts with his game.
If he had played in the match he would have been the least accurate driver, the player missing the most greens in regulation and the worst bunker player on the team.
The statistics, however, fail to take into account the effect pressure has on players and an ability to rise to an occasion.
Visitors to St. Andrews can now be treated to a view of the famous links from a vehicle befitting the surroundings.
The "Rolls Royce" , Elmo Inc.
American-made golf cart, has been purchased by Gleneagles Golf Products Ltd, parent company of Auchterlonies of St. Andrews.
Another went to the Aladdins Cave of Golf at Uxbridge.
The carts can come with a variety of extras including a refrigerator, a TV, stereo and dashboard fans, but the distinctive white cart will be seen around the Old Course for promotional purposes.
Golf enthusiasts will have the opportunity to plan their entire year on the new Golfer's 1990 Year Planner which is being launched this autumn.
The planner incorporates all the major professional, amateur and ladies' events, dates and venues, with colour-coded cross references in their date positions to hive an "at a glance" picture of the entire 1990 golfing calendar.
Nearly 100 events, including the major U.S. tournaments, are shown, identifying those scheduled for TV coverage.
The planner is endorsed by Peter Alliss who stated, "This excellent new planner will appeal to all golfers, invaluable for those in golf administration and everyone who follows the game." 
The planner will be available at pro shops and by mail order at a cost of £9.95.
For further details contact B.D.P.Ltd., Tel: 0990 872321.
Alison Nicholas and Florence Descampe are among the 209 players chasing one of 33 places at the final Qualifying Tournament at the sectional qualifying event to be played at the Plantation Golf and Country Club in Florida in October.
L.P.G.A. Tour School
Should they be successful they will travel to Sweetwater Country Club in Sugar Land, Texas, for the chance of clinching a place on the lucrative L.P.G.A. Tour.
Among the other players hoping to secure a place is Pearl Sinn, who made such a big impression during America's defeat in the Curtis Cup last year.
Lisa Isherwood of Wales sustained a broken leg during a Home International foursomes tie against Scotland, after she slipped and fell on wet ground as she was leaving the 8th green.
The match was level at the time and the Welsh were forced to concede the tie.
Scotland eventually won the match by the narrow margin of 5-4.
Helen Dobson, British Ladies' Champion and Stroke-play Champion, and Elaine Farquharson, runner-up in the British Amateur, have been chosen to represent Great Britain in the International Ladies' Doubles Amateur Championship, at Sao Paulo, Brazil, in October.
Last year, Great Britain was represented by Julie Hall (nee Wade) and Helen Wadsworth, who won the championship.
Seve Ballesteros spent several hours on the practice ground with Bob Torrance, Golf Monthly's Teaching professional, during the German Masters.
 "A great player like Seve wants basically confirmation of what he is or is not doing right," explained Bob.
"We worked on him getting better rotation with his forearms.
If he hit it as straight as Ben Hogan, he would never get beaten."
The advice was to prove valuable because, coupled with an observation of his own — that he was standing too open — he won the European Masters-Swiss Open a week later.
The purple patch continued for Andrew Murray immediately after his win at Walton Heath when he broke the course record at Ferndown with a 62 in the Alliss Manitou charity event.
Lea-Anna Moffitt, a 16 year-old member of Tyneside Golf Club, is the latest girl golfer in the country to win the coveted Gold Award under the Golf Foundation Merit Award Scheme.
Lea-Anna is the 14th girl to receive the Gold award.
Taking the game in 1986, Lea-Anna's first handicap was 36, but her progression has been extremely rapid and she is currently playing off 15.
Her successes include winning the 1987 Gosforth Junior Open, the 1988 Tyneside G.C. Girls' title and selection for the Durham County girls' team for whom she had a 100 per cent record in the four matches she played.
Miss Moffitt is Latest Golden Girl
Although studying for her G.C.S.E. this year, Lea-anna has still maintained a high standard of play in competitions and county matches as well as finding time to study for her Gold Award and achieving an 85 per cent pass rate on questions relating to the Rules of Golf.
The Golf Foundation Merit Award Scheme is designed to give young golfers an incentive to improve their technique and also make them more knowledgeable about the Rules and Etiquette.
The importance of this scheme cannot be over-emphasised as it provides pupils with set targets which will motivate them to work hard and raise the standard of their play.
At each stage of the Award, a certificate, identity card and badge, are given to the successful junior to testify to his or her achievement.
It is hoped that golf clubs will allow the holders of identity cards to play for a nominal green fee at off-peak times and that such cards will act as a passport to junior membership, particularly in the cases of youngsters whose parents are not golfers and, therefore, may find it difficult to join a club.
Eighth place in the PLM Open helped Leif Hederstrom to the Epson Shooting Star award for August.
The Swede's cheque for £7,110 enabled him to jump 39 places in the Volvo Order of Merit from 157th place to 118th.
Peter McEvoy collected his 100th point in the Home Internationals when, in partnership with Ricky Willison, he clinched a foursomes point against Wales at Ganton.
Century for McEvoy
It was fitting that the century should be reached at Ganton, where McEvoy won the first of his two Amateur Championships.
It continued a remarkable run for McEvoy, who led Great Britain and Ireland to victory in the Eisenhower Trophy in Sweden last season, claiming the individual honours, then played a big part in winning the Walker Cup for Great Britain and Ireland at Peachtree.
He followed that with his century of points at Ganton.
In January 1989, Apollo, in association with the Volvo Tour, launched an interesting new concept called Apollo Week.
Held at La Manga, Spain, this training school was devised to help players at all stages of their careers as professional golfers.
1990 Apollo Week
The week provided essential winter practice and competition opportunities, as well as first class teaching and instruction about other aspects of life on the Tour.
For players who attended, it was extremely valuable.
Vijay Singh and Paul Broadhurst are just two examples of young players with real potential who have obviously benefited from the experience.
Now a permanent fixture on the Volvo Tour calendar, the 1990 event is to be held at Pennia, on the Algarve, between 6th and 13th January.
A total of 35 players will be invited to attend and these will be mainly selected from the top 50 at the 1989 P.G.A.
European Tour Qualifying School.
Bob Torrance, Bernard Gallacher, Tommy Horton and others will be the teachers at Apollo Week, providing expert coaching in all the different areas of play.
Each evening there will be a series of seminars on physical fitness and tournament preparation, combined with lectures covering financial management and tax, travel and the Tour.
The individual golfer will not have to pay for apollo Week.
The week is funded by Apollo's umbrella sponsorship and by individual scholarships given by National Federations and by "patron" companies.
This year's event attracted a number of scholarships from the Volvo Tour itself to manufacturers such as Wilson and Dunlop Slazenger and Tour sponsors like Diners Club and Hewlett Packard.
A £150,000 tournament featuring the top women professional golfers in the world, including 10 from the W.P.G. European Tour, is to be staged in Australia in March 1990.
Sara Lee Masters
The Sara Lee Masters is to be played at the Lakes G.C., Sidney, over 54 holes, with a limited field of 72 players from the W.P.G. European, L.P.G.A., Asian and Australian Tours.
The top 10 places in the Woolmark Order of Merit as on October 1, qualified to play in the event, played under the auspices of the L.P.G.A. of Australia.
There will be an added incentive for the European competitors with a specially-arranged stop-over in Kuala Lumpar for a three-day £15,000 celebrity Pro-Am the week before the event.
Sandy Lyle has launched a Stableford competition for club golfers to raise money for the Paul O'Gorman Foundation, which raises money for children with leukaemia.
Paul O'Gorman Foundation
The Stableford is open to all golfers and they are asked to find sponsorship, play 18 holes completing one of Sandy's cards — available from every club in the country — and return them and the money by October 31.
Twenty cards will be drawn from a hat and the winners will be invited to play in a friendly Pro-Am with Sandy and some other professionals and celebrities.
Sandy will personally thank, by letter, every golfer who raises more than £10. it is hoped that more than £12 million can be raised to establish a new centre for the research and treatment of childhood leukaemia.
Scorecards for the event can be picked up at your golf club and the round can be played any time.
Paul O'Gorman died in February 1987 at the age of 14 and the Foundation was set up in his memory.
Russell Design Associates has designed and produced the "Golfer's Address Book" for Bob Pringle whose company, Old Troon Sporting Antiques, is a specialist in golfing memorabilia.
The outstanding feature of the book is its 26 colour illustrations about golf and golfers which were painted in 1911 by E. Stuart Silver, a Leeds clergyman.
The Address Book is being sold to international markets from Old Troon Sporting Antiques, 49 Ayr Street, Troon.
Two L.P.G.A. players sufferred hand injuries during the recent Rail Charity Classic.
Betsy King cut her finger as she attempted to cut a bagel and had to receive six stitches.
She was still able to play in the event and eventually finished tied for second place behind Beth daniel.
Lori Garbacz was not quite so fortunate when an open window slammed shut on her hands breaking two of her fingers.
She was forced to withdraw from the next event and missed the next few weeks of the Tour.
Britain's top golf club stewards will be the beneficiaries of a £20,000 sponsorship which aims to find the 1990 Golf Club Steward of the Year.
Stewards Chase Top Award
Sponsored by William Lawson's Scotch Whisky, the award, now in its second year, is the only one to recognise the professional contribution made to the efficient running of golf clubs by stewards.
All golf club stewards throughout the U.K. will receive an entry form to the William Lawson's Golf Club Steward of the Year Award.
Completion of the form will result in six regional finalists being selected to attend a Grand Final on the Martini Terrace in London on Monday, April 30th.
Each will then be interviewed by a panel of experts and asked questions that draw upon their professional skills and personality.
Overall winner of the 1990 award will receive a £1,500 Longshot Golf holiday to Spain, with the runner-up claiming an all-expenses paid weekend for two at Scotland's famous Gleneagles hotel.
Winner of the 1989 award was David Forshaw of Lymm G.C. in Cheshire, with David Lithgow of Great Barr G.C. as runner-up.
William Lawson's is also sponsor of Britain's largest amateur golf tournament, the Wm Lawson's Scotch Whisky Cup, which attracts entries from 1,500 clubs and 100,000 golfers.
Lawson's is owned by Martini and Rossi, and is one of Europe's top-selling whiskies.