

Then Try
CONSERVATION work in Essex
The future is in your hands
BTCV
Protecting the Environment
Essex Conservation Work
Replanting woodland ravaged by storms and disease, coppicing, hedgelaying and pond clearance to maintain a rich variety of wildlife habitat.
Ensuring important public access to the countryside by repairing footpaths, and fencing to protect sensitive wildlife areas.
Activities which involve using traditional rural skills.
These are just some of the projects carried out by volunteers from local conservation groups in Essex.
Without their efforts this vital work could not be done.
Anyone over fifteen may take part, but families with younger children are also welcome.
Volunteers come from working, unemployed, retired and student backgrounds.
The groups are supported by the British Trust for Conservation Volunteers (BTCV).
are arranged for most Sundays and in some areas Wednesdays and Thursdays, approx 9.30 am to 4 pm.
They are led by an experienced conservationist who explains the project and the safe use of tools.
Drinks are usually provided at regular breaks.
Very often a warden will provide an informative talk with a tour of the site.
Not only does essential and interesting environmental work get done locally, but there is also the satisfaction of learning new skills in the fresh air and meeting  like-minded people.
How is this Achieved?
 "Tasks" …
Lifts can often be arranged or you can make your own way.
Transport.
Waterproofs, wellingtons or other strong footwear and a packed lunch.
As a member of a local group you can receive a newsletter and attend regular social meetings.
Members have the opportunity to go on weekend projects, conservation working holidays and training courses run by BTCV all over the country.
All You Need for a Fun Day Out…
If the outdoor work is not for you, there are many ways in which you can still help.
Even if you cannot make an active contribution your support is of great value.
If you would like to know more contact any of the people listed overleaf or return the tear off slip.