

We are appealing for funds to help the badger — one of Britain's shyest and most harmless animals "in the wild" .
It has no enemies except man.
A report published by a review body for the Ministry of Agriculture has described the current badger slaughter policy of the Ministry as "unconvincing" .
The slaughter policy has not worked.
In 1987 the Ministry killed 711 badgers and found tuberculosis in only 92.
Heartless men make a sport of putting terriers down badger setts.
Both badgers and terriers often suffer terrible injuries.
When the badger does not come out, the men dig it out and smash it with spades and sticks.
My colleague, Lord Houghton, introduced a bill in the House of Lords to make this illegal.
The problem was later dealt with in the Commons, and now people caught digging out badgers have to prove it was a mistake.
They can no longer plead they thought they were digging for foxes, which are not protected, for that is how they escaped conviction in the past.
But these monstrous people who dig out and bait badgers have to be caught.
On 15th February 1988 a Press Report stated that — two men from Nottinghamshire were fined £700.00 each and a third man £500.00 for killing two badger cubs — a crime to which they pleaded guilty.
The magistrates pointed out that they did not consider this sufficient punishment, but since the men already had a huge backlog of unpaid fines, there was little point in imposing a larger sum, and no alternative sentence was possible under current law.
The recent record of these men is appalling.
In November 1987 they were up before the court on badger digging charges — one got off due to inadequate evidence.
The previous January they were found guilty of badger digging and fined.
The men said they would be out every night to "pay for" this prosecution and during the following week two fallow deer fawns were killed.
Many friends of the badger are forming badger vigils, to discover this cruelty and call the police to arrest wrong-doers.
We have already helped a number of these groups, but we need your help urgently.
First To ensure the law protecting badgers is enforced.
Second To support the badger protection groups in their efforts to mobilize volunteer vigils over badger setts day and night.
Third To make the public aware of what has been happening to the badger.
If we do nothing the badger is doomed to suffer, and terrible suffering goes on all the time.
But our work costs money.
So please give as much as you can afford for this NATIONAL CRUSADE.
Please don't delay.
Every day more and more badgers are being tortured and slaughtered.
I am sure you care deeply about British Wildlife, for we have little enough left.
Please help us preserve it for the future generations.
With warmest personal regards, Yours sincerely, Gridley of Stockport
P.S. If you look in the dictionary, you will that to "badger" is to "persecute unmercifully" .
A dreadful cross for the badger to bear.
Please send £6, £10, £20, or whatever you can afford, in the envelope provided, and help us to save the badger.
Thank you very much.