

A Colour Atlas of Tropical Medicine & Parasitology
Third Edition
W. Peters & H.M. Gilles
Tropical diseases are encountered not only in countries of the developing world, but on an increasing scale also in the more affluent parts of the world due to an exponential increase in travel during the past decades.
A high proportion of these diseases are caused by parasites, many of which are widely distributed in temperate climates as well as the tropics and subtropics.
This Atlas provides a complete overview of the clinical aspects, pathology, parasitology and ecology of all the diseases encountered in the warmer climates, as well as the parasitic diseases of temperate regions.
Life cycles are presented, together with distribution maps of the most important diseases.
The positions of the main parasites (including bacteria and viruses) responsible for the diseases are placed in their zoological context with the aid of a series of tables which also indicate, in relevant cases, the prevalence of major parasites.
In the past few years the advent of AIDS has introduced a number of parasitic, bacterial and fungal diseases, some previously little known, that have proved to be highly pathogenic in immunocompromised patients.
These receive wide coverage in this edition, as do a number of "new" conditions such as Lyme disease.
Hantan haemorrhagic fever and cryptosporidiosis.
"This is the second edition of a handbook which has become an essential companion of teachers and students of tropical medicine and parasitology throughout the world.
It is more than an atlas: it is a superbly illustrated synopsis of the characteristics of the major tropical diseases, their infective agents, their ecology, their life cycles and their vectors…probably the best value for money for anyone interested in obtaining an illustrated guide to tropical medicine and medical parasitology."
Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology
 "…a guide for the medical practitioners of both tropical and temperate regions to the origins and diagnosis of infections that are tropical as opposed to being cosmopolitan, and of great value for training and teaching because it reproduces much better and more comprehensively than is possible with ordinary textbooks the appearance of specimens that will be examined…has been prepared with great care and deserves to remain one of the standard texts in the subject for many years." 
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
Another vital AIDS atlas which illustrates clinical features of early and late disease and the epidemiology, diagnosis, symptoms and prevention of AIDS in the tropical regions of the world.
It will prove essential reading for a wide range of physicians, dentists and health care workers not just in tropical countries but in other regions of the world too.
Dermatologists, STD specialists, epidemiologists and infectious disease and tropical medicine specialists will need to have a copy of this vital new work to hand.
A major feature of the book is the unique and abundant material showing differences in presentation and disease progression compared with patterns seen in developed countries (eg. diseases in women and children).
A Colour Atlas of AIDS in the Tropics
Written by a team of physicians at the forefront of AIDS research in Britain, the fully revised 2nd Edition of this widely acclaimed atlas now brings you right up to date with the most significant developments and advances in AIDS research over the past two years.
A Colour Atlas of AIDS AND HIV DISEASE 2nd Edition
All sections have been expanded with particular emphasis on paediatric AIDS, oral manifestations, and the effect of AIDS on the central nervous system.
The newer, more reliable tests which have been introduced since publication of the first edition are also described and depicted.
AIDS now affects every sector of the health service of most nations: for this reason the sections on protection against cross-infection for surgeons, dentists, laboratory technicians, nurses and other health care workers is much expanded.
Finally, there is a completely new section on tropical AIDS.
 "Aids is a growth topic for medical writers, hence the spate of" me too"books, but this colour atlas is different.
The rapid advance in knowledge of the subject is shown by the 266 pictures — with the usual high standard of colour reproduction — instead of the 214 of the 1986 edition; and a bonus is the clear text attached to the illustrations…there are now 16 appendices covering subjects such as AIDS in Africa, treatment options in Kaposi's sarcoma, and advice for people who are positive for antibody to HIV."
British Medical Journal
This atlas aims to provide the student and newly qualified doctor with a guide to the diagnosis of the common exanthemata, and the experienced physician with clinical photographs of less common though important diseases.
Emphasis has been placed on clinical aspects of disease, although a brief account of the causative organism and the relevant pathology is also given.
The texts accompanying the illustrations are concise, but are intended when read in sequence to give a simple coherent account of each disease.
A Colour Atlas of Infectious Diseases 2nd Edition
In this second edition the standard work has been fully revised with a number of new photographs and rewritten text to reflect developments and progress in infectious diseases.
"In this second edition of a superbly illustrated text…there are 493 plates, nearly all in colour and most clinical — a few depict histological, microbiological, parasitological, morbid anatomical, and radiological aspects of this extremely important group of diseases — characteristic temperature charts are included also, and there are ECGs from patients with diphtheria and mumps and from a child with measles encephalitis.
Every illustration is accompanied by a short text."
Abstracts on Hygiene and Communicable Diseases
"…has all the qualities of excellence…
Among the important additions are leprosy and several of the important sexually-transmitted diseases.
The passage of time is signified by the removal of variola and vaccinia and the addition of infections in patients with disturbed immunity.
Other additions include the much-feared rabies and the interesting erythema infectiosum due to a parvovirus.
Once again, an outstanding book has been produced and kept up to date ."
Journal of Applied Bacteriology