

A Colour Atlas of Aids and HIV Disease
Charles F. Farthing * Simon E. Brown * Richard C.D. Staughton Second Edition 
A Colour Atlas of AIDS was the first book of its kind: written by a team of physicians at the forefront of AIDS research in Britain it comprehensively described in words and outstanding colour photography all aspects of this pandemic disease from epidemiology to transmission and prevention.
Now a fully revised and updated 2nd Edition brings the topic right up to the minute by taking into account the many significant developments and advances made in medical knowledge and research in AIDS over the past two years.
All sections have been expanded with particular emphasis on paediatric AIDS, oral manifestations, and the effect of AIDS on the central nervous system.
The newer, more reliable tests which have been introduced since publication of the first edition are also described and depicted.
AIDS now affects every sector of the health service of most nations: for this reason the sections on protection against cross-infection for surgeons, dentists, laboratory technicians, nurses and other health care workers is much expanded.
Finally there is a completely new section on tropical AIDS.
 "Contains pictures of superb quality…will be invaluable in teaching the superficial signs of the disease." 
British Medical Journal
Reviews of the first edition:
"The whole complex story of AIDS is dealt with in clear text, simple diagrams and universally excellent photographs…will teach most doctors more about AIDS than half a dozen lectures — its accuracy and simplicity of style make it suitable for anyone connected with the management of patients.
Postgraduate Doctor
The AIDS epidemic: Epidemiology; Immunology; Virology; The definition of AIDS; The antibody response to HIV; the HIV antibody test; The origin of HIV; The clinical spectrum and classification of HIV disease.
Contents
Clinical manifestations of HIV disease: HIV seroconversion illness, or "acute HIV disease" Lymphadenopathy; Weight loss; Oral cavity disease; Skin disease; ENT problems; Kaposi's sarcoma; Pulmonary disease; Disease of the nervous system; Gastrointestinal disease; Lymphoma; Paediatric HIV disease.
Other sexually transmitted diseases in HIV positive patients; Counselling of patients with HIV disease; Transmission and prevention of HIV disease;
Appendixes: The full definition of AIDS; AIDS in Africa (M Rolfe); Treatment options in Kaposi's sarcoma; Advice for those who are HIV antibody positive.
A Colour Atlas of AIDS 2nd Edition will also be available as an up to date slide set, comprising about 100 colour slides and an accompanying booklet.
It provides all who are involved in the treatment, diagnosis, prevention and epidemiology of AIDS with a unique opportunity to teach and educate patients, colleagues, co-workers and the public at large about the causes, management, transmission and containment of this pandemic disease.
Slide Set
Another vital AIDS atlas which illustrates clinical features of early and late disease and the epidemiology, diagnosis, symptoms and prevention of AIDS in the tropical regions of the world.
It will prove essential reading for a wide range of physicians, dentists and health care workers not just in tropical countries but in other regions of the world too.
Dermatologists, STD specialists, epidemiologists and infectious disease and tropical medicine specialists will need to have a copy of this vital new work to hand.
A major feature of the book is the unique and abundant material showing differences in presentation and disease progression compared with patterns seen in developed countries (eg. diseases in women and children).
A Colour Atlas of AIDS in the Tropics
Contents: AIDS in the Tropics; History; Virology; Serology; Epidemiology of AIDS in the Tropics; Early Clinical Manifestations & AIDS; Spectrum of HIV-related Disease; Sexually Transmitted Diseases; AIDS-Related Complex (ARC); Kaposi's Sarcoma; SLIM Disease; Pulmonary Manifestations; Sepsis; Diseases of the Nervous System; Other Tumours; Paediatric AIDS; Prevention and Health Education; Recognised Risks Groups; Protection of Health Workers; Counselling.
Tropical diseases are encountered not only in countries of the developing world, but on an increasing scale also in the more affluent parts of the world due to an exponential increase in travel during the past decades.
A high proportion of these diseases are caused by parasites many of which are widely distributed in temperate climates as well as the tropics and subtropics.
A Colour Atlas of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 3rd Edition
This Atlas provides a complete overview of the clinical aspects, pathology, parasitology and ecology of all the diseases encountered in the warmer climates, as well as the parasitic diseases of temperate regions.
Life cycles are presented, together with distribution maps of the most important diseases.
The positions of the main parasites (including bacteria and viruses) responsible for the disease, are placed in their zoological context with the aid of a series of tables which also indicate, in relevant cases, the prevalence of major parasites.
In the past few years the advent of AIDS has introduced a number of parasitic, bacterial and fungal diseases, some previously little known, that have proved to be highly pathogenic in immunocompromised patients.
These receive wide coverage in this edition, as do a number of "new" conditions such as Lyme disease, Hantan haemorrhagic fever and cryptosporidiosis.