

Institute of Biology
Information Sources on Courses of Higher Education
The following is a list of some of the available material on courses of higher education currently offered at universities, polytechnics and colleges.
Many of the publications are revised annually, and newest editions should be available from any public reference library.
(If they are not on the shelves, you can always request them on inter-library loan.)
Some of this material might be found at your local/school careers office, where you should also be able to get help and advice with filling in UCCA forms etc.
The literature included here is only intended as a preliminary guide.
Up-to-date details of courses must be sought by consulting current prospectuses, which are available on application to the Registrar at individual colleges/polytechnics/universities.
(Regional Advisory Councils in England Wales)
A Compendium of Advances Courses in Colleges of Further and Higher Education
(Scottish Technical and Vocational Education Council.
SCOTVEC
A Guide to Courses
(Department of Education and Science)
Choose Your Course Series
Guide is intended to provide a broad review of the current work of colleges and institutes of higher education.
ALSO provides general information about the college or institute, including total number of students currently enrolled, the number of full-time staff and accommodation facilities (SCPDCIHE)
Colleges and Institutes of Higher Education
(Horticultural Education Association)
Courses and Training for Careers in Horticulture
(National Consultative Committee for Agricultural Education) Lists of full-time and sandwich courses in the UK, and part-time courses in Scotland.
A quick reference guide.
Courses in Agriculture, Horticulture and Fisheries
Series.
Guide to first degree courses in the UK.
(Hobsons Ltd)
CRAC
Degree Course Guide
Titles allied to biological sciences include: Agricultural Sciences (including Food Science Technology) Biochemistry Biological Sciences (including Biology, Botany, Developmental Biology, Genetics and Zoology.
Dentistry (with the cooperation of The Dental Education Advisory Council Medicines Microbiology and Immunology Pharmacy and Pharmacology (including related medical studies) Physiology (including Anatomy and Human Biology) Psychology Veterinary Sciences
(Hobsons Ltd) Designed to help A-level students to decide which degree course will meet their vocational needs.
CRAC
Degree Insights Series
(CNAA) Preliminary guide showing what courses are available leading to CNAA awards at colleges and polytechnics.
Directory of First Degree and Diploma of Higher Education Courses
Comprehensive guide to courses in UK polytechnics, colleges, and those colleges recognised as efficient by CIFE, ARBS and ARELS-FELCO (Hobsons Ltd)
CRAC
Directory of Further Education
Details of all full-time, part-time, block release and day release courses.
Degree, professional, BTEC, National, City and Guilds, Regional, college, GCE "A" level, SCE, H-Grade plus entrance requirements, college announcements and addresses.
(Kogan Page).
Directory of Schools of Medicine and Nursing
Polytechnics Central Admission System.
Guide for Applicants
(BTEC)(Business and Technician Education Council) HNC/HND Science (Applied Biology)
Guide to Technician Courses
(Hobsons Ltd) Provides information about degrees and other qualifications offered on a part-time basis by universities, polytechnics and colleges of higher education.
CRAC
Part-time Degrees, Diplomas and Certificates
(Lund Humphries on behalf of the Committee of Directors of Polytechnics.
Polytechnic Courses Handbook
(Careers Consultants Ltd) Information for students, parents, careers advisors and specialist subject teachers who have particular careers in mind and want to find out what courses are available.
Also gives information on sandwich courses, and about the professional examinations necessary and the university, polytechnic and college courses which are recognised for exemption.
Professional and Vocational Degree Course Offers
(Hobsons Ltd) A guide to all courses in universities, polytechnics and colleges which combine full-time study with training and experience in industry and commerce.
CRAC
Sandwich Courses
(Hobsons Ltd) Inside views of university and polytechnic life.
CRAC
Students Eye
(Grafton) Reports by students on university life.
Sunday Times Good University Guide
(The Association of Commonwealth Universities)
The Compendium of University Entrance Requirements for First Degree Courses in the UK
(NATFHE — available from Lund Humphries)
The Handbook of Degree and Advanced Courses in Institutes/Colleges of Higher Education, Colleges of Education, Polytechnics, University Departments of Education
How to apply for admission to a university.
Contains essential information.
UCCA Handbook.
(Hobsons Ltd) A guide to university, polytechnic and college courses — where to study courses and careers; how to apply.
CRAC
Your Choice of Degree and Diploma
Written by the student body, alternative prospectuses give a report on the students viewpoint and can be obtained from individual NUS offices at some colleges of higher education.
These are available in addition to the more traditional prospectus, from the Registrar.
ALTERNATIVE PROSPECTUSES