

CHAMBERS BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY
Priced at £29 it will be yours absolutely free when you join The Folio Society
See inside for examples from the 15,000 fact-filled biographies in this fascinating volume that Auberon Waugh described as "a brilliant and indispensable reference book" 
— for no more than the cost of ordinary books DO YOU BUY BOOKS?
Then you will know the joy of opening a book and finding its type easy to read, the paper of its pages sympathetic to your touch, the illustrations in balance with the text, and the binding secure while allowing the book to lie flat when open.
YOUR PERSONAL LIBRARY OF SPECIAL EDITIONS
The hand of the craftsman is, alas, increasingly rare, even in the production of great literature.
However, The Folio Society is dedicated to producing books of outstanding quality at affordable prices: classics and curiosities, published as though for the first time, with specially commissioned illustrations to enhance the text.
Yet the average price our books is only a little over £16 — less than the average paid for all books in shops.
A Folio Society book is a "Special Edition" in every sense.
Style and elegance characterise the typography and cover designs; our type-setting is either hot-metal or photoset, whichever best suits the text; the paper is always from a single batch, to ensure evenness of shade; our sewn bindings incorporate buckram, leather, silk, patterned and marbled paper, and a selection of traditional cloths.
All our books come in protective slip-cases, as merited by their high quality.
The Folio Society is reputed to be an "exclusive club" , and indeed it is: exclusively for lovers of good books.
We publish all our own books, and our list of titles reflects the wide range of powerful, amusing and entertaining subjects that interest our Members.
Be they established classics or minor masterpieces, these are books you will want to keep.
As a Member of The Folio Society, you can build up a collection of superb books that are marvellous to read, beautiful to look at, and available only to Members.
Because so much has been put into making such fine volumes, they have tended to increase in value year by year.
You can share these benefits by making an initial commitment for only four books from the list of over 140 titles that will come to you with your free volume of the CHAMBERS BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY.
To apply for Membership and to claim your free introductory book, simply complete, sign and return the Membership Application.
Please do not send any money at this stage.
THE FOLIO SOCIETY 202 Great Suffolk Street, London SEl lPR
Written with style, as much to entertain as to inform, the CHAMBERS BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY's features include: guides to the pronunciation of difficult and foreign names suggestions for further reading, at the end of most biographies selections from all countries and every historical era 36-page subject index rigid slip-case for protection THE CHAMBERS BIOGRAPHICAL DICTIONARY sells for £29, but it will be yours to keep, ABSOLUTELY FREE, when you join The Folio Society.
You don't have to make a commitment now: just complete and return the Application, and we'll send you the book to see and try out before making up your mind.
If you then decide NOT to join, simply return the book and owe us nothing.
If you decide to join, we'd like you to accept the book as an expression of our thanks, and as your introduction to the Folio world of fine volumes.
Ideal for quick reference or leisurely browsing
YOUR FREE INTRODUCTORY VOLUME
Did you know…?…which Emperor died in exile in Chislehurst, Kent?
…which Calcutta-born journalist with a flair for illustration eventually won international acclaim through novels about the English class system?
…that Charlotte Bronte turned to novel writing only after her Poems, written jointly with her two sisters, sold only two copies?
…that the legendary soldier, Pyrrhus, whose many battles were characterised by massive casualties, was himself killed by a tile hurled by a lone woman?