

LENTEN APPEAL 1989
 "I am very excited about being in Community, when St. Joe's is being done up — it's so important." 
 "I still want to be around when the house re-opens." 
 "I am not so sure whether I can handle the fame of being the last project leader of the old St. Joe's!" 
These are just some of the reactions of members of the community regarding the renovation of St. Joseph's House.
In this Lenten Appeal we would like to share with you some of our feelings about the rebuilding of our original — and most famous — house of hospitality.
We feel it to be important to dedicate an appeal like this, as the house is more than just bricks and mortar; it takes a central place in the history of Simon.
Also, the project is proving to be even larger than originally thought.
To us, St. Joe's embodies our own history: a history of caring and campaigning for homeless people, but more vitally a history of "Simon" and its ideas, principles and values.
"It is the place where most of the ideas of how to provide, how to meet needs of different people were hammered out.
Many groups of people with different needs and problems experimented with different ways of living together."
(M.T.
Wallich-Clifford — wife of the founder).
Or as Lewis Broadhurst (current chairman of the community) put it: "It is the motherhouse and all that." 
But of course the integral part of St. Joe's, the thing most people remember it for, is its history of hospitality.
Jeannie, who lived there prior to its renovation, puts it well: "Although dilapidated, it had a marvellous atmosphere.
I'm sure it will be lovely when it will be done up."
Alan, a resident of St. Theresa's feels: "Staring at it…
How long will it take for it to get back together again.
You were always offered a cup of tea."
Sandy, a visitor, told us: "It brought tears to my eyes when I heard that the house would be closed for renovation.
It is a worthwhile reason to be closed, but it always, so much, felt like home.
I hope it will feel like that in the future."
In the last Simon Star we reported how excited we are about the fact that we've been able to start the work.
Here we are not only going to give you technical details, but also try and tell you what it means to us as a Community.
For so long have we planned and hoped to do this that the reaction of Richard, an ex-worker, was quite typical: "Serious…?
You mean the builders are in there…?
I must come and look at it."
Currently the work is on schedule.
We will demolish and rebuild the rear extension.
We've had to underpin the adjoining party wall.
We will demolish the roof structure and put in a new rsj.
It will need new valley gutters and we found we had to replace the roof structure (something we originally thought was not needed).
The house will need re-roofing, re-building of the rear wall as well as stitching cracks in the party wall and building in elbow ties between party wall and the new rear wall.
So, physically, the house will be almost all-new.
Now, with the work in progress, the house continues to evoke emotions.
John, who lived there, said"The old homestead has been gutted.
I felt a bit  gutted myself when I looked at it."
John Yeudall, who's been involved in the Community for many years as worker, chairman and elected member said"My feelings about it being stripped is how very little building there is for just so much emotion and feeling in it.
Just a few bits of timber really."
Lewis agreed with that when he said "Every square inch of that place contains emotions for more than one person — quite unbelievable." 
Paul, perhaps, is slightly apprehensive"St. Joe's means a lot.
I felt sad when we had to move out.
It will never be the same."
Bill, a co-worker and management member, takes a more humorous view "It was a doss house — but if you sit there now you get a cold bum!" 
And so we all look forward to the day the renovation will be finished.
We hope to continue the sense of home, comfort, belonging, warmth and hospitality that we all felt was there.
We hope that in this Lenten Appeal we've been able to give you a sense of that.
After all, these are the most important things we can offer to those who are homeless.
It is only with your support that we can continue to do so.
Thank You