

Croxteth Hall & Country Park 1989
An old-fashioned welcome to LIVERPOOL'S historic country estate, with special attractions for all the family.
YOUR visit to the Hall is like stepping straight into a vanished world.
Historic Croxteth Hall
Discover the turn-of-the-century lifestyle of a great country house, depicted by above and below stairs character figures in the furnished rooms.
A ground-floor display sets the scene, with an AV show on The Way They Lived and an invitation to Meet Our Edwardians.
Plus a fascinating history-in-pictures of the Molyneux family, Earls of Sefton (past owners of the estate), and displays of carriages and crafts.
Our top attraction and a must for adults and children alike, with pigs, cattle, sheep, horses, poultry and baby animals in the original farm buildings close to the Hall.
THE HOME FARM
See the traditional breeds of the past, and discover the story of modern farming through talking posts, displays, demonstrations and special events to mark British Food & Farming Year.
Don't miss the delightful Victorian Walled Garden, with old fruit trees trained in curious shapes, peaches and figs grown under glass, herb garden, original mushroom house, and a wealth of flowers — all with attractive explanatory panels to increase your enjoyment of the visit.
GARDENS AND COUNTRYSIDE
The Country Park has 500 wooded acres to explore, especially beautiful at rhododendron time (May–June) and in autumn.
Children will love the adventure playground and miniature railway, picnic sites and woodland walks.
See more of this beautiful country estate and its wildlife on a Ranger-guided walk, or learn to ride at the Earl's former stud stables.
Large Gift Shop with souvenirs and publications; also Garden and Farm Shops in summer.
Sweets and Ices.
 "The Old Riding School" Cafe open daily in summer.
OTHER SERVICES
Don't miss our exciting year-round programme of special events.
Details also available of Park-based societies including Garden Society, Young Growers Club, Lancashire Trust for Nature Conservation, WATCH, Conservation Volunteers and adult education including Flower Arrangement.
EVENTS AND ACTIVITIES
Parkland open free daily 9am-7pm or dusk.
Main opening season for attractions 16th April — 24th September 1989, 11am-5pm daily.
Easter and winter opening times on request.
Hall 90p, Farm 90p, Walled Garden 50p, or inclusive ticket for all three £2 (saves 30p).
Children and pensioners half price.
Additional charge on Heyday (18th June) and as stated on events programme.
Pre-booked groups can visit both during and outside normal opening hours at discount prices.
All facilities closed over Christmas and New Year.
ADMISSION
Wheelchair access to most areas except principal rooms in the Hall.
Dogs and cycles not allowed in the Hall, Garden, Farm, Cafe or Playground.
For further details contact: Croxteth Hall and Country Park Liverpool L12 0HB.
Tel. 051-228 5311 (Riding Centre enquiries — 051-220 9177)