

Vevay's Total Colour Kit is a complete make-up collection in one!
Everything you need to create great make-up looks from dawn to dusk.
In one elegant, slim line case, the Colour Kit contains all this: 13 Eye Shadows 2 Lip Glosses 2 Blushers Eyeliner Pencil Mascara Lip Brush Blusher Brush Double-ended Eye Shadow Applicator Make-up Mirror
It's yours ABSOLUTELY FREE when you join the Vevay Beauty Club.
All you pay is £1.99 for membership.
Vevay is a new and exciting approach to beauty.
Every five to six weeks we'll send you a colour brochure about each new Vevay pack full of exclusive beauty products, every one specially matched to your skin type and colouring.
But you're never under any obligation to buy.
If you don't want to receive a pack, just tell us.
And the Vevay range of products covers everything — rich creamy cleansers and moisturisers, up-to-the-minute fashion shades for eyes, lips — and hair care, too.
In short, Vevay keeps you looking good from top-to-toe.
Just fill in this FREEPOST card and return it to us NOW, and we'll rush your TOTAL COLOUR KIT to you!
SEND NO MONEY
The Vevay Beauty range covers everything from the latest cosmetics to skin and hair care — every product thoroughly clinically tested and selected for you individually to suit your colouring and skin type.
A COMPLETE BEAUTY RANGE THAT'S CRUELTY-FREE!
1 You're never under any obligation to buy!
10 REASONS WHY VEVAY IS THE BEST BEAUTY CLUB FOR YOU.
2 Free Total Colour Kit as your introductory gift
3 Regular full-colour brochures offering you the very latest Vevay Beauty Packs at reduced members-only prices
4 Each pack costs around £8 — but you can always say no to any pack you don't want, you're never under any obligation to buy and we'll stop sending you them whenever you ask
5 Exclusive fashion cosmetics and skincare formulations that are specially selected to suit you — and delivered directly to your door
6 Regular copies of Viva Vevay, our members' newsletter to keep you up-to-date with fashion, beauty tips and hints, skincare advice and readers' letters
7 The guarantee of cruelty-free cosmetics and the finest pure and natural ingredients
8 We don't expect you to buy every Beauty Pack.
Even if you only buy one in a whole year, we will still be happy to give you all the benefits of Vevay membership
9 Every pack comes to you on a see-before-you-buy basis.
If any pack fails to please you, simply return it within 10 days — and owe nothing
10 Your own personal Beauty Advisory Service — just write or phone us, we're always happy to help you