

Introduction
Notes for guidance
Section through Gyproc cove
Dimensions
Accessories
Gyproc cove adhesive: 5kg and 12.5 kg bags
Galvanised nails or non-rusting screws: 30 mm or 40 mm
There are two methods of fixing Gyproc cove to dry, sound and rigid backgrounds: either use Gyproc cove adhesive, or nail or screw fix to timber grounds or plugs.
Fixing instructions should be followed carefully.
Tools and materials needed
Fixing
To avoid damage, Gyproc cove should be carried on edge, whether singly or in a bundle.
Handling
Installation
Fixing with Gyproc cove adhesive
1.
Drawing guide lines
Draw pencilled guide lines along walls and ceiling, 67 mm for 100 mm girth cove, and 83 mm for 127 mm girth cove, from the angle of intersection.
Areas which will be in contact with the cove members should be scratched to provide a key for the Gyproc cove adhesive, then brush away any dust and loose particles.
Next, cut to length and mitre the cove with a fine toothed saw using either the template or a mitre block, then lightly sandpaper any rough edges.
Saw cuts should be made into the curve, as illustrated.
2.
Cutting cove
Mitring by the projection method is necessary for angles other than 90°.
See Fig. 7.
1 kg of Gyproc cove adhesive is sufficient to fix about 5 m of 100 mm girth, or 3 m of 127 mm girth cove.
1 kg of adhesive requires approximately 400 ml (¾pint) of water.
3.
Applying adhesive to cove
If correctly mixed, Gyproc cove adhesive will remain usable for about 30 minutes after mixing, and will set hard in about an hour.
To mix, slowly add powder to clean water stirring to a smooth paste stiff enough to spread without running; a stiffer consistency will be difficult to apply, whilst too thin a mix will impair the bonding properties of the adhesive.
All tools and buckets must be kept clean and free from set material.
Very dry plaster, or other high-suction backgrounds should be dampened immediately before fixing the cove.
Apply the adhesive approximately 3 mm thick to the two surfaces that will be in contact with the wall and ceiling, along the length of the cove.
Offer up the cove and push firmly and evenly into position between the guide lines.
Two people are required if the length exceeds 2 m.
4.
Applying cove to wall/ceiling angle
Remove any excess adhesive and use it to make good the mitres and joints.
Finally, draw a moistened paint brush along the junctions of cove and backgrounds.
To avoid accidentally moving the cove, drive nails lightly into the wall immediately below the cove, and remove them when the adhesive has set.
With uneven ceilings, it may be helpful to drive a nail through the ceiling member of the cover into the ceiling at each end of the length.
The nail heads should be driven just below the surface of the cove without fracturing the paper liner, and made good with Gyproc cove adhesive.
The ivory-coloured surface of Gyproc cove is suitable for most types of surface treatment, except plastering.
When painting, first treat the cove with Gyproc drywall top coat or with a primer recommended for plasterboard by the paint manufacturer.
5.
Making good external mitre
Decoration
At stairwells or where glazing or a doorway extends to ceiling height, it may be necessary to terminate the cove at either side.
A stop end is normally used, constructed as follows and as shown in the illustration.
Gyproc cove as a stop end
6.
Mitring at a door frame
A stop end consists of a pair of external mitres, one of which, the left hand one in the illustration, is wedged shaped having no length along the wall edge.
Simply cut the appropriate external mitre on a length of cove then cut it off square.
The ceiling edge will then be 67 mm deep for 100 mm girth cove and 83 mm deep for 127 mm girth cove.
Both lengths are fixed in the normal manner, the longer one first, and the mitre made good with adhesive.
This plan shows part of a typical domestic bay-window with the broken lines showing the position of each length of cove before the mitres are cut.
Draw pencil lines along the ceiling 67 mm (for 100 mm girth cove) or 83 mm (for 127 mm girth cove) from the walls and parallel to them so that the lines intersect.
Now offer up a suitable length of cove with square ends and mark it on the wall edge where the walls meet and on the ceiling edge where the lines drawn on the ceiling intersect.
The cove is then cut with a saw along a line drawn between the two marks.
Projection method of mitring
7.
Interior of bay window wall
For short individual tubes only.
Cove nailed to timber batten.
Other uses for Gyproc cove
For concealing lighting units
Suitable for continuous runs of lighting.
Cove nailed to timber splayed fillet, attached to lighting trough.
Fixing below ceiling line
With a curtain pelmet
Fixed direct to ceiling.
Cove nailed to ceiling and timber box.
Gyproc cove is only one of the range of British Gypsum home improvement products.
Information leaflets on Thermal board and other British Gypsum products are available.