

Rockwell
The Better Alternative to the Flat Roof
Forget the problems involved in traditional flat roofing.
With the Rockwell System these can be a thing of the past.
Rockwell is a u.P.V.C.
Greca Profile Corrugated Roofing and Cladding Sheet 1.2mm thick x 1092mm wide.
It is robust, durable, attractive, yet lightweight.
A Rockwell System, illustrated below, can be constructed on any roof where a minimum fall of 1:40 can be achieved.
A greater pitch is preferable if possible.
Clean and easy to construct Maintenance free Good heat retention Choice of sheet colours Excellent weathering properties No condensation problems
Can be used as New Roof or to Replace Existing Faulty Roofing
The cost of a Rockwell low-pitched roofing system compared favourably with that of traditional flat roofing.
Timber framework is constructed on top of existing roof to give as much fall as possible.
This framework is then covered with 19mm. exterior plywood.
Roof void should be ventilated.
Rockwell can also be used as a fascia.
Various accessories are available for corner trims.
Vapour barrier, sealed at overlaps, is laid on top of ply roof deck.
Profiled insulation panels are laid on top of vapour barrier and then covered with Rockwell sheet.
Seal all sheet side and end laps with Rockwell butyl sealing strip.
Sheet is fixed with Rockwell screw, cap, and washer sets.
The finished roof will now be weatherproof for many years and require no maintenance.
It can be walked on for access if required.
Please see overleaf for full fixing instructions
Rockwell Sheet is available from your Rockwell Stockist shown below:
GENERAL HINTS
MINIMUM FALL:
The minimum suggested fall is 1:40, however, if a very small fall such as this is used it is important to take great care to seal all side and end laps with Rockwell sealing strip using two strips per joint.
A small piece of Rockwell sealing strip should also be placed around each fixing before tightening to aid in giving a complete watertight seal.
Note that a greater fall is preferable.
Plywood ¾″ thick (19mm) is the preferred material for the roof deck and is mandatory in some applications.
As an alternative ¾″ thick chipboard can be used where regulations allow but fixings into this will not be as secure as into plywood.
ROOF DECK:
There are a number of vapour barriers on the market which can be used or polythene sheeting can be used.
It is important to seal the joints of the vapour barrier which should be overlapped at least 75mm.
VAPOUR BARRIER:
The insulation panels for Rockwell sheet are profiled to match the sheet and as well as providing thermal insulation they greatly reduce any risk of condensation forming on the underside of the sheet.
If extra thermal insulation is required flat insulation panels can be laid underneath the profiled Rockwell insulation panels.
If this is done, however, longer fixing screws will be required.
INSULATION PANELS:
This provides the waterproof top layer of the roof and, provided that all side and end laps have been sealed with Rockwell sealing strip, will give a durable watertight roof which needs no maintenance.
A roof constructed in the manner illustrated overleaf can be walked on if access is required.
Care should be taken though not to damage the roof covering with sharp objects and it should be noted that, because it is smooth, Rockwell sheet can be slippery when wet.
This roofing method is not suitable for constant foot traffic.
ROCKWELL SHEET:
Should, for any reason, a sheet become damaged in service it is simple to replace a Rockwell sheet by unscrewing the damaged sheet and replacing it with a new one.
ACCIDENTAL DAMAGE:
A range of accessories for Rockwell sheet is available.
There are flashing units for flashing up to abutments or, if desired, these can be reversed to run into gutters.
There is a butyl based Rockwell flashing tape which can be used for sealing edges of a roof (it is also used to seal holes in roofing felt), and there are Rockwell angle trims and wide angles to provide attractive finishes.
Your stockist will be able to advise on the accessories most suitable for your project.
Please note that Rockwell flashing units are suitable for all colours except white, clear or smoked tint.
FINISHING DETAILS:
A Rockwell low pitched roofing system, as shown overleaf, can be built on top of an existing faulty felt roof without the need to remove the existing roof.
Timbers are placed on top of the existing roofing, secured through the existing roof covering into existing supports.
The room is then constructed as shown.
The opportunity should be taken to create as great a fall as possible when installing timbers on top of existing roof.
EXISTING FLAT ROOFING:
All suggestions are given in good faith and for general help and guidance but since detail may vary with different roofs they cannot be assumed to be suitable for every application.
NOTE: