

EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Lithuania and Azerbaijan crises
Lithuania
President Mikhail Gorbachev on Jan. 11 went to the Soviet Baltic republic of Lithuania on a mission to seek solutions to a secessionist crisis created by the December 1989 decision of the Communist Party of Lithuania (CPL) to declare itself independent of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU)[see pp. 37128-29].
He announced an initiative on the question of secession by a republic from the Soviet Union, which appeared to have potentially far-reaching implications for the separatist aspirations of Lithuania and other republics.
December reaction of CPSU central committee to Lithuanian party independence — Preparations for visit
The CPSU central committee's decision that Gorbachev should visit Lithuania was taken at a plenum on Dec. 25-26, held to discuss the CPL independence declaration.
At this plenum Gorbachev was highly critical of the CPL leadership, declaring its action "illegitimate" and invalid and condemning its first secretary Algirdas Brazauskas for compromising with nationalist and separatist forces.
Gorbachev reaffirmed his position that the future of perestroika ( "restructuring" ), and the prospects for reforming the Soviet Union's federal structure, depended on the unity of the CPSU.
The plenum, which was described as "stormy" , decided that a formal CPSU stance on the question of CPL independence would be adopted at the next central committee plenum (scheduled for late January but subsequently deferred until February), to be based on assessments made as a result of Gorbachev's visit to Lithuania.
Vadim Medvedev, the central committee secretary responsible for ideology, ruled out the use of force to bring the CPL to heel, however, telling a press conference: "Our party uses political, not military means." 
Before leaving Moscow for Lithuania Gorbachev met on Jan. 4 and 6 with the leaderships of both the CPL and the rival "Lithuanian Communist Party on the CPSU platform" (created in December by a breakaway faction supporting unity with the CPSU — ibid.).
Significantly, according to unofficial reports, he also met four members of the leadership of the nationalist Lithuanian Restructuring Movement (Sajudis).
An advance party comprising more than 40 CPSU central committee officials and led by Medvedev arrived in Lithuania on Jan. 8 to sound out public opinion at meetings in factories and on collective farms.
Gorbachev's visit
Gorbachev's initiative on secession was announced on Jan. 11, his first day in the Lithuanian capital, Vilnius, at a meeting with Lithuanian intellectuals at the Academy of Sciences.
Reminded his audience of the existing theoretical provision in the 1977 USSR Constitution for a union republic to secede, he announced that a draft law was currently in preparation on a "mechanism for how a republic could leave the Soviet Union," including "the time-frame for leaving, defence, communications, and a whole series of questions" .
(On Jan. 12 Yury Maslyukov, a CPSU politburo member accompanying Gorbachev in Lithuania, said that the secession of a republic would be decided by referendum.)
According to the official Soviet news agency Tass Gorbachev "declared himself to be in favour of the principle of self-determination stopping short of secession" , and he expressed the conviction that the way towards republican political sovereignty, economic independence and cultural development was a restructuring of the Soviet Union as a federation of sovereign states.
Earlier, in conversation with Vilnius residents during a walkabout in the city centre, Gorbachev said with reference to Lithuania's relationship with the Soviet Union: "Nothing will be decided without you.
We shall decide everything together."
However, he warned of the threat posed by the secession issue to the future of perestroika, commenting: "We have embarked on this path and I am the one who chose it.
My personal fate is linked to this choice."
He also warned Lithuanians and other Soviet peoples contemplating independence that they should reflect "a thousand times" .
To coincide with Gorbachev's arrival in Vilnius, Sajudis had organized a mass rally in the city's Cathedral Square on the afternoon of Jan. 11.
Up to 300,000 people heard speeches by leaders of nationalist organizations and senior CPL officials calling for the restoration of Lithuania's full independence from the Soviet Union.
Commentators described Gorbachev's remarks, particularly the juxtaposition of his announcement about possible secession with his comment about his own and perestroika's fate, as a bold gamble to confront and try to contain separatist aspirations by endorsing a constitutional path to independence for republics, but at the same time warning of dire consequences should they follow it.
The Guardian of Jan. 12 assessed that Gorbachev was "trying to buy time, in the hope that once the principle of secession has been established Lithuanians will think seriously about the political and economic implications" .
The Sajudis chairman Vytautas Landsbergis on Jan. 12 dismissed Gorbachev's proposal as a "cheap lie" intended to impress the Western media.
Other officials expressed concern that the proposed mechanism might actually prove to make secession impossible in practice.
From Maslyukov's statement it already appeared that the proposed rules on referendums on secession required a vote in the whole Soviet Union, not just in the republic concerned.
Following a tour of Lithuania visiting factories and farms, Gorbachev ended his visit on Jan. 13 with an address to CPL activists in Vilnius.
He made an impassioned appeal to the party to reconsider its break with the CPSU, but at a press conference on Jan. 16 Brazauskas declared that Gorbachev's visit to Lithuania had not changed the aims of the CPL.
Election of Brazauskas as Lithuanian president
The Lithuanian Supreme Soviet on Jan. 15 elected Brazauskas as Chairman of its Presidium (i.e. president of Lithuania) by 228 votes to four, with 19 abstentions.
He defeated three other candidates, one of them being leading Sajudis member Romualdas Ozalas.
Brazauskas succeeded Vytautas Astrauskas, who had resigned unexpectedly after two years in office [for his appointment see p. 35657].
On the same day the Lithuanian Supreme Soviet voted overwhelmingly to declare invalid on Lithuanian territory the USSR Law on Supervision of the Constitution, passed by the USSR Congress of People's Deputies in December 1989 [see p. 37127].
Vote in Latvia to abolish Communist monopoly
Emulating Lithuania, the Latvian Supreme Soviet decided on Jan. 11 by 225 votes to nine, with 20 abstentions, to abolish the clauses in Article 6 of the Latvian Constitution guaranteeing the "leading role" of the Communist Party.
Azerbaijan
The developments in Lithuania were rapidly eclipsed by events in the southern Soviet republic of Azerbaijan.
The unrest which had been escalating in Azerbaijan since the outbreak in February 1988 of the dispute with neighbouring Armenia over the Nagorny Karabakh region [for December 1989 developments see p. 37128], exploded in mid-January into intercommunal violence across the republic and on the Armenian border.
For a time Soviet rule appeared to collapse in the face of support for the nationalist Azerbaijan Popular Front.
A massive security clampdown aimed at restoring order resulted in major bloodshed, particularly in the capital, Baku.
Disturbances along Azerbaijan-Iran border
Between Dec. 31 and Jan. 2 several thousand Azerbaijani rioters pulled down or set fire to fences and other installations along a 137-km stretch of the border between the Nakhichevan Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic (an Azerbaijani exclave separated from Azerbaijan proper by a strip of Armenian territory) and Iran.
One person was reported to have died during the disturbances.
Some demonstrators attempted to cross the border, prompting the Iranian authorities to issue a protest to the Soviet Union.
Azerbaijani officials claimed that the attacks on the border were the consequence of frustration of local residents that they had received no response to demands presented during the previous month for freer access to their fellow Azerbaijanis in northern Iran (numbering up to 14,000,000 — twice the number of Soviet Azerbaijanis), and to rich agricultural land given over to border defences.
However, officials in Moscow and sections of the national media claimed that the attack on the border was inspired by "extremists" associated with the Azerbaijan Popular Front who were seeking to create a separate state through the union of Soviet and Iranian Azerbaijan.
The State Security Committee (KGB), which was responsible for Soviet border defences, rushed border guard reinforcements to the Azerbaijan-Iran border on Jan. 3 amid reports that attacks on border installations had spread and now threatened the entire 800 km frontier.
Furthermore, on Jan. 5 Azerbaijanis reportedly tore down stretches of the 12-km-long border fence between Nakhichevan and Turkey.
Meanwhile, an estimated 10,000 people took to the streets of Baku on Jan. 4 to demonstrate solidarity with those attacking the border.
In an effort to defuse border tensions the Soviet Union and Iran on Jan. 5 signed a tourism agreement allowing easier passage from Azerbaijan into Iran.
On Jan. 6 it was announced that a border crossing point was to be created between Nakhichevan and Turkey.
Demonstrations on the border had reportedly subsided by Jan. 9.
The first secretary of the Azerbaijan CP committee in the Nakhichevan ASSR, Gaidar Isayev, was removed from office on Jan. 3, ostensibly on "health grounds" but apparently as a consequence of the border incidents.
Anti-Armenian pogrom in Baku — Declaration of state of emergency and despatch of Soviet troops
Mass demonstrations began again in Baku on Jan. 8 over sovereignty over Nagorny Karabakh.
Tens of thousands of Popular Front supporters, most of them refugees from Nagorny Karabakh and Armenia, criticised the Azerbaijani CP leadership for acquiescing in the central Soviet authorities' retaining responsibility for security in Nagorny Karabakh when the region had been restored to Azerbaijani control in November 1989 following 10 months of direct rule from Moscow [see p. 37044].
Azerbaijani anger over the sovereignty issue was provoked further on Jan. 10-11 when the Armenian Supreme Soviet voted to extend the provisions of its republican budget and election laws to cover Nagorny Karabakh.
At mass demonstrations in Baku there were calls for the Azerbaijan authorities either to reassert full sovereignty over Nagorny Karabakh or to resign.
At its session on Jan. 11 the Armenian Supreme Soviet also voted for itself a right of veto over legislation approved by the authorities in Moscow.
This appeared to be a reply to a decree passed by the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium on the previous day ruling as unconstitutional a December 1989 declaration of a "unified Armenian republic" incorporating Nagorny Karabakh [see p. 37128].
On Jan. 13 Azerbaijani anger boiled over into an anti-Armenian pogrom in Baku, when some 70,000 people at a rally in the city centre were told that an Armenian resident of the city had attacked two Azerbaijanis with an axe, killing one of them, when they came to evict him from his flat.
Gangs of Azerbaijanis left the demonstration to hunt down Armenians, roaming the streets of Baku and breaking into homes.
During Jan. 13-15, in a pogrom which reportedly surpassed in horror the massacre of Armenians in Sumgait in February 1988 [see pp. 36034-35], up to 60 people, most of them Armenians, were killed.
Intercommunal fighting erupted almost immediately in other parts of Azerbaijan, while raids across the Armenia-Azerbaijan border by vigilante bands raised the spectre of civil war involving the two republics.
Inside Nagorny Karabakh, and in the Shaumyan and Khanlar regions just outside, sporadic fighting — which since the beginning of January had already left six people dead — turned into full-scale guerrilla warfare, with rival bands in possession of stolen Army weapons, armoured vehicles, makeshift rocket launchers and even helicopters.
On Jan. 15 the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium, meeting in emergency session, decreed the despatch of Army, Navy and KGB units to Azerbaijan to try to halt the violence.
Some 5,000 regular troops, together with an additional 6,600 Interior Ministry troops, were sent to join over 6,000 Interior Ministry troops already in Azerbaijan.
The Presidium also declared a state of emergency in Nagorny Karabakh and the adjacent regions of Azerbaijan proper, in a border region of Armenia, and along Azerbaijan's borders with Iran and Turkey.
The troops were authorized on Jan. 17 to fire on Azerbaijani or Armenian militants to defend themselves or to protect weapons stores.
On the same day it was reported that efforts to impose the state of emergency regulations were being hampered by mass civil disobedience, with demonstrations and road blocks slowing the movement of the newly arrived military units from airfields at Yevlakh and Gendzhe (Azerbaijan's second largest city, formerly Kirovabad; it had been given back its pre-Soviet name on Dec. 30).
Military assault on Baku
Baku, meanwhile, remained without special security measures or curfew restrictions, and gangs of looters were said to be attacking abandoned Armenian homes largely unchallenged by the sole detachment of 1,000 Interior Ministry troops who had arrived from Moscow on Jan. 14.
Armenians were sheltering in Army barracks or were being evacuated from the city by boat across the Caspian Sea to Krasnovodsk in Turkmenia.
A state of emergency was ordered for Baku by the USSR Supreme Soviet Presidium on Jan. 19, after demonstrators had massed for three consecutive days outside the Azerbaijan CP central committee's headquarters to demand the leadership's resignation, and had erected barricades on the city's outskirts to prevent the entry of Soviet troops.
Troop reinforcements were also ordered for Azerbaijan and Armenia.
Shortly before midnight on Jan. 19 Soviet troops began an assault on the city by land and sea, using tanks to smash the barricades, and there ensued bitter street battles.
The official death toll from the assault was put at 83, including nearly 70 civilians, but nationalists claimed that it was as high as 600.
Sporadic sniper fire continued throughout Jan. 20 in Baku.
At the same time thousands of angry and grieving demonstrators defied the state of emergency and gathered outside the Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet building, where the Presidium President, Elmira Kafarova, issued a statement denouncing the military action and declared three days of national mourning.
On Jan. 22 more than 750,000 people thronged the streets of Baku for the mass funeral of Azerbaijanis killed in the troop assault on the city.
Thousands of Azerbaijan CP members symbolically burned their party cards.
On Jan. 25 the USSR Defence Minister, Gen. Dmitry Yazov, told a press conference for Soviet journalists in Baku that the authorities had ordered the military intervention to pre-empt a meeting of the Popular Front scheduled for Jan. 20 at which its leaders would have announced that they had seized power in Azerbaijan.
However, this statement was apparently contradicted by Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze on Jan. 29 when he asserted that "the introduction of troops was prompted not by political goals connected with the suppression of dissent…but by the sole aim of ending bloodshed" .
Dismissal of Azerbaijan CP leader
Abdul Rakhman Vezirov was dismissed as Azerbaijan CP first secretary on Jan. 20.
A meeting of the party central committee on Jan 24 elected to replace him Ayaz Niyaz ogly Mutabilov, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, at the same time expelling Vezirov from the party.
The authority of the Azerbaijan CP had all but collapsed in the face of the latest upsurge of Popular Front support.
Gasan Aziz ogly Gasanov was appointed as the new Chairman of the Council of Ministers on Jan. 26.
Secession threat by Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet — Earlier secession declaration in Nakhichevan
The Azerbaijan Supreme Soviet, meeting in emergency session, on Jan. 22 threatened that unless all troops were withdrawn from Azerbaijan within 48 hours it would call a referendum on Azerbaijan's session from the Soviet Union.
A general strike began in Baku on the same day.
Nationalists in Nakhichevan on Jan. 19 had declared the region's secession from the Soviet Union and their intention to set up an independent Islamic republic.
Soviet authority had already collapsed in two towns in south-east Azerbaijan close to the Iranian border — Jalilabad, where Popular Front activists had seized control on Dec. 29 after driving out government and CP officials and police, and Lenkoran, where similar events occurred on Jan. 11.
Lifting of blockade of Baku port
Soviet tanks and artillery, backed by naval guns, on Jan. 24 smashed a blockade by merchant ships of Baku's port.
The 40-minute bombardment reportedly sank several oil tankers and barges in the harbour.
The blockade had been mounted after rumours that the true Baku death toll was being concealed by the military authorities' dumping of bodies of victims in the Caspian Sea.
Clampdown against nationalist groups — Offers of peace talks
The military authorities in Baku moved against the Azerbaijan Popular Front on Jan. 24, arresting 43 leading members and raiding the offices of the National Defence Council, a radical group allied to the Front which had allegedly been responsible for co-ordinating arms supplies to Azerbaijani militants.
On the previous day a military decree had been issued reaffirming a ban on all strikes and protest meetings, introducing 30-day administrative detention without trial, and outlawing specified nationalist organizations including the National Defence Council.
Despite this clampdown, USSR Interior Minister Vadim Bakatin was quoted on Jan. 25 as calling for dialogue between officials and moderate elements within the National Front to end the violence.
On the same day the first indication that such dialogue was already under way came with the announcement that evacuation of Armenian and Russian refugees and servicemen's families from Baku had been suspended after the Popular Front had agreed to guarantee their safety (more than 30,000 people, including most of Baku's Armenian community, having already been evacuated in the previous 10 days).
By Jan. 28 there were reports that tensions in Baku and elsewhere were easing, with some relaxation of the general strike.
The Army was also reported to have regained control of Nakhichevan and Lenkoran.
The prospect that nationalists in Azerbaijan and Armenia might be able to settle the conflict in their republics without reference to the authorities in Moscow was raised on Jan. 24 when leaders of the Azerbaijan Popular Front and the Armenian National Movement agreed to attend peace talks organized by the Latvian Popular Front beginning on Feb. 1 in Riga (the Latvian capital).
Meanwhile, Armenian and Azerbaijani nationalists on Jan. 25 agreed a ceasefire along part of the border between Armenia and Nakhichevan.
The death toll for the month from the conflict throughout Azerbaijan and the Armenian border areas was put officially at more than 200.
EUROPE
EAST GERMANY
Disintegration of communist-led government — Round table talks
Unable to sustain a viable communist-led coalition government, Prime Minister Hans Modrow (in office since November 1989 — see p. 37025) made repeated calls during round table talks for opposition leaders to join a broader coalition.
On Jan. 28 agreement was reached to form an all-party government of national responsibility which would hold office until an early general election, the election date being brought forward from May 6 to March 18.
Around 2,000 East Germans continued to leave for West Germany each day (as against 344,000 for the whole of 1989).
The position of the Socialist Unity Party — Party of Democratic Socialism (SED-PDS — since December the new name of the communist Socialist Unity Party or SED — see pp. 37107-09) had been badly damaged over its controversial attempt to set up a successor organization to the hated State Security police or "Stasi" .
In the face of severe criticism from all parties Modrow conceded on Jan. 12 that no such office would be set up until after the general election.
Wolfgang Berghofer, the popular mayor of Dresden and an SED-PDS deputy chairman, was one of 40 officials to leave the party on Jan. 20, while others demanded that it be disbanded.
Christa Luft, Minister of the Economy, revealed at a round table meeting on Jan. 3 that the country's budget deficit in 1989 was 5,000-6,000 million Marks, of which agricultural losses due to adverse weather conditions totalled 1,300 million Marks.
Foreign debt to non-socialist countries was US$20,600 million (a higher per capita debt than Poland's, according to western reports).
On the foreign-exchange account, income in 1989 had amounted to US$9,300 million in 1989 but expenditure had been US$11,700 million.
Round table talks
Round table talks between the SED-PDS, the four other coalition or bloc parties (Liberal Democratic party (LDPD), Christian Democratic Union (CDU), National Democratic Party (NDPD) and the Democratic Farmers' Party (DBP)), the churches, and at least nine opposition groups, held on four occasions in December [see p. 37108], continued on Jan. 3, 8, 15, 18, 22 and 29.
On Jan. 3 eight opposition groups threatened to withdraw from the talks unless a complete report were presented at the next session on the disbanding of the security police and the disarming of former security officers.
(The government had agreed on Dec. 14 — see p. 37108 — to disband and replace the National Security Office, as the Stasi had been renamed in November.)
Opposition groups and the West German government accused the SED-PDS of exploiting fears of a neo-Nazi revival (the Soviet war memorial in Treptow, East Berlin, had recently been daubed with slogans demanding that Soviet forces return home) in order to re-establish the party's position through a reformed intelligence service.
They demanded that no action be taken on the SED-PDS proposal, involving creation of a new Office for the Protection of the Constitution, until after the general election.
(Government plans for an electoral law which would ban foreign financial support for parties in the elections were also criticized in both East and West Germany.
They were described as designed to disadvantage the fledgling opposition parties which could expect substantial support from West German sister parties.
The plans were later dropped.)
At the Jan. 8 round table meeting Peter Koch, who was responsible for disbanding the National Security Office (and was subsequently dismissed on Jan. 12), revealed that there had been over 85,000 Stasi employees, 25,000 of whom had already been dismissed; all weapons would be impounded by the end of January.
Describing the report as "shamefully inadequate" the Social Democrat delegate and others walked out and declared that they would withdraw completely if Modrow (who was in Bulgaria for a COMECON meeting — see p. 37202) did not present a satisfactory report at the next session on Jan. 15.
Also on Jan. 8 at the weekly Monday demonstration in Leipzig protesters chanted anti-SED slogans and for the first time called for the resignation of both Modrow and Gregor Gysi (who had replaced Egon Krenz as SED leader in December — see p. 37108).
Demonstrations by tens of thousands were held in numerous other towns.
Volkskammer session — Cabinet changes — Approval of new travel law
In a session on Jan. 11-12, in which round table delegates also participated, the Volkskammer (parliament) heard a statement by Modrow, approved changes to the Council of Ministers, and discussed legislative reforms.
Outside the building there were skirmishes among several thousand protesters when a minority attempted to protect the East German flag, which was hauled down by other demonstrators and replaced with the hammer and compass emblem cut out.
Faced with expressions of "growing concern" from Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany and vociferous criticism from the bloc parties (three of which threatened to leave the coalition over the issue), Modrow withdrew plans to create an Office for the Protection of the Constitution before the elections.
In the changes to the Council of Ministers, Kurt Wünsche (LDPD) replaced Hans-Joachim Heusinger (LDPD) as Justice Minister; Hans-Joachim Lauck (SED-PDS) replaced Karl Grünheid (SED-PDS) as Minister for Mechanical Engineering, and Peter Diederich (DBP) replaced Hans Reichelt (DBP) as Minister for the Protection of Nature, Environmental Protection and Water Management.
(Reichelt had resigned on Jan. 9 after 17 years in office, and on Jan. 18 testified to the parliamentary committee investigating corruption and abuse of office.)
Gerhard Schürer's post as Chair of the State Planning Commission was abolished and Grünheid took over the new position of Chair of the Economic Committee.
Wolfgang Schwanitz was dismissed as Head of the Office of National Security.
(On Jan. 22 Modrow announced that Uta Nickel had resigned as Finance Minister.
She was under investigation for allegedly ordering unspecified illegal payments in her former post but denied direct responsibility or any resulting personal gain.)
Disciplinary proceedings were to be brought against Günter Sarge, who resigned as President of the Supreme Court on Jan. 19, and against the deputy state Prosecutor-General, Harri Harland, for inadequate execution of their duties.
The Prosecutor-General, Günter Wendland, had resigned on Dec. 5 after criticism of his role in the case of Alexander Schalck-Golodkowski [see below], and was on Jan. 11 replaced by Hans-Jürgen Joseph.
The Volkskammer approved a new travel law to come into effect on Feb. 1, 1990.
Presented on Nov. 28 and given a first reading on Dec. 1, the new law had replaced an initial draft of Nov. 5 which had been immediately rejected.
The new law gave every citizen the right to travel abroad and to return to the German Democratic Republic (GDR) at any time.
Hard currency needed for travel would be obtained from a fund financed by both East and West Germany [see p. 37109 for Dec. 5 agreement on this issue].
In addition GDR citizenship would only be lost if a citizen renounced it.
The Volkskammer also approved constitutional changes to allow participation by foreign companies in East German firms.
Foreign investment was, however, not generally to exceed 49 per cent of the firm's capital.
During a two-day visit to West Germany Luft agreed on Jan. 16 that special provisions could, however, be made for small- and medium-sized enterprises.
The government had announced on Jan. 4 that military service was to be reduced from 18 to 12 months.
The Volkskammer on Jan. 11-12 gave a first reading to a law allowing an alternative of 18 months' civilian service.
Programme for transition to market economy
On Jan. 15 as part of a three-stage plan of "transition to an efficient market economy" subsidies worth 1,200 million Marks a year were cut on children's clothes, shoes and some other items.
Further cuts in two stages were substantially to reduce the overall annual business subsidies, which totalled 51,000 million Marks.
Luft's plan, which had been announced on Jan. 13, omitted previous emphasis on a "socialist" market economy and envisaged the lifting of restrictions on private ownership.
On Jan. 24 she announced further proposals which envisaged lifting the state's foreign trade monopoly, full convertibility for the East German Mark by 1992, the lowering of tax rates, and the introduction of a commercial banking system.
Opposition party developments
Six opposition groups announced on Jan. 3 that they had formed an "Alliance" 90"to contest the general election, although differences soon emerged, in particular over reunification.
The group comprised Democracy Now, Democratic Awakening, New Forum, the Peace and Human rights Initiative, the Social Democratic Party, and the United Left.
United Left was reported on Jan. 7 to have left the alliance although it remained open towards it.
New Forum, which had first emerged in September 1989 [see p. 36895], decided at a delegates' conference in Leipzig on Jan. 6 not to form a political party but to remain a citizens' movement which was "open to citizens of different ideological and party opinions" .
Another conference on Jan. 27, at which membership was reported to be between 150,000 and 200,000, approved a programme favouring "radical disarmament and demilitarization of society,…a solidarity-based society which rests on the self-determination and tolerance of its citizens" , and the development of "the social net parallel to the [market]economy" .
New Forum would field candidates at local and Volkskammer elections.
The majority of delegates favoured German reunification if approved by a referendum in both countries.
About one-third of the delegates (including two of the by then three New Forum delegates to the round table talks) declared, however, that they could not support this aspect of the programme.
At the first national delegate conference of the Social Democratic Party on Jan. 12-14 delegates agreed to change the party's name from the Social Democratic Party of the GDR (Sozialdemokratische Partei der DDR — SDP) to the Social Democratic Party of Germany (Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands — SPD).
Identical with the name of its West German counterpart, this had been the party's name before its merger with the Communists in 1946, and an SPD executive announced on Jan. 23 that the party's pre-1946 assets were to be restored to it.
Although the party had at first favoured the maintenance of two German states the Jan. 12-14 conference affirmed its policy goal to be "a united Germany…with the consent of our neighbours" .
The conference was attended by Johannes Rau, the West German Minister President of North Rhine-Westphalia.
The German Social Union (Deutsche Sozialchristliche Union — DSU) was founded on Jan. 20 in Leipzig to unite all Christian, liberal and conservative forces in the GDR.
The umbrella organization hoped for funding from the West German Christian Democrat parties and at that stage comprised 12 opposition groups including the German Forum Party, the Progressive People's Party, and the Christian Social Party of Germany (Christliche Soziale Partei Deutschlands — CSPD).
The CSPD leader Hans-Wilhelm Ebeling, pastor at the Thomas Church in Leipzig, was elected executive chairman and Peter-Michael Diestel was elected general secretary.
Numerous other parties and groupings were formed during the month.
Ransacking of old Stasi headquarters
On Jan. 15 tens of thousands of protesters took part in demonstrations called by New Forum to lend "emphasis to demands for the unconditional dissolution of the Stasi" .
Outside the old Stasi headquarters in the Lichtenberg district of East Berlin demonstrators stormed and ransacked the building and were only persuaded to stop after Modrow and New Forum round table delegates broke off their meeting and appealed for calm at the scene itself.
This first violent incident in over three months of continued demonstrations raised political tensions and led both the CDU and LDPD to threaten leaving the government.
At the Jan. 15 round table meeting Modrow promised that the Office of National Security would be disbanded by Jan. 25.
He repeated an earlier offer to the opposition parties to participate in government.
Modrow visit to West Berlin — Kohl speech on German unity
In the first such visit by an East German head of government, Modrow went to West Berlin on Jan. 16 for talks on improving links and simplifying travel arrangements between the two halves of the city.
On Jan. 17 at the French Institute on International Relations in Paris Kohl made his first major speech abroad since presenting his 10-point plan for a German confederation on Nov. 28 [see pp. 37025-26].
Hitherto reticent on the question of the inviolability of existing frontiers, not least for domestic political reasons, Kohl on this occasion apparently addressed the issue particularly of retaining the Oder-Neise line between the GDR and Poland, declaring: "I should like to say clearly: no responsible politician in the Federal Republic of Germany…is dreaming of a Germany on the" pan-Germanic model "." 
SED-PDS party executive meeting
At an emergency meeting on Jan. 20 the SED-PDS party executive decided, despite pressure from the rank and file, not to disband the party since this would "lead to greater social tension, not less" .
At the meeting Berghofer resigned from the party along with 39 other members.
Berghofer was reconfirmed as mayor of Dresden shortly afterwards and declared that he would not join another party until after the election.
Krenz (who with two other former politburo members had resigned his Volkskammer seat on Jan. 9) and 13 other former politburo members were expelled from the party.
Membership was 1,400,000 in mid-January 1990 as compared with 2,300,000 in early 1989.
NDPD and DBD congresses
At a congress on Jan. 20 the NDPD voted against renaming itself the Republicans.
Wolfgang Gläser was elected chair instead of Günter Hartmann (elected on Nov. 2 — see p. 37024), but resigned three days later, saying that he did not wish to be identified with the right-wing of the party.
At a party congress of the DBP on Jan. 27 delegates representing 117,000 members (7,000 fewer than in October 1989) approved an electoral programme which included continued support for co-operative and state ownership of farms.
Günther Maleuda (parliamentary Speaker since November 1989 — see p. 37025) was re-elected party chair.
Agreement on government of national responsibility
Faced with the progressive disintegration of the SED-PDS, Modrow called at the ninth round table meeting on Jan. 22 for immediate talks on a grand coalition.
On the same day 100,000 people demonstrated in Leipzig chanting "Down with the SED" and "Germany united fatherland" .
Lightning strikes were increasingly breaking out throughout the country.
The three ministers belonging to the CDU (which had been under pressure from its West German counterpart to dissociate itself from the regime) also withdrew from the coalition on Jan. 25 "to make way for negotiations" but would continue in a caretaker capacity.
Modrow's offer was not immediately accepted but on Jan. 28, after seven hours of talks, Modrow and opposition groups reached agreement on the formation of a government of national responsibility in which eight opposition leaders would enter the Cabinet as ministers without portfolio.
As also approved by the Volkskammer on Jan. 29, the general election due on May 6 was brought forward to March 18.
Municipal and communal elections also due on May 6 would still be held on that date.
Corruption and treason investigations
As announced on Jan. 15 Erich Honecker, the former head of state, and Erich Mielke, the former head of the secret police, were to be charged with treason.
Honecker had undergone surgery for a malignant kidney tumour on Jan. 10 and was briefly arrested upon leaving hospital on Jan. 29, being released on Jan. 30 because he still needed medical attention.
The Prosecutor-General's office announced on Jan. 9 that preliminary proceedings were being brought for abuse of office and corruption against 30 former senior GDR officials including 10 former SED politburo members, Schalck-Golodkowski, former Secretary of State at the Foreign Trade Ministry, and Gen. Markus Wolf, former head of the GDR's counterintelligence.
On the same day Schalck-Golodkowski (who had given himself up to the West Berlin authorities on Dec. 7 — see p. 37107) was released in West Berlin because there were reportedly insufficient grounds on which to open legal proceedings against him.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Collapse of federal communist Party congress
The ruling League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) on Jan. 20 began its 14th (extraordinary) congress in Belgrade.
The main item on the agenda was a policy declaration committing the party to the creation of a pluralist political system in Yugoslavia [for controversy in early 1989 surrounding the convening of the congress see p. 36662].
In the four decades since the break with the Soviet Union in 1948 Yugoslavia had been the most open and liberal communist state, but in the wake of the recent overthrow of communist monopolies across Eastern Europe it now found itself, as The Times of Jan. 19 noted, "at the tail-end of East European reforms" .
Congress proceedings
In advance of the congress the League of Communists (LC) in each republic and province had accepted in principle the draft of a congress policy declaration entitled For a New Outline of Democratic Socialism for Yugoslavia.
As published in the newspaper Borba on Dec. 15, 1989, this document announced that "the end has come for authoritarian socialism" and stated that the LCY supported freedom of assembly and speech and all other civil liberties "regardless of political convictions" .
It said that the formation of associations, movements or parties "depends on the will of citizens" , and that the LCY would "campaign for its own political legitimacy" and would seek to retain power at free elections which would be "guaranteed by the Constitution" .
It also endorsed an independent judiciary, a mixed economy with equal status for private property, and Yugoslavia's "full participation in the European integration process" including accession to bodies such as the European Communities.
The declaration stated: "We are changing all of this now in order that tomorrow it will not be too late for socialism in Yugoslavia." 
Among the republican and provincial LCs there existed, however, deep divisions, most notably between the radical reformist Slovene LC, which advocated a full multiparty democracy and the transformation of the LCY into a loose confederation of independent republican parties, and the hardline Serbian LC, which sought to retain "democratic centralism" and warned that political pluralism translated into a full multiparty system would be exploited by nationalists seeking the fragmentation of the country.
The congress, attended by 1,654 delegates, was opened on Jan. 20 by the outgoing LCY central committee presidium president Milan Pancevski (Macedonia).
After nearly three hours of procedural wrangling the congress debate was opened by Pancevski's keynote address based on the draft congress declaration.
Thereafter, the debate immediately degenerated into exchanges of invective between the proponents of the diametrically opposed Serbian and Slovene positions.
Pancevski himself appeared to come down on the side of the Serbian position by stressing repeatedly that political pluralism "must be based on socialist orientation and the federal structure" and asserting: "The LCY finds unacceptable the thesis according to which the essence and form of political pluralism are reduced to a classic multiparty system alone." 
For his part the head of the Slovene delegation, Cyril Ribicic, reminded the delegates of the changes under way elsewhere in Eastern Europe and warned that the congress was "the last chance for Yugoslav communists to mark a watershed on the way towards multiparty pluralism" .
The Slovene party on Jan. 21 presented proposals for a new federal party structure, with eight independent parties free to make reforms at their own pace.
This was immediately rejected outright by the Serbian state presidency President and leading hardliner Slobodan Milosevic, who accused the Slovenes of creating a climate for "internecine warfare in the party and in the country" .
Meanwhile, commissions were attempting to finalize drafts of the various congress declarations, but dozens of contradictory amendments were being tabled by the various delegations.
The Commission for the Transformation of the LCY not only had to contend with the opposing Slovene and Serbian proposals, but also with proposals that the party be reconstituted as a Socialist Party of Yugoslavia, or even split into a communist and a socialist party.
Break-up of congress following Slovene walkout
On the evening of Jan. 22 the congress voted to endorse abolition of the LCY's constitutionally guaranteed leading role in society.
This was approved by an overwhelming majority (only 28 delegates voted against).
However, a vote on the Slovene proposals to restructure the federal party was resoundingly defeated.
Within a few hours the 126-member Slovene delegation walked out in protest over this defeat and over votes on amendments to the draft congress declaration, which had thereby rejected clear commitments to human rights and to closer ties with West European organizations.
Slovene LC leaders announced that links between their party and the LCY were suspended.
A proposal by Milosevic that the congress should continue without the Slovene delegation was rejected, and in the early hours of Jan. 23 Pancevski finally declared that the session, which had been due to adopt the full congress declaration and resolutions on the congress debate, as well as elect a new party leadership, had been adjourned.
He set no date for its resumption, however.
Yugoslav and foreign observers alike assessed that the effective collapse of the congress heralded the collapse of the LCY.
Position of federal government on multiparty system
The federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic on Jan. 23 declared in a nationwide broadcast that "Yugoslavia continues to function with or without the LCY" .
Deputy Prime Minister Zivko Pregl said on Jan. 21 that the outcome of the congress would not affect the government's plans to press ahead with legislation to change the federal Constitution and create the conditions for a multiparty system, and he observed that the LCY in future "will be relevant to the extent that it succeeds in elections which will be direct and secret" .
Scheduling of multiparty elections in Slovenia and Croatia — Proliferation of opposition parties
Multiparty elections to the republican Assemblies were scheduled to take place in Slovenia and Croatia in April 1990, the Slovene and Croatian LCs having given their endorsement at congresses in December 1989.
In both Slovenia and Croatia there had been a proliferation of new political parties in the past year.
By the end of January new opposition parties had also been formed in Macedonia, Serbia and Vojvodina.
However, the authorities in Serbia on Jan. 13 banned an opposition party calling itself the Serbian National Renewal because of its overtly nationalist programme.
Currently the only group claiming to be a nationwide opposition party was the Association for a Yugoslav Democratic Initiative [referred to on p. 36470 as the Initiative for a Democratic Yugoslavia].
Kosovo violence
In the last week of January violence erupted once again in the autonomous (Serbian) province of Kosovo.
Demonstrations by members of the majority ethnic-Albanian population appeared to have been sparked off by concern that, given the position taken by the Serbian delegation at the extraordinary LCY congress, Kosovar Albanians were to be denied a multiparty political system in the province which would allow Albanian nationalist parties to challenge Serbian domination.
Tens of thousands of Albanians in at least 12 Kosovar towns were involved in daily clashes with riot police which by the end of the month reportedly had left at least 27 people dead.
A crowd of more than 10,000 ethnic Albanians gathered outside the provincial LC headquarters in the capital, Pristina, on Jan. 24, and a representative of a new independent students' group read out a list of demands.
These included a multiparty system, the resignation of the provincial LC leadership, equal rights for Kosovar Albanians, the release of political prisoners and an end to political trials, and the lifting of the state of emergency in the province (imposed during the last serious disturbances in Kosovo in February-March 1989 — see pp. 36470; 36514-15).
Rahman Morina, the Kosovo LC presidium president, was booed and heckled when he tried to address the demonstrators.
After several hours the crowd had swelled to around 40,000 people.
Riot police used water cannon and tear gas against those who ignored warnings to disperse peacefully, and around 100 arrests were made.
Later, the Kosovo LC presidium denounced the demonstrators' demands as "unacceptable and hostile" .
As rioting spread to several towns by Jan. 26, the security presence was heavily reinforced throughout the province.
In Pristina special police units armed with automatic weapons lined the main thoroughfares and surrounded key buildings and the university campus, while guards were posted around villages inhabited by Serbs.
Police also occupied the Stari Trg mine at Trepca, the main flashpoint of the 1989 uprising [ibid.].
The first deaths occurred on Jan. 27, when (according to unofficial reports) at least nine Albanians were shot dead during clashes with police in the towns of Orahovac and Djakovica.
The Yugoslav media (which claimed only four fatalities from these incidents) said that police had acted in self defence after demonstrators fired on them with automatic weapons.
Another person died on the same day and at least eight people were hospitalized with bullet wounds after police had moved in to smash barricades erected by demonstrators at Pec.
At least four demonstrators were shot dead by police on Jan. 28 at Suva Reka, and on Jan. 29-31 another 13 people, including one police officer, died in clashes in various locations.
The worst rioting was in Podujevo, where on Jan. 29 and 31 several thousand demonstrators, many of them schoolchildren and students, fought running battles with police who resorted to rubber bullets and tear gas dropped from helicopters.
On Jan. 30 the violence took a new turn with a report of a direct confrontation between Albanians and Serbs in the village of Kosovska Vitina.
On Jan. 31 the federal Collective State Presidency announced that it had ordered (unspecified) "special measures" to try to end the violence; according to unofficial reports a majority of the Presidency members had voted two days earlier against sending federal troops to Kosovo to put down the unrest.
On Jan. 29 the Federal Executive Council (Cabinet) had called for dialogue to end the violence.
There appeared to be little prospect of dialogue, however, as Serbian political leaders were not only denouncing the Albanian demonstrators as "terrorists" , but openly accusing leaders in Slovenia and Croatia of trying to undermine Serbia by voicing support for the demands of the Kosovar Albanians.
In Belgrade (the Serbian as well as the federal capital) tens of thousands of Serbs and Montenegrins held a vigil on Jan. 30-31 outside the Federal Assembly building to demand that the Army be sent into Kosovo and to protest against the stance of the Slovene and Croatian leaderships.
Up to 100,000 demonstrators voiced similar demands in the Montenegrin capital, Titograd, on Jan. 31.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Civil war — Coup plot trial — Famine relief plans
Military actions by Tigrean, Oromo and Eritrean rebels
Against a background of impending famine, heavy fighting took place between government forces and the Tigrean People's Liberation Front (TPLF) during late December and January.
Reports of the fighting were contradictory.
It appeared that the TPLF initially made gains in Gondar, Wollo and Shoa provinces, but were then driven back by government troops, aided by some local inhabitants.
In particular, the government claimed that by mid-January it had recaptured the towns of Debre Tabor (in Gondar) and Mehal Meda, Jihur and Rabel (in Shoa).
The TPLF acknowledged on Jan. 6 that it had staged a "strategic withdrawal" from Debre Tabor.
Elsewhere, the previously quiescent Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) claimed a series of successes in early January, reporting the capture of Asosa, Mendi, Begio and Bambesi, all Oromo province towns close to the Sudanese border.
Six Cuban medical workers were seized by the OLF in Bambesi.
The Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) announced on Jan. 1 that it was freeing 10,000 Ethiopian prisoners of war.
In a new departure, EPLF gunboats attacked and set fire to a Polish freighter off the Eritrean Red Sea coast on Jan. 3; they seized the 30-strong crew and fired rockets to drive off a second Polish freighter which attempted to come to their aid.
The crew were subsequently released into Sudanese care on Jan. 22.
The EPLF apologized for attacking the ships, attributing this "mistake" to a "confused military situation" .
A Yugoslav vessel, bound for Massawa, was intercepted and briefly detained by the EPLF on Jan. 10, before being allowed to proceed to Djibouti.
The International Herald Tribune of Jan. 22 quoted US administration officials as saying that they strongly suspected that Israel had supplied cluster bombs to the Ethiopian Air Force.
Their comments, based on eyewitness accounts of bombing raids, followed persistent reports of substantial Israeli military assistance to Ethiopia; the two countries had renewed diplomatic relations in November 1989 [see p. 37035].
Reported agreement to allow commencement of food transport
The Archbishop of Canterbury, the Most Rev. Robert Runcie, announced on Jan. 18 after a meeting with Foreign Minister Tesfaye Dinka that the Ethiopian government had agreed to allow the church-based Joint Relief Programme to begin transporting food aid by road into rebel-held areas, in accordance with a December plan [see p. 37113].
Opening of coup plot proceedings
The trial opened on Jan. 9 of 14 senior military officers, including five major-generals, facing charges of mutiny and attempting to overthrow the government by force.
All the charges related to the coup attempt mounted in May 1989 [see pp. 36646-47].
A further 21 military and police officers were indicted on similar charges on Jan. 2.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Fighting in south
After the breakdown in December 1989 of talks aimed at ending the civil war in southern Sudan [see p. 37114], fighting broke out afresh in January, with the rebel Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA) claiming several victories in Eastern Equatorial province.
The SPLA claimed that the Bright Star campaign forces had captured the garrison town of Kajo Kaji, on the White Nile, 100 km south of Juba, on Jan. 6, after destroying an armoured column sent to relieve the town; Kaya garrison, to the west of Kajo Kaji, reportedly fell on Jan. 14, and on Jan. 28 the SPLA claimed to have captured the town of Yei, on the main road south-west from Juba to the frontier with Zaïre.
More than 100 foreign aid workers were evacuated from Juba on Jan. 29-30, benefiting from a brief ceasefire called by the SPLA.
Subsequent reports quoted them as saying that an atmosphere of panic pervaded the town, with a rebel assault expected daily, food running low, and government troops shooting civilians who attempted to flee.
The government had rejected repeated appeals by the SPLA that the 300,000 civilians to be allowed to evacuate Juba.
It was reported that about 20,000 refugees fled to Uganda and Zaïre in the last two weeks of January as a result of the fighting.
Arab-African clashes in central Sudan
Violent fighting between members of the Arab Sabaha tribe and the African Shiluk broke out in the countryside around Kosti, some 250 km south of Khartoum (the capital), at the end of December.
Large numbers of Shiluk who had fled their southern homeland were working as labourers for Sabaha farmers in the Kosti area.
An argument over the length of their Christmas holidays was believed to have triggered the clashes, in which up to 600 people were reported killed.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
Dismissal of Cabinet — Human rights reports
Criticism of the current government, expressed publicly in the newspaper of the ruling Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP) and at an SRSP central committee meeting on Jan. 8, led the country's President (and SRSP secretary-general), Maj.-Gen.
Mohammed Siyad Barre, to dismiss the entire Cabinet on Jan. 9.
Referring to serious economic difficulties and alluding to the continuing civil war, Barre said that the Cabinet had "not acted decisively to combat the problems" .
Unusually, when Lt.-Gen.
Mohammed Ali Samater was reappointed as Prime Minister on Jan. 21, Barre allowed him the responsibility of choosing his own ministerial team; no immediate announcements were made about who was to be chosen.
(In line with a review of the Constitution the President had said in November 1989 that free elections would be held the following year in which "all political currents will be able to express themselves and share power" .)
It was reported that Samater, the outgoing Prime Minister, was reappointed only after the failure of efforts to bring into the post someone from the Issak tribe, whose appointment could suggest some degree of reconciliation in the civil war.
The Issak had been the main casualties in the government's campaign to stamp out support for the rebel Somali National Movement (SNM).
The freighter Kwanda, detained by the SNM on Dec. 11 [see p. 37114], was released and arrived in Djibouti on Jan. 4 with its 12-member crew.
In their continuing efforts to cut off supplies to government forces besieged in Berbera, the SNM claimed to have captured another cargo ship in the Red Sea on Jan. 15.
The US-based Africa Watch on Jan. 18, and the international human rights organization Amnesty International on Jan. 25, published reports further damaging the Barre regime's image on human rights issues.
Africa Watch spoke of a campaign of terror and the indiscriminate slaughter of 50,000-60,000 civilians since the civil war erupted in May 1988, while Amnesty noted a wave of arrests and renewed killings in mid-1989, shortly after the departure of the team which the organization had sent to monitor implementation of a January 1989 amnesty [see pp. 36390; 36806].
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Suppression of rebellion
A rebellion in the north-eastern border region of Nimba county led during January to several hundred deaths in fighting between rebels and regular troops.
Between 13,000 and 16,000 people took refuge in Guinea and up to 40,000 in Côte d'Ivoire, where a relief operation was launched.
According to a message broadcast by President Samuel Doe on Dec. 30, 1989, armed rebels, said to have infiltrated from Côte d'Ivoire, attacked a border customs post on Dec. 24, killing an Army officer and replacing the Liberian flag with an "unknown" one.
Troops were sent to the area, but claims by Doe that the situation had been brought under control proved premature and a dusk-to-dawn curfew was imposed on the region in early January.
The rebels, thought to number about 150, managed to take control of several villages and, following one clash with regular forces on Dec. 31, to capture arms and ammunition.
By mid-January about 50 government troops and 50 rebels were believed to have been killed; some estimates put civilian deaths at several hundred.
Charles Taylor, a former government employee who was charged in 1984 with theft of government funds [see p. 32898]and had subsequently escaped from custody in the USA, claimed that a previously unknown group led by him, the National Patriotic Forces of Liberia (NPFL), was responsible for the rebellion.
The dissidents reportedly included former Liberian soldiers who had fled abroad after a failed coup attempt in 1985 [see p. 34147], when pro-Doe Army units exacted retribution against civilian inhabitants in the Nimba area Following the initial clashes between rebels and troops, the January 1990 fighting assumed a tribal nature, with rebels attacking members of the Krahn ethnic group (to which Doe belonged), while regular forces sent in from Monrovia (the capital) retaliated against the principal Nimba tribe, the Gio.
Doe on Jan. 22 warned members of the armed forces against "harrassment" of citizens in Nimba.
Alleged foreign involvement
According to the confessions of three captured rebels, broadcast on Jan. 11, a total of 150 men had undergone commando training in Libya and Burkina.
The Burkinabe government, however, denied harbouring or assisting subversives.
Liberian accusations to the effect that the Côte d'Ivoire government had provided support for the rebels put a strain on relations between the two countries, the Liberian ambassador in Abidjan being withdrawn "for consultations" in early January.
The Ivorian government claimed only to be providing humanitarian assistance to refugees from the conflict.
Cabinet and Army changes — Retrial of convicted coup plotters
The Internal Affairs Minister, Col. Edward Sackor, was dismissed on Jan. 2 and was later replaced by Ansumana Kromah, a native of Nimba county.
Sackor had in late 1989 headed a committee given the responsibility of investigating alleged subversive activity in the area, but which had concluded that the allegations were groundless.
On Jan. 24 Brig.
Edward Smith, commander of the battalion which had sent troops to Nimba county, was replaced by Brig. -Gen.
Moses Craig.
Meanwhile on Jan. 9 the Supreme Court ordered a retrial of 10 members of the opposition Liberia Unification Party who in October 1988 had been convicted of plotting against the Doe regime [see p. 36610].
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Aftermath of Cabinet reshuffle
President Ibrahim Babangida cancelled visits to the United States and to Italy scheduled for mid-January in response to unrest following the Dec. 29 reshuffle which affected the senior levels of the military and civilian structures [see p. 37115].
In the reshuffle Lt.-Gen.
Domkat Yah Bali, a Christian who was up till then considered to be the regime's "number three" , had lost the Defence portfolio and the post of Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and was removed from the Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC).
Refusing the offer of the Interior portfolio, he had announced his premature retirement from public service.
Christians demonstrated on Jan. 8 in the southern state of Ondo and on Jan. 11 in a number of northern, predominantly Moslem towns — Kaduna, Jos, Yola and Bauchi — against a perceived favouritism towards Moslems, in particular Hausa-speaking northern Moslems, in making high-level appointments.
Following the reshuffle, the President, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the Army and police chiefs, and the Ministers of External Affairs, Petroleum Resources, and Budget, were all northern Moslems.
Babangida, who declared that appointments were made solely on merit, had attempted to reduce ethnic and religious divisions among Nigerians in what was constitutionally a secular state.
The changes had effectively brought the security forces under the direct control of the President, who was now Minister of Defence and Commander in Chief of the Armed Forces.
Additionally, the State Security Service and the anti-riot Mobile Police Force now reported directly to him.
Thus, it was suggested, Babangida was well placed to forestall any attempt within the security forces to hinder the progress of transition to a civilian, two-party system of government by 1992.
Administrative secretaries were in early January appointed to run the two new parties, the National Republican Convention and the Social Democratic Party [see p. 36968].
At national level, Adamu M. Fika and Stephen B Agodo, both of whom had previously held senior posts in the Cabinet office, were named as the administrative secretaries; a further 44 secretaries were appointed at state level.
Austerity budget
The 1990 budget, presented by Babangida on Jan. 1, renewed the government's commitment to economic reform under the structural adjustment programme [see p. 37140], and stated that emphasis would be placed on reducing inflation and restricting monetary expansion.
Further cuts in government subsidies on petrol, diesel, kerosene and fertilizer were announced.
At the same time, Babangida expressed a commitment to "economic reconstruction, social justice and self-reliance" .
In addition, "corrective strategies" for the diversification of economic activity — at present too dependent on oil — would be implemented, specifically in the agricultural sector and relating to ongoing petrochemical and liquefied natural gas projets.
GDP growth (at 1984 constant factor cost) increased in 1989 by 4 per cent, slightly less than in 1988.
A GDP growth rate of 4.7 per cent was forecast for 1990.
The annualized inflation rate for 1989 was 47.5 per cent, but the actual rate at end-year was 44 per cent .
In response to higher than expected government revenue in 1989, as a result of an increase in the value of exports, especially oil, projected revenue for 1990 was set at naira 47,657million (US$1.00=N 7.6627 as at Jan. 8, 1990), of which N 38,628 million was expected to come from crude oil export (based on a estimated price of US$16 per barrel) and N 9,029 million from non-oil sources.
Overall revenue to federal government, however, under the terms of a new revenue allocation formula, was expected to be N 25,430 million, which after estimated total federal government expenditure of N 39,760 million, left a deficit of N 14,330 million.
A two-day visit to Lagos in late December 1989 by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Managing Director Michel Camdessus had given rise to speculation that the Fund would soon agree to further financing facilities [for 1989 standby arrangement see p. 37140].
In his budget speech Babangida announced that a provision of $2,000 million had been allocated for external debt servicing in 1990, which he considered to be "unsustainable" .
The government would therefore seek further debt reduction agreements with the London and Paris Clubs (of commercial and government creditors).
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Renewal of state of emergency
Parliament voted on Jan. 17 to renew for a further six months the state of emergency first imposed under the Ian Smith regime in 1965 [see p. 21092]and regularly renewed since then.
Only three MPs voted against the measure.
The Minister of Home Affairs, Moven Mahachi, said that the continued operation of the Emergency Powers Act was necessary because of the activities of Mozambican Renamo guerrillas along the country's eastern border; 60 Zimbabwean civilians had been killed since July 1989 by the rebels, who were now, he said, "more co-ordinated and organized" .
As a further reason for renewing the Act he stated that "certain political parties" were training young Zimbabweans outside the country, with the aim of having them return to commit destabilizing acts.
Human rights organizations opposed the emergency powers, which allowed for indefinite detention without trial.
Government change
President Robert Mugabe announced on Jan. 19 the merger of the Ministry of Trade and Commerce with that of Industry and Technology, to be managed on an acting basis by the Minister of Industry and Technology, Bernard Chidzero, who was also Senior Minister for Finance, Economic Planning and Development.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Fighting — Halt in Cuban troop withdrawal
With no apparent progress in mediation efforts in Angola [see p. 37115], the fighting intensified in January, particularly near Mavinga in the south-east, with the government forces — FAPLA — -deploying tanks, helicopters and MiG fighter aircraft.
By the end of the month it appeared that FAPLA, which claimed to be acting defensively, had breached the rebel UNITA defences and come close to capturing the airstrip near Mavinga, 19 km south of the Lomba river.
Heavy casualties were reported.
The Angolan and Cuban governments announced on Jan. 25 a temporary suspension of the Cuban troop withdrawal initiated under the New York agreements of December 1988 [see pp. 36480-81].
The suspension of the Cuban withdrawal was prompted by an attack on Jan. 21 by UNITA guerrillas on a water supply point in Benguela province.
Four Cuban soldiers guarding the point were killed and five injured.
UNITA attributed the incident to a lack of information regarding the movement of Cuban troops (all of whom, the Cubans had confirmed, were north of the 13th parallel, as required, by Oct. 25).
The incident, potentially jeopardizing the implementation of the New York agreements (and, by implication, Namibia's unimpeded progress towards independence), was discussed by the Angolan and South African Foreign Ministers at a meeting in Windhoek, the Namibian capital, on Jan. 26.
Of a planned 2,266 a total of 1,581 Cuban troops had been withdrawn during January, bringing to 31,138 the number withdrawn since January 1989.
The agreements envisaged the departure of all Cubans, totalling some 50,000, by mid-1991 [see p. 36481 for timetable].
Savimbi visit to Portugal
The UNITA leader Jonas Savimbi on Jan. 13 postponed a visit to Portugal in view of the military situation; he arrived there on Jan. 27, but returned on Jan. 30, cancelling plans to travel to other west European countries.
In the course of his visit, his first to Portugal since 1975 (when Angola's independence agreement was signed — see pp. 26973-75), Savimbi held discussions with President Soares and with Prime Minister Aníbal Cavaço Silva — the latter in his capacity as leader of Portugal's ruling Social Democratic Party and not as head of government.
The UNITA Chief of General Staff, Demostenes Amos Chilingutila, was replaced in mid-January by Arlindo Chenda Pena (known as "Ben-Ben" ).
Recommendation of reforms by ruling party
The central committee of Angola's ruling MPLA-PT party, at a session on Jan. 15-18, recommended certain reforms for consideration by the party's third congress, due to be held in December 1990.
A statement indicated that these would include as yet unspecified legal and political measures to enable Angolans to "participate democratically" in solving Angola's problems.
The party was also to redefine itself as "the vanguard of all working people" instead of "the vanguard of the working class" .
The committee reaffirmed, however, that the single-party system remained "the most appropriate" at this stage.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Setting of independence day
The Constituent Assembly elected in November 1989 [see pp. 37031-32]voted unanimously on Jan. 31 to adopt March 21 as the date for the formal declaration of independence.
Meanwhile disagreement among the 72 deputies to the Assembly over the draft Constitution delayed its formal adoption until Feb. 9.
Following its formalization by three South African legal experts on the basis of principles already adopted by the Assembly [see p. 37116], the draft Constitution was finally tabled for discussion on Jan. 25.
Reports indicated that it included strong guarantees of fundamental human rights, but that a number of clauses gave rise to heated debate, including proposed provisions allowing for detention without trial and for the postponement of local elections for five years.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
ANC Lusaka meeting — Internal developments
The African National Congress (ANC) on Jan. 21 ended a four-day meeting in Lusaka, Zambia, involving its national executive council (the exiled leadership) and the seven long-term ANC prisoners released by the de Klerk regime in South Africa on Oct. 15, 1989 [see p. 36964], who travelled to Lusaka on Jan. 14.
These seven, led by Walter Sisulu, had since their release addressed major pro-ANC rallies inside South Africa, acting as if the organization were no longer banned, and were widely regarded as constituting an effective "internal ANC leadership" , although the organization denied the existence of differences of approach.
Meanwhile, heightened expectations of the imminent release of Nelson Mandela had been fuelled by remarks on Jan. 8 by his wife Winnie Mandela, who said after a three-hour visit to his prison bungalow that "I don't think that we are talking about months any longer" .
With ANC president Oliver Tambo undergoing prolonged medical treatment (in connection with which he had travelled to Sweden on Jan. 3), the senior Lusaka-based ANC leaders were general secretary Alfred Nzo, as acting president, and Chris Hani, the chief of general staff of the ANC military wing Umkhonto we Sizwe.
Other influential executive council members were the head of the international department Thabo Mbeki (whose father Govan Mbeki was one of the seven released on Oct. 15) and Joe Slovo, who was also general secretary of the South African Communist Party (SACP).
Slovo's publication of a draft policy programme Has socialism failed?, revising the former hardline SACP stance to espouse multiparty democracy, received considerable attention, particularly in view of the close alliance between the SACP and the ANC, and the extent to which the threat of communism had been accentuated by the South African regime in its attitude to the ANC in the past.
Nzo had said on the ANC's 78th anniversary on Jan. 8 that the ANC would continue its armed struggle, and would only participate in any process of negotiations if it enjoyed equal political opportunities with all other participants.
On Jan. 16 he called again for an intensification of the armed struggle, but on Jan. 18 he reportedly told the executive council meeting that currently "we do not have the capacity within our country to intensify the armed struggle in any meaningful way" , that the ANC must "begin without delay to prepare our negotiating position" , and that in the event of its being unbanned it would have to decide whether to operate only as a legal movement or, alternatively, to maintain underground units.
The national executive had received the text of a 10-point proposal drawn up by Nelson Mandela, he said.
It had also set out its stance in the Harare Declaration, adopted by the Organization of African Unity (OAU) in August 1989 [see p. 36837]and subsequently endorsed by the Non-aligned Movement and the UN General Assembly.
President Kaunda of Zambia said on Jan. 22, at a summit meeting of the six frontline states in Lusaka which was also attended by the ANC leaders, that UN Secretary-General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar had confirmed that he had presented the Harare Declaration to the South African government shortly after Christmas.
At the end of the Jan. 21 ANC meeting Nzo issued a statement reflecting no change in the organization's stance on conditions for entering negotiations, and again reaffirming the need for armed struggle.
He also told a press conference that Sisulu and the other former prisoners, on their return to South Africa, were to make a "direct intervention" in the "fratricidal strife" in Natal; several hundred people had died there as supporters of the United Democratic Front clashed repeatedly with members of Inkatha, the predominantly Zulu organization led by Chief Mangosuthu (Gatsha) Buthelezi.
Nelson Mandela's lawyers on Jan. 25 made available to the press copies of a document, originally written by him in prison and given to the then President P. W. Botha in July 1989, which expressed his own view of the urgent need for the government to negotiate with the ANC.
Mandela reportedly gave a second document, containing the 10-point proposals subsequently discussed by the ANC's executive council meeting, to President F. W. de Klerk on Dec. 13 [see p. 37116].
On Jan. 26 a single-paragraph statement by Mandela, dated Jan. 25 and reaffirming support for the ANC's policy of nationalizing the "mines, banks and monopoly industries" , was released to refute rumours that he now favoured a mixed economy.
UDF repudiation of restrictions
On Jan. 17, challenging the government by repudiating unilaterally the restrictions prohibiting "any activities of acts whatsoever" formally imposed in February 1988, the United Democratic Front (UDF) held a press conference in Johannesburg, announcing that it would resume full public activity and reopen its offices.
Popo Molefe and Patrick Lekota, released from detention on Dec. 15 [see p. 37116], were reinstated as secretary-general and publicity secretary respectively, and the UDF announced "the intensification of the struggle" .
A national conference would be held on April 6-8, the first meeting since 1985 of the organization's national general council, when a new executive committee would be elected; the UDF would continue as "an integral part of the Mass Democratic Movement" and intended to maintain its own activities even after legalization of the ANC.
On Jan. 18 Justice Minister H. J. "Kobie" Coetsee announced that the government was taking a comprehensive approach in a review of the position of restricted and banned organizations.
A distinction drawn the previous day by Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok, who pointed out that the UDF was subject to restrictions but not formally banned, was dismissed by the UDF on Jan. 18 as a "play on semantics" ; moreover, the UDF had decided simply to disregard the restrictions, rather than apply to the authorities to have them lifted.
PAC attitude on negotiations
Holding a press conference in Gaborone on Jan. 26 during a visit to Botswana, Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC) president Zephania Mothopeng called for the total elimination of apartheid through armed struggle, and rejected de Klerk's reformist measures.
An ANC statement on Jan. 27 expressed regret that the PAC was controlled by hostile forces, and that efforts to bring it into the main course of the armed struggle had failed.
Transkei attitude on future of South Africa
Gen. Bantu Holomisa, military leader since the December 1987 coup in the "independent" Transkei homeland, met de Klerk in Umtata, Transkei, on Jan. 11; de Klerk also went to Ciskei on Jan. 18.
Holomisa told him that "winds of change" in South Africa had made people in Transkei doubt "the wisdom of clinging to independence" and that its future was "inseparably bound up with that of South Africa" ; he had promised to hold a referendum on this issue.
Relations with Transkei, where de Klerk urged a return to civilian rule, had been complicated by Holomisa's allegations that two men arrested on Dec. 29, 1989, had been South African agents on a mission to kill him.
Holomisa had ended Transkei's state of emergency on Nov. 7, 1989 [see p. 37033], freed ANC and PAC prisoners, and encouraged contact with the ANC; during a visit to the United States at the end of January 1990 he said that these measures showed a commitment to change and to unity on the part of all black people, and that he wanted to make Transkei's independence an instrument of liberation for South Africa.
Foreign Minister's visit to Hungary
Foreign Minister R. F. "Pik" Botha visited Budapest, Hungary, on Jan. 3-4.
His Hungarian counterpart, Gyüla Horn, who praised South Africa's role in resolving the Namibia question as well as welcoming de Klerk's reform programme.
South African reportedly sought to recruit skilled white labour in Eastern Europe, working in West Germany through the South African embassy in Bonn and the consulate in Munich.
On his return on Jan. 5 Botha referred to contacts with other (unnamed) Eastern European countries, but said that the establishment of diplomatic relations would depend on internal developments in South Africa in the coming months.
He called on the ANC to understand that, as he put it, their Eastern European "brother comrades" were gone and their political philosophy was dead.
The ANC on Jan. 6 called for demonstrations of protest at Hungarian embassies worldwide over Hungary's "bad faith and a cynical disregard for international agreements" .
A South African foreign affairs spokesman said on Jan. 5 that there had been contacts with Soviet representatives on a regular basis, "for example on the Namibian issue" , and "should we wish to pursue talks we would do so directly" , with no need for Hungarian or any other mediation.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
State of the Union address
In his State of the Union address, delivered to the US Congress on Jan. 31, President George Bush stated that "the events of the year just ended, the revolution of 1989, have been a chain reaction — change so striking that it marks the beginning of a new era in the world's affairs" .
Suggesting that "the time is right to move forward on a conventional arms control agreement, to move towards more appropriate levels of military forces in Europe" , he proposed that the USA and the Soviet Union should each reduce to 195,000 the number of their combat forces in central and eastern Europe.
Bush suggested that this figure reflected "the advice of our senior military advisers" and was "designed to protect American and European interests and sustain NATO's defence strategy" .
The President also stated that it was time "to offer our hand to the emerging democracies of Eastern Europe" and time "to build on our new relationship with the Soviet Union; to endorse and encourage a peaceful process of internal change towards democracy and economic opportunity" .
Nevertheless, whilst accepting that "the Soviet military threat in Europe is diminishing" , Bush claimed that there was "little change in Soviet strategic modernization" , and that, therefore, "we must sustain our own strategic offensive modernization and the Strategic Defence Initiative" .
He also declared that he agreed "with our European allies that an American military presence in Europe is essential — and that it should not be tied solely to the Soviet military presence in eastern Europe" .
The address covered a range of other foreign and domestic issues, on which excerpts are given below.
Panama.
"One year ago the people of Panama lived in fear, under the thumb of a dictator.
Today, democracy is restored.
Panama is free.
Operation "Just Cause" has achieved its objective.
The number of military personnel in Panama is now close to what it was before the operation began.
And tonight, I am announcing that — well before the end of February — the additional number of American troops…will be back home.
[For US invasion of Panama, deportation of Noriega and subsequent developments see pp. 37112-13; 37179; 37181.]
US values.
"America — not just the nation — but an idea,[is]alive in the minds of people everywhere.
As this new world takes shape, America stands at the centre of a widening circle of freedom — today, tomorrow and into the next century…
The cornerstones of this free society have already been set in place: democracy, competition, opportunity, private investment, stewardship and, of course, leadership.
Our challenge today is to take this democratic system of ours, a system second to none, and make it better.
"We need to save more — expand the pool of capital for the new investments that mean more jobs, more growth…
We need to cut the tax on capital gains — encourage risk takers…to take those steps that translate into economic reward, jobs, and a better life for all of us.
Federal budget.
"We'll do what it takes to invest in America's future.
The budget commitment is there…
It's there for research and development…
It's there for our housing initiative…
The money's there to keep our kids drug free…
It's there for space exploration, and it's there for education.
"That budget brings federal spending under control.
It meets the Gramm-Rudman target, brings that deficit down further and balances the budget by 1993 — with no new taxes.
Environment.
"…We will elevate the Environmental Protection Agency to Cabinet rank,…not more red tape, but the certainty that here at home, and in our dealings with other nations, environmental issues have the status they deserve.
This year's budget provides over 2,000 million dollars in new spending to protect our environment, with over 1,000 million dollars for global change research.
Foreign relations.
"For more than 40 years, America and its allies held communism in check, and ensured that democracy would continue to exist.
Today, with communism crumbling, our aim must be to ensure democracy's advance, to take the lead in forging peace and freedom's best hope — a great and growing commonwealth of free nations.
To the Congress and to all Americans, I say it is time to acclaim a new consensus at home and abroad — a common vision of the peaceful world we want to see.
Conclusion.
"The anchor in our world today is freedom.
Holding us steady in times of change — a symbol of hope to all the world.
And freedom is at the very heart of the idea that is America.
Giving life to that idea depends on every one of us.
Our anchor has always been faith and family.
"…
Let all Americans — all of us together here in this chamber, the symbolic centre of democracy — affirm our allegiance to this idea we call America.
And let us remember that the State of the Union depends on each and every one of us."
Presentation of 1991 budget
President George Bush presented a $1,233,300 million federal budget request for the fiscal year 1991 (beginning on Oct. 1, 1990) in an address to the joint Houses of Congress on Jan. 29.
The package adhered to Bush's election campaign pledge not to raise taxes, whilst also ensuring that, in theory, the budget deficit did not exceed $64,000 million, the legal requirement stipulated by the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction law.
(The Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act, passed in 1985 and amended in 1987 [see pp. 34094-95; 35895-96], was designed to eliminate the deficit by 1993.)
In practice, however, the proposed budget relied very heavily on accounting manoeuvres and optimistic assumptions concerning future levels of economic growth.
The $63,100 million deficit figure within the Bush package was achieved by savings and revenue raising measures totalling $36,500 million.
The savings [see budget headings below]consisted of cuts worth some $14,000 million in projected spending on middle class entitlement programmes (including Medicare and federal and military retirement programmes), and in farm subsidies, and a cut of over $3,000 million from the defence budget.
Revenue-raising measures were assessed as generating nearly $20,000 million.
They included reforms within the Inland Revenue Service (raising $3,000 million) and Bush's controversial capital gains tax changes, dropped from the fiscal 1990 budget under congressional pressure [see p. 37036], which actually involved reducing the rate of tax, but were assessed as encouraging sufficient declarations of capital gains in fiscal 1991 to raise an additional $4,900 million.
Details of budget proposal
Defence.
Defence Secretary Richard Cheney gave details of the $295,000 million defence budget request contained within the Bush budget.
It represented a 2.6 per cent decrease in real spending compared with the 1990 budget, and involved the recommended closure of 35 domestic military bases, the realignment or reduction of forces at a further 200 military facilities and the closure of 13 overseas bases.
Cheney described the cuts as based upon "fundamental changes under way in the world and Eastern Europe" and "dramatically altered circumstances from a fiscal standpoint" .
The cuts would reduce personnel numbers within the Army by 17,000, the Air Force by 15,000 and the Navy by 6,000.
The Air Force would also lose a squadron of B-52 bombers whilst the Navy would lose several vessels including the USS Iowa and USS New Jersey, two of its four battleships.
Several weapons systems received an increased budget allocation, however, including research spending on the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI) which was to increase by 22 per cent to $4,650 million, almost all of which would be used to investigate the possible deployment of small, space-based missile interceptors known as "Brilliant Pebbles" .
The budget also contained funding for the acquisition of a further five B-2 Stealth bombers ($5,500 million), an extra Trident submarine, the conversion of 12 MX intercontinental ballistic missiles into a rail-based mobile system and the continued development of the small Midgetman missile.
Education.
The proposed Education Department budget of $26,600 million represented an increase of only $500 million (2 per cent, i.e. below inflation for the second successive year, despite Bush's claim to be the "education President" ).
Social programmes.
Bush proposed a 6 per cent increase in the budget of the Department of Health and Human Services, the bulk of whose spending was concerned with income support and medical assistance.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development, which underwent deep cuts during the Reagan years, was to receive an extra $5,300 million (a 29 per cent increase).
Drugs.
The overall programme to combat drug use was set at $10,600 million, an increase of $1,100 million compared with 1990.
Of this sum, $7,600 million was targeted at law enforcement, $1,700 million at drug treatment and $1,400 million for drug prevention and education.
Environment.
Overall spending for environmental programmes was set to increase by $2,000 million, most of which would be spent on cleaning up radioactive and toxic waste at federal weapons facilities, preserving the country's dwindling areas of wetland and researching into the effects of global warming.
The budget included a $175 million plan to plant 1,000 million trees.
Foreign aid.
The budget included a request for $15,000 million for foreign aid, an increase of $1,000 million compared with 1990.
This included $300 million for a proposed new special assistance initiative for Eastern Europe to "support democracy and economic restructuring" , and a new $441-million anti-drug package for Latin America.
Space.
The budget proposed increasing the budget of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) by $2,800 million.
A significant portion of the new funds would be used for NASA's plans to conduct a massive study of the planet Earth, and for Bush's initiative to send astronauts back to the moon and on to Mars.
Other programmes.
Bush proposed a budget of $26,700 million (an increase of 12 per cent) for civilian research and development; and $41,400 million (a 4 per cent increase) for defence research and development.
The budget of the Transport Department was to increase to $26,900 million, and was to be directed primarily towards improving the country's air traffic control system.
The $30,900 million budget for the Department of Veterans' Affairs included an increase of $1,000 million in the allocation for its 172 hospitals.
Reaction to budget
Critics of the administration reproached Bush for his failure to take real steps to tackle the deficit.
The administration's forecast that the economy would grow at a rate of 3.3 per cent with interest rates falling by 2 per cent was castigated as unrealistic, a view echoed by most economic commentators.
Other planned savings were attacked because they were bereft of any specific proposals as to how they could be achieved (such as the planned reduction of $1,500 million in farm subsidies), or were derived merely from a change of financial practices.
The budget proposal was also assailed for including measures which had been suggested by the Reagan adminstration but which had been abandoned after their rejection by Congress.
Among these were plans to eliminate the transport operating subsidies (including those to Amtrak, the national passenger railway), and to cut by more than one third the programme to assist low-income families in meeting energy costs.
Frustration among the majority Democrats within Congress was directed towards Richard Darman, Director of the administration's Office of Management and Budget (OMB), and principal architect of the budget proposal.
The chairman of the House budget committee, Leon Panetta (Dem., California) suggested that the budget was "not a serious effort" to cut the deficit.
Marty Russo (Dem., Illinois), a member of that committee, accused Darman of leaving the hard budget choices to Congress and characterized the budget process as one "that stinks and lies" .
Democratic anger was compounded by the Congressional Budget Office's latest estimate of the 1990 budget deficit as $138,000 million.
The most recent estimate of the OMB — which was official yardstick for purposes of the Gramm-Rudman law, but whose record of accuracy was considerably inferior to that of the CBO — as contained within the budget proposal was $124,000 million.
Both sums were considerably in excess of the $100,000 Gramm-Rudman target for 1990 which Bush's previous budget, which also contained numerous accounting manoeuvres, had theoretically achieved.
Controversy over Moynihan proposal on social security payments
Even before the Bush budget had been presented, there was a widespread expectation that negotiations on the 1991 budget between the administration and Congress would be highly acrimonious.
This was partly due to the legacy of the bitterness over the 1990 budget [see p. 36969], but was also the result of an initiative made on Dec. 29, 1989, by Senator Daniel Moynihan (Dem., New York), who had suggested cutting social security contributions in an effort to make the US taxation system more progressive and to unmask the true size of the budget deficit.
Social security employee contributions, a payroll tax levied at a flat rate of 7.65 per cent on the first $51,300 of an individual's earned income, were paid into trust funds and used to finance retirement benefits and Medicare — health-care programmes for the elderly.
The level of contributions had been increased sharply in recent years in order to make provision for a demographic trend whereby in the early part of the 21st century an increased proportion of the total population would be in receipt of retirement benefits at a time when the proportion in work (and therefore contributing to the funds) would be reduced.
Since the currently accumulating social security receipts were invested in Treasury securities, however, they were being used to fund the current budget deficit.
It was estimated that the level of social security contribution cuts suggested by Moynihan would increase the 1991 budget deficit by $55,000 million, thereby making it imperative to impose real cuts in spending or to raise new taxes if the Gramm-Rudman target was to be achieved.
The administration opposed Moynihan's suggestion, but the proposed budget contained a commitment to isolate the social security contributions from the calculation of the budget deficit starting in 1993 — after the next presidential elections — when, in theory, the budget should be in balance in accordance with the Gramm-Rudman schedule.
Moynihan and his growing body of supporters ridiculed this proposal, and many commentators felt that the administration would find it very difficult to reject Moynihan's demand for an immediate social security tax cut (which would benefit all citizens) whilst pursuing a reduction in capital gains tax which would be of chief benefit to those who were already among the most wealthy.
Arraignment of Manuel Noriega
Gen. Manuel Noriega, the former Commander of the Panamanian Defence Forces and self-proclaimed head of state, surrendered to the US military on the evening of Jan. 3, leaving the papal nunciature in Panama City where he had taken refuge on Dec. 24 following the invasion of Panama by US forces on Dec. 20 [see pp. 37112-3].
He was immediately flown to Florida to face drugs trafficking charges.
In February 1988 he had been indicted by a Miami grand jury for having conspired between 1981 and 1986 with the Medellín drugs cartel of Colombia to traffick drugs into the USA.
On his surrender Noriega was transported by helicopter to the nearby Howard Air Force Base in Panama, and there he was turned over to representatives of the US Drug Enforcement Agency.
He arrived at Homestead Air Force Base in Florida in the early hours of Jan. 4, and was finally transferred to a cell in the basement of the Miami federal courthouse.
Making his first court appearance on Jan. 4, Noriega refused to enter a plea, on the grounds that he was a political prisoner who had been illegally apprehended.
US District Court Judge William Hoeveler, who presided over the arraignment proceedings, entered a not-guilty plea on the prisoner's behalf on the 12-count indictment which charged Noriega with having used his position as Commander of the Panamanian Defence Forces to provide protection for drug traffickers and to allow a cocaine-manufacturing laboratory to be established in Panama.
The indictment also named 15 co-defendants, ranging from Lt. Col. Luis del Cid, Noriega's closest confidant, to minor figures including several pilots.
Five of the 15, including del Cid, were in US custody.
Noriega's team of defence lawyers gave notice that they intended to pursue a defence strategy based jointly on aspects of international law and on domestic US criminal procedure.
Under international law there was considerable doubt about the legality of Noriega's seizure.
His removal to the USA was a violation of Panamanian law prohibiting the extradition of its nationals, and, as a foreigner who had committed his alleged crimes outside the USA, the US claim to jurisdiction to try Noriega was far from certain, although some legal experts suggested that sufficient precedents existed to circumvent any such defence.
There was also a degree of uncertainty surrounding the extent to which, as a head of state (since Dec. 15, 1989 — see p. 37112), he was entitled to sovereign immunity.
The litigation involving the late ex-President Marcos of the Philippines [see pp. 36428; 36893]suggested that such immunity did not apply to a former head of state particularly when it was specifically waived by the country from whence he had been deposed.
The lines of defence open to Noriega involving US criminal procedure included the claim that the publicity surrounding the case was so intensive and pejorative that it would be impossible for Noriega to receive a fair trial.
There was also a possibility that documents seized during the US invasion of Panama could be ruled inadmissible as evidence on the grounds that they were illegally obtained.
Also, because of the absence of any significant physical evidence, the case against Noriega was expected to rely heavily on the testimony of self-confessed drug criminals who had reached plea bargaining arrangements with the US authorities in return for giving evidence.
(A claim by the US military that 50 kg of cocaine had been discovered in a house used by Noriega for voodoo rituals was retracted on Jan. 22 when it was admitted that the substance was in fact tamales, a central American foodstuff, wrapped in banana leaves.
Although an estimated 450 kg of cocaine and other drugs had been discovered since the US invasion, none could be linked directly with Noriega.)
A core element to the case, as in that of the trials arising from the Iran-contra scandal, was expected to involve access to classified material [see, for example, p. 36392].
There were fears that the proceedings could become deadlocked by defence demands for documents relating to Noriega's role as a Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) operative which could prove very embarrassing to the US administration, and in particular to President Bush, director of the CIA in 1976-77.
To refuse access to such information on the basis of national security considerations might open the possibility of the case against Noriega being dismissed on the grounds that the defendant was being denied information essential to his defence.
A team of specialists in national security matters from the federal Justice Department was dispatched to Miami within days of Noriega's arraignment to assist with this aspect of the prosecution case.
The first skirmish over the national security issue came at a closed hearing on Jan. 11 when it was reported that the prosecution had accused the lawyer of one of Noriega's co-defendants of improperly disclosing classified information when making an earlier request for access to National Security Council records.
In a surprise move on Jan. 17 Judge Hoeveler stated that he wanted to bring the Noriega case to trial "very quickly" , and set a trial date for March 5.
Prosecuting counsel Myles H. Malman assured Hoeveler that the prosecution case would be ready by that date unless it was impeded by defence motions demanding the disclosure of classified documents.
Frank Rubino, Noriega's chief defence lawyer, described himself as "shocked" by the judge's suggestion, having previously estimated that it would take at least nine months before the case would be ready for trial.
A motion for Noriega's release on bail was denied on Jan. 26 on the grounds that he represented "an extraordinary danger to the community" and that he might use his "vast wealth overseas" to flee to a country from which the US could not recover him.
A defence motion filed on the same day, however, caused consternation with the claim that Noriega was a US prisoner of war who should be transferred to a neutral third country for trial.
Rubino also alleged that the US treatment of his client constituted a serious breach of the 1949 Geneva Convention governing the treatment of prisoners captured during any international conflict, including undeclared wars involving forces of an unrecognized government.
Experts in international law agreed that, should Noriega succeed in establishing his claim for POW status, not only would the terms of his current imprisonment be radically altered but also the scope of any possible sentence.
On Jan. 28 Noriega was transferred to the Metropolitan Correctional Centre 25 miles south of Miami.
Sentencing of Richard Secord
Retired Air Force general Richard V. Secord was sentenced to two years' probation on Jan. 24 for his role as one of the principal participants in the Iran-contra scandal.
In November 1989 Secord had pleaded guilty to a felony charge of making a false statement to congressional investigators by denying that he knew that funds from the Iran-contra operation had been used to instal a security system at the house of Oliver North.
His admission was part of a plea bargain with independent counsel (special prosecutor) Lawrence E. Walsh whereby a further 11 charges were dropped [see p. 37037].
Resignation of legislator
Robert Garcia, a Democratic member of the House of Representatives for New York, resigned his seat on Jan. 7 shortly before being sentenced for his role in the Wedtech corruption case.
Garcia and his wife, Jane Lee Garcia, were convicted in October 1989 of extorting $178,500 in cash, loans and jewellery from the Wedtech Corporation, a now-defunct defence contractor [for their indictment in November 1988 see p. 36679].
In resigning the South Bronx district seat which he had held since 1978, Garcia followed the example of fellow Democrat Mario Biaggi who had resigned from the House of Representatives in August 1988 after being convicted in connection with the Wedtech affair [ibid.].
Garcia's resignation ended an inquiry into his conduct by the House ethics committee.
On Jan. 19 Garcia and his wife were each sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
Inauguration of black Governor of Virginia
Douglas Wilder became the first elected black Governor in US history when he was sworn in at Richmond, Virginia, on Jan. 13.
Wilder narrowly defeated his Republican opponent in November 1989, his 6,700-vote victory being confirmed only after a recount.
In his 20-minute inaugural address Wilder stated that his election represented "not a victory of party or the accomplishments of an individual, but the triumph of an idea…as old as America…that all men are created equal" .
Arrest of mayor of Washington DC on drug charges
Marion Barry, the mayor of Washington DC for the past 11 years, was arrested on Jan. 18 after being secretly filmed allegedly buying and smoking crack, a highly addictive cocaine derivative.
Medical tests conducted later that evening found evidence of cocaine in the mayor's blood and urine samples.
On the following day Barry was charged with possessing crack — an offence punishable by up to one year's imprisonment — and was released without bail pending a further hearing on Feb. 5.
Barry announced that he would not resign "at this point" but would seek to "heal my body, mind and soul" .
He left the city on Jan. 22 to begin a programme for alcohol dependency at a Florida clinic, leaving his official responsibilities in the hands of Carol Thompson, the city's chief administrator.
Barry's arrest resulted from an undercover "sting" operation conducted by the Federal Investigation Bureau (FBI) and the Washington police, which enlisted the assistance of Hazel "Rasheeda" Moore, a model and long-standing female friend of the mayor.
Moore lured Barry to the Washington hotel room where he was arrested after being filmed purchasing and smoking crack and requesting sex with Moore.
The motivation of Moore in co-operating with the operation was unclear, although FBI sources suggested that she had recently undergone a religious experience.
Although Barry had consistently denied the drug accusations which had bedeviled him throughout much of his time in office, pressure upon him increased significantly following his discovery in December 1988 in a Washington hotel room by police who had arrived to investigate drug allegations against Charles Lewis, a friend of Barry's.
Lewis was subsequently convicted on four charges of cocaine trafficking, and at a further hearing on Nov. 6, 1989, he testified that he had supplied Barry with crack on "more than one occasion" .
The accusation (the first to be made against Barry publicly and under oath) came as Lewis pleaded guilty to two charges of conspiring to purchase crack, as part of a plea bargain in which the prosecution dropped a further 15 charges in return for the assistance of Lewis in investigating Barry.
The mayor had responded to the accusation by dismissing Lewis as "a convicted felon" who would "say anything in court…trying to save his own hide" .
Despite the persistent rumours of drug use Barry commanded a considerable degree of popularity, particularly amongst the city's 70 per cent black population, and on Jan. 21, 1990, he had planned to announce his candidacy for a fourth consecutive term as mayor.
He frequently attempted to deflect criticism of his administration and personal life by characterizing such allegations as the product of white racism.
Even after his arrest opinion surveys suggested that Barry retained considerable support and that many of his constituents believed him to have been the victim of a vindictive campaign of persecution by the federal authorities.
There was also widespread disquiet over the nature of the undercover operation which had trapped him.
Although the Rev. Jesse Jackson had formally moved his address to Washington DC in 1989 — thereby making him eligible to run for mayor — he had persistently maintained that he would not stand against his "old friend" Barry.
Asked for his reaction to the news of Barry's arrest, Jackson declared that he was "too stunned to react" .
Agreement to end coal strike
Representatives of the United Mine Workers' Union (UMW) reached an agreement on Jan. 1 with the Pittston Coal Company to end a nine-month strike by more than 2,000 miners.
Although the precise terms of the agreement remained undisclosed — pending its ratification by the union's membership and the company's board of directors — William Usery, the official mediator, described it as fair, honourable and "a victory for collective bargaining" .
The dispute had begun in April 1989 when Pittston announced that it intended to cut costs by withdrawing from the Association of Coalmine Operators, the body responsible for negotiating labour contracts with the UMW on an industry-wide basis and for providing health and pension benefits.
At its height, the bitter strike produced numerous acts of violence and involved over 46,000 miners in 10 states in sympathetic "wildcat" actions.
In contrast to the laissez-faire attitude towards labour disputes displayed by the Reagan administration, President George Bush's Secretary of Labour, Elizabeth Dole, had intervened in the dispute in October 1989 when she appointed Usery (himself a former Labour Secretary) as mediator.
Pittston chairman Paul Douglas, who had refused to negotiate with UMW president Richard Trumka prior to Usery's appointment, described Dole's intervention as "a magical stroke" .
Conclusion of child molestation trial
The longest and costliest criminal trial in US history ended on Jan. 18 when Raymond Buckey and his mother, Peggy McMartin Buckey, were acquitted of charges that they had sexually molested children at their family-owned kindergarten in Los Angeles, California.
The jury returned verdicts of not guilty on 52 counts of child abuse but was unable to reach a conclusion on a further 12 such charges against Raymond Buckey, and on a joint conspiracy charge against the two.
Superior Court Judge William Pounders dismissed the conspiracy charge and declared a mistrial in the case of the other 12 counts.
The trial, which had begun in April 1987, was estimated to have cost $15,000,000.
When the original allegations were made in 1983 the case generated a huge degree of publicity and sparked off an intense national debate over the safety of children in private nurseries.
In 1984 a total of 115 charges involving 41 children were filed against seven members of the kindergarten's staff (including Raymond Buckey's aged grandmother), although these numbers were later reduced.
Raymond Buckey spent almost five years in prison before being released on bail in February 1989.
At a hearing on Jan. 30 it was announced that retrial on the outstanding charges would begin on March 9.
AMERICAS
PANAMA
Surrender of Noriega — Aftermath of invasion
Following the United States invasion of Panama on Dec. 20 to remove Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega from power [see pp. 37112-13], Noriega on Jan. 3 voluntarily left the papal nunciature, where he had sought refuge, and gave himself up to the US authorities after being persuaded by the papal nuncio, Mgr José Sebastián Laboa, that asylum in a third country was not a viable option.
A hostile demonstration by about 20,000 people near the nunciature earlier on Jan. 3 apparently influenced his decision.
Noriega left the nunciature in full military uniform and, as he had requested, surrendered to a US general.
[For his subsequent formal arrest by US Drug Enforcement Agency officials and departure for the USA see p. 37179.]
Assurances had been given by the USA that he would receive a fair trial and would not face the death penalty.
His departure gave rise to widespread public rejoicing, as Panamanian citizens joined US troops in jubilant street celebrations.
Nine prominent members of the Noriega regime were thought to remain in the papal nunciature, one of whom, Lt.-Col. Nivaldo Madriñán, head of the criminal investigation force, surrendered on Jan. 4.
By the end of January US forces still remained stationed near the Cuban and Peruvian embassies (where members of the deposed regime and their families, including Noriega's wife and daughters, were still taking refuge) and were stopping and searching vehicles leaving diplomatic premises.
The new government of President Guillermo Endara (installed by the US authorities at the start of the invasion) threatened on Jan. 3 to break off diplomatic relations with Cuba and Nicaragua (the only two countries to have consistently supported the Noriega regime) if they continued to refuse to recognize the new authorities of the country, and the Peruvian chargé d'affaires, Luis Sandiga, was on Jan. 16 ordered to leave the country.
The residence of the Nicaraguan ambassador had been ransacked by US troops on Dec. 29, prompting an apology from US President George Bush.
The head of the newly formed Panamanian Public Force (FPP), Col. Roberto Armijo (hitherto police chief under Noriega, and since the failed coup in October 1989 a member of the General Staff of the Armed Forces), resigned on Jan. 3.
He was replaced by the deputy commander, Lt.-Col. Eduardo Herrera Hassan, who had returned from exile after the invasion.
President Endara confirmed on Jan. 23 during a visit to Costa Rica that his government intended to abolish the Panamanian Defence Forces in favour of a civil guard force modelled along Costa Rican lines.
Cost of invasion — Announcement of US aid
The cost of the US invasion as regards losses from damage and looting, which was worst in Panama City and in Colón, was estimated in early January at US$2,000 million, according to the president of the Panamanian Chamber of Commerce.
Hundreds of homes had been destroyed in the battles between US troops and the Panamanian Defence Forces (FDP), especially near the FDP headquarters.
President Endara on Jan. 18 appealed for international aid to rebuild Panama, and on Jan. 25 President Bush announced a package of aid for Panama worth $1,000 million.
Half of the amount was destined for housing, public works and other economic assistance, while the remainder was to be made up of export assistance and trade benefits.
Casualty and detention figures
Casualty figures released by the US Defence Department on Jan. 9 stated that 220 Panamanian civilians and 314 members of the FDP had been killed and 124 FDP members wounded.
Earlier figures given out by the US Army in January said that 23 US soldiers had been killed (later amended to 26) and 323 wounded.
US military officials said that only about 130 people remained in detention out of a total of 5,300 Panamanians who had been held for questioning since the invasion.
Commencement of troop withdrawal
The first withdrawal of US troops began on Jan. 2 with the return of about 300 troops to the USA, and as of Jan. 7 a total of 3,300 troops had returned home, out of a total of 26,000 who had been in Panama.
(These included 13,000 based in Panama and an extra 2,000 troops flown in on Dec. 23 to restore order in Panama City.)
US Southern Command officials said in mid-January that the aim was gradually to reduce US troop strength in Panama to its pre-invasion level of about 13,000.
AMERICAS
EL SALVADOR
Charging of soldiers with murder of Jesuits
President Alfredo Cristiani stated in a broadcast on Jan. 7 that investigations had shown that elements of the armed forces were involved in the murders on Nov. 16 of six Jesuits and their two servants [see pp. 37037-38].
A special commission had been formed, he said, comprising senior officers and civilian lawyers, to bring those responsible to justice.
In another broadcast on Jan. 13 he disclosed the names of nine men, eight of whom he said had been arrested, and a magistrate on Jan. 19 formally charged five soldiers and four officers including Col. Guillermo Alfredo Benavides, director of a military school, in connection with the murders.
A total of 45 soldiers and two officers of the elite Atlacatl battalion had been confined to their barracks during the investigation.
Progress of FMLN offensive in capital
The military estimated on Dec. 4 that 1,853 guerrillas and 450 government troops had been killed since the beginning of the offensive launched by the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (Frente Farabundo Martí para la Liberación Nacional — FMLN) in San Salvador on Nov. 11.
Radio Venceremos, the FMLN's broadcasting station, claimed on the same day that the armed forces had sustained 475 dead and 1,395 wounded.
A proposal for an internationally supervised ceasefire put forward by the FMLN on Nov. 22 was rejected the following day by Cristiani, who, however, offered on Dec. 10 to renew peace talks.
At the end of November guerrillas renewed their attacks on the wealthy suburbs of Escalón and San Benito and fighting also took place on the flanks of the San Salvador and Guazapa volcanos outside the capital.
The curfew was relaxed on Dec. 4 by five hours (and fully lifted on Feb. 1), but the state of siege remained in force.
Later in December the armed forces dropped leaflets over the capital calling for the death of guerrillas and their international allies, and urging "patriots" to destroy anyone who threatened their lives or property.
Fighting continued in the provinces, particularly in Usulután.
Murder of left-wing politician
Hector Oquelí Colindres, deputy secretary of the National Revolutionary Movement (Movimiento Nacional Revolucionario — MNR) and foreign policy spokesperson for the FMLN who lived in Mexico, was kidnapped by armed men on his way to the airport in Guatemala City on Jan. 12.
His body was later found in a Guatemalan village near the border with El Salvador, together with that of Gilda Flores, a member of Guatemala's Social Democratic Party, who had been abducted with him.
Oquelí, 45, was briefly Deputy Foreign Minister in 1979.
AMERICAS
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES
Canadian membership
Canada on Jan. 1 formally joined the OAS as its 33rd member, having held observer status since 1972.
The decision, reflecting increased priority to be given to the hemisphere in Canadian external relations, had been announced by Prime Minister Brian Mulroney at the Costa Rica Pan-American summit on Oct. 27, 1989 [see p. 36972], and Canada had signed the OAS Charter on Nov. 13.
INTERNATIONAL
AVIATION
Crash of Colombian jet in New York
A Boeing 707 belonging to the Colombian national airline Avianca crashed on Long Island, New York, on Jan. 25, during a second attempt to land at the city's John F. Kennedy airport, causing the death of 67 people and injuring some 80 of the remaining 91 people on board.
The airliner had come from Bogotá, the Colombian capital, via Medellín (Colombia).
Experts believed the crash to be due to pilot error, and sabotage was virtually ruled out of the investigation.
REFERENCES.
November 1989 Avianca crash in Colombia p. 37040.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Imposition and subsequent lifting of state of siege
Gen. Prosper Avril, the self-proclaimed President of Haiti, imposed a 30-day state of siege during the night of Jan. 20-21.
Under this emergency measure dozens of opposition figures were arrested without charge, and many were subsequently beaten and deported.
The decree also imposed strict censorship of the media, including the closure of opposition radio stations.
Those opposition leaders who were deported included Louis Roy, founder of the Haitian Red Cross and co-author of the country's 1987 liberal but short-lived Constitution [see pp. 35695; 36147]; Hubert de Ronceray, a conservative human rights campaigner; Antione Izmery, a leading businessman; Michel le Gros, a leading member of the Movement for the Installation of Democracy (MIDH); and Gerard Emile Brun of the social democratic National Congress of Democratic Movements.
Amongst those arrested were Serge Gilles, Joseph Manigat, Max Bourjolly, Sylvain Jolibois and Abby Brun.
Marc Bazin, the leader of the MIDH, who was a liberal economist and former Finance Minister and World Bank official, and who was considered by most observers to be the most likely candidate to win fair and free presidential elections, was not believed to have been amongst those detained.
The pretext for Avril's imposition of the state of siege was the murder on Jan. 19 of Col. André Neptune and his wife, who were shot by unidentified assailants.
The motive for the attack, which occurred in the vicinity of de Ronceray's house in Port-au-Prince, was unclear, but one possible explanation was that Neptune — who was travelling in a car similar to that owned by de Ronceray — was mistaken for the opposition figure.
Despite the fact that there had been at least 350 murders in Haiti in the past year, Avril responded to the attack by claiming that emergency measures were necessary "to protect democratic accomplishments against terrorism" .
Avril's action was also interpreted as a warning to the opposition.
When the President and a 28-member delegation (which included his wife and children) had made a state visit to Taiwan between Jan. 7 and 15, numerous opposition leaders had condemned the visit as a pointless extravagance which Haiti, the poorest country in the Western hemisphere, could ill afford.
In advance of Avril's visit Izmery and Roy sent a telegram to the Taiwanese government on behalf of the Committee for the Defence of the Constitution, claiming that the President lacked any constitutional authority.
The action of Avril, who had seized power in September 1988 in a military coup [see pp. 36281-82], appeared to have jeopardized the country's planned return to democracy, a prerequisite for the full resumption of US aid, suspended since the abortive elections of November 1987 [see pp. 35695-99].
(On Jan. 5 the Provisional Electoral Council had published a (slightly revised) electoral timetable for 1990 which included the scheduling of local elections on April 29, legislative elections on July 22 — with run-off contests on Aug. 12, and presidential elections on Oct. 28, with a run-off contest on Nov. 25.)
On Jan. 30, however, Avril announced the lifting of the state of siege, stating that it had "produced positive results" in the struggle against "terrorism" .
Although many of those arrested remained in detention, Avril suggested that elections would be held in accordance with the published timetable.
REFERENCES.
Reference article pp. 37070-72; April 1989 attempted coups p. 36586.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Developments in anti-drugs campaign
Cancellation of US naval activity
United States President George Bush reportedly assured President Virgilo Barco Vargas by telephone on Jan. 11 that the USA would never take any action against drug trafficking on Colombian territory "without the full consent of the government of Bogotá" .
The arrival of two US warships, the aircraft carrier John F. Kennedy and the cruiser Virginia, off Colombia's Caribbean coast on Jan. 7, without prior agreement between the two countries, had led to accusations from both the government and opposition parties that the USA had violated Colombia's sovereignty and was intent on an air and sea "blockade" .
Both vessels had withdrawn from Colombian territorial waters by Jan. 9 and the incident did not prevent a meeting taking place between representatives from Colombia, Peru and Bolivia on Jan. 10 in Santa Cruz, Bolivia, for the purpose of preparing the ground for the international drug summit (which Bush was expected to attend) scheduled to begin in the Colombian city of Cartagena on Feb 15.
Peace offer by drug barons
In a communiqué broadcast on Jan. 17 the leaders of the Medellín and Cali drug cartels, under their assumed name of the "Extraditables" , announced that they accepted the "victory" of the government of President Barco in the five month "war" waged between them [see p. 36844; 36889-90; 37119]and would end their hostilities, release their hostages, cease drug shipments and surrender weapons and explosives, in return for constitutional and legal guarantees which would respect their rights and allow them to return to their families and communities.
However, the determination of the drug barons to avoid extradition to the United States on drug charges was generally considered to have been the major factor behind the offer to surrender.
Their initiative was thought to have been in response to an open letter published on Jan. 15 under the signatures of three former Presidents, the Archbishop of Bogotá, and the leader of the left-wing Patriotic Union Party (UP), which had offered them the prospect of "society's support…for less rigorous treatment" by the government if they released the estimated dozens of hostages they had seized over the previous two months and stopped drug trafficking.
Barco, although widely rumoured to have been involved in the drafting of the open letter, stated on Jan. 19 that the war against the cartels would continue in order to "assure the final success of the government's policy" .
On Jan. 22 the Medellín cartel released its fifth hostage, Alvaro Diego Montoya Escobar (the son of the General Secretary of the Presidency Germán Montoya Vélez), kidnapped on Dec. 17, 1989, as proof of its claimed intention to achieve a peaceful settlement with the government.
AMERICAS
PERU
Murder of former Defence Minister
Gen. Enrique López Albújar, 59, former Army Chief of Staff, and Defence Minister, from October 1987 until the major government reorganization in May 1989 [see pp. 35703; 36274; 36653], was on Jan. 9 shot dead in the capital, Lima, by three assailants.
The left-wing Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA) claimed to have carried out the killing, but police security experts stated that the Maoist Shining Path guerrilla group (Sendero Luminoso) was probably responsible.
Roadblocks were set up throughout Lima, and an estimated 15,000 people were reportedly arrested for questioning, although the Interior Minister Augustín Mantilla confirmed that none of these were suspected of direct involvement in the attack.
President Alan García, who declared Jan. 10 as a national day of mourning, came under strong pressure from leading civil servants and opposition party leaders to intensify security for former as well as present senior government officials, especially in the light of recent police intelligence reports that Sendero Luminoso planned an escalating campaign of violence to disrupt presidential elections due on April 8.
Albújar was reported to have been alone and unarmed at the time of the attack.
AMERICAS
CHILE
Naming of Cabinet by President-elect
Patricio Aylwin Azócar, 71, due to take office as President on March 11 following his victory in the presidential election on Dec. 14, 1989 [see p. 37117], announced his prospective Cabinet on Jan. 9.
Its composition broadly reflected the relative strengths in the new Congress of the member parties of the Coalition for Democracy (CPD — see p. 36460) led by Aylwin.
Nine portfolios thus went to the Christian Democratic Party (PDC) and five to the Socialist Party (PS — whose three major factions re-united following an agreement signed by them on Dec. 30, 1989).
Two of the remaining portfolios were distributed among the Radical Party (PR), and one each to the Party for Democracy (PPD), the Radical Socialist Democratic Party (PRSD), the Liberal Alliance Party (PAC) and an independent, Alberto Etchegaray Aubry, who supported the PDC.
Enrique Krauss Rusque (PDC) Interior Enrique Silva Cimma (PR) Foreign Carlos Ominami Pascual (PS) Economy Alejandro Foxley Rioseco (PDC) Finance Ricardo Lagos Escobar (PPD) Education Francisco Cumplido Cereceda (PDC) Justice Patricio Rojas Saavedra (PDC) Defence Carlos Hurtado Ruíz Tagle (PAC) Public Works Juan Agustin Figueroa Yanez (PR) Agriculture Luis Alvarado Constella (PS) National Patrimony Rene Cortazar Sanz (PDC) Labour Jorge Jimenez de la Jara (PDC) Health Juan Hamilton Depassier (PDC) Mines Alberto Etchegaray Aubry (Ind.)
Housing, Urban Development Germán Correa Diaz (PS) Transport, Communications Enrique Correa Diaz (PS) Secretary to the Government Edgardo Boeninger Kausel (PDC) Secretary-General of the Government Sergio Molina Silva (PDC) Director National Planning Office Rene Abeliuk Manasevich (PRSD) Vice-President Production Development Corporation Jaime Toha Gonzalez (PS) President National Energy Commission 
Prospective Cabinet
Retention of two junta members in service posts
Aylwin announced on Jan. 5 that following discussions he had invited the Air Force Commander-in-Chief, Maj.-Gen.
Fernando Matthei Aubel, and the head of the paramilitary police, Gen. Rodolfo Stange Oelkers, both members of the current ruling military junta, to remain in their service posts when his new government came into office.
Matthei acknowledged the President-elect as the future "supreme" commander of the armed forces, while Stange emphasized the professional role of the police "whatever the government" and said that he had "great hopes" for the new administration.
The retention of these two was widely interpreted as a move by the future government to counterbalance the influence of President Augusto Pinochet Ugarte, who had resisted requests from Aylwin that he step down for his post of Commander in Chief of the Army [see p. 37117].
As reported on Jan. 7 the Naval Commander-in-Chief and junta member, Adml.
José Toribio Merino, had stated that he intended to retire before the March 11 handover of power, thus allowing Pinochet to nominate his successor.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Resignation of Defence Minister
The Defence Minister, Italo Argentino Lúder, 73, on Jan. 24 handed in his resignation to President Carlos Saúl Menem, an action which he described as "irrevocable" .
Lúder had objected to his non-notification of and subsequent exclusion from a dinner hosted by Menem on Jan. 17, when one of the guests was the Army Chief of Staff Gen. Isidro Cáceres, and when matters of internal security were believed to have been discussed.
In response Lúder had given a disciplinary "warning" to Cáceres which Menem, in his capacity as Commander-in-Chief of the Armed Forces, had refused formally to endorse.
A leading figure in the ruling Justicialist Party (Partido Justicialista — the formal name for the Peronists), Lúder had been interim head of state in 1975 (during the illness of the then President, Maria Estela Martínez de Perón), and had sanctioned the commencement of what became known as the military's "dirty war" (1976-1983) against "left-wing guerrillas" .
He had also been the Peronist candidate in the 1983 presidential elections, losing to Raúl Alfonsín Foulkes of the Radical Party (UCR)[see pp. 32717-18].
Humberto Romero, hitherto Secretary of Defence, was on Jan. 25 appointed as the new Defence Minister.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Secessionist uprising in Kashmir — Bofors and Bhopal developments
The recently elected National Front government led by V. P. Singh [see pp. 37030-31; 37124-25]faced its first crisis in January when serious unrest in the northern state of Jammu and Kashmir soured India's delicate relations with neighbouring Pakistan.
Onset of unrest
The volatility of the situation in Kashmir was impressed upon Singh at an early stage of his premiership when, in early December, the daughter of the central Home Affairs Minister was kidnapped by Moslem secessionists [see p. 37126].
By late December a campaign of violent protest organized by the principal secessionist group, the Kashmir Liberation Front (KLF), had rendered the summer capital, Srinagar, ungovernable.
The whole of the Kashmir Valley was largely paralysed, either by KLF-sponsored hartal (strikes) or by government-imposed curfews.
The central government responded by dispatching large numbers of (mainly Hindu) paramilitary troops to patrol the Valley.
Resignation of Chief Minister — Imposition of Governor's rule
On Jan. 16, the central government informed the Chief Minister of Jammu and Kashmir, Farooq Abdullah — whose National Congress (Farooq) party was allied to the formerly ruling Congress (I)— that Gen. (retd) K. V. Krishna Rao was to be replaced as state Governor.
Abdallah resigned in protest on Jan. 18.
Within 24 hours Jagmohan had been sworn in as the new state Governor, a post he himself had vacated in favour of Rao in July 1989.
Jagmohan's first act was to impose Governor's rule in Jammu and Kashmir, under Section 92 (A) of the state constitution.
(There was no provision for the imposition of President's rule — i.e. central control — in Jammu and Kashmir, as the state enjoyed a special status under Article 370 of the Indian Constitution.)
Deterioration in security situation
On Jan. 20 fresh riots broke out in Srinagar after paramilitary forces arrested large numbers of "extremists" .
The next day at least 35 people were killed when troops fired on crowds in three areas of the city.
Large numbers of Indian troops arrived in Srinagar on Jan. 25, hours after separatist gunmen had shot dead four Air Force officers.
The next day (India's Republic Day), the Indian government imposed a news blackout in Srinagar, a move which was formalized on Jan. 28.
Effects of dispute on Indo-Pakistan relations
The unrest in Kashmir had a severely adverse effect on relations between India and Pakistan, which had improved during 1988-89 [see pp. 36485; 36736; 36813-14.
The first clear evidence that the unrest in Kashmir had adversely affected bilateral relations came on Jan. 14 when a spokesman for the Pakistan Foreign Office expressed "deep concern over the deteriorating situation in the Indian-occupied Kashmir" .
In a strongly worded statement issued the next day, a spokesman for the Indian External Affairs Ministry described the Pakistani statement as "wanton, unwarranted and unacceptable interference" in India's internal affairs.
Sahibzada Yaqub Khan, the Foreign Minister of Pakistan, arrived in New Delhi on Jan. 21 for three days of talks with Indian leaders, including I. K. Gujral, the Minister of External Affairs.
Yaqub Khan commented on his visit during a speech broadcast on Jan. 30.
He had reaffirmed, he said, Pakistan's long-established position that Kashmir was a disputed territory, the future of which had to be decided by a free plebiscite under UN supervision.
He went on to say that he had denied that Pakistan was providing weapons and training for Kashmiri insurgents and had assured Indian leaders of Pakistan's commitment to the 1972 Simla Agreement (whereby the two countries had agreed to respect a line of control in Kashmir resulting from ceasefire positions at the end of 1971 Indo-Pakistan war).
India reacted sharply to Yaqub Khan's broadcast, accusing him of "direct incitement to subversive violence and terrorist activities" .
A report on New Delhi radio on Jan. 30 quoted the Indian Army Chief of Staff, Gen. V. N. Sharma, as saying that his troops were fully prepared to protect Kashmir's border "at any cost" .
Initiation of criminal proceedings in Bofors case
On Jan. 22 India's Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) filed preliminary criminal charges against the Swedish arms manufacturers, Bofors, and a number of other companies and individuals.
Charges of criminal conspiracy, corruption, abuse of official position by public servants, cheating, criminal breach of trust and forgery were filed against 14 persons and companies.
Rajendra Shekhar, the CBI director, said that the charges would be a "launching pad" for a full investigation of the Bofors affair.
Three of the accused were identified by name:(i) Win Chaddha, head of the Delhi-based Anatronic General Corporation and the Bofors agent in India until late 1985;(ii) Martin Ardbo, the Bofors managing director at the time of the original 1986 deal with the Indian government [see p. 35382]; and (iii) G. P. Hinduja, a London-based Indian industrialist who had first been implicated in the affair by the Madras-based Hindu newspaper in April 1988 [see p. 36030].
The charges, filed before a court in New Delhi, related to a contract awarded in 1986 to Bofors for the supply of a field artillery system to the Indian Army.
Allegations that bribes had been paid by Bofors officials to senior Indian officials to secure the contract first surfaced in April 1987 [see p. 35382].
Although a parliamentary report presented in April 1988 found no evidence of corrupt dealings [see p. 36030], the affair had already seriously damaged the standing of the Gandhi government.
By late 1989 the Bofors affair had developed into a major electoral issue [see p. 36976]and in late December, some three weeks after being elected, the new National Front government issued a notification excluding Bofors from entering into future weapons contracts with the Indian government [see p. 37126].
Government position on inadequacy of 1989 Bhopal settlement
Dinesh Goswami, the Minister of Law and Justice, announced on Jan. 12 that the central government had decided to oppose the US$470,000,000 settlement between the Gandhi government and the US company Union Carbide Corp.
(UCC) on compensation for victims of the 1984 Bhopal gas disaster [see pp. 33467-68].
In a surprise move, the settlement had been ordered into effect by the Indian Supreme Court in February 1989 [see p. 36466].
Declaring that "life in India is not so cheap" , Goswami told a press conference in Delhi that the compensation was "totally inadequate" and that the government would support future review petitions filed against the 1989 settlement.
On Dec. 22 a panel of the Supreme Court had overturned one challenge by a group of Bhopal victims by upholding legislation passed in 1985 which had given the central government the sole right to negotiate with UCC.
The petitioners had argued that the Gandhi government had no right to reach a final deal with UCC against the victims' wishes.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AFGHANISTAN
Internal opposition to Najibullah regime
Reports in January suggested that the government of President Najibullah was facing serious opposition from dissatisfied elements within the Afghan armed forces and the People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan (PDPA).
The Far Eastern Economic Review of Jan. 25 claimed that the Afghan government had pre-emptied at least two coup plots in December 1989, arresting 127 Army and Air Force officers including 11 generals.
The first group of officers arrested were believed to be linked with the fundamentalist Hizb-i-Islami mujaheddin group led by Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.
A second round of arrests included officers loyal to the Khalq ( "Masses" ) faction of the PDPA.
However, Najibullah, a member of the PDPA Parcham ( "Banner" ) faction, was apparently forced to release many of those apprehended in the second round of arrests after Lt.-Gen.
Shahnawaz Tanay, the influential Khalq Defence Minister, went on a three-day strike and refused to leave his Army headquarters in Kabul.
Iranian and mujaheddin reports of divisions within PDPA
On Jan. 14 the official Iranian news agency IRNA reported that growing tension between the Parcham and Khalq factions had recently led Najibullah to impose a 14-day emergency in Kabul; officers and soldiers had been warned to remain in barracks.
On the same day, a mojaheddin radio station reported that bloody intra-Parcham clashes had broken out in Kabul between supporters of Najibullah and those of Sultan Ali Keshtmand, Chairman of the Executive Committee of the Council of Ministers.
Announcement of return of French diplomats to Kabul
An Afghan Foreign Ministry spokesman announced on Jan. 12 that the French government had declared its intention to become the first western government to reopen its embassy in Kabul.
All Western diplomats had left Kabul in the weeks leading up to the Soviet troop withdrawal in February 1989 [see p. 36448-50], when the United States was predicting the imminent collapse of the Najibullah regime.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Further discussions on Indian troop withdrawal
Ranjan Wijeratne, the Sri Lankan Foreign Minister, visited New Delhi on Jan. 5-6 for talks with his Indian counterpart, I. K. Gujral [see p. 37126 for Wijeratne's previous visit in early December].
The discussion focused on the contentious issue of the deadline for the final withdrawal of the Indian Peace Keeping Force (IPKF) from Sri Lanka.
(In late December, Gujral had told the Indian parliament that the IPKF withdrawal would be complete by March 31, 1990 — see p. 37126 — or three months later than a deadline agreed in mid-September — see p. 36893).
Wijeratne tried unsuccessfully to persuade Gujral to advance the deadline to Feb. 4, Sri Lanka's national day.
In the event, the most that Wijeratne received was a "personal assurance" from Gujral that the withdrawal would be completed by the end of March.
The two ministers also agreed to take steps to try and prevent fighting between rival Tamil militias.
In mid-December the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE, or the Tamil Tigers — the main Tamil insurgent group) had routed the pro-IPKF Tamil National Army (TNA) in bloody fighting around the eastern port of Batticaloa [see p. 37126].
IPKF withdrawal from Jaffna
In a surprise move the IPKF withdrew from Jaffna town on Jan. 27, pitching their camp at an airfield some 20 km away.
The withdrawal meant that the eastern port of Trincomalee was the only major town still patrolled by the IPKF.
Residents reported that the Tamil Tigers had taken immediate control of Jaffna following the Indian pull-out.
If confirmed, the news suggested that the Tamil Tigers had reached some sort of agreement with the IPKF and the Jaffna-based TNA.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Developments over Hong Kong's future political system
January was a month of intense political and diplomatic activity in Hong Kong, much of it related to constitutional developments ahead of the territory's restoration to China in 1997.
Chinese pronouncement on future political system
In mid-January the Chinese government issued details of the governmental framework likely to be established in the post-1997 Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (SAR).
The Chinese "blueprint" was approved at a meeting in Canton on Jan. 17-20 of the political subcommittee of the Basic Law drafting committee (BLDC, the body established to permit "consultation" on the proposed "mini constitution" by which Hong Kong would be ruled after 1997).
The full committee was due to meet for a final session in mid-February, prior to presentation of the Basic Law to the Chinese legislature for approval in March-April 1990.
The BLDC political subcommittee (composed of 10 Chinese and six Hong Kong representatives) proposed that 30 per cent of the Hong Kong Legislative Council (Legco) would be directly elected in 1997, rising to 40 per cent in 1999 and 50 per cent in 2003 [for figures proposed under the second draft of the Basic Law published in February 1989 see p. 36763].
The current 57-seat Legco comprised 31 government-appointed members, 14 chosen by functional constituencies and 12 by electoral college.
The subcommittee approved a Legco voting system under which legislation would require the approval of three separate groups of members, distinguished by their mode of selection to the council.
Foreign nationals would be permitted to hold a maximum 15 per cent of the 60 Legco seats.
In addition, the subcommittee proposed that all senior SAR officials should be Chinese nationals having no right of abode elsewhere.
Criticism of subcommittee's proposals and of UK attitude towards democratization
The six Hong Kong members of the BLDC subcommittee took the unprecedented step of publicly announcing their disapproval of the subcommittee's proposals.
In Hong Kong itself the political model put forward by the subcommittee was generally regarded as inadequate and designed to permit little more than token democracy.
However, much of the hostility aroused by the subcommittee's report appeared to be directed towards the United Kingdom government, which was widely accused of failing to stand up to the Chinese over Hong Kong's future.
Demands for faster democratization in Hong Kong had increased dramatically in the aftermath of the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre in Beijing [see pp. 36720-22].
In response, the UK House of Commons select committee on foreign affairs had proposed in late June that a Bill of Rights and a fully directly elected legislature should be introduced in Hong Kong by 1997 [see p. 36815].
There was widespread demand by Hong Kong citizens for the UK to grant the right of abode to over 3,000,000 British passport holders; in mid-December the government announced details of a selective British citizenship scheme [see p. 37122].
China's vehement criticism of the British citizenship scheme [ibid.]was only one example of a hardening of Chinese attitudes towards the UK over Hong Kong.
The new Chinese stance was evident during the Jan. 10-13 visit to Beijing by Sir David Wilson, the Hong Kong Governor.
According to Western press reports, he was reminded sternly of earlier Chinese warnings about the "subversive activities" of some Hong Kong citizens.
It also emerged that Deputy Foreign Minister Zhou Nan, a formidable hardliner, was to replace Xu Jiatun as head of the New China News Agency (Xinhua) in Hong Kong (China's unofficial ambassador to the territory).
Douglas Hurd, the UK Foreign Secretary, did not announce any concrete measures towards Hong Kong's democratization during a visit on Jan. 13-16.
According to the Hong Kong-based Far Eastern Economic Review of Feb. 1, Hurd's silence on the issue "clearly signalled that [the UK's]desire for" convergence "between pre- and post-1997 political systems in Hong Kong overrides all and any promises for representative government" .
Meeting on boat people
The UK narrowly failed in late January in an attempt to win international approval for its policy of involuntary repatriation of the Vietnamese "boat people" in Hong Kong.
After the first involuntary repatriation operation, carried out by the Hong Kong authorities on Dec. 12, 1989 [see pp. 37121-22], the process was temporarily halted pending a meeting of the 29-nation UN steering committee for the Comprehensive Plan of Action on Indochinese refugees (CPA) established in June 1989 [see p. 36734].
This committee's two-day meeting opened in Geneva on Jan. 23.
Press reports beforehand had confidently pronounced that an agreement had already been reached during private discussions, providing for the start of a concerted programme of involuntary repatriation.
However, the meeting ended in disagreement on Jan. 24, the United States and Vietnam both opposing a plan, agreed by all other member countries, to begin involuntary repatriations on July 1, 1990.
The USA pressed instead for a full 12-month moratorium on involuntary repatriation in order to give refugees a greater opportunity to take advantage of voluntary repatriation schemes; the Vietnamese government proposed a nine-month moratorium.
REFERENCES.
December 1989 start of involuntary repatriation of boat people p. 37122.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Rail disaster
More than 300 people were killed and another 430 injured on Jan. 4 when the crowded Zakaria-Bahauddin passenger express hurtled into the rear of a stationary freight train in southern Pakistan.
The crash was the worst rail disaster in Pakistan's 42-year history.
The collision occurred in thick fog at Sangi station, 30 km north of Sukkur, Sindh province.
Visiting the scene of the crash on Jan. 5, Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto said that the disaster might have been the result of a "well calculated scheme" , and she ordered an immediate judicial inquiry.
The driver of the express, who had managed to save his life by leaping out of the engine, blamed station officials for the crash and on Jan. 9 police arrested two Sangi station signalmen.
According to press reports the two were subsequently charged with manslaughter.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Lifting of martial law in Beijing — Relations with Soviet Union
Martial law was lifted in Beijing on Jan. 11, having been imposed by the authorities in May 1989 in an attempt to quell growing pro-democracy demonstrations centred in the city's Tiananmen Square [see p. 36641; see pp. 36720-22 for crushing of pro-democracy movement in early June].
Announcing on television on Jan. 10 that martial law was being lifted, Li Peng, Premier of the State Council, said that social order had returned to normal and that a "great victory" had been won in "quelling the counter-revolutionary rebellion" .
He resolutely defended the earlier decision to impose martial law, describing it as "timely, necessary and correct" .
US President George Bush on Jan. 11 welcomed the move as "a very sound step" , and cited the announcement as a justification for his policy of maintaining contacts with the Chinese government [see p. 37122 for visits to China by senior US officials in July and December 1989].
Many foreign commentators, however, described the lifting of martial law as a cosmetic exercise.
Release of pro-democracy demonstrators
A spokesman for the Ministry of Public Security announced on Jan. 18 that 573 people arrested for taking part in pro-democracy demonstrations in April-June 1989 had recently been released from prison.
According to the spokesman the "law-breakers" were released "because they pleaded guilty and showed repentance" .
The human rights organization Amnesty International estimated that as many as 10,000 demonstrators were detained in Beijing alone after the June crackdown.
Sino-Soviet relations
Igor Rogachev, a Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister, visited China on Jan. 9-12 for consultations on the Cambodian issue.
Rogachev was the most senior Soviet visitor to China since President Mikhail Gorbachev visited Beijing in mid-May 1989 [see pp. 36641-42].
Some press reports in January claimed that Sino-Soviet relations were deteriorating as a result of the upheavals in Eastern Europe [see pp. 37104-10].
The Guardian of Jan. 9, for example, reported that Chinese Communist Party (CCP) documents circulated internally in late December had been critical of Gorbachev and had blamed him for the "subversion" of socialism in Eastern Europe.
The report also claimed that CCP study groups were working on detailed analyses of Gorbachev's "revisionism" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN
Attempted assassination of mayor of Nagasaki
Hitoshi Motoshima, the mayor of Nagasaki, was shot in the back and seriously wounded as he emerged from Nagasaki City Hall on Jan. 18.
Within hours of the attack police arrested Kazumi Tajiri, who admitted to the shooting, and who was identified as one of the leaders of an ultra-nationalist right-wing group — Seiki Juku, variously translated as "Spiritual Justice School" , or "Righteous-Minded Academy" .
During the past year numerous threats had been made against Motoshima's life by right-wing elements, and the shooting occurred only weeks after the police had, at the mayor's request, withdrawn a 24-hour bodyguard.
The death threats had been provoked by Motoshima's suggestion in December 1988 that Emperor Hirohito (who was at the time dying of cancer) bore some responsibility, "as do all of us who lived in that period" , for Japan's role in the Pacific War of 1941-45.
His remarks, which broke an established Japanese taboo prohibiting even oblique criticism of the monarch, had coincided with an intensive international debate concerning the degree to which Hirohito had exercised real power prior to 1945.
With a general election due on Feb. 18, the assassination attempt was widely interpreted as an embarrassment for the ruling Liberal Democratic Party which had expelled Motoshima for refusing to withdraw his remarks.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Opposition demonstrations — Government response
Peaceful demonstrations by students and intellectuals during January constituted the first significant challenge to the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) since it took power in 1924.
The demonstrations were arranged by the Mongolian Democratic Union (MDU), an organization formed in December 1989 [see p. 37124]and given official recognition on Dec. 22 by the Mongolian parliament, the People's Great Hural.
In an interview with Ulan Bator radio on Jan. 19, the MDU leader Sanjaasurengiyn Dzorig (a 27-year old lecturer at the Mongolian State University) claimed that the organization's key objective was to "accelerate and deepen the processes of reconstruction and renewal" .
Despite temperatures as low as -30C, some 5,000 people attended an MDU rally in Ulan Bator on Jan. 14.
The rally was sanctioned by the government, but, unlike a smaller rally in December [ibid.], was not reported in the Mongolian media.
At the rally, demonstrators criticised the Mongolian government for the slow pace of its economic and political reform programme [see p. 36703].
There were also demands that former President and party leader, Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal, should return to Mongolia from exile in Moscow and stand trial for "Stalinist crimes" [for Tsedenbal's removal from office in 1984 see p. 33159].
The crowd also demanded the removal of the two remaining statues of Stalin from central Ulan Bator, one of which was taken down by the authorities on Jan. 16.
Banning of demonstrations — Further MDU rally
On Jan. 19 the Hural adopted temporary measures prohibiting rallies and demonstrations in key sectors of Ulan Bator.
However, another peaceful MDU rally took place on Jan. 21 in the central Sukhe Bator Square.
On the same day, MDU leaders held their first meeting with MPRP officials.
Government response to MDU rallies
The MDU rallies prompted the government and party to announce a number of measures obviously designed to placate the demonstrators.
On Jan. 21 the MPRP politburo announced that the number of "special provisions" for leading party members had been reduced.
Four days later it was announced that Tsedenbal had been stripped of his membership of the Mongolian Revolutionary Youth League.
On the same day Deputy Premier Byambasuren announced on television that a new constitution was being drafted and that discussion was also under way concerning the introduction of a multiparty system.
According to some reports, a group of Hural deputies had proposed on Jan. 19 that the right of candidature in elections should be extended to include non-MPRP members.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA (KAMPUCHEA)
UN Security Council approval of Australian peace plan — Military situation
During a meeting in Paris on Jan. 15-16, the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States) unanimously approved in principle an Australian proposal for the UN to administer Cambodia during an agreed transition to free elections.
The first stage of the plan would be UN verification of Vietnam's September 1989 withdrawal from Cambodia [see pp. 36881-82], the implementation of a ceasefire, and the cessation of all external arms supplies to the warring factions.
Once this had been achieved, the plan envisaged a transitional period leading to "full and fair elections" during which the UN would play "an enhanced role" , although the level of UN involvement was not specified.
The plan suggested that Cambodian sovereignty be vested in a Supreme National Council, possibly composed of prominent figures from the Phnom Penh regime and the tripartite resistance Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea (CGDK).
Once formed, the Council would delegate executive powers to an interim UN administration.
Evolution of plan — Responses
The notion of an enlarged UN role in Cambodia was first put forward by a US congressman, Stephen Solarz, in response to the failure of the August 1989 Paris conference on Cambodia [see pp. 36848-49].
That conference had floundered largely as a result of the Phnom Penh government's apprehension over the issue of power sharing and the role of the UN.
Phnom Penh objected resolutely to any formula which offered the Khmers Rouges (the militarily-dominant element of the CGDK) full involvement in any future Cambodian administration.
On the question of the UN, the Phnom Penh regime was openly wary of an institution which it felt had legitimized the Khmer Rouge claim to power by allowing the CGDK to occupy the Cambodian seat at the General Assembly [see p. 37041].
Solarz's original idea was developed into a full plan in November 1989 by Gareth Evans, the Australian Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Evans proposed that the problem of power-sharing could be side-stepped if a UN interim administration were to govern Cambodia pending a general election.
The Phnom Penh regime's abdication of complete political control would be offset by the CGDK vacating the Cambodian seat in the General Assembly.
Hun Sen, Premier of the Phnom Penh government, voiced his approval of the Australian plan during an interview with the Financial Times published on Jan. 27.
The Vietnamese government, the Phnom Penh regime's strongest supporter, also responded favourably.
In the Jan. 27 interview, Hun Sen also outlined a variation of the Australian plan, under which Cambodia would be effectively partitioned, with a CGDK administration controlling the western lands bordering Thailand.
Once a ceasefire had been imposed, the two governments would "relinquish part of their authority" to a UN Interim Administration, which, amongst other things, would organize elections.
A National Council would be established, with representatives from both governments at the UN.
Of the three CGDK members (the Khmers Rouges and the Armée nationale sihanoukiste (ANS) and the Khmer People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), only the Khmers Rouges were critical of the Australian plan.
During talks in Bangkok on Jan. 4 with an Australian envoy, Khieu Samphan, the nominal leader of the Khmers Rouges, insisted that he and his colleagues had to be included in any interim Cambodian administration.
However, the Khmer Rouge objection decreased in significance after their Chinese backers had approved the plan in Paris.
Prince Norodom Sihanouk, then CGDK president [see below], and Son Sann, CGDK premier and leader of the KPNLF forces, both responded positively to the plan.
Resignation of Sihanouk
Sihanouk resigned as president of the CGDK on Jan. 24, citing "international hostility" towards him since the August 1989 Paris conference.
The Prince also said that he wanted to show the world that he was not "an accomplice of the Khmers Rouges" .
Sihanouk had previously resigned the presidency on a number of occasions, most recently in July 1988, following which he had resumed it in February 1989 [see pp. 36464; 36615].
Battle claims
The Phnom Penh government and its guerrilla foes continued to issue widely conflicting claims during January about the military situation on the ground [for battle reports in September and October 1989 see pp. 36882; 36976].
Vonadk, the Khmer Rouge clandestine radio, reported on Jan. 6 that an offensive had been launched the previous day against the key north-western provincial capital of Battambang.
The report claimed that Khmer Rouge fighters had attacked the 5th military region's command based in the city as well as Bek Chan airport.
A later Vonadk report claimed that the city was under Khmer Rouge control for four hours and that 35 government soldiers were killed in the assault.
On Jan. 9 Phnom Penh home service acknowledged that an assault on Battambang had occurred, but claimed that the Khmer Rouge forces were easily repelled.
A correspondent from the Financial Times reported after a visit to Battambang on Jan. 24 that the city "is not, and has not been under siege" .
However, outlying villages had been attacked and the city's rail link with Phnom Penh was frequently severed.
Vonadk reported on Jan. 8 that resistance fighters had carried out a grenade attack in Phnom Penh on Jan. 6, killing a number of "traitorous Vietnamese puppets and lackeys" .
A Foreign Ministry official admitted that a number of small bombs had exploded on Jan. 6, but denied that they had caused any injury or damage.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Proposals for relaxation of travel restrictions
The President of North Korea, Kim Il Sung, called in his New Year national address for freedom of movement between the two Korean states.
 "In order to reflect the aspirations of all the people for national reunification," stated Kim, "we call for the total openness of both North and South, by crushing the barriers between North and South and realizing free and mutual visits." 
To this end he proposed that representatives from the two states hold "top-level" talks on dismantling the barriers within the heavily fortified Demilitarized Zone (DMZ) which had divided the Korean peninsula since the end of the Korean War in 1953.
The South's initial response was to question the sincerity of Kim's initiative and to dispute the existence of the "concrete wall" to which Kim had referred in his speech as "the symbol of national division" .
It was denied that any such wall existed on the southern side of the border, other than a series of anti-tank defences well to the south of the DMZ.
In a speech on Jan. 10, however, the South Korean President, Roh Tae Woo, "welcomed" Kim's proposals and repeated an earlier invitation [see p. 36892]for the two leaders meet "as quickly as possible" .
He also revealed that, as a gesture of goodwill, the annual "Team Spirit" military exercises between South Korea and the USA would be reduced in size and duration and would be accompanied by invitations to North Korea, China and the Soviet Union to send military observers.
(In recent years the Team Spirit exercise had involved some 200,000 troops and had been vehemently condemned by North Korea as act of unwarranted aggression which impeded channels of communication between the two states — see also p. 36465.)
Roh also suggested that, as a first step towards free movement, the two countries should allow exchanges of letters and telephone calls by displaced persons and divided families, and should immediately allow visits by those over 60 years old.
Notwithstanding these initiatives by the two Presidents, there was no progress during January within any of the established channels of inter-Korean communication.
The 10th preparatory meeting for the holding of joint legislative talks failed to make any progress on Jan. 24.
Several sessions of sports talks, designed to agree upon the formation of a single Korean team for the 1990 Asian Games [see pp. 36975; 37041], were equally unsuccessful and finally broke down on Jan. 29 after the North Korean delegation arrived with a three-metre long picture of the concrete wall to whose alleged existence Kim had referred.
Red Cross talks remained deadlocked over a proposal made in late 1989 to allow a exchange visit by members of divided families which had failed to reach fruition because of the South's refusal to accept the North's demand to stage a revolutionary opera as part of the planned exchange.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Realignment of political parties
Announcement of plans for merger of ruling and opposition parties
The political system of South Korea underwent a momentous realignment on Jan. 22, when it was announced that two of the country's three main opposition parties, the Reunification Democratic Party (RDP) and the New Democratic Republican Party (NDRP), would merge with the ruling Democratic Justice Party (DJP) to form a new conservative alliance.
The agreement was finalized during 10-hour talks at the presidential mansion between President Roh Tae Woo, the DJP's leader, and Kim Young Sam and Kim Jong Pil, the respective leaders of the RDP and the NDRP.
Roh announced the planned merger on national television on the evening of Jan. 22, stating that it would "establish a new political order that will achieve democratic development and solve the nation's economic crisis" .
The origins of the realignment lay in long-standing merger negotiations between Kim Young Sam and Kim Jong Pil, whose parties faced waning popular support.
Both the RDP and the NDRP occupied the nebulous centre ground of South Korean politics and were distinct only in that each had a strong regional basis.
Roh's subsequent decision to join them reflected the strategic vision associated with his political style; the merger offered an opportunity to break the current legislative impasse resulting from the DJP's failure to command an overall majority within the legislature.
The new party, tentatively named the Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), would control approximately 220 of the 299 seats in the National Assembly.
(The proposed name of the party echoed that of the Liberal Democratic Party, a similarly broad conservative grouping, which had ruled Japan since its formation in 1955.)
It was widely believed that the DLP would use its two-thirds majority to alter the constitution prior to the 1992 elections.
A shift from a presidential system to that of a Prime Minister and Cabinet would make it easier for parties to divide up the rewards of victory between their various factions (as illustrated by the Japanese model).
Each of the three constituent elements within the new party was due to hold a convention to ratify the merger.
A further convention, to launch the new party, was planned for the end of May 1990.
Early indications suggested that there were members within each of the three parties who were opposed to the merger, although the numbers and level of commitment of such dissidents was unclear.
The largest and most radical of the opposition parties, the Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), led by Kim Dae Jung, was excluded from the merger.
Kim denounced the move as a "betrayal of our people…a kind of coup d'etat" and demanded immediate elections in order to let the people judge the agreement.
As news of the merger broke there were scattered protest demonstrations in Seoul and elsewhere and students clashed with police at five universities within the capital.
Appointments to senior DJP posts
Prior to the announcement of the planned merger, Roh had announced changes within the leadership of the DJP on Jan. 5, in an attempt to heal divisions within the party which had been exacerbated by Roh's decision to force former President Chun Doo Hwan to testify before the National Assembly in December 1989 [see p. 37123].
The post of chairman, vacant since the resignation in December of Park Jun Kyu, was filled by Park Tae Joon, chairman of the highly successful state-owned South Korean steel company and a relative by marriage to Chun.
Roh also appointed Gen. (retd) Park Jun Byung as secretary-general and Chung Dong Sung as chief floor leader, both of whom were allies of former President Chun.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Banning of opposition leader from elections
Aung San Suu Kyi, the most prominent opposition figure in Myanma, was on Jan. 16 banned from taking part in general elections scheduled for May 1990. ln late December 1989 U Nu, a former Prime Minister, had also been banned from standing in the elections [see p. 37123].
Suu Kyi, secretary general of the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD), had been under house arrest since July 1989 [see p. 36816].
The decision to ban Suu Kyi was taken by the Yangon (Rangoon) division elections commission after a complaint had been filed against her by a member of the National Unity Party (NUP), the majority of whose members had links with the former ruling Burma Socialist Programme Party.
The NUP member had based his objections on Suu Kyi's marriage to a British academic, her long residence in the United Kingdom and her alleged links with insurgent groups.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Cabinet changes — Re-election of Chamlong as Bangkok governor
Meechai Ruchupan resigned on Jan. 3 as Minister attached to the Prime Minister's Office, a post which he had held since 1980.
Meechai, a senior legal expert, was the sole non-party member of the Thai Cabinet, being most recently reappointed in August 1988 [not 1987 as indicated on p. 37082].
According to the Bangkok Post of Jan. 12 his resignation stemmed partly from his disenchantment over the December appointment of Thamrong Patthanarat as Bangkok city clerk, the municipality's most powerful civil servant.
In late December, the leader of the Democrat Party (one component of the ruling six-party coalition), Bichai Rattakul, had resigned as Deputy Prime Minister [see p. 37121]following the rejection of his request for a Cabinet review of Thamrong's appointment.
Bangkok elections
Maj.-Gen.
Chamlong Srimuang was re-elected as governor of Bangkok on Jan. 7, polling 61.3 per cent of valid votes compared with 48.9 per cent in November 1985 [see p. 34618].
His nearest rival, a Prachakorn Thai candidate, received 24.7 per cent of the votes.
Chamlong described the result as a "voice from heaven" and promised to continue carrying out his duties with honesty and self-sacrifice.
In simultaneous elections to Bangkok city council, Chamlong's Palang Dharma party captured 50 out of 57 contested seats.
Switching of Interior and Industry Ministers
On Jan. 9 Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven, the Thai Prime Minister, carried out further Cabinet changes, switching the portfolios of Maj.-Gen.
Pramarn Adireksarn, the Interior Minister, and Banharn Silpa-Archa, the Industry Minister.
Pramarn's effective demotion was seen as a consequence of the Bangkok gubernatorial elections, since he and Chamlong had been involved in a series of highly publicized conflicts during 1989.
Chamlong's overwhelming election success was widely portrayed as a vote against Pramarn's retention of the powerful Interior portfolio, a ministry which by necessity had close links with the Bangkok Metropolitan Administration.
Chatichai's Jan. 9 announcement ended days of speculation over his intentions with regard to his Cabinet.
This had mainly centred on Gen. Chaovalit Yongchaiyut, the Army Commander-in-Chief, since according to some sources Chatichai had invited Chaovalit to join the Cabinet in late December in an attempt to boost the stability of his six-party coalition.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Bougainville dispute
Formal closure of Panguna mine
Bougainville Copper Ltd (BCL), the owners of the huge opencast Panguna copper mine on Bougainville island, began laying off all but 300 of the mine's 2,300 workforce on Jan. 7.
The move followed a decision by the Australian company CRA Ltd, the owner of 56.3 per cent of BLC's shares, to maintain the mine on a "care and maintenance" basis only from the end of 1989.
The mine had been forced to cease production in May 1989 [see p. 36657]as a result of an escalating campaign of violence and sabotage waged by the Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA).
Since the BEA's attacks began in 1988, more than 40 people had been killed.
The original rebel demand for compensation for the despoliation of land by the mining operation had escalated to include the permanent closure of the mine and independence for Bougainville, an area ethnically distinct from the Papuan mainland.
Despite a major security operation the government had proved incapable of suppressing the rebellion by force, and had failed in numerous attempts to achieve a ceasefire through negotiation.
Economic adjustment package
The mine's formal closure was a severe blow to the country's economy as it was estimated to provide up to 20 per cent of government revenue and some 40 per cent of the country's export earnings; in formulating the 1990 budget, the government had assumed the mine's reopening by the end of 1989.
Falling prices of key agricultural commodities (including coffee, copra and cocoa) compounded the economic consequences of the closure and forced Finance Minister Paul Pora to announce an emergency adjustment package on Jan. 9.
This included a 10 per cent devaluation of the kina (the country's currency), from 1 kina=US$1.1631 to 1 kina=$1.0493; a freeze on credit from banks; cuts in government expenditure; and negotiations with the trade union movement to restrict wage increases.
It was reported on Jan. 16 that the government had also requested assistance worth $US130,000,000 from the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank.
Officials from the two agencies were due to visit the country in February to negotiate the terms of an assistance package, the largest ever requested by Papua New Guinea.
The government's problems were aggravated by the temporary closure of the Ok Tedi mine (the most important copper and gold producer after Panguna) on Jan. 18.
Local landowners blocked road access to the mine for 24 hours as part of a continuing protest over the distribution of royalties from the mine.
Reports of rebel leader's death — Continuing fighting
The authorities reported on Jan. 11 that Francis Ona, the leader of the Bougainville rebels, had been killed by a more militant faction of the BRA and had been succeeded by Sam Kauona, an explosives expert trained by the Australian Army.
The uncorroborated announcement coincided with a government decision to extend the current state of emergency within the province and to step up its military campaign against the secessionists.
The government offensive, combined with rebel counterattacks, resulted in a new level of violence on the island.
The government claimed on Jan. 16 that security forces had destroyed the rebels' headquarters, but on the following day the BRA staged one of its most spectacular actions to date when it attacked the island's prison, releasing all Bougainville inmates and killing five prison officers.
Further rebel attacks resulted in more deaths, the destruction of a helicopter and numerous government buildings, and the severing of power lines.
On Jan. 22 Michael Wortley, a British employee at the Panguna mine, was killed by rebels as he attempted to clear an emergency airstrip for the evacuation of the remainder of the mine's employees.
The attack coincided with the destruction of an aircraft at Wakunai airport on the island's east coast, and resulted in the suspension of all domestic flights.
The remaining Panguna employees were later evacuated by road, and it was reported that the PNG Army was retreating from the countryside in order to concentrate upon defending the island's towns.
Despite requests by the PNG government for further military assistance from Australia, which had already loaned the security forces several attack helicopters for use against the rebels, the Australian government stated on Jan. 20 that troops would only be sent to the island to protect Australian nationals.
Following Wortley's death and the wounding of two Australians, the Australian government on Jan. 24 advised the 1,000 Australian citizens living on Bougainville to leave the island immediately.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FIJI
Restoration of full civilian rule
Fiji returned to full civilian rule on Jan. 5 when Maj-Gen.
Sitiveni Rabuka, who had led two military coups in 1987 [see pp. 35251-55; 35567-70], resigned as Minister of Home Affairs and returned to military duties as head of the armed forces.
The other two serving Army officers within the Cabinet also resigned their portfolios, which were reassigned among the remaining 17 members of the Cabinet of the Prime Minister, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara.
Ratu Sir Josaia Tavalqia, who was reappointed as Minister for Forests, resigned on Jan. 8 due to ill health.
**Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Home Affairs; Public Service Josefata Kamikamica Finance and Economic Planning Berenado Vunibobo Trade and Commerce Apenisa Kurusaqila Health Ratu William Tongiavalu Lands and Mineral Resources Tomasi Vakatora Housing and Urban Development Taniela Veitata Employment and Industrial Relations **Vatiliai Navunisaravi Fijian Affairs; Rural Development Finau Tabakaucoro Women's Affairs and Social Welfare *Ratu Ovini Bokini Forests Sailosi Kepa Attorney General; Minister of Justice **Filipe Bole Education Youth and Sport **Viliame Gonelevu Primary Industries and Co-operatives Apisai Tora Communications, Works and Transport Irene Jai Narayan Indian Affairs David Pickering Tourism, Energy and Civil Aviation Ratu Inoke Kubuabola Information Iswari Bajpai Co-operative and National Marketing Authority *New appointment.
**Altered responsibility.
Fijian Cabinet (end-January)
In his New Year address Fiji's President, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, suggested that Fiji's new constitution (guaranteeing political power for the country's native Melanesian inhabitants) would be adopted during the latter half of 1990, and that legislative elections would be held within two years.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEW ZEALAND
Cabinet reshuffle
Prime Minister Geoffrey Palmer named a new Cabinet on Jan. 31 after he had requested the resignation of those ministers who had announced their intention not to contest the general election which was due later in 1990.
As a result of the changes Richard Prebble, who had been dismissed for disloyalty in November 1988 by David Lange, Palmer's predecessor [see p. 36294], returned to the government.
Geoffrey Palmer Prime Minister; Minister for the Environment Helen Clark Deputy Prime Minister; Health; Labour **Michael Moore External Relations and Trade; Foreign Affairs; Overseas Trade and Marketing Koro Wetere Maori Affairs **David Caygill Finance *Richard Prebble State-Owned Enterprises; Police; Railways; Pacific Island Affairs Michael Cullen Social Welfare Phil Goff Education **Jonathan Hunt Housing; Communications Bill Jeffries Justice; Transport; Civil Aviation and Meteorological Services Margaret Shields Consumer Affairs; Statistics; Women's Affairs **Peter Tapsell Defence; Lands; Recreation and Sport **David Butcher Commerce; Energy **Annette King Employment; Youth Affairs; Immigration *Fran Wilde Disarmament and Arms Control; Tourism *Phillip Woollaston Conservation; Local Government *Peter Neilson Customs; Works and Development; Revenue *John Sutton Agriculture; Forestry *Clive Matthewson Science; State Services *Margaret Austin Internal Affairs; Arts and Culture; Civil Defence; Research, Science and Technology *New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
Composition of new Cabinet (Feb. 1, 1990)
ASIA — PACIFIC
BRUNEI
Release of political prisoners
The Brunei government on Jan. 6 ordered the release of six political prisoners who had been detained soon after the large-scale revolt which broke out in Brunei and other parts of British Borneo in 1962 [see p. 19261; for release of 38 political detainees in 1988 see p. 36355].
The Times of Jan. 10 reported that the United Kingdom government had pressed for the release of the six after being informed of their plight by Roland ( "Tiny" ) Rowland, the chief executive of the Lonrho group of companies.
A small number of political prisoners remained in detention in Brunei, including the two leaders of the banned Brunei National Democratic Party arrested in early 1988 [see p. 36355].
The Reuters news agency reported on Jan. 8 that three members of the banned People's Party of Brunei (the main driving force behind the 1962 rebellion) had been detained by the Brunei authorities in March 1989 after returning from exile.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Aftermath of revolution — Challenges to National Salvation Front
The National Salvation Front (NSF) which had taken power following the violent overthrow of the regime of Nicolae Ceausescu at the end of 1989, struggled in its first weeks to maintain its unity and to contend with growing popular criticism.
During January the NSF announced significant political, social and economic reforms, and the arrest of Ceausescu's key associates.
However, it faced charges that many of its leading members were themselves too closely identified with the Ceausescu regime, and that, as a non-elected body, its practice of ruling by decree was uncomfortably reminiscent of Ceausescu.
It was also charged with chronic indecisiveness.
Furthermore, the announcement that the NSF would contest the free elections scheduled for April was greeted with consternation in many quarters, opponents depicting it as a ploy by communists to retain control of the country.
Security situation in early January
The Army announced on Jan. 4 that the security situation throughout the country had been brought under control, with most members of the Securitate police now in detention.
However, Col.-Gen.
Vasile Ionel, a Deputy Defence Minister and Army Chief of Staff [wrongly given as Ionel Vasile on p. 37105], urged continued vigilance against isolated attacks by Securitate officers still at large, and said that the Army would withdraw to barracks "only when we are fully aware that there is no one to endanger people's lives and security" .
A decree establishing military tribunals to try cases of "terrorism" by Securitate agents during the revolution was issued by the NSF Council on Jan. 7, and the first such trial began in the city of Sibiu on the following day.
(The Securitate had been formally abolished by a decree of the NSF Council published on Jan. 1.)
By the end of January the known death toll from the revolution had again been revised downwards drastically to stand at 689.
Somewhat less than twice that number were reported to have been injured.
referendums
Demonstrations and NSF promises to abolish Communist Party and restore death penalty — Retractions and cancellation of
A demonstration by Bucharest students on Jan. 7, the first to be staged since the revolution, featured criticisms of the composition and policies of the NSF, and particularly of the decision, announced at a press conference by leading NSF member Silviu Brucan on Jan. 4, that the Front would run in the April elections.
Up to 3,000 students at Bucharest Polytechnic, as well as demanding sweeping changes in education policy, expressed concern that the NSF was dominated by communists who were trying to ensure that they stayed in power by scheduling the elections so that the emerging political parties would have little time to organize.
There was also anger over the perceived dearth of true student representatives on the NSF, and over its control of the media.
The NSF Council had issued a decree guaranteeing freedom of assembly on Jan. 3, although organizers of public meetings were required by law to give at least 48 hours' notice to the authorities.
The students demonstrating on Jan. 7 had been refused permission to hold their rally in Victory Square in central Bucharest, the authorities having cited security concerns.
However, some 300 members of the National Peasants' Party staged a march on Jan. 7 through the centre of Bucharest in memory of those killed by the Securitate during the revolution and to protest against the NSF decision to stand in the elections.
Anger at the preponderance of communists in the NSF, together with suspicions that the punishment to be meted out to Securitate agents might be too lenient, erupted at a demonstration by over 10,000 people outside the NSF headquarters (the former Foreign Ministry building) in Victory Square on Jan. 12, following ceremonies marking a Day of National Mourning for the victims of the revolution.
President Ion Iliescu and Prime Minister Petre Roman tried to address the crowd from a makeshift platform on top of an armoured car, but were barely audible about jeering and shouts of "Down with the communists!" and "Death for a death!" .
The NSF Council executive met representatives of the demonstrators, and Vice-President Dumitru Mazilu then announced to the crowd decrees outlawing the Romanian Communist Party (RCP), and scheduling a referendum for the end of the month on restoring the death penalty.
The NSF's earlier decision to abolish the death penalty had been confirmed by Iliescu in his New Year's broadcast to the Romanian people on Jan. 1, "in order to stress the profoundly popular and humanist character of the new regime" and in compliance with students' proposals that "the two dictators [i.e. Nicolae Ceausescu and his wife Elena]were the last persons who deserved this fate" .
A decree to this effect had been published by the NSF council on Jan. 7.
On Jan. 13 the NSF reversed the decision to abolish the RCP.
Iliescu said that the NSF leadership had been criticized for giving in to mob rule, and that the issue, like that of the death penalty, should instead be put to a referendum.
However, following a meeting of the NSF Council on Jan. 17 it was announced that plans for both referendums, scheduled for Jan. 28, had been cancelled.
Confirmation by Brucan on Jan. 23 that the NSF would field candidates in the forthcoming elections (rescheduled to May 20) brought around 2,000 demonstrators back to Victory Square on Jan. 24.
Demanding that the NSF should stand down in favour of a caretaker administration, they were confronted by a cordon of tanks and troops around the NSF headquarters.
Later the NSF Council issued a decree permitting demonstrations in Bucharest only in four public parks, but on Jan. 25 and 26 up to 1,000 demonstrators defied the decree and again gathered in Victory Square.
Brucan's announcement also prompted the immediate resignation from the NSF of Romania's best-known former dissident, Doina Cornea.
Resignation of Mazilu
An internal power struggle within the NSF was suggested on Jan. 26 by the resignation of Mazilu.
He claimed that he was the victim of a "Stalinist" campaign to oust him by fellow NSF members who had used information on him obtained from Securitate files to publish smears in the NSF-controlled media.
The Guardian of the following day noted: "His charge adds weight to allegations…that the Front does indeed include hardline, unrepentant Communists posing as democrats." 
President Ion Iliescu First Deputy President Dumitru Mazilu* Deputy Presidents Cazimir Ionescu, Karol Kiraly Secretary Dan Martian Members Bogdan Teodoriu, Vasile Neacsa, Silviu Brucan, Gheorghe Manole, Ion Caramitru, Nicolae Radu *resigned Jan. 26.
Executive bureau of NSF Council (as announced on Jan. 3)
Demonstrations and counterdemonstrations on Jan. 28-29
The biggest demonstrations since the revolution featured a confrontation on Jan. 28 between pro- and anti-NSF supporters in Victory Square.
On Jan. 29 a show of strength by riotous crowds of pro-NSF supporters prompted accusations that the NSF was orchestrating mob rule.
The opposition National Peasants' Party, Liberal Party and Social Democratic Party, together with student groups, had called a demonstration for Jan. 28 once again to protest against the planned NSF participation in the elections.
However, the demonstrators, numbering up to 40,000, were confronted by a smaller, officially sanctioned demonstration by NSF supporters already in Victory Square.
Some anti-NSF demonstrators rushed the cordon of tanks and troops around the NSF headquarters, and fist fights broke out first with soldiers and then with rival demonstrators.
Meanwhile, the NSF-controlled radio and television services had been calling its supporters to come to the square; some were brought by lorry, and by mid-evening they had forced the anti-NSF demonstrators, now outnumbered, to retreat from the Square.
Up to 60,000 demonstrators loyal to the NSF took to the streets of Bucharest on Jan. 29.
There were accusations that their presence had been orchestrated using methods reminiscent of the Ceausescu regime, with factory NSF committees giving workers time off to participate in demonstrations, and transport being laid on to bring demonstrators from as far away as Constanţa, the Black Sea port around 200 km from Bucharest.
A rally in Victory Square was addressed by both Iliescu and Roman.
Elsewhere in the city there were ugly incidents: NSF opponents were beaten up; the National Peasants' Party leader, Corneliu Coposa, had to be evacuated by armoured car after a crowd laid siege to his party's headquarters; and Liberal Party officials fled as their headquarters was stormed and ransacked.
Shortly after the Jan. 28 demonstrations began at noon, leaders of the three parties behind the anti-NSF demonstration were summoned for urgent talks at the NSF headquarters.
Iliescu later reported that it had been agreed to establish a dialogue involving the NSF and representatives of the 20 political parties now in existence [These round table talks will be covered in the February News Digest.]
Petre Roman Prime Minister Mihai Draganescu Deputy Prime Minister Gelu Voican-Voiculescu Deputy Prime Minister Stefan Nicolae Agriculture and Food Gheorghe Caranfil Chemical and Petrochemical Industry Andrei Plesu Culture Gen. Nicolae Militaru Defence Adrian Georgescu Electric Power Sergiu Celac Foreign Affairs *Alexandru Margaritescu Foreign Trade (acting) *Ioan Folea Geology *Dan Enachescu Health Col.-Gen.
Mihai Ghitac Interior *Teofil Pop Justice *Mihnea Marmeliuc Labour and Social Security Col.-Gen.
Victor Stanculescu National Economy *Aurel Ioan Stoica Machine Tool Industry *Nicolae Dicu Mining *Stelian Pintilie Post and Telecommunications *Mihai Sora Public Education *Nicolae Stoicescu Religious Affairs *Ioan Rimbu Timber Industry *Capt.
Mihai Lupoi Tourism *Corneliu Burada Transport Simion Hincu Water, Forests and Environment *January appointment.
Members of provisional government (end-January)
Amnesty for political prisoners — New Prosecutor-General
The NSF Council on Jan. 5 issued a decree amnestying all people sentenced after 1947 for "political offences" as a result of protests against the dictatorships and personality cults of Ceausescu and his predecessor Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej, against abuse of power by officials, and in support of democracy and human rights.
Also amnestied were all prisoners (except repeated offenders) who had been sentenced before Dec. 22, 1989, to prison terms of up to three years for crimes other than murder, rape, grievous bodily harm, robbery, bribe-taking and abuse of power.
Gheorghe Robu was appointed Prosecutor-General by decree of the NSF Council on Jan. 11.
Economic reforms — Food supply problems — Foreign aid
In his New Year address Iliescu announced that collective and state farms were to be largely privatized, and that a five-day working week would be introduced in March (most Romanians had been required under Ceausescu to work a six- or even a seven-day week).
Romania's once-thriving agriculture sector, collectivized under the Communist regime, had been starved of resources for development, because of the priority given to large-scale industrialization: Iliescu revealed that official agricultural production statistics had been grossly exaggerated.
The present reforms would retain the system of co-operatives, but allow farmers to take possession of livestock from the collective and state farms and to retain up to 30 per cent of their produce for private consumption or sale.
In addition, every member of the co-operative would be allowed a private plot of up to 5,000 square metres, while the land on which a farmer's home and outbuildings stood (up to a maximum of 6,000 square metres) would become the freehold property of the householder.
Moreover, people who had migrated to towns would be allowed to return to the countryside and receive plots upon joining co-operatives, while local residents who were not farmers would be allowed plots of 2,500 square metres provided that they paid a tax and undertook to put the land to cultivation.
Farmers would be allowed to sell produce from their private plots in markets or by contract at prices not fixed by the state.
Iliescu also announced that work on unfinished grandiose construction and infrastructural projects had been halted pending an investigation of their economic worth.
The most notorious of these was the "House of the Republic" , a vast new presidential palace in Bucharest which had already cost over 6,000 million lei (US$700 million).
The NSF Council affirmed on Jan. 3 that the former regime's prohibition on foreign borrowing was being dropped in order to finance economic recovery.
Repayment in full of Romania's foreign debt, which had peaked in the early 1980s at more than US$11,000 million, had been a priority of the Ceausescu regime in its last years and had been accomplished by April 1989 [see p. 36622].
However, the massive exports which had generated the necessary finances had been one of the main causes of the extreme economic hardship suffered by ordinary Romanians.
Iliescu announced in his Jan. 1 address that food exports (previously 80 per cent of all food produce) had been stopped, and that food stocks were being channelled into the shops.
However, by mid-January food stocks had run perilously low and the NSF issued an appeal for international emergency food aid.
The Agriculture Ministers of the European Communities (EC) on Jan. 23 announced food aid to Romania worth a total of ECU 40,000,000, including grain, beef, butter and olive oil.
During a visit to Bucharest on Jan. 6-7 Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze promised an increase in deliveries of Soviet oil and gas to help the country through the winter.
Since the revolution gas and electricity consumption had risen by up to 50 per cent because of the lifting of the draconian energy rationing imposed through all recent winters by the Ceausescu regime.
Lifting of travel restrictions
A decree published on Jan. 8 allowed all Romanian citizens over the age of 14 to receive 10-year passports within 20 days of application and to travel abroad freely without needing visas to leave or re-enter Romania.
However, Tourism Minister Mihai Lupoi had admitted on Jan. 3 that people wishing to travel to the West would have to find their own hard currency, since the state could not afford to sell any in exchange for lei.
No restriction would be placed on the amount in lei being taken out of the country for visits to other COMECON countries.
Death of Corneliu Bogdan
Corneliu Bogdan, a respected career diplomat and since Dec. 28 the Minister-Secretary of State at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and de facto NSF spokesman, died on Jan. 1, aged 68.
Resignation of Orthodox Patriarch
Teoctist Arapas, Patriarch of the Romanian Orthodox Church since 1986, resigned on Jan. 18.
Under Ceausescu he had issued effusive statements of support for the regime, even after the Dec. 17 Timisoara massacre, and remained silent over the demolition of churches and the persecution of priests who championed human rights.
Since the revolution he had come under attack from laity and junior clergy, while Culture Minister Andrei Plesu condemned his church's failure to provide a basis for an organized opposition movement to Ceausescu.
Romanian Orthodoxy was professed by around 85 per cent of Romanian Christians.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
President Havel's New Year address and amnesty
Vaclav Havel, elected President of Czechoslovakia on Dec. 29, 1989 [see p. 37107], broadcast a New Year's address to the country on Jan. 1.
Breaking with the tradition of the previous 40 years of communist rule, he admitted that the country was not prospering, describing the economy as wasteful, inefficient and environmentally destructive.
 "The state, which calls itself a state of the working people, is humiliating and exploiting the workers," he said.
Main tasks ahead were the holding of free elections "soon and with dignity" ; ensuring respect for the interests and religious traditions of the Czech and Slovak nations; improving the position of "all citizens who are worse off than others" ; and strengthening Czechoslovakia's authority in the world.
Also on Jan. 1 Havel declared an amnesty which involved pardoning certain categories of short-term prisoners and reducing the sentences of others.
About 20,000 prisoners (some two-thirds of the total held) benefited from the amnesty, which excluded, however, those convicted of abusing the powers of a public official or of violent crimes.
It was subsequently reported that the amnesty had disrupted production at a number of important factories which used prisoner labour.
Havel's visit to East and West Germany
Havel's first journey abroad as President, to East and West Germany on Jan. 2, represented a further break with tradition, as it had become customary for leaders of Soviet bloc countries to make their first foreign visit to Moscow.
In East Berlin Havel held talks with Manfred Gerlach, acting Chairman of the East German Council of State (head of state).
The Czechoslovak Prime Minister, Marian Calfa, and Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier, who accompanied Havel, held talks with their East German counterparts, Hans Modrow and Oskar Fischer.
Havel later paid a visit to the Berlin Wall.
At a joint press conference with Gerlach Havel expressed hopes that the path towards a confederation of the two German states would be taken quickly, but added that such a process would have to be part of a pan-European process, and that the neighbours of both German states must be relieved of all anxiety over a greater Germany.
Flying on to Munich, in West Germany, Havel held talks with West German President Richard von Weizsäcker, Chancellor Helmut Kohl, Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Bavarian Minister President Max Streibl.
He also met leaders of the opposition Social Democrats and the Greens.
Havel's visits to Poland and Hungary
On Jan. 25 Havel visited Poland, meeting President Wojciech Jaruzelski and Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki (who had himself made a working visit to Prague three days earlier), and addressing a joint session of both houses of parliament.
He then went on to Hungary, meeting Mátyás Szürös, the acting President, on Jan. 26, and addressing the Hungarian National Assembly.
In his speech to the Polish parliament he said that the changes in Eastern Europe provided a historic opportunity to build a Europe made up of independent democratic states, not divided into blocs and relying on the protection of superpowers.
He also suggested that Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary should co-operate on economic and disarmament initiatives and on approaches to west European bodies.
Changes in CPCz leadership — Resignations of federal ministers from party
The first session of the Communist Party of Czechoslovakia (CPCz) central committee since the extraordinary party congress in December 1989 [see p. 37107]was held in Prague on Jan. 6.
A 24-member political executive committee was elected to replace the party presidium.
It included CPCz chairman Ladislav Adamec and first secretary Vasil Mohorita (who had been elected at the congress), and Frantisek Adamek, Jiri Machalik and Ondrej Saling, who were elected central committee secretaries.
Apart from these five officials, the other members of the political executive committee were to work in that body alongside their regular jobs.
The central committee session also agreed on extensive cuts in the party's staff and premises.
A CPCz spokesman said on Jan. 10 that the party apparatus was to be cut by 80.3 per cent, or 8,488 people.
The mass resignation of CPCz members from the party continued during January; by Jan. 20, 250,000 were reported to have left since early December.
It was revealed on Jan. 8 that Valtr Komarek, a federal First Deputy Premier, had left the party, and on Jan. 18 the resignation from the CPCz of Marian Calfa, the federal Prime Minister, was announced.
The central committee of the Communist Party of Slovakia (CPSl) on Jan. 20 elected Peter Weiss chairman of its executive committee, replacing Jan Siroky (appointed only on Dec. 17 — see p. 37106), who was elected a secretary of the central committee together with Pavol Kanis and Vladimir Jakubac.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Protests over restoration of Turkish minority rights
The process of democratic reform in Bulgaria begun in November 1989 [see pp. 37028-29; 37109-10], was overshadowed in the early part of January by a wave of nationalist protests against restoring civil and religious rights to the country's ethnic-Turkish minority.
The State Council and the Council of Ministers, acting upon a recommendation made by the central committee of the ruling Bulgarian Communist party (BCP) on Dec. 29, had published on the same day a joint resolution "condemning all actions which curtail the right to a free choice of name, to freedom of religion, and also the right of everyone — while formally recognizing and using the Bulgarian language as the official language — to speak other languages in their day-to-day communication and to observe their customs" .
The resolution said that the campaign of forced assimilation waged against the ethnic-Turkish minority since 1984 had been based on arbitrary and autocratic decisions which had flagrantly violated Bulgaria's Constitution and international treaty commitments and had eroded national unity.
It ordered all competent authorities "to take measures to rectify the abuses and to guarantee the genuine exercise of the rights of all Bulgarian citizens without distinction of nationality, origin, creed, sex, race, education [or]social and material status" .
Up to 5,000 ethnic Turks and members of the Pomak community (descendants of Bulgarians converted to Islam during Ottoman rule) had held a vigil outside the National Assembly building on Dec. 28-29, but had dispersed after the contents of the resolution had been disclosed to them by National Assembly Speaker Stanko Todorov.
On Dec. 16 some 4,000 Pomaks had demonstrated in the town of Goce Delcev (south-west Bulgaria) to call for the restoration of their cultural and religious rights and for a criminal investigation into atrocities committed against their 300,000-strong community during a campaign of forced assimilation in 1972-73.
The nationalist backlash against the restoration of minority rights began on Jan. 1-2 with demonstrations by more than 10,000 people in the town of Kurdzhali, southern Bulgaria (the Kurdzhali district, and the Shumen and Razgrad districts in the north east, were the main areas of Turkish settlement).
The demonstrators claimed that the rights and freedoms of ethnic Bulgarians would now suffer in places where Turks formed a majority and that national security would be threatened by pan-Turkish aspirations.
They chanted anti-Turkish slogans, called for the government's resignation, and demanded a nationwide referendum on the minority rights issue.
On Jan. 2 police prevented clashes with around 2,000 ethnic Turks and Pomaks who were staging a counter-demonstration in Kurdzhali.
Nationalist protestors from Kurdzhali arrived in Sofia (the capital) on Jan. 3 to petition the National Assembly, their numbers swelling on the following day to around 10,000 as supporters joined them from several parts of the country.
Rallies, demonstrations and strikes were reported on Jan. 4-6 in a number of towns and cities in support of the nationalists' demands, and on Jan. 5 there was a general strike in Kurdzhali and in the nearby city of Khaskovo.
A further large demonstration took place in Sofia on Jan. 7.
Petur Mladenov, the BCP general secretary and State Council President (de facto head of state), met representatives of the Sofia demonstrators on Jan. 5, and on the following day members of the BCP leadership held meetings with demonstrators in other cities.
Also on Jan. 5 Todorov broadcast on nationwide state television an appeal for an end to the protests, but he made it clear that the Dec. 29 resolution would not be rescinded.
At the Jan. 7 Sofia demonstration speakers attempting to explain the new policy on minority rights, including Prime Minister Georgi Atanasov, were booed and heckled by the crowd of at least 6,000.
On the proposal of Todorov, a "public council" comprising government and BCP officials, representatives of the opposition Union of Democratic Forces (UDF — see p. 37110), religious leaders, representatives of the nationalist protesters and members of the Turkish community convened on Jan. 8 to try to resolve the minority rights problem.
Strikes and protests were called off by the nationalists pending the outcome of the discussions, which ended on Jan. 12 in an apparent climb-down by the nationalists, all participants in the "public council" endorsing a draft declaration which upheld the Dec. 29 decisions on minority rights.
This declaration was approved by the National Assembly on Jan. 15, but its provisions had yet to be enshrined in law.
Statements from both the BCP leadership and the UDF implicated local BCP organizations in provoking the nationalist protests.
There were even reports of material assistance being given to protesters by local officials, such as transport to demonstrations and financing for the protesters' co-ordinating committees.
UDF representatives on Jan. 9 accused hardline elements in the BCP regional administrations of encouraging the protests in order to sabotage the democratic reform process in Bulgaria and to rally conservative forces in the BCP ahead of an emergency party congress beginning on Jan. 30.
Amnesty
Around 40 people convicted of political crimes in connection with acts of defiance during the campaign to impose Slavic names on ethnic Turks were released from prison in accordance with an amnesty bill passed by the National Assembly on Jan. 15.
Also released were the nearly 750 first offenders serving prison sentences of up to three years, and around 250 people serving sentences for criminal negligence.
An estimated 8,500 other prisoners — most of the remaining prison population — also benefited from reductions in their prison terms.
End to constitutional guarantee of Communist monopoly — Round table talks
In accordance with the recommendation made by the BCP central committee in December 1989 [see p. 37109], the National Assembly on Jan. 15 voted overwhelmingly to repeal Paragraphs 2 and 3 of Article 1 of the Constitution, whereby the BCP was defined as the "leading force in society and in the state" and as guiding "the construction of an advanced socialist society in close fraternal co-operation with the BAPU [Bulgarian Agrarian People's Union — hitherto the only other legal political party — ibid.]" .
A proposal by the BAPU parliamentary group to repeal Paragraph 1, defining Bulgaria as a "People's Republic" and as "a socialist state of the working people from town and country, headed by a working class" , was rejected on procedural grounds after a heated debate, but it was decided to set up a working group of government and opposition representatives to examine this and other possible constitutional amendments, with a view to submitting proposals to a forthcoming National Assembly session.
A bill legalizing unofficial demonstrations, submitted in December [ibid.], was passed by the National Assembly on Jan. 25.
Beginning of round table talks
As a result of preliminary agenda-setting discussions on Jan. 3-4, round table talks on political and economic reform involving the BCP, the BAPU and the UDF convened on Jan. 16.
The BCP delegation was headed by politburo and secretariat members Andrei Lukanov and Aleksandur Lilov, and the UDF delegation by Zhelyu Zhelev and Petar Beron, respectively the organization's president and secretary.
UDF representatives had acknowledged some loss of grass-roots support in early January, because of UDF backing for restoring Turkish and Pomak rights.
The organization nevertheless attracted 50,000 supporters to a rally in central Sofia on Jan. 14 when it presented its platform for the round table talks.
A key UDF demand was for the general election, currently scheduled for no later than June, to be postponed until November, in order to give opposition parties more time to organize.
The UDF proposed instead that by-elections should be held in May to fill the seats left vacant by the expulsion from the Assembly of the disgraced former BCP leader and head of state Todor Zhivkov and his closest associates, and to replace other deputies who were most discredited by their record under the Zhivkov regime.
Other UDF demands included: deletion of the whole of Article 1 from the Constitution; creation of a democratic multiparty system; dissolution of BCP workplace cells; depoliticization of the Army and police; freedom of speech and of the press; full disclosure of information on the activities, structure and financing of the state security service; and equality for private, co-operative and state property relations.
On Jan. 16 the round table talks immediately ran into problems when the UDF representatives accused the BCP of reneging on promises made during the preliminary discussions that the opposition would be allowed its own newspaper and access to state television and radio, and that a building would be handed over for use as a UDF headquarters.
Although agreement was reached on establishing a UDF newspaper with a maximum 70,000-copy circulation, the talks were broken off by the UDF delegation on Jan. 18 after the BCP had refused to give written guarantees that the other promises would be fulfilled.
They were resumed on Jan. 22 after a series of compromises had been agreed, including live radio coverage of the talks.
Arrest of Zhivkov
Sofia radio announced on Jan. 29 that Todor Zhivkov was in remand prison pending investigation of charges against him including abuse of power, embezzlement of state funds, and "incitement to racial hatred" .
A warrant for Zhivkov's arrest had been issued on Jan. 18, but he was believed to have been effectively under house arrest at one of his 30 former official residences since shortly after his resignation in November 1989.
The radio announcement also said that criminal proceedings had started against Zhivkov's son-in-law, Ivan Slavkov, and against Milko Balev, Zhivkov's former second-in-command, on charges including abuse of power and embezzlement.
It had been announced in mid-December 1989 that police were investigating allegations that Zhivkov's son Vladimir Zhivkov was responsible for the death in suspicious circumstances in 1988 of Tatyana Tityanova, a television announcer, and that Zhivkov's grandson Todor Slavkov had escaped prosecution after taking part in the gang rape of a 17-year-old girl in July 1988.
EUROPE
HUNGARY
 "Danubegate" scandal
In the run-up to the country's first multiparty elections for 43 years, scheduled for March 25, the ruling Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP) was shaken by revelations during January that the Interior Ministry's security police had not stopped covert surveillance of the activities of opposition politicians, despite the enactment during the past 12 months of laws and constitutional amendments creating a multiparty system [see pp. 36399; 36960-61].
Surveillance methods included bugging, telephone tapping and infiltration of the new opposition parties by informants.
The scandal, dubbed "Danubegate" because of its similarities to the notorious US "Watergate" affair of 1972-74, was made public on Jan. 5 at a press conference by members of the opposition Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) and League of Young Democrats (FIDESZ).
They showed on video film documents leaked by a source in the State Security Service giving details of the surveillance operation, including transcripts of bugged telephone conversations.
They urged Prime Minister Miklós Németh to reveal who had been privy to the intelligence information, and called for the dismissal of Interior Minister István Horváth; they stopped short of calling for the government's resignation, however, saying that the country needed stability before the elections.
On Jan. 8 the office of the Chief Military Prosecutor announced that there was sufficient evidence to open an investigation into the affair.
At a further press conference on Jan. 19 the opposition parties produced Maj. József Vegvari, an officer in the State Security Service who identified himself as the source of the leaked information, who alleged that reports compiled as a result of the surveillance operation had regularly been passed to senior HSP members and discussed at meetings of the Council of Ministers.
He also stated that no change in surveillance practices had been ordered.
The head of the Interior Ministry's internal security section, Maj. József Horváth, resigned on Jan. 17, followed on Jan. 21 by Deputy Interior Minister Ferenc Pallagi.
Also on Jan. 21 the government ordered the State Security Service to be disbanded.
Horváth's resignation was accepted by the Országgyülés (parliament) on Jan. 23.
On the following day the Országgyülés adopted a new law on internal security, including strict controls on the use of telephone and mail surveillance, after hearing acting Interior Minister Zoltan Pál admit that covert monitoring of the opposition had continued until little more than a week before, and that documents relating to the scandal had been shredded in defiance of a government order to secure all files for investigation.
Pál blamed "old reflexes" within the security service.
Opposition by-election victory
Gaspar Miklós Tamas, one of Hungary's most prominent dissidents prior to the end of one-party communist rule, on Jan. 13 won a parliamentary by-election in Budapest for the SzDSz.
Tamas had led in a first round of polling on Dec. 9, but the result had been declared void because the turnout did not reach the necessary 50 per cent[see p. 37130].
The 50 per cent threshold did not apply to this second round, in which Tamas polled 55 per cent of the votes cast, compared with 33 per cent for an independent candidate backed by the HSP; the Hungarian Democratic Forum, which had won four by-elections in July and September 1989 [see pp. 36830; 36895], did not participate.
Tamas had attempted to stand in the same constituency in the 1985 general election, but had been thwarted by what he had alleged to be communist manipulation of the candidate selection process [see p. 33812-13].
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
New convertible currency
With effect from Jan. 2, Yugoslavia introduced a new dinar, worth 10,000 old dinars and fully convertible.
The exchange rate was pegged to the West German deutschmark at DM 1.00=7 dinars at least until June 30, 1990.
Prime Minister Ante Markovic, introducing the currency reform in line with a controversial IMF-backed package of economic austerity measures announced by him on Dec. 18, 1989, had said also that wage increases would be linked to the new dinar's exchange rate, meaning that wages were thus effectively frozen for six months at November 1989 levels.
The wage freeze was part of a campaign to bring down inflation from 2,000-2,500 per cent to a target of 13 per cent.
In preparation for the currency reform, the old dinar had been devalued on Dec. 19 from DM 1.00=53,733 dinars to DM1.00=70,000 dinars.
The law on the currency reform had been approved by parliament the following day, while on Dec. 26 Yugoslavia's first stock exchange had been set up in Ljubljana.
EUROPE
POLAND
Price increases — Communist party dissolution and formation of social democratic parties
Sharp price rises were introduced on Jan. 2 in line with the Solidarity-led government's IMF-backed austerity programme [see p. 37130].
Coal prices rose sixfold, those of electricity, gas and petrol rose fourfold, and public transport fares were doubled.
Real incomes fell by 36 per cent in January, since the government had effectively imposed a wage freeze for the month, with wage increases restricted to one-fifth of the rate of inflation in succeeding months.
Also on Jan. 2 the currency was devalued by 31.5 per cent from US$1.00=6,500 zloty to $1.00=9,500 zloty.
Limited convertibility meant that hard-currency bills could be settled in zlotys through state banks.
High customs tariffs and turnover taxes were introduced to prevent a large-scale inflow of consumer goods.
The basic bank lending rate was set at 36 per cent per month.
Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki, facing a damaging strike from Jan. 16 in the Silesian coal mines (Poland's main foreign currency earner), repeated on Jan. 18 that austerity measures were essential to economic reform and recovery.
The Solidarity leader Lech Walesa also appealed for a return to work.
At three of the five principal affected pits the strikers, whose demands for pay increases and reforms had been supported by the OPZZ union federation, agreed on Jan. 19 to return to work.
Dissolution of PUWP — Formation of successor SDPR and Rival SDU
The Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP, or in its Polish acronym PZPR), since August 1989 no longer the ruling party but with four ministers in the Solidarity-led coalition government, opened on Jan. 27 its 11th and final congress, dedicated to the task of disbanding itself.
Party membership officially stood at 1,800,000, but popular support for the party was reportedly little over 2 per cent.
The intention was to hand over to a new social democratic party and a younger generation of leaders less tainted with the communist past.
A controversial issue was the future ownership of the assets of the PUWP; a parliamentary commission had been set up shortly before the conference to investigate the extent to which such assets, valued by the party at some US$70,000,000, should be forfeited as illegally acquired from the state.
Protesters, demanding that the party give up these assets, demonstrated outside the congress, and were involved in violent clashes with police.
After adopting amendments to the congress agenda and hearing the report by outgoing party first secretary Mieczyslaw Rakowski, delegates on Jan. 27 decided to suspend the PUWP congress and resume meetings forthwith as the founding congress of a new and as yet unnamed party of the left.
On Jan. 28 this founding congress suffered a split and walkout by some 100 delegates led by Tadeusz Fiszbach, who criticized the attempt to create a successor party without a sufficiently clear break with the communist past.
The new party's statutes, committing it to parliamentary democracy and the rule of law, seeking membership of the Socialist International, and abandoning democratic centralism and the dictatorship of the proletariat, were adopted by 1,402 votes to six with 37 abstentions.
Shortly before midnight the founding congress adjourned after adopting (with 1,090 votes in favour) the name Social Democracy of the Polish Republic (SDPR).
The PUWP then resumed its congress, voted to cede all its assets, rights and duties to the SDPR, and, finally, passed a resolution to end its activity.
Rakowski in his Jan. 27 report had stated that a new party should make a break with the PUWP's Stalinist mentality, and announced that he would not be a candidate for its leadership.
He had, however, noted that in clamping down on the protests of 1980 the Polish party had acted under great Soviet pressure.
He had also expressed concern at the current Solidarity-led government's abandonment of socialism and moves to adopt capitalist solutions for economic recovery.
The SDPR, with some 1,200 delegates present, elected its leadership on Jan. 29, and on Jan. 30 ended its congress after electing a supreme council.
Aleksander Kwasniewski, 36, was elected party chairman and Leszek Miller, 44, general secretary, with 1,049 and 926 votes respectively.
The career of Miller had been that of a classic party functionary rising to PUWP central committee secretary and politburo member, whereas Kwasniewski, who came up through the editorship of party youth wing newspapers to become Minister of Youth and Sports from 1985, had made his name as a pragmatist and advocate of co-operation with Solidarity in the 1989 round table talks.
The 150-member supreme council comprised these two ex officio, the leader of the parliamentary group, 50 representatives of provincial bodies and the armed forces, and 97 elected by the congress; besides Miller only one, Zbigniew Sobotka, had been a PUWP politburo member, while 27 were representatives of the liberal "July 8 movement" .
A new party daily paper, Trybuna Kongresowa, began publication as a successor to the PUWP's Trybuna Ludu.
Fiszbach's supporters had meanwhile declared, on Jan. 29, their intention of forming a separate Social Democratic Union (SDU), and their repudiation of the former PUWP's assets.
Among some 100 delegates supporting this separate formation were Marek Krol, elected to the PUWP secretariat the previous July, and Transport Minister Franciszek Adam Wieladek.
Fiszbach himself, a former PUWP party secretary in Gdansk, was a leading party liberal, Deputy Speaker of parliament, and reputedly close to Walesa.
Of the members of parliament formerly in the PUWP, about 30 reportedly joined the SDPR, while 27 backed the SDU and more than 100 were as yet uncommitted.
Some 300 of the original PUWP congress delegates also refrained from joining either grouping.
Many of these were regarded as more hardline communist elements, but others were associated with a Krakow group led by reformer Heronim Kubiak.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Leadership changes in Turkmenia and Moldavia
As the result of republican elections on Jan. 7, a new Turkmen Supreme Soviet was constituted on Jan. 19.
It elected to the new post of Chairman of the Supreme Soviet (i.e. executive President of Turkmenia) Saparmurad Niyazov, the Turkmen Communist Party first secretary [the elections in the Soviet republics will be covered in full in a forthcoming News Digest article].
The Presidium of the Moldavian Supreme Soviet on Jan. 10 appointed Pyotr Paskar as Chairman of the Moldavian Council of Ministers (Prime Minister) in place of Ivan Kalin, who was to take up a diplomatic post.
Death sentence for spy
The Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda reported on Jan. 14 that a former Soviet diplomat had recently been sentenced to death for passing Soviet defence secrets to the United States.
The spy, referred to in the report only by his US code name "Donald F." , had been recruited by the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in 1961 while working at the Soviet mission to the United Nations in New York.
He was said to be one of the highest-placed spies unmasked by Soviet intelligence in recent years.
EUROPE
WARSAW PACT
Czechoslovak and Hungarian requests for full withdrawal of Soviet forces
The Czechoslovak Foreign Ministry on Jan. 9 announced that the Czechoslovak side was to press for a complete withdrawal before the end of 1990 of the estimated 75,000 Soviet troops stationed in the country since the entry of Warsaw Pact forces in 1968.
Bilateral negotiations on reducing the Soviet military presence in Czechoslovakia, agreed during a visit by Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier to Moscow in December 1989, began on Jan. 15-16, and the Soviet side reportedly acknowledged the desirability of a complete military withdrawal from Czechoslovakia.
Hungary's Prime Minister, Miklós Németh, told parliament on Jan. 23 that in recent conversations with his Soviet counterpart, Nikolai Ryzhkov, it had been agreed in principle that Soviet troops could be withdrawn completely from Hungary, and that negotiations on a timetable would begin shortly.
On Jan. 18 the Hungarian government had called for a complete Soviet withdrawal by no later than the end of 1991 [for Hungarian Defence Minister's non-committal response to a suggestion to the same effect in December 1989, see p. 37130].
More than 10,000 Soviet troops had left Hungary since the start of a partial withdrawal in April 1989 [see p. 36595], and according to a Soviet announcement on Dec. 28 the withdrawal of another 8,000 troops was envisaged for 1990, but this would still leave a Soviet presence estimated at between 37,000 and 44,000 troops.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Official denials of unrest — Limited reform programme
The overthrow in November-December 1989 of hardline communist rule across Eastern Europe prompted many foreign observers to look to Albania for signs of a popular uprising against the country's Stalinist rulers.
The Albanian authorities, however, strenuously denied reports alleging popular unrest centred on Shkodër, Albania's second largest city, in the north of the country close to the Yugoslav border.
In early January the Yugoslav media reported public hangings in Shkodër to deter protesters.
(The first Yugoslav report of unrest in Shkodër had appeared on Dec. 19, when a Serbian newspaper claimed that a few days earlier there had been an anti-government demonstration involving "a large number of people" .
US analysts claimed subsequently that the student-led protest had been violently suppressed.)
On Jan. 14, on the basis of assessments by diplomats based in Albania's capital, Tirana, the official Yugoslav news agency Tanjug retracted a report broadcast by the Yugoslav media three days earlier, which had claimed that a state of emergency had been declared in Shkodër and security stepped up around key installations throughout the country.
On Jan. 25, however, Tanjug quoted statements by four refugees from Shkodër who said that anti-Stalinist demonstrations had taken place there on Jan. 11 and 14, involving up to 7,000 people; that there had been many arrests; and that police reinforcements were patrolling the city and the surrounding area.
In his New Year's message to the Albanian people on Jan. 1 Ramiz Alia, the head of state and first secretary of the ruling Party of Labour (APL), suggested that the upheavals in Eastern Europe had inspired Albania's enemies to renew a "campaign of slanders" .
He asserted that Albania was a "society of justice" without "social conflicts or national oppression" .
On Jan. 11 the APL newspaper Zëri i Popullit claimed that the "slanders" were the work of Albanian emigrés seeking to foment an uprising in order to restore the monarchy.
Prince Leka, the pretender to the Albanian throne, speaking from his home in South Africa on Dec. 31, had issued a call for Albanians to revolt.
Strain in Albanian-Greek relations following Yugoslav reports
On Jan. 11 several thousand people demonstrated in Athens (the Greek capital) to protest against the treatment of ethnic Greeks in Albania.
On Jan. 26 demonstrators in Athens threw eggs and tomatoes at Albanian Deputy Foreign Minister Sokrat Plaka at the start of an official visit intended to reduce tensions.
Tanjug had alleged on Dec. 16 that four brothers who were members of Albania's ethnic-Greek minority had been tortured and killed in October 1989 for trying to flee the country.
On Jan. 9 the Greek Foreign Ministry challenged the Albanian authorities to prove that the Pressos brothers were alive.
Alia's reform proposals
Addressing an APL central committee plenum on Jan. 25, Alia proposed political and economic reforms which he said would contribute to the "further strengthening of the internal situation and stability" .
The political reform proposals included open meetings of grass-roots party organizations; the selection of officials up to the rank of Deputy Minister, district APL first secretary or divisional Army or militia commander, and of all enterprise and institution directors, to be "based on elections by the working people, on merit" in order to "have as few cadres as possible appointed directly from above" ; a limit of two terms in office for all members of elective party and state bodies, including the People's Assembly (parliament) and the APL central committee; a choice between candidates in elections to these bodies (albeit only communist or communist-backed candidates; Alia categorically ruled out abandoning "the hegemony of the APL" and allowing rival political parties); and reduction in the bureaucratic apparatus.
On the economic front Alia's proposals included encouraging initiative in enterprises and curtailing the role of central planning bodies; paying bonuses to workers exceeding production targets; allowing agricultural workers to sell surpluses at prices not fixed by the state; curtailing artificial price fixing, by means of state subsidies, for all but essential goods; and allowing people to build their own homes.
Alia blamed the overthrow of communist rule elsewhere in Eastern Europe on what he termed the "revisionism" and "hypocrisy" of the former "ruling cliques" , who had "compromised and soiled the legitimacy of the socialist state" .
He added: "We will have to live with this tragedy painfully, but of course not in despair." 
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Steps towards formation of European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Experts from 34 countries, and from the Commission of the European Communities (EC) and the European Investment Bank met in Paris on Jan. 15-16 to discuss the formation of a European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, as agreed at the December 1989 Strasbourg European Council meeting [see p. 37132].
There appeared to be general consensus that the new Bank's capital should amount to 10,000 million European currency units (ECU) and that its objective should be to help reinforce the competitive and private sector (without necessarily excluding the public sector, which the United Kingdom government had advocated).
Other matters, such as the amount of capital to be subscribed by each contributing country, and the eligibility of the Soviet Union for funding, were left until a further meeting due on March 10-11.
Countries represented at the Paris meeting were the 12 EC countries, the six European Free Trade Association countries (Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland), eight East European countries (Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Hungary, Poland, Romania, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia), Cyprus, Turkey, Malta, and five non-European member countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries (Australia, Canada, Japan, New Zealand and the United States).
At the meeting President Mitterrand of France declared that no meeting of comparable importance had taken place since 1944 when the allied powers had decided at Bretton Woods to create the International Monetary Fund and World Bank.
Other assistance to Eastern Europe
Meeting informally on Jan. 21 in Dublin, the Irish capital, EC Foreign Ministers supported the Soviet Union's call for the holding of a summit meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) in 1990 rather than two years later as scheduled.
The Ministers approved an emergency package of food aid for Romania and Poland worth 68,800,000ECU, of which 40,000,000ECU was to go to Romania.
They also discussed a proposal by Jacques Delors, the President of the EC Commission, that East Germany should be given preferential status as a potential EC member.
In a speech to the European Parliament on Jan. 17 he had stated "that there is a place for East Germany in the Community should it so wish" .
Talks between EC and East German officials on trade and co-operation began on Jan. 29 with the aim of concluding an agreement by mid-1990 as outlined in the Strasbourg communiqué [ibid.].
EMS currency realignment
In the first realignment of currency values within the European monetary system (EMS) since January 1987 [see p. 34889], the Italian lira was devalued — by 3.68 per cent against the Deutschmark — while the relative values of the other currencies remained virtually unchanged.
The realignment, the 12th since the establishment of the EMS in March 1979 [see pp. 30010-11], was decided on Jan. 5 and took effect on Jan. 8.
At the same time the Italian government undertook to reduce from 6 to 2.25 per cent the margin either side of the central rate by which the lira's exchange rate was allowed to fluctuate.
All currencies in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) would now limit fluctuations within 2.25 per cent margins except the Spanish peseta, which had joined the ERM on June 19, 1989 [see p. 36741], and which retained a plus or minus 6 per cent margin.
Three EC member country currencies, sterling, the Greek drachma and Portuguese escudo, remained outside the mechanism.
Jan. 8, 1990 Jan. 13, 1987 German mark (DM) 2.04446 2.05853 French franc (FF) 6.85684 6.90403 Dutch guilder (Fl) 2.30358 2.31943 Belgian-Luxembourg franc (BF) 42.1679 42.4582 Italian lira (IL) 1,529.70 1,483.58 Danish krone (DK) 7.79845 7.85212 Irish punt (IR£) 0.763159 0.768411 Spanish peseta (Pta) 132.889 133.504* *Central rate applied when peseta joined ERM in June 1989.
New central rates against European currency unit
EUROPE
GREECE
Calling of general election
Xenofon Zolotas, who had become Prime Minister of an all-party government after an inconclusive general election on Nov. 5, 1989 [see pp. 37050-51], announced on Jan. 26 the calling of a further general election.
Scheduled for April 8, 1990, this would be the third in the space of 10 months.
The decision was precipitated by the government's inability to resolve its differences, in particular over how to tackle the country's increasingly precarious economic position.
A 24-hour general strike on Jan. 25, called by the General Confederation of Greek Labour, was supported by an estimated 1,700,000 workers, disrupting public transport, telephone, electricity and water services, and also affecting industry, construction and the retail trade.
Workers demanded wage increases in line with inflation, "democratic tax reform" and a radical renegotiation of working conditions.
Prior to the April 8 general election, the Parliament was due to elect a successor to President Khristos Sartzetakis (for whose election in 1985 see pp. 34435-36).
The exact electoral procedure was to be approved by Parliament on Feb. 17, with a first round of voting due on Feb. 23.
According to the draft rules, a candidate would need to win at least 200 out of 300 votes to secure election in the first round or in a second round five days later.
Failing this, a candidate could be elected by securing 180 votes in a third round; if this were not achieved, Parliament had to be dissolved.
(March 10 was the date already set for the dissolution of Parliament in advance of the general election.)
EUROPE
PORTUGAL
Cabinet reorganization
A major government reorganization took place following setbacks for the ruling Social Democratic Party (Partido Social Demócrata — PSD) in municipal elections on Dec. 17 and the sudden resignation of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Defence, Eurico de Melo, on Jan. 2.
The Prime Minister, Aníbal Cavaço Silva, had been under pressure to reorganize the government for some time, and the Cabinet sworn in on Jan. 5 contained five new ministers.
A new Ministry of the Environment was also created and 12 new secretaries of state were appointed.
No appointment was announced to the deputy premiership, which De Melo, a veteran figure in the PSD, had held since 1987.
Aníbal Cavaço Silva Prime Minister *Carlos Brito Defence Fernando Nogueira Minister of State; Justice António Capucho Parliamentary Affairs *Miguel Beleza Finance Luis Valente de Oliveira Planning and Territorial Administration *Manuel Pereira Interior Joao de Deus Pinheiro Foreign Affairs *Arlindo Cunha Agriculture, Fisheries and Food Luis Mira Amaral Industry and Energy Roberto Carneiro Education Joao Oliveira Martins Public Works, Transport and Communications *Arlindo Carvalho Health José Silva Peneda Employment and Social Security Joaquim Ferreira do Amaral Trade and Tourism António Couto dos Santos Youth *Fernando Ferreira Real Environment *New appointment
Portuguese Cabinet
as of Jan. 5, 1990
Brito was second vice-president of the PSD and had stood unsuccessfully as candidate for mayor of Oporto in December.
Beleza was a director of the Banco de Portugal and Pereira was a member of the European Parliament.
Among the outgoing ministers Alvaro Barreto, the Health Minister, had held senior government posts for 11 years and had been a minister for nine of these.
Municipal elections
In the December municipal elections the opposition Socialists (Partido Socialista — PS) emerged as the strongest party.
The secretary-general of the PS, Jorge Sampaio, became mayor of Lisbon (the capital), where the PS entered into an alliance with the Communists and the Greens; the PS won absolute control in Oporto.
EUROPE
SWEDEN
Cabinet reshuffle — Nuclear energy policy
Prime Minister Ingvar Carlsson reshuffled his Cabinet on Jan. 9, when the most significant change involved the splitting of the Environment and Energy Ministry, created in October 1986 and led since then by Birgitta Dahl.
Dahl retained responsibility for the environment while the energy portfolio went to Rune Molin, vice-president of the Trade Union Confederation (LO), who also took over the industry portfolio from Ivar Nordberg.
Ingela Thalén, became Health and Social Affairs Minister in place of Sven Hulterström; her previous post, that of Labour Minister, was taken by Mona Sahlin [for previous Cabinet list see p. 37160].
The change was widely reported as bringing into question the government's commitment to the phasing out of nuclear energy by 2010, as approved in a 1980 referendum [see pp. 30335; 30994; 34831].
Legislation in 1988 envisaged closing the first two of the country's 12 nuclear reactors in 1995 and 1996 [see p. 36161].
Dahl was known as a staunch supporter of the anti-nuclear lobby, while Molin favoured a delay in the closures, arguing that their high cost might jeopardise Swedish industrial competitiveness and employment prospects.
In addition Carlsson created a new inner Cabinet comprising himself and the Ministers of Finance, Justice, Labour, Industry and Foreign Affairs.
The inner Cabinet was to co-ordinate the work of three groups, chaired respectively by the Labour, Industry and Foreign Ministers, which were due to report in April on social issues, the economy (including nuclear policy), and foreign and security issues.
EUROPE
WEST GERMANY
SPD victory in Saarland elections
The Social Democratic Party (Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands — SPD) won 54.4 per cent of the votes in Land (state) elections in Saarland on Jan. 28, taking 30 out of 51 seats in the Landtag (state parliament).
[For narrow SPD victory in last Land elections in March 1985 see p. 33746.]
The turnout was 83.2 per cent.
The Christian Democrats (Christlich-Demokratische Union — CDU) and the Free Democratic Party (Freie Demokratische Partei — FDP), which at federal level formed the governing coalition, each lost around 4 per cent of the vote as compared with March 1985.
The neo-Nazi Republicans (Republikaner) had campaigned strongly for German reunification, while also playing on West German fears engendered by the flood of immigrants from Eastern Europe, but failed to win the 5 per cent of votes needed to win representation in the Landtag.
Oskar Lafontaine, 46, Minister President of Saarland since 1985, was on Jan. 29 nominated by Hans-Jochen Vogel, the SPD chair, as SPD candidate for federal Chancellor, and this nomination was expected to be approved by a meeting of the SPD presidium in March.
Elections to the Bundestag (Federal Diet — which in turn elected the Chancellor) were due on Dec. 9, 1990.
Lafontaine's popularity in the Saarland had been reinforced by successes in tackling regional problems of high unemployment, declining heavy industry, and environmental degradation.
His campaign had also warned of the strains on West Germany's infrastructure from a continuing inflow of East Europeans into the country.
 "We cannot stand by," he said,"while more and more people from East Germany and Eastern Europe come over here, while the economies there bleed to death and here unemployment rises.
We must therefore pump every extra mark we have into those countries, so that those people find happiness in their own lands."
Seats Percentage of vote 1990 1985 1990 1985 SPD 30 26 54.4 49.2 CDU 18 20 33.4 37.3 FDP 3 5 5.6 10.0 Republicans 0 — 3.3 Greens 0 0 2.7 2.5 NPD* 0 0 0.2 0.7 DFP** 0 — 0.2 DKP*** 0 0 0.1 0.3 *National Democratic Party of Germany (Nationaldemokratische Partei Deutschlands. **German Family Party (Deutsche Familien-Partei) formed on Nov. 3, 1989, as a splinter group from the CDU and active also in Bavaria, Hessen and North Rhine-Westphalia.
***German Communist Party (Deutsche Kommunistische Partei).
Land elections in Saarland
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Resignation of Employment Secretary
Norman Fowler unexpectedly resigned as Secretary of State for Employment on Jan. 3 and was replaced by Michael Howard, hitherto the (non-Cabinet) Minister for Housing and Planning.
Fowler, who had been a member of the Cabinet since January 1981 [see p. 30708], stressed that he was leaving for "family reasons" and that there was no disagreement between him and the Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
Storm deaths
A total of 47 people were killed in the United Kingdom when hurricane-force winds of over 100 mph swept through north-western Europe on Jan. 25.
Other deaths reported were 20 in the Netherlands, 10 in Belgium, eight in France, seven in West Germany, and four in Denmark.
More than 1,000,000 people were left without electricity in both the UK and France and transport services were severely disrupted.
A similar storm on the night of Oct. 15-16, 1987, had killed considerably fewer people but caused more extensive material damage.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Possibility of talks on devolution
In a carefully worded speech on Jan. 9 Peter Brooke, the United Kingdom Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, stated that "there may now in my judgment be enough common ground to make worthwhile the start of talks soon on new arrangements for exercising political power within Northern Ireland" .
The following day James Molyneaux, the leader of the Official Ulster Unionist Party (OUP), said that he thought there was enough in Brooke's speech "to make it worthwhile for us to meet him" , although along with other unionist politicians in Northern Ireland he reportedly remained adamant that the Anglo-Irish Agreement of 1985 had to be suspended before talks could be opened.
Jim Nicholson, the OUP member of the European Parliament, said on the weekend of Jan. 20-21 that if the Irish government were prepared to countenance a new agreement then unionists would be prepared to "put everything on the table" in talks with the Irish government.
Charles Haughey, the Irish Prime Minister, on Jan. 21 and again on Jan. 22 declared that if "a new and more broadly based agreement can be reached by direct discussions and negotiations with all the parties involved, the Irish government will be prepared to contemplate, in agreement with the British government, a new and better-structured agreement or arrangement to transcend the existing one" .
On Jan. 28 Brooke stressed that "we are talking about a possibility rather than a probability" of talks.
Allegations of shoot-to-kill policy
On Jan. 13 three men were shot dead by two soldiers in plain clothes as they attempted to rob a betting shop in Falls Road, west Belfast.
The three men, two of whom were subsequently found to have been carrying replica guns, were not thought to be IRA members but had known records of delinquency.
The killings again prompted allegations that the British Army was operating a "shoot-to-kill" policy.
[For controversy over Gibraltar killing of three IRA members in March 1988, see pp. 36236; 36405; 37098; for summary of events surrounding Stalker-Sampson inquiry into fatal shootings in 1982 by Royal Ulster Constabulary units see pp. 36239-40.]
Haughey, Gerard Collins, the Irish Foreign Minister, and the Rt.
Rev. Cahal Daly, the Roman Catholic Bishop of Down and Connor, all called for an independent public inquiry into the killings, but Brooke declared that he had every confidence in the investigation being undertaken by the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
EUROPE
ANDORRA
Elections of head of government and leader of parliament
Oscar Ribas Reig, "liberal nationalist" and head of government in 1982-84 [see pp. 31515; 32942], won 22 of the 28 votes in the General Council (Consell General de las Valls) to become President of the Executive Council (government) on.
Jan 12, following the parliamentary elections held on Dec 10, 1989.
Another liberal nationalist, Josep Maria Beal Benedico, received 15 votes to become First Syndic-General or president of the General Council.
Oscar Ribas Reig President of Government Jaume Bartumeu Cassany Finance, Commerce and Industry Guillem Benazet Riba Agriculture and Natural Heritage Joan Santamaria Tarre Public Services Càndid Naudi Mora Tourism and Sport Antoni Armengol Aleix Labour and Social Security
Executive Council
EUROPE
TURKEY
Özal's visit to USA — Rejection by World Bank of Turkish loan request
During a 10-day private visit to the USA, ostensibly for medical reasons, Turkish President Turgut Özal met World Bank President Barber Conable on Jan. 17 and US President George Bush on Jan. 18.
His meeting with Conable followed a Jan. 16 decision by the World Bank to reject a Turkish request for a US$400,000,000 restructuring package, on the grounds that Turkey had failed adequately to fulfil the World Bank's conditions on budget and inflation rate cuts.
In his meeting with Bush, Özal reportedly sought to express his disquiet about a bill passing through the US Congress aimed at marking the "75th anniversary of the Armenian genocide of 1915-23" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Lack of progress in Middle East peace negotiations — Events in occupied territories
During January 1990 many of those involved in the current round of Middle East peace negotiations expressed their growing sense of disillusionment with the process.
Talks with the ultimate aim of arranging elections among Palestinians in the occupied territories and which had started in May 1989 [see p. 36670]had become increasingly convoluted.
By the end of the year the various parties had still not managed to organise a first-stage meeting, of Egyptian, Israeli and US officials, which was supposed to discuss a second-stage Israeli-Palestinian meeting on the proposed elections.
The Israeli government maintained its absolute refusal to grant the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) a direct role in the second-stage talks.
Positive Egyptian response to Baker plan — Reiteration of "conditions" by Israel
Commentators reported that a diplomatic breakthrough had occurred on Dec. 6 when Egypt formally accepted the "five proposals" put forward in October by US Secretary of State James Baker [see pp. 36986-87].
The so-called "Baker plan" had been accepted in early November by the Israeli Cabinet, on condition that the USA guaranteed the non-involvement of the PLO [see p. 37051].
According to some sources Egypt's acceptance of the Baker plan indicated that the PLO leadership had accepted that it must play an "invisible" role in the initial stages of the peace process.
However, on Dec. 11 the Israeli Foreign Minister, Moshe Arens, dampened the mood of optimism by calling for further assurances that Israel would not be expected to talk directly with the PLO.
Commenting on the Arens statement the Middle East Economic Digest of Dec. 22 said that "the PLO's apparent approval of Cairo's move made the Egyptian government an unacceptable interlocutor for Tel Aviv" .
US and Palestinian frustration over peace process
Baker reportedly expressed his dissatisfaction over the slow progress of the peace process, during a meeting in Washington on Jan. 9 with the Norwegian Foreign Minister, Kjell Magne Bondevik.
The next day, US State Department representative Margaret Tutwiler hinted to reporters that Baker was considering transferring his attention from the Middle East to areas of the world "where the circumstances are producing change" , although he continued to hold meetings on the Middle East during January.
In the middle of the month, he held separate meetings in Washington with Itzhak Rabin, the Israeli Defence Minister, and Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, the Egyptian Foreign Minister.
Baker's disenchantment exemplified a general hardening of US policy and attitude towards Israel.
Thus the US State Department openly criticised the Israeli Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, for a Jan. 14 speech in which he claimed that the occupied territories would be used to settle future Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union.
An article by the US Senate minority (Republican) leader, Robert Dole, in the New York Times of Jan. 17 called for a cut in foreign aid to Israel and the diversion of the funds to Eastern Europe.
Dole's article also contained a thinly veiled criticism of the powerful pro-Israel lobby in the USA, which, he claimed, had "turned some of our foreign aid programmes virtually into entitlement programmes" .
Soon after the publication of Dole's article, the US administration announced that President George Bush had read and "appreciated" it.
Statements issued by the PLO during January were highly critical of the Baker plan and of the pace of peace negotiations in general.
Typical of the Palestinian mood was a commentary broadcast on PLO central radio in Baghdad, Iraq, on Jan. 11 which claimed that the peace negotiations had reached a "level of absurdity" and described discussions between the USA and Israeli as a "dialogue among deaf people" .
During a visit to Jordan on Jan. 10, Farouq Qaddumi, who was appointed to the foreign affairs portfolio of the Palestinian government-in-exile in April 1989 [see p. 36536], said that the Baker plan had failed and called for a meeting of the Palestine National Council (PNC, the Palestinian parliament-in-exile) to discuss future strategy.
According to the Financial Times of Jan. 19, the PLO chairman, Yassir Arafat, had recently threatened to call a PNC meeting and resign if the current peace efforts reached a dead end.
Peres visit to Cairo
Shimon Peres, Israel's Vice Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, visited Egypt on Jan. 23-25.
On his arrival in Cairo, Peres announced that the start of "significant negotiations with the Palestinians" was "very close" , a sentiment he reiterated after meeting President Hosni Mubarak on Jan. 24.
However, in Israel, aides close to Prime Minister Shamir were critical of Peres' statements and denied that an Israeli-Palestinian dialogue was imminent.
Amnesty International report
In a report published on Jan. 3, the human rights organization Amnesty International accused the Israeli government of condoning, and even encouraging, the extrajudicial execution of Palestinian civilians in an effort to contain the intifada ( "uprising" ).
An Israeli Foreign Ministry spokesman dismissed the report as "nonsense" and said that the charges were "outrageous" .
In the report, Amnesty called for an urgent review of the guidelines under which troops were permitted to open fire.
The guidelines, it said, appeared to "permit the killing of people who are involved in activities which do not necessarily endanger life" .
The report also criticized as "inadequate" the investigation by the Israeli security forces and the government of abuses.
Arrest of Husseini — Opening of Yasseen trial
Faisal al-Husseini, the director of the East Jerusalem Institute of Arab Studies and one of the chief co-ordinators of the intifada, was arrested in East Jerusalem on Jan. 19 for questioning about his alleged involvement in the attempted formation of a Palestinian "popular army" unit.
Husseini, who had spent 21 months in detention between April 1987 and January 1989 [see p. 36408], was eventually released on Jan. 22 after a protest by the US State Department.
The trial opened in Gaza on Jan. 3 of Sheikh Ahmed Yasseen, leader of the non-PLO Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas), a fundamentalist group which played an increasingly prominent role in the intifada during 1989.
Sheikh Yasseen was charged with 15 offences, including involvement in the murder of two Israeli soldiers in May 1989.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Weizmann affair
The collapse of Israel's fragile coalition government over the issue of ministerial contacts with the PLO was narrowly averted in early January.
The threat of fresh elections only diminished after Likud and Labour (the two main coalition partners) reached an "eleventh hour" compromise agreement.
The political crisis was centred on the figure of Ezer Weizmann, the Minister of Science and Technology.
A former hardline Defence Minister under Menahem Begin in the late 1970s, Weizmann left Likud in 1980, forming in March 1984 his own Yahad party which then merged into Labour in 1986 [see p. 34770].
He was currently the Cabinet's leading "dove" and the only Minister who openly advocated direct Israeli-PLO talks.
Dismissal of Weizmann
Itzhak Shamir, the Prime Minister and Likud leader, announced at the end of a Cabinet meeting on Dec. 31 that he was dismissing Weizmann from the Cabinet, claiming that Weizmann had maintained contacts with the PLO over a period of time.
Such contacts, Shamir maintained, were not only against government policy, but were also a crime under Israel's anti-terrorist laws.
Evidence relating to Weizmann's PLO contacts was revealed by Shamir on Jan. 1, when he alleged that Israel's internal security service Shin Bet had recently monitored a telephone conversation between Weizmann and a Palestinian activist in Tunis, and that the Israeli secret intelligence service Mossad had gathered evidence of a meeting in Switzerland in June 1989 between Weizmann and Nabil Ramlawi, the PLO's Geneva representative.
Labour Party response
The Labour Party objected strongly to Weizmann's dismissal and threatened to withdraw from the year-old coalition unless the decision was abrogated.
Under the December 1988 coalition agreement [see p. 36948]a new election would automatically be called if either major party withdrew from the government.
The Labour Party based its objections on the manner of Weizmann's dismissal, claiming that his removal contravened a clause in the coalition agreement which prevented Shamir from dismissing Labour ministers.
Labour also objected to Shamir's apparent use of Israel's intelligence services in a political context.
However, the party was very careful not to support in principle ministerial contact with the PLO, a stance which clearly angered Weizmann.
In an interview with an Israeli newspaper published on Jan. 2, Weizmann described Shimon Peres, the Labour leader and Vice Prime Minister, as a "son of a bitch" and claimed that Peres had actually briefed him during his telephone conversation with the Palestinian in Tunis.
Compromise solution — Weizmann's resignation from inner Cabinet
Since under Israeli law a minister's dismissal only took effect 48 hours after the initial announcement was made, government politicians had sufficient time to reach a solution to the crisis.
Under the compromise agreed by Labour and Likud on Jan. 2, Weizmann resigned from the 12-member "inner Cabinet" but retained his Science and Technology portfolio.
He was replaced in the inner Cabinet by Gad Yaakobi, the (Labour) Minister of Communications.
According to most reports, Itzhak Rabin, the (Labour) Defence Minister, played the key role in the Labour-Likud negotiations.
The Financial Times of Jan. 3 reported that Rabin had asserted his role as the Labour Party's "chief playmaker" to the "evident discomfiture" of Shimon Peres.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-IRAQ
Acceptance of Soviet mediation offer on peace talks — Rejection of Iraqi proposal — Release of wounded PoWs
A Soviet offer to host peace talks between the Iranian and Iraqi Foreign Ministers in Moscow was formally presented by the Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze on Jan. 11 and almost immediately accepted by the two countries.
Speaking on Jan. 10, the Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman, Gennady Gerasimov, had outlined the proposal while emphasising that the Soviet peace effort did not represent "any substitution for the UN peace effort in the region" .
Iraqi President Saddam Hussein had on Jan. 5 announced his own three-part proposal aimed at reviving deadlocked negotiations at the UN in Geneva.
This proposal, rejected by Iran as failing to address the issue of troop withdrawals to internationally recognised boundaries, involved (i) direct talks between Iran and Iraq in each other 's capitals under UN auspices;(ii) the unconditional release of all sick and wounded prisoners of war (PoWs); and (iii) the opening of the Iran-Iraq borders to allow the resumption of civilian travel, especially to each other 's Islamic shrines.
The UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, had on Nov. 28, 1989, presented a report to the Security Council, Paragraph 41 of which called for priority to be given to the withdrawal of forces and release of PoWs.
The report, which had been prepared by the Secretary-General's special envoy, Jan Eliasson, after his 17-day visit to the two countries, coincided with an Iraqi proposal to establish five Iran-Iraq expert negotiating committees to discuss various aspects of UN Security Council Resolution 598 [see p. 35600]in direct negotiations.
This latter idea was rejected by Iran, which maintained its insistence on negotiations on Resolution 598 in its entirety and under UN mediation, despite Hussein's Dec. 2 suggestion that the committees could eventually lead to meetings "at leadership level" .
An Iranian proposal on Dec. 17, 1989, for the exchange of all sick, wounded and disabled PoWs, was rejected by the Iraqi Foreign Minister, Tariq Aziz, who claimed that Iran insisted on "keeping the issue of war prisoners unresolved to…use it as a pressure card for bargaining" .
However, on Jan. 17 Iran released 53 sick and wounded Iraqi PoWs, 50 of whom were returned to Iraq (the remaining three seeking political asylum in Iran), and on Jan. 18, 20 sick and wounded Iranian PoWs were returned by Iraq to Iran.
The operations were organized by the International Committee of the Red Cross.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
Visit of UN human rights delegation to Iran — Anti-Montazeri demonstrations
The special envoy of the UN Human Rights Commission, Reynaldo Galindo Pohl, arrived in Iran on Jan. 21 as head of the first UN delegation to visit the country to investigate alleged human rights abuses since the 1979 revolution.
During his eight-day visit, Pohl inspected conditions in a number of Iranian prisons and was greeted on Jan. 23-24 by sit-ins outside the UN office in Tehran by the families of political detainees, demanding to be allowed to provide him with evidence of abuses.
Thousands of people in Qom on Jan. 5 demonstrated their opposition to the regime's leading "moderate" dissident, Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri (the designated spiritual successor to Ayatollah Khomeini until his resignation in March 1989 — see pp. 36538-39), who had reportedly criticized government policies and claimed that Iran was selling oil to Israel.
Such statements were regarded by the fundamentalist Jomhuri-e-Eslami newspaper as "aimed at weakening the Islamic Republic" .
Iran's spiritual leader, Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei, addressing the Majlis (parliament) on Jan. 8, described as "treason" any "act or word which weakens the people's trust" in the institutions of government.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Amnesty report on political detentions
A report on Amnesty International's first investigation into political detentions in Saudi Arabia, published on Jan. 11, claimed that over 700 political opponents of the regime — principally members of Shia opposition groupings — had been held without trial since 1983, including some 100 in 1989 alone.
The detainees were "usually held in solitary confinement" , were "routinely tortured" to exact "confessions" and were "denied access to family or legal counsel" .
An official denial issued by the Saudi Press Agency on the same day said that the report was "inaccurate" , "exaggerated" and based on accounts which had been subjected to "distortion and biased machinations by suspicious sources" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ARAB MAGHREB UNION
Maghreb summit
The first summit (or Presidential Council) of the five-country Arab Maghreb Union (AMU), formed in February 1989 [see p. 36474], was held in Tunis on Jan. 21-23 and was attended by heads of state of Algeria, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia.
President Yaya of Mauritania, the fifth member state, did not attend because of the death of his wife on Jan. 16, Mauritania being represented instead at Foreign Mnisterial level.
The summit had been postponed from its original scheduled dates of Jan. 9-10 at the apparent request of the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi.
An agreed final statement read out on Jan. 23 by the Tunisian Foreign Affairs Minister, Abdelhamid Escheikh, said that the summit had approved recommendations for (i) the expansion of representation on the AMU Consultative Council [see p. 36988]from 10 to 20 parliamentarians from each member country;(ii) the creation of four joint specialist ministerial committees on food security, economy and finance, infrastructure, and human resources;(iii) the establishment of a permanent AMU secretariat at a venue to be decided; and (iv) the exploration of means of developing closer defence co-operation.
A report on defence was to be presented by AMU Foreign and Defence Ministers at the next Maghreb summit.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TURKEY-SYRIA-IRAQ
Turkish diversion of Euphrates river
An operation by Turkey to divert the flow of the Euphrates river away from Syria and Iraq in order to fill the reservoir behind the newly constructed Ataturk dam (believed to be the fifth largest in the world) was begun on Jan. 13 in a ceremony presided over by the Turkish President, Turgut Özal.
The diversion, scheduled to last until Feb. 13, provoked bitter criticism from Syria and the concern of the Iraqi government, but during the Jan. 13 ceremony Özal said that he had "taken into account the needs and concerns of [Turkey's]neighbours" and pledged that Turkey would "never use the control of water to coerce or threaten [Syria and Iraq]" .
At a meeting with Özal in Ankara on Jan. 14 the Iraqi Oil Minister, Issam Abdel Rahim al Chalabi, reportedly called on Özal to reduce the period of diversion to two weeks.
On Jan. 15 the Syrian Foreign Ministry summoned the Turkish ambassador in Damascus to lodge a formal complaint, in view of the effects of the diversion on Syria's water and electricity supplies.
The Turkish government, which had announced the intended diversion on Nov. 20, 1989, rejected the complaint, pointing to the fact that it had increased the supply of water to Iraq and Syria by 50 per cent between November and January to compensate for the loss of water in January-February.
Turkey had also offered to supplement any shortfall in electricity supply to Syria, but had received no formal response to this offer.
The dam was part of a US$21,000 million Southern Anatolia Development Programme involving a total of 21 dams and 17 hydro-electric stations affecting the Tigris and the Euphrates rivers.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION-UNITED STATES
Bush and Gorbachev New Year messages
The United States and Soviet Presidents, George Bush and Mikhail Gorbachev, each sent televised New Year messages to the other's country on Jan. 1.
The two leaders expressed enthusiasm in developing closer ties between their countries during the 1990s and referred to the Malta summit in December 1989 [see pp. 37110-12]as a turning point in their relations and in the disarmament talks.
While Gorbachev called for superpower collaboration to "make [the world]more calm and reasonable" , Bush sought to assure the Soviet Union that "the West [sought]no advantage from the extraordinary changes under way in the East" .
He went on to praised Gorbachev as "a good partner in peace" .
Gorbachev declared that 1990 "could become a genuine turning point in the effort to limit and reduce arms" and that it would "open up a period of genuine [US-Soviet]co-operation [aimed at building]a world ruling out subversive action, pressure, interference and armed invasions" .
The 1990s could become a decade of "drawing the USA and the Soviet Union together on the basis of universal human values and the balance of interests,…ridding the world of superfluous unnecessary weapons, outdated political concepts and military doctrines, and artificial barriers between peoples and states" .
He warned against "hesitations, wait-and-see attitudes, doubts and suspicions" and said it would be "naïve, senseless and dangerous to try to thwart the aspiration for a better future" .
Turning to the internal Soviet situation Gorbachev described 1989 as "the most difficult year of perestroika [restructuring]" since its launch in 1985, as the country had "encountered a number of most acute problems" , but he declared that the goal of "a humane, democratic socialism, a society of freedom and social justice" was within sight.
Bush reported his assurance to the Soviet leader at Malta that he "support[ed] the dynamic process of reform in the Soviet Union" and that the two countries would "work together to reduce barriers to trade, investment and the free movement of goods and ideas" in order that "the entry of the Soviet Union into the global market [could]be advanced" .
He declared that "democratic values" were "not exclusively American or Western" but were "deeply rooted in the human spirit" .
On arms talks, much remained to be done, but 1989 had given him "confidence that [the superpowers were]heading in the right direction" .
INTERNATIONAL
CSCE
Seminar on military doctrine
The Jan. 16-18 opening session of a three-week seminar on military doctrine, taking place in Vienna under the auspices of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), was attended by senior military figures from most of the 35 CSCE countries.
The meeting, which was the first of its kind in post-war Europe, focused on the implications for existing military doctrines arising from the changes under way in Eastern Europe and the emerging atmosphere of East-West co-operation.
Addressing the seminar on Jan. 17, the head of the arms control directorate of the Soviet armed forces general staff, Gen. Nikolai Chervov, predicted that the Warsaw Pact would eventually become a "purely political alliance" and that its supreme body, the Political Consultative Committee, would probably cease to exist.
He said that fundamental changes to the Pact's command and control structure would be needed, with a greater emphasis on national-oriented doctrines.
Responding to Chervov's call for the inclusion of naval forces in the current Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) talks, the chairman of the US Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Colin Powell, said that "the real threat in Europe [did]not come from the US Navy but from the overwhelming Soviet ground forces, backed by air forces" .
In an opening address to the session on Jan. 16, Powell had expressed his conviction that "the period of confrontation in Europe must end" , and declared that "as senior military officers" of their respective countries, the seminar's participants were "duty-bound to contribute to the historic process unfolding today across [the European]continent" .
He emphasised, however, that US troops would remain in Europe "for as long as they [were]welcomed by the governments and publics of Western Europe" .
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Open Skies test flight over Hungary
A Canadian Air Force C-130 Hercules transport aircraft conducted a three-hour flight in Hungarian airspace on Jan. 6 in order to test procedures for a proposed NATO/Warsaw Pact "Open Skies" confidence-building regime.
The flight, which involved a detailed aerial survey of Soviet and Hungarian military bases in Hungary, was the first of its kind in the history of the two blocs.
A NATO/Warsaw Pact Open Skies conference was scheduled for Ottawa, the Canadian capital, in February.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Summit meeting
The 45th (summit) session of the 10-nation Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) was held in Sofia, the Bulgarian capital, on Jan. 9-10 and was attended by heads of government of all member states with the exception of Cuba and Vietnam (represented by their Deputy Prime Ministers).
The meeting was preceded by calls for the disbandment of the organization but ended with an agreement to review existing COMECON financial and trade arrangements to allow for the wider operation of market principles.
A communiqué issued on Jan. 10 stressed the importance "of a decisive renewal of the entire system of mutual co-operation and of the mechanism of multilateral co-operation within the CMEA framework, of a radical review of its functions and purposes, of drafting a new charter to meet the modern and long-term requirements of interaction among the CMEA member countries" .
The statement reported the summit's decision to establish a "special commission to consider the suggestions of the countries on the key aspects of co-operation within the CMEA framework and to work out in the shortest time drafts of new fundamental CMEA documents" .
The commission's first meeting was to be held in Prague, the Czechoslovakian capital, in mid-March.
The Czechoslovak Finance Minister, Vaclav Klaus, expressed impatience at the pace of progress envisaged by the communiqué, declaring that Czechoslovakia did "not want to wait for committees" and wished to "start the overhaul tomorrow" .
The Hungarian Prime Minister, Miklós Németh, meanwhile said that the leaders had "agreed that COMECON in its present form was unviable" and that priority had to be shifted from "a system of five-year plans" to one involving "bilateral contacts" .
The meeting adopted a Soviet proposal to phase in gradually from 1991 a protocol allowing for the introduction of hard-currency trading among member countries.
The Czechoslovak and Polish delegations had been the most vehement opponents of an immediate switch to the new system, as proposed on Jan. 9 by the Soviet Prime Minister, Nikolai Ryzhkov.
The system was seen to benefit the Soviet Union, whose oil and gas exports to Eastern Europe would attain high market prices.
During a visit to Poland on Jan. 4, Klaus had declared that it was "necessary to disband COMECON" and on Jan. 5 the Polish Foreign Trade Minister, Marcin Swiecicki, said that "the time [had]come to create in place of COMECON, a new, looser organization" .
These statements were followed on Jan. 8 by a proposal from Hungarian Deputy Prime Minister Péter Medgyessy for the creation of an integrated unit or "inner circle" of the three most market-oriented COMECON economies (Czechoslovakia, Poland and Hungary).
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Moroccan oil spill — Oil spillages off Madeira and in New York harbour
An oil slick of approximately 300 sq km, which had moved by Jan. 2 to within 20 km of the Moroccan coast, threatened a major ecological disaster along 200 km of coastline centring on the capital, Rabat, and a number of holiday resorts and fishing ports.
A series of explosions on Dec. 19, 1989, on board an Iranian supertanker, the Kharg-5, carrying 285,000 tonnes of crude oil, had caused 70,000 tonnes of its load to be discharged into the sea some 500 km north of the (Spanish) Canary Islands.
Delays in handling the spillage and the stricken vessel caused the movement of the slick, but it became clear by Jan. 11 that the slick would not actually reach the coastline, largely because of the strength and direction of the prevailing sea currents, and because of the light quality of the oil (Arabian Light).
The Moroccan Interior Ministry had on Jan. 2 warned of an environmental catastrophe of "tragic proportions" and the loss of up to 100,000 jobs in the fishing and tourism industries.
An official of the Iranian Environmental Protection Agency rejected these claims on Jan. 2, saying that the leakage was an "ordinary matter" which "the imperialist media had needlessly blown up" .
A Dutch company in charge of the salvage operation claimed later that the problem had been made worse by the refusal of the Spanish and Moroccan authorities to allow the tanker to be towed into their ports for pumping of the remaining oil and for emergency repairs.
However, during a visit to the spill site on Jan. 2, the French Environment Minister, Brice Lalonde, said that the delay in managing the crisis had been caused by days of "haggling" between the Iranian government and the Dutch company over fees to be charged for the salvage operation.
It was also known that the Kharg-5 had twice been damaged by Iraqi missiles in the Gulf during the Iran-Iraq war.
Madeiran and New York harbour oil slicks
The Portuguese government succeeded in enlisting the aid of the European Communities after an 18-km oil slick washed up on the beaches of Porto Santo island in the (Portuguese) Madeiras on Jan. 16, causing the deaths of large numbers of turtles, seagulls and rare birds.
The source of the slick was unknown, although it was not far from the site of a 25,000-tonne oil spill from a Spanish supertanker, Aragón, on Jan. 2.
The Exxon corporation admitted on Jan. 3 that 500,000 gallons of heating oil had been spilled into New York harbour after a pipeline was hit by an Exxon-owned vessel on Jan. 1.
A number of bird sanctuaries were seriously affected by the spill.
Moscow environment conference — Rainforest conference in Brazil
Some 700 religious leaders and parliamentarians from around 30 countries attended a Global Forum on Environment and Development for Survival in Moscow on Jan. 15-19.
Speaking on Jan. 19, the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, took up an Austrian proposal for a UN-sponsored "international Green Cross" to help countries in "ecological distress" and for a UN force of "green berets" to intervene in ecological disasters.
Calling for a "greening of politics" , Gorbachev said that a planned 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development in Brasilia should be held at "summit level" .
Gorbachev also called for international regulation to protect zones with a "unique place in nature" , especially the Antarctic.
In his opening address to the conference, the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, said that the end of the Cold War had clarified "the social and economic dimensions [of security]" .
He also declared that no environmental strategy would be "viable if conditions of absolute necessity drove poor people into actions such as deforestation" and he called on the North to provide "unpolluting technologies" to the Third World.
A statement issued by rainforest countries on Jan. 16 at the end of a rainforest/global warming conference in Sao Paolo, Brazil, recognized that "the conservation of tropical forests is of crucial importance for global climatic stability" but called for simultaneous commitment from industrialized countries to reduce their own production of "greenhouse gases" .
The conference was attended by scientists from both rainforest and industrialized countries and was organized by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Papal visit to Africa
Pope John Paul II began his sixth tour of Africa on Jan. 25, visiting Cape Verde (Jan. 25-26), Guinea-Bissau (Jan. 27-28), Mali (Jan. 28), Burkina (Jan. 29-30) and Chad (Jan. 30-Feb. 1).
During a mass in Cape Verde on Jan. 25, he said that the developments in Eastern Europe should not lead to the international community forgetting the plight of the Third World, while in Mali on Jan. 28 he appealed for harmony between the Christian and Moslem religions.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 803,943 sq km.
Population: 110,407,376 (1989).
Capital: Islamabad.
Languages: Urdu (national); Punjabi, Sindhi, Pushtu and English.
Religion: Islam (state religion-97%); Hinduism and Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 55 yrs (women), 54 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 520,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 350 (1987).
Currency: Pakistani rupee (USdollars 1.00=Rs 21.2259 as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Islamic Republic of Pakistan was proclaimed in March 1956, having been a British dominion since the partition of the Indian Empire in August 1947.
In July 1977 the armed forces, headed by Gen. Zia ul-Haq, assumed power and martial law was imposed (see p. 28570), following an allegedly fraudulent election in March of that year (see pp. 28301; 28565).
Zia assumed the presidency in September 1978 and was confirmed in this office (by referendum) in December 1984 for a five-year term beginning in March 1985.
Zia was killed in an aircrash on Aug. 17, 1988 (see p. 36217).
Ghulam Ishaq Khan, Chairman of the Senate (the upper house of the federal legislature, comprising 87 members nominated by the National and Provincial Assemblies), was immediately appointed acting President and a caretaker Emergency National Council was formed, comprising leading members of the Cabinet and the armed forces, and the four provincial Chief Ministers.
Benazir Bhutto, leader of the Pakistan People's Party (PPP) which had gained the largest number of seats in elections to the National Assembly held on Nov. 16, 1988 (see pp. 36347-48), was sworn in as Prime Minister on Dec. 2, and a new federal Cabinet was appointed on Dec. 4.
Ishaq Khan was elected President on Dec. 12, winning a large majority of votes in an electoral college comprising the National Assembly, the Senate and the four Provincial Assemblies (see p. 37150).
Benazir Bhutto Prime Minister; Defence; Finance Begum Nusarat Bhutto Senior Minister Without Portfolio Aitzaz Ahsan Interior Syed Iftikhar Hussein Gilani Law and Justice Syed Ghulam Iftikhar Shar Education Mukhtar Ahmad Awan Labour Sardar Farooq Ahmad Khan Laghari Water Makhdoom Ameen Faheem Communications Zafar Leghari Railways Ali Nawaz Shah Industries Agha Tariq Khan Culture Rao Sikandar Iqbal Food, Agriculture and Co-operatives Syed Faisal Saleh Hayat Commerce; Local Government and Rural Development Syed Amir Haider Kazmi Special Education; Social Welfare Jehingir Badar Oil Sahibzada Yaqub Khan Foreign Affairs *Mohammad Hanif Khan Northern Areas, States, Frontier Regions and Kashmir Affairs *Yousuf Raza Gilani Housing and Construction Syed Qasim Ali Shah Tourism Parwez Ali Shah Youth Affairs Khan Bahadur Khan Religious Affairs Khwaia Ahmed Tariq Rahim Parliamentary Affairs Ghulam Ahmed Maneka Overseas Pakistani Affairs; Manpower Advisers to the Prime Minister Rao Rashid Ahmed Establishment V. A. Jafarey Finance, Economic Affairs, Planning and Development Iqbal Akhund National Co-ordination and Security Maj.- Gen. (retd) Nasirullah Khan Special Assistant to the Prime Minister Ministers of State Col. (retd) Ghulam Sarwar Cheema Defence *Mir Baz Mohammad Khan Khitran Environment and Civic Affairs Raja Shahid Zafar Production Javad Jabbar Science and Technology Ehsanul Haq Piracha Finance Shehnaz Wazar Ali Education Rehana Sarwar Women's Division Farooq K. Azam Railways Ahmad Sayeed Awan Information and Broadcasting Mustaq Awan Housing and Construction Haji Amanullah Religious Affairs Mahbubur Rahman Food, Agriculture and Co-operatives Ahmed Alam Anwar Manpower Sher Afghan Parliamentary Affairs Zafar Ali Shah Water and Power Mahmuda Shah Special Education; Social Welfare Begum Khatwani Population Welfare Rufin Julius Minority Affairs Shah Nawaz Junejo Local Government and Rural Development Muzaffar Shah Narcotics Chowdhury Qadir Bux Milap Sports Ghulam Akbar Lasi Labour Khalid Ahmad Khan Officer on Special Duty for Cabinet Affairs Yahya Bakhtiar Attorney-General *Already Cabinet members who assumed these new responsibilities on Jan. 28, 1990.
Cabinet
POLITICS
Difficulties facing PPP government
The PPP government of the Prime Minister, Benazir Bhutto, faced a growing domestic political crisis during the latter half of 1989, culminating in an opposition motion of no confidence held on Nov. 1, which the government narrowly survived (see p. 37043).
The inability of the PPP to provide a strong leadership or to overcome decisively the challenges to its authority, both at federal and province level, left the political system in a state of paralysis.
The presence of an opposition-dominated Senate (appointed during Zia's presidency) and the government's need to concentrate on preserving its small majority in the National Assembly ensured that no legislation of any significance was introduced to deal with the country's worsening social and economic problems, while deteriorating relationships with the provinces, in particular Punjab, created further uncertainty and the threat of destabilization.
The relationship between Bhutto and the President, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, also became increasingly strained as both sought to establish the limits of their authority.
Ishaq Khan maintained his claim to be following a strictly non-partisan attitude in interpreting his constitutional role (greatly enhanced by constitutional amendments introduced by Zia in August 1988), but soon disputed the Prime Minister's right to make senior military appointments.
Bhutto had announced that the term of Adml.
Iftikhar Sirohey as Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff would end in mid-August, but Khan blocked Sirohey's retirement on the grounds that only he had the right to make such decisions.
The dispute broadened to include the appointment of judges after the retirement of several members of the Supreme Court.
On Jan. 25, 1990, Bhutto gave birth to a daughter (thereby becoming the first head of government to give birth while in office); the withdrawal of the Prime Minister from public life during the latter months of her pregnancy increased the aura of indecisiveness surrounding the government, particularly as the Cabinet had offered its resignation in mid-November (see p. 37043).
Provincial affairs
In Punjab the confrontation between the central government and the administration of the Chief Minister, Nawaz Sharif, leader of the opposition Islamic Democratic Alliance (Islami Jamhoori Ittehad-IJI), worsened as each side tried to destabilize the other by a variety of means after the failure in March 1989 of the PPP's attempt to win a no confidence vote against Sharif in the provincial assembly (see p. 37150).
Sharif alleged that the government was using its federal powers to try to unseat him by denying transport and access to credit to the industrial concern, Ittefaq, of which he was a partner, thereby adding further pressure in the federal investigations of Sharif and his supporters.
The government in return accused Sharif of tax evasion, fraud and the theft of electricity and claimed that the state of Punjab was seeking a "state of rebellion" .
The government also tried to secure the removal from Punjab of four senior civil servants and police officers who it believed were strong supporters of Sharif.
Sharif retaliated by refusing to let the four go and furthermore supported the charges laid by the Punjab police against leading PPP members in the state, including Salman Taseer, deputy leader of the PPP in the provincial assembly.
Sharif was also one of the main organizers of a rally held on Aug. 17, 1989, in Islamabad to mark the first anniversary of Zia's death.
The federal government banned all political meetings in the city but the event went ahead as a "religious ceremony" .
The rally attracted an estimated 100,000 people, but several leaders of the opposition IJI were notable by their absence, displaying some of the deep divisions within a diverse grouping held together only by their opposition to the Bhutto government.
In Baluchistan the advent of an opposition coalition government led by Chief Minister Akbar Bugti (appointed on Jan. 25, 1989, two days after the Baluchistan High Court had ordered the reconvening of the province's assembly-see p. 37150), leader of the Baluchistan National Alliance, caused further problems for the central government after clashes in early October 1989 between the paramilitary Frontier Corps and members of the Bugti tribe.
Bugti accused the PPP of using the Frontier Corps to try and overthrow his government.
The disturbances, in which several people were killed, followed attempts by the Corps to confiscate unlicensed weapons and ammunition from tribespeople.
In the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), the PPP coalition administration of Chief Minister Aftab Sherpao successfully resisted the attempts of the IJI and its allies to unseat it, but only at the cost of offering government jobs and incentives to secure the support of independents.
In July 1989 the Awami National Party (ANP), which had left the administration on April 27 (see p. 37150), formally joined in an alliance with the IJI.
Within the province of Sind some PPP members openly criticized the dependence of the federal government on the support of the Muhajir community (Urdu-speaking migrants originally from India) at a time of increasing communal tensions and violence between the Sindhi and non-Sindhi (mainly Muhajir) communities (see below).
Ten PPP MPs from Sind demanded the right to sit separately from the main PPP block in the National Assembly.
SECURITY
Tensions between ethnic groups in Sind (see pp. 37150-51) again erupted into major violence on Oct. 1, 1989, when members of the extremist Sind National Alliance (SNA), demanding independence for the province, occupied Sukkar airport and burnt the Pakistani flag.
Hundreds of SNA supporters were subsequently arrested by the authorities, including the SNA's leader, G. M. Syed, who was placed under house arrest.
This action provoked further disturbances on the streets of Karachi and in other towns and cities.
Economic indicators
GDP growth 6.1% (1988 est.)
Current-account balance -US$1,584 m. (1988 est.)
Trade balance -US$3,152 m. (1987-88 est.)
Budget deficit US$3,000 m.
Total external public debt US$17,200 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 25.9% (1987) Gross domestic product US$38,830 m. (1986-87)
Inflation rate 6.3% (1988)
Unemployment Over 10%
Principal trading partners EC, USA, Japan
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 143,998 sq km.
Population: 114,718,395 (1989).
Capital: Dhaka.
Languages: Bengali (state language-95%); tribal dialects (5%).
Religion: Islam (state religion-85%), Hinduism, Buddhism and Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (women), 54 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 103,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 160 (1987).
Currency: taka (USdollars 1.00=taka 31.4120 as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The People's Republic of Bangladesh (formerly East Pakistan) was unilaterally proclaimed independent on March 26, 1971, by the Awami League; de facto secession from Pakistan followed the Indo-Pakistan war which was concluded in December 1971.
President Hussein Mohammad Ershad has held effective political power since the military coup of March 1982, and was elected by universal adult suffrage to the post of President for a five-year term in October 1986 (see p. 34813), having assumed that office in December 1983.
The President appoints a Council of Ministers and is head of the armed forces.
In elections to the Jatiya Sangsad (unicameral parliament) held on March 3, 1988, Ershad's Jatiya Party increased its absolute majority.
A strong but politically excluded opposition is largely composed of the broadly socialist alliance led by the Awami League and the right-of-centre grouping led by the Bangladesh Nationalist Party (BNP).
On July 10, 1989, parliament approved constitutional amendments limiting a President to two elected five-year terms and creating the post of an elected Vice-President (see p. 36814).
Lt.- Gen. (retd) Hussain President; C-in-C. of Armed Forces; Mohammad Ershad President of Council of Ministers; Defence; Establishment and Re-organization Moudud Ahmed Vice-President; Industry, Islam, Law and Justice Kazi Zafar Ahmed Prime Minister; Information Shah Moazzam Husayn Deputy Prime Minister; Labour and Manpower Mohammad Rezwanul Haq Chowdhury Social Welfare Wahidul Huq Finance Anwar Hussain Manzur Communications Azizur Rahman Health and Family Planning Mahbubur Rahman Jute A. B. M. Gholam Mustafa Irrigation, Water Development and Flood Control Maj.- Gen. (retd) Mohammad Abdul Munim Agriculture Sirajul Hossain Khan Relief and Rehabilitation Anisul Islam Mahmud Foreign Affairs Korban Ali Ports, Shipping and Inland Water Transport Abdul Malek Textiles Lt.- Col. (retd) Zafar Imam Cultural Affairs A. K. M. Mayeedul Islam Forestry Air Vice-Marshal (retd) A. K. Khandker Planning Sunil Kumar Gupta Fisheries and Livestock Maj.- Gen. (retd) Mahmudul Hasan Home Affairs Mustafa Jamal Haider Works M. A. Sattar Commerce Sardar Amzad Hossain Land Administration and Land Reform Shaikh Shahidul Islam Education Ziauddin Ahmed Bablu Energy and Mineral Resources Ruhul Amin Hawlader Youth and Sports Lt.- Col. (retd) H. M. A. Gaffar Civil Aviation and Tourism Mohammad Naziur Rahman Local Government and Rural Development B. M. Abbas Adviser to the President on Water Resources Syeda Razia Faiz Women's Affairs 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
President Ershad continued to make changes in the composition of his government throughout 1989 in order to balance the forces within the ruling Jatiya Party and remove those ministers connected with corruption.
Some of his actions, in particular the unexpected introduction of a constitutional amendment allowing for an elected Vice-President and the subsequent appointment of Moudud Ahmed to that post, caused some disquiet among party members.
The former Vice-President, A. K. M. Nurul Islam, protested at the summary manner of his dismissal on Aug. 13 (see p. 36852), while M. A. Matin resigned on the same day as Deputy Prime Minister and deputy parliamentary leader claiming that he had been passed over in promotion to the post of Prime Minister.
On Oct. 3 a further reshuffle was made among the ministers of state and a new minister, Abdul Malek, sworn in as Minister of Textiles.
Other portfolios were redistributed with Sunil Kumar Gupta moving to the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock, Lt.- Col. (retd) Zafar Imam to Cultural Affairs and Sardar Amzad Hossain to Land Administration and Reform.
On Nov. 14 Syeda Razia Faiz was appointed Minister of Women's Affairs with Rezwanul Haq Chowdhury retaining the Social Welfare portfolio.
Opposition rivalries
The opposition to Ershad remained fragmented and divided during 1989, in spite of appeals by some opposition figures for a united front against him.
Mutual recrimination between the Awami League and BNP groupings intensified in early April after Sheikh Hasina Wajed, leader of the Awami League, accused the leader of the BNP, Begum Khaleda Zia, of involvement in the assassination of Hasina's father, former Prime Minister Sheikh Mujibur Rahman.
In reply the BNP accused Hasina of involvement in the killings of Khaleda's husband, former President Ziaur Rahman.
The BNP also alleged that the Awami League was involved in negotiations with the government about participation in a future general election (the BNP and the Awami League had both boycotted a general election held in March 1988-see pp. 35835-36).
Observers noted the existence of a group within the Jatiya Party reportedly in favour of early legislative elections, with the participation of opposition parties, in order to legitimize the Ershad regime after the alleged rigged elections of March 1988 and to present evidence to foreign aid donors of a committed return to democracy.
The government consistently denied rumours of an early poll, claiming that no parliamentary elections would be held before the presidential contest due in April 1991, although local elections at sub-district level were expected to go ahead in May 1990, after the success of similar elections in the Chittagong Hill Tracts on June 25, 1989 (see p. 36736).
In May, 55 intellectuals issued a call for all the opposition parties, including the Moslem fundamentalist groups, to unite against Ershad.
The call was likely to go unheeded, however, as the BNP pursued its own policy of building up links to create an anti-Awami League alliance.
This policy included a greater rapprochement with the fundamentalist Jamaat-i-Islami.
Relations between the secular parties and the Jamaat-i-Islami remained difficult, however, particularly against a background of continuing violence between the student supporters of the Awami League, the BNP and the Jamaat and of controversial statements by some Moslem leaders.
Clashes between students on the campuses of the country's universities worsened during August and September, leading to the deaths of an estimated 11 people and to injuries to a further 200.
Formation of two new political parties
Former BNP members who had split from the party in July 1988 (see p. 36558) formed the Bangladesh Democratic Party in July 1989.
The new party was led by Jamaluddin Ahmed (president) and Abdul Hasnat (general secretary).
Another new political party, the National Democratic Party, combining former members of the Jatiya Party and leading supporters of both the Awami League and the BNP, was launched on Sept. 10 by two former ministers under Ershad, Salahuddin Kadar Choudhury and Anwar Zahid, who had resigned on Jan. 21, 1988 (see p. 35836).
The new party aimed to present a viable alternative to the existing groupings but was widely expected to take part with the BNP in forming an anti-Awami League alliance.
Challenges to Constitution
On Sept. 2, 1989, the Supreme Court ruled invalid a section of the Eighth Amendment to the Constitution pertaining to the establishment of permanent High Court benches outside Dhaka.
The amendment had been approved by the Jatiya Sangsad in June 1988.
The ruling, the first occasion on which a constitutional amendment had been overturned in the court, marked a defeat for Ershad.
SECURITY
The unrest in the Chittagong Hill Tracts between predominantly Buddhist Chakma tribal peoples and Moslem Bengali settlers and the security forces subsided after the local elections on June 25, 1989, in the region (for which see p. 36736; for legislation creating local councils see p. 36524).
Reports of violent incidents in the area had increased prior to the elections, as had the numbers of Chakma refugees crossing into neighbouring India.
On Aug. 23, 1989, Ershad announced an amnesty, valid until Sept. 30, for members of the separatist Shanti Bahini (Peace Force) organization.
The amnesty was reportedly requested by the newly elected local councils of Rangamati, Bandarban and Khagrachbari.
Several members of Shanti Bahini surrendered to the authorities, but the amnesty failed to stop sporadic bombings or the flow of refugees.
By September the number of refugees in Indian camps along the border was estimated at 64,000.
Negotiations continued between the Indian and Bangladeshi governments over terms for the return of refugees to their homes.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2% (1988-89)
Current-account balance -US$286.5 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$1,444.4 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$206.3 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 1.4% (1986)
Total external public debt US$8,851 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 24.2% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$17,600 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 11.4% (1988 est.)
Unemployment 30% (1988)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA (24%), Western Europe (22%), Middle East (9%); Imports: Western Europe (18%), Japan (14%), Middle East (9%)
A series of natural disasters played a major part in hampering growth in Bangladesh's economy in late 1988 and in 1989.
The destruction caused by the floods in August-September 1988 (see p. 36288), the cyclone of December 1988 (see p. 36559) and the tornado in April 1989 (see p. 36591) led to the loss of both agricultural and manufacturing production, as well as to serious damage to infrastructure and services.
Real growth in gross domestic product (GDP) was estimated at less than 2 per cent for the financial year to June 1989, compared with a target figure of 6.2 per cent.
Although substantial food and relief aid was forthcoming from foreign and international donors, the government was forced to divert resources to reconstruction and to alleviating the imbalances in the economy.
A serious drought in early 1989 affected agricultural crops, in particular paddy rice and jute.
Production of jute (the country's principal export commodity) was estimated to have been reduced to 50 per cent of the projected total for 1989 of 4,500,000 bales.
Storms and flooding at the end of August were reported to have killed more than 150 people and made thousands homeless in southern Bangladesh.
The problems faced by the agricultural sector were offset by continued growth in the non-traditional manufacturing areas such as garments.
However, continued investment of raw materials and capital goods was required if the necessary growth and investment was to be sustained.
The country's third five-year plan was due to end in June 1990; economic growth under the period of the plan was estimated at about 3 per cent per annum, less than the 5.5 per cent annual target.
Inability to raise local funds through savings and investment to reach the proportion required for projects prevented the disbursement of foreign aid committed to such projects, the World Bank estimating that USdollars 4,600 million was waiting to be disbursed.
To alleviate this problem a "Paris Club" meeting of major foreign aid donors in April 1989 agreed to reduce the necessary local component of investment from 20 per cent to 13 per cent.
The meeting also agreed to the provision of about dollars 2,000 million in aid for the financial year 1989-90.
Foreign aid played an important role in helping to cover Bangladesh's large budget and balance-of-payments deficits, as well as providing food aid to bridge the gap between local production and demand.
In early 1989 Bangladesh received the final tranche of its three-year structural adjustment facility with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which expired in June.
The government opened negotiations with the IMF for another three-year facility.
Conditions were expected to include further liberalization of exchange regulations and the provision of credit and tax changes.
World Bank initiative on flood control
A World Bank-sponsored meeting of Bangladesh aid-donor countries and organizations held in London on Dec. 11-12, 1989, approved an action plan aimed at protecting the country from flooding.
The London conference approved an initial dollars 150,000,000 programme of pilot projects and studies, including detailed hydraulic investigation of some of the 55 rivers running through the country.
The studies would be followed by an investment programme, estimated at some dollars 500,000,000.
Massive deforestation in the Himalayan foothills during the 1980s had aggravated what was already a serious problem in Bangladesh.
Flooding in 1987-88 killed thousands of people and caused great damage to agriculture and to the infrastructure (see pp. 35570-71; 36288).
However, according to some scientific reports, the devastation wrought by the recent floods could soon be overshadowed by the effects of global warming, which, it was feared, might completely submerge vast expanses of low-lying land (see pp. 36783-84).
FOREIGN
Visit by Pakistani Prime Minister — Demonstrations by Biharis
Benazir Bhutto, the Prime Minister of Pakistan, arrived in Dhaka on Oct. 1, 1989, for a three-day official visit.
The visit was the first by a Pakistani Prime Minister for 15 years and coincided with Pakistan's official re-entry into the Commonwealth (see p. 36963).
The two leaders promised to improve bilateral ties and to strengthen the South Asian Association for Regional Co-operation (SAARC).
The visit was also marked by a demonstration by Biharis demanding relocation to Pakistan.
The rally developed into clashes with police as demonstrators in the area near where Bhutto was staying demanded a meeting with her.
Up to 250,000 Biharis (Urdu-speaking non-Bengalis, originally mostly from the Indian state of Bihar) lived in 66 refugee camps throughout the country.
On June 9, 1988, a Mecca-based Moslem humanitarian organization, the Rabita al-Alam al-Islami, had signed an agreement with Pakistan to raise funds for the eventual repatriation of the Biharis, estimated to cost dollars 250,000,000.
Relations with India
Relations with India remained influenced by the situation and refugee problem in the areas neighbouring the Chittagong Hill Tracts (see above).
In early October 1989 a border co-ordination conference agreed on greater co-operation in measures to counter smuggling and drug trafficking in the area.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Foundation: The European Communities (EC) comprise the European Coal and Steel Community (ECSC-established by the Treaty of Paris signed in 1951 and effective since 1952), the European Economic Community (EEC-established by the Treaty of Rome signed in 1957) and Euratom (the European Atomic Energy Community-set up in 1957).
Objective: Regional co-operation.
Membership: Originally Belgium, France, West Germany, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands; since 1973 Denmark, Ireland, the United Kingdom; since 1981 Greece; since 1986 Portugal and Spain.
Key institutions:(i) The Commission (which proposes legislation and implements the Treaties-for composition see pp. 36405-06);(ii) the Council (the key decision-making body generally comprising the relevant government ministers from each state but also meeting twice a year at head of state and government level as the European Council);(iii) the Parliament or Assembly, directly elected since 1979;(iv) the European Court of Justice;(v) the European Investment Bank; and (vi) the Economic and Social Committee (Ecosoc, an advisory body).
Progress towards single internal market
During the second half of 1989 the European Communities (EC) made significant progress in their efforts to attain a single internal market for goods and services by Dec. 31, 1992, as agreed in principle in December 1985 (see p. 34107) with effect from July 1987 as the Single European Act (see pp. 34889; 35534; for resulting Community legislation see pp. 34625-26; 34885; 35533-35; 35912; 36152-54; 36306; 36493-94; p. 37131).
The most notable successes were in the fields of financial services legislation, in technical and industrial standards, in transport policy, in the motor industry, in telecommunications and broadcasting, and in competition and merger policy.
However, efforts to abolish intra-EC border controls received an early setback with the failure to materialize by January 1990 of the so-called "Schengen agreement" on a scheduled lifting of barriers, and negotiations on the harmonization of indirect taxation had to be shelved in the face of strong opposition from several member states.
The issue of workers' rights found expression in a Community Charter of the Fundamental Social Rights of Workers (pp. 36668; 36985) which was resolutely opposed by the United Kingdom alone, but which received, in a modified form, the assent of all other heads of state at the Strasbourg summit on Dec. 8-9, 1989 (see pp. 37132-33).
Financial services legislation
A major element of the EC's single market in financial services was put in place on Dec. 15, 1989, when a meeting of the Council of (Finance) Ministers approved amendments to the Second Banking Directive.
The new version of the directive, which had received the assent of the European Parliament (EP) on Nov. 22, and which was due to come into force in January 1993, allowed providers of financial services the right, in principle, to trade anywhere in the EC provided that they met minimum standards (the so-called "single passport" concept).
The directive proved controversial, however, because of its insistence on the so-called "reciprocity" principle, which declared in effect that banks from non-EC countries would be eligible to enter the future unified market only if their domestic markets offered a comparable degree of access to EC counterparts.
(On Aug. 16, for example, the EC Banking Federation had listed 26 non-EC countries, including Japan, the United States, Canada and Australia, as maintaining unfair restrictions on EC member banks.)
The reciprocity measures, as originally drafted in 1988, had aroused particularly strong protests from the USA and from Japan, which saw them as part of a protectionist "fortress Europe" policy designed to exclude non-EC institutions.
In the final version, however, the wording had been amended to state that foreign banking markets were required to provide equivalent, but not necessarily identical, access facilities to EC banks if they wanted to trade within the EC; it was also agreed that any foreign banks which were already trading legally within the EC would not need to reapply for authorization.
The final hurdle was overcome on Dec. 18, when the Ministers approved a directive on the question of solvency and capital adequacy for banks-an issue which had already caused deep disagreement, notably in West Germany, where fears had been expressed that it would lead to a dilution of the sector's relatively high national standards.
The main disagreements had centred on the question as to whether banking and securities firms should be allowed to include risk investments (ie shares in other companies), rather than merely cash deposits, when they were declaring the capital on which their financial integrity was assessed for authorization purposes.
Whereas this practice was widespread in the UK, it was banned in most other EC member states; UK observers noted that its abolition in the UK would force UK institutions to double their cash holdings, a factor which they said would raise costs and which could thus jeopardize the dominant position of the London market in European equity trading (see also p. 36494).
The European Commission had already given ground to the UK in November 1989, by modifying its insistence that securities businesses should hold capital equivalent to 20 per cent of outstanding exposure, demanding instead a level of 8 per cent.
With the establishment of the single passport principle, the two directives were regarded as having opened the way for a further liberalization of investment and insurance law.
A further directive, agreed on Dec. 22, abolished all the remaining national rules which currently barred EC life insurance companies from offering policies to citizens of other member states (for changes relating to other insurance areas see p. 36494).
The directive, which had hitherto been opposed by West Germany, Greece and Spain, was due to come into effect at the end of 1994; the Commission aimed to reach agreement on a single passport for insurance companies during 1990.
The Commission issued a warning on Nov. 16, for the first time, against what it called price-fixing by banks on interest rates-having frequently intervened over the commissions charged by banks on non-banking business.
(For further actions over competition policy in industrial sector see below.)
Efforts continued to establish a harmonization of European accounting practices, in accordance with the Fourth and Seventh Company Law Directives (1978 and 1983 respectively), the first of which had created the Contact Committee of officials, the standards body which had originated most of the current proposals (but which was still not recognized by many EC members), while the second had included measures to standardize the presentation of consolidated accounts within the EC (see p. 36154 for earlier developments).
Progress continued towards the creation of a structure for a unified EC market in equities.
It was reported on Sept. 17 that the Federation of European Stock Exchanges had agreed to initiate a shared electronic market information service for the 200-300 largest companies in the new EC equity market, but no firm timetable was set for the move.
Sir Leon Brittan, the EC Commissioner responsible for competition policy, had said on Aug. 30 that the Commission would consider opening up membership of the unified financial services market to members of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA); he stressed, however, the need for reciprocal liberalization in those countries (Switzerland and most of Scandinavia imposing tight limits on the extent of foreign shareholdings in their domestic companies).
It was clear by the end of 1989 that the Commission's plans to introduce a uniform 15 per cent withholding tax on capital savings had been dropped in the face of vigorous opposition from many member states (see also p. 36494).
The EP approved on Oct. 11 the second reading of a draft law making insider trading (ie share dealing on the basis of secret, price-sensitive company information) a criminal offence throughout the EC from June 1992.
By the end of 1989 many member countries, including West Germany, Ireland, Luxembourg and Italy, still had no laws banning the practice.
VAT and excise duties
The Commission continued during this period with its efforts to secure uniform rates of value added tax (VAT) and excise duties within the EC (see pp. 36153; 36493), particularly in the light of the proposed abolition of border controls which, it felt, could encourage cross-border shopping in low-rate countries and thus perpetuate market imbalances.
The Commission issued on Oct. 25, 1989, a revised set of proposals for the harmonization of excise duties, under which member governments would be given a minimum set of duties for each product, together with a non-mandatory target rate.
The new excise rate proposals replaced the compulsory uniform rates which it had originally proposed in 1987, but which had been rejected by nearly all member countries.
The Commission had, however, moved away by January 1990 from its original goal of fixing uniform VAT rates across the EC.
The UK had maintained that rates should be left for the market to decide, and had demanded the indefinite maintenance of discretionary zero rating for sensitive items (the Commission's position being that zero rating would be tolerated only for a limited period).
At a meeting on Dec. 18 of the Council of (Finance) Ministers it was agreed to postpone further discussion of the issue until the end of 1991.
There was also controversy over the Commission's plans to abolish the zero rating of intra-EC exports with effect from January 1993, and to replace it with a complex system of approximation under which a central clearing house would apportion VAT payments between the countries involved in a transaction.
Most countries had objected that they would be forced to rely on each other 's trade statistics, that exporters would face more rather than less paperwork at national borders, and that the potential for fraud would increase.
As a result Finance Ministers agreed in Luxembourg on Oct. 9 to prolong the existing system "for a limited period" , on the grounds that there was not enough time before January 1993 to introduce another, more effective one.
Technical standards and consumer protection
The EC Council of (Consumer Affairs) Ministers agreed on Nov. 9, 1989, on a directive preparing the way for EC-wide levels of product safety for consumer goods in the unified market, but rejected the Commission's demand that the rule should be extended to non-consumer products.
(Common safety standards for engineering products had been given final approval by the Council on June 14.)
The Commission initiated on July 5 an important plan for the eventual removal of all specifically national technical requirements within the EC, in readiness for the harmonization of standards.
Public procurement
EC Industry Ministers failed on Dec. 22, 1989, to reach agreement on measures to liberalize the systems for public procurement in the EC, regarded as one of the most important aspects of the single market process, since it accounted for some 15 per cent of total gross national product (GNP) of the 12 member countries.
Although the Ministers had agreed in principle on June 14 on a deregulation of public purchasing in pursuance of the terms of a 1988 agreement, the fields of energy, transport, communications and drinking water already had been excluded from the deal (see p. 36493).
While West Germany and the UK argued in favour of removing most restrictive legislation (although the UK had appealed for the treatment of certain oil and gas projects as a special case, while West Germany and Spain had made similar appeals for their coal industries), France and Italy demanded that they be allowed to retain their rules restricting the access of foreign contractors to certain projects in these fields.
Energy
The Commission continued during this period to press for the creation of a single EC market in energy, particularly in response to appeals from France, which sought larger export markets for its nuclear-generated electricity.
Progress was slow, however, because of existing rivalries between other member states, notably West Germany, which feared a loss of their existing market share in coal- and gas-generated electricity.
On Oct. 30, however, EC Energy Ministers approved a Commission proposal to simplify the prices paid by large consumers for electricity and gas.
Failure of Schengen agreement
Belgium, France, West Germany, the Netherlands and Luxembourg reached a draft agreement in March 1989 providing for the abolition of their respective border controls by the beginning of January 1990, in what they saw as a model for the complete abolition of customs posts throughout the EC after 1992.
By mid-year, however, it was evident that the so-called Schengen agreement, originally conceived in Schengen (Luxembourg) in June 1985 (see p. 33786), was unlikely to materialize on schedule because of continuing disputes, and when the Interior Ministers of the five countries met on Dec. 14-15 in Schengen they were unable to agree on a final document.
The official explanation was that the five had failed to agree on the definition of West Germany's territory, particularly in the light of the opening of East Germany's borders on Nov. 9 (see p. 37025).
Whereas the West German government maintained that East Germans should have automatic access to the Schengen agreement area, its four partners regarded the territory covered by the agreement as extending only to the eastern boundary of the Federal Republic.
Disagreements had been obvious since well before the opening of East Germany's borders.
Le Monde had reported on June 29 that Wolfgang Schauble, the West German Interior Minister, had complained of disagreements with the Netherlands over policies toward drugs, but that the five still hoped to remove their respective border controls by January 1991.
Since then Luxembourg had declared its opposition to a relaxation of its tight bank secrecy laws, except in cases of suspected tax evasion (see p. 36947).
France had also opposed the imposition of tighter controls on the ownership of guns, on the grounds that the right to bear arms had been incorporated into the Constitution drawn up after the 1789 revolution-although it had also demanded the right to suspend the travel rights enshrined in the Schengen agreement in cases of emergency (for earlier disagreements see p. 36154).
The five signatory countries agreed, however, on Dec. 14-15 to allow one another 's police forces to enter their respective territories, with effect from the end of 1991, while in "hot pursuit" of criminals.
(It was reported in June 1989 that Spain and France had agreed to abolish some customs and police controls on border roads in the Pyrenees.)
The UK continued to oppose the complete abolition of border controls after 1992, on the grounds (i) that it would facilitate the free movement of terrorists, drug dealers and illegal immigrants;(ii) that it could increase the spread of rabies and other diseases spread by animals; and (iii) that the UK's geographical characteristic as an island represented a valid natural boundary.
In a report of Dec. 8, 1989, the House of Commons select committee on the EC argued that the Single European Act contained no obligation to remove border controls.
It was announced on Dec. 13 that the Trevi Group of Justice and Interior Ministers formed after the Trevi security conference of 1976 (see pp. 34883; 36492), had agreed to establish a joint police database for use primarily against international terrorism and drug dealing.
The database was to be established from 1993, although differing legal standards for the protection of computer data could still cause technical problems.
The Commission announced on July 5, 1989, that it was to phase out by January 1993 the limits on the value of goods which citizens of EC member states were allowed to take across internal borders, in readiness for the abolition of border controls.
Transport issues
EC Transport Ministers agreed on Dec. 5, 1989, to adopt new deregulatory rules allowing airlines the right to reduce scheduled air fares at will from Jan. 1, 1990, provided that they had the approval of either the arrival or destination airport of any flight.
The Ministers also ruled that from 1993, EC carriers would lose any right they might currently enjoy to a guaranteed share of business on any route.
(The Commission had ruled on Nov. 13 that nine such route-sharing arrangements were illegal.)
Observers noted after the announcement on Dec. 5 that fare reductions of up to 30 per cent appeared likely to result, because the Transport Ministers' decision would effectively outlaw many existing route-sharing deals.
(For details of 1987 agreement on dismantling air cartels see pp. 35793; 36494.)
On Dec. 4 the Ministers had reached a 30-month agreement, effective from July 1, 1990, which extended the rights of cabotage by road haulage firms in other EC member countries.
Under the new arrangement, which had been hotly contested by France and was approved only on a majority vote, each member state was to be allowed 15,000 two-month permits a year which would allow unlimited cabotage rights within the EC.
Negotiations were also under way with Switzerland for a relaxation of that country's ban on the 40-tonne lorries which were usual in all EC member states except the UK and Ireland, and Austria was also being asked to upgrade rail and road transit routes, particularly over the Brenner Pass between Innsbruck and the Italian border.
It was announced on Dec. 13 that British Airways, the Dutch carrier KLM, and the Belgian carrier Sabena had agreed to form a new airline, to be called Sabena World Airlines, in which each would hold a 20 per cent stake (the Belgian government holding the remainder).
Brittan said, however, on Dec. 13 that the Commission would be examining the proposed deal.
The Transport Ministers had further agreed on July 4 to establish a centralized air traffic control system for the EC area, in an effort to end the existing dislocations caused by the inadequate interaction of separate national systems.
The new centre, which was to cost some 60,000,000 European currency units (1 ECU=USdollars 1.09565 or pounds 0.67654 as at July 5, 1989) was to be run by Eurocontrol, the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation; it was intended only to co-ordinate, and not to replace, the separate national systems, however.
On Nov. 22 the EC Commissioner responsible for Transport, Karel van Miert, released details of a plan to allow private trains to operate on national rail networks.
The day before, the Transport Ministers had agreed on a timetable for the establishment of a high-speed rail network in northern Europe, costed provisionally at pounds 4,300 million, and incorporating the (non-high-speed) Channel Tunnel, which was due for completion in 1993 (see p. 37158).
On Dec. 12 it was announced that the railway authorities of France, Belgium and the UK had agreed a pounds 580,000,000 order for 30 high-speed locomotives, intended for use on such routes.
France had announced on Dec. 1 that it was to start research on a new generation of high-speed trains capable of 350 kmph, compared with the existing speed of 300 kmph on some routes.
Automobiles
The Commission announced on Dec. 12, 1989, that it was asking Japan to agree to voluntary restraints on the number of Japanese cars sold, and possibly also constructed, in the EC, for a period of two to three years (see also p. 35386).
French producers had demanded that Japan should limit its sales to a maximum of double the number of EC-built cars sold in Japan, the actual ratio in 1988 having been 11 to one.
(See below for directive on fitting of catalytic converters.)
Merger control and competition policy
The Commission finally agreed on Dec. 21, 1989, after some years of often bitter disagreement, on a formula for determining whether cross-border corporate mergers within the EC should be subject to vetting by the Commissioner for competition policy so as to determine whether they would result in an unduly large market share for the newly merged companies (for earlier drafts see p. 36310).
Under the new regulation, which was to become effective in October 1990, the Commissioner would have the sole authority to examine, and if necessary to veto, any merger where the joint world-wide turnover of the merging companies already exceeded 5,000 million ECU per annum, of which 250,000,000 ECU from each company came from the EC, which threshold being revised every four years.
The Commission would have no automatic powers, however, in cases where at least one of the merging companies (i) derived less than pounds 1,750 million of its global turnover in the EC; or (ii) derived more than two-thirds of total turnover from a single EC country.
It was expected that some 40-50 mergers per year would fall due for examination in this way.
Proposed mergers involving a projected turnover of under pounds 1,400 million could be examined by the Commission at the request of any state official, but the agreement said that under no circumstances could a merger qualify for both national and EC scrutiny at once.
Earlier proposals to invalidate share deals already struck, in cases where a merger had been vetoed, were dropped on the insistence of the UK.
Commission officers raided the premises of 10 leading cement producers on April 26, while investigating allegations of a price-fixing arrangement.
The 10 companies, in Belgium, France, West Germany and Italy, were responsible for about half of total EC consumption of cement.
On April 13 a similar raid had been conducted on six soda ash producers in the UK, the Netherlands, France and West Germany.
Meanwhile the Commission stepped up its campaign to halt, and often to reclaim, unfair state subsidies paid by governments to national industries.
The Commission on Oct. 13 barred a French industrial consortium led by the steel manufacturer Pechiney from accepting a state offer of cut-price electricity.
On Nov. 15 it ordered the French car group Renault to repay some F 12,000 million (approximately equivalent to USdollars 1,900 million as Nov. 13, 1989) of state aid received since 1988, having already demanded the repayment of F 111,200,000 from the Peugeot group in respect of a cheap credit deal.
Meanwhile pressure was increased on West Germany and Spain to stop state aid to car manufacturers, and on Italy in particular to desist from its heavy subsidies to numerous industries.
Brittan also said in early December that he was to look into the UK government's award of some pounds 38,000,000 of secret financial inducements to British Aerospace, at the time of its purchase of the Rover car group in September 1988.
On the other hand the Commission approved the award of state aid in several countries to assist in the closure of coal mines, as provided for under existing outline legislation.
Telecommunications
The EC Communications and Telecommunications Ministers agreed on Dec. 8, 1989, on a programme to deregulate and liberalize the remaining areas of the EC market in telecommunications which had not been covered by earlier agreements (see p. 36494), voting to deregulate value-added telephone services by April 1, 1990 (with transitional concessions to Spain, Portugal and Greece), and to extend the ruling to packet-switching and circuit-switching services by the start of 1993.
In response to objections by France and Italy to the use of Article 90 of the Treaty of Rome (concerning the mandatory use of directives in case of unfair national monopolies-ibid.), the programme allowed for the continuation of national licensing procedures for packet-switching operators.
Broadcasting
The Commission agreed in November 1989 to provide funding for European research into high-definition television (HDTV) technology through a joint venture involving some 30 television companies as well as the manufacturers Philips and Thomson.
The European companies were hoping to meet the deadline set by the International Radio Consultative Committee for the presentation of technical proposals for a new system which, once chosen, would effectively set a world standard, Japan and the USA having already submitted their applications to the Committee.
Foreign Ministers had approved in Luxembourg on Oct. 5, by a majority verdict, a directive setting minimum ethical standards for television broadcasting in the single market.
Denmark and Belgium voted against the measure, which was adopted despite fears about mandatory maximum quotas for non-EC material (see p. 37211-12 for Council of Europe convention on this issue).
The USA had threatened on Oct. 11 to take the EC to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) over the issue, which it claimed was protectionist.
Research funding
The Commission approved on Dec. 17, 1989, for the third framework programme, its key technology research and development initiative, a budget of 5,700 million ECU over a five-year period of which one-third was to be for research into information technology.
The third framework programme, once approved by the Council and Parliament, would run from 1990 to 1994 thus overlapping with the second framework programme (see p. 36052).
The budget was smaller, however, than the 7,700 million ECU which the Commission had originally proposed, but which had been seen as excessive by the UK, Spain and the Netherlands.
On Nov. 7 the Joint European Torus (JET), based near Oxford in the UK (see p. 36052), had issued an appeal for an additional 400,000,000 ECU over the period to 1996, to enable it to continue its research into nuclear fusion.
Education
EC Education Ministers agreed on Dec. 14, 1989, at a meeting in Brussels to extend the Erasmus programme of inter-university exchanges, which had been running since 1988, for a further five years from 1990 to 1994.
The ministers approved a budget of 192,000,000 ECU for the period to 1992, more than double the award for the expiring two-year phase; they also agreed to open talks with the EFTA members with a view to extending the scheme.
European Court ruling on women's pay
The European Court of Justice ruled on Oct. 17, 1989, that employers could be called upon by wage tribunals to prove that wages paid to women were equivalent to those for men, whereas previously the burden of proof as to non-equivalence had rested solely on the plaintiff.
The court was finding in favour of two female employees of a Danish company.
Restraints on tobacco industry
The Council of (Health) Ministers approved on Nov. 13, 1989, by a majority vote, the implementation of a directive forcing cigarette manufacturers to reduce the tar levels in some brands to a maximum of 12 mg per cigarette by 1997, and also obliging them to print more explicit health warnings on all cigarette packets.
The UK abstained in the vote, arguing that health issues should be decided by the governments of member states.
Environmental issues
The Commission published on June 21, 1989, its plans for a new European Environment Agency whose main task would be the accumulation and processing of data on environmental issues.
Although the body was to be an EC organ it was also intended to open its membership to EFTA countries.
Towards the end of 1989 the Commission substantially stepped up its campaign for universal environmental controls within the EC, most notably with regard to drinking water standards, where it sought to advance its planned deadlines for water purity.
It faced substantial protests, however, from water suppliers, notably in the UK (see pp. 36903; 37159) and in West Germany, who objected that the massive costs involved would need to be spread over a longer period.
EC Environment Ministers gave their final approval on July 18, 1989, to a directive requiring the use of catalytic converters in the exhausts of all new models of small cars by July 1, 1992, and to all new cars of all types by Jan. 1, 1993 (see pp. 36119; 36495).
Discussions were in progress for a mandatory EC-wide system of minimum technical standards for motor vehicles, which was expected to be in place by mid-1990.
From Jan. 1, 1990, it became illegal for European industries to dump fly ash (the residue from coal-fired power stations) in the North Sea.
Community Environment Ministers voted on June 8 to prolong indefinitely a six-year ban on the import of skins and other products from baby seals, in response to pressure from animal welfare organizations (see also p. 35959).
1990-91 proposed agricultural support measures
Unveiling its price proposals for 1990-91 on Dec. 20, 1989, the Commission announced that it was recommending a virtual freeze of agricultural support prices, in its efforts to secure a balance between prices and supplies.
The proposals would, according to the Commission, result in an average 1.1 per cent reduction in ECU terms, although the average farmer would see an actual increase of 0.2 per cent in national currencies.
(For April 1989 agreement on 1989-90 measures see p. 36599.)
The Commissioner responsible for Agriculture, Ray McSharry, announced on July 12 that the Commission intended to increase the funding for its controversial "set-aside" scheme, whereby farmers were paid grants to keep farming land out of production, in a further effort to reduce over-production.
EC Agriculture Ministers agreed on Dec. 12 to eliminate all border veterinary checks on meat and meat products by Jan. 1, 1993, replacing them with checks at the point of origin; on the insistence of Denmark, Ireland and the UK, however, the move would be conditional on the eradication of certain animal diseases throughout the EC.
Meanwhile, West Germany was coming under increasing pressure from the Commission to lift its ban imposed in early November on the import of British beef products, imposed because of fears that they were infected with bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE, or "mad cow disease" ) which might be transferable to humans.
Scandal over tainted cattle feed
A major scandal erupted in early November 1989 with the discovery that cattle on some 1,800 farms in the UK and the Netherlands had been affected by lead poisoning, following the illegal sale of rice bran which had been accidentally tainted with lead.
While the milk from such farms was declared unfit for sale, farmers were also prevented in most cases from selling their cattle for slaughter for a period of several months.
Two Dutch businessmen were charged on Nov. 17 with knowingly supplying the contaminated feed.
Allegations of farming fraud
The Court of Auditors, the EC's financial supervisory body, issued a report on Dec. 13, 1989, in which it strongly criticized the Commission for slack supervision of the distribution of grants and subsidies to farmers and to commercial food producers.
The report claimed that fraudulent claims by farmers might account for up to 8 per cent of the total spent on ewe premiums, or some 100,000,000 ECU a year; meanwhile, it said, subsidised milk powder intended for calf feed was being illegally diverted into food for human consumption.
The question of fraud had earlier been raised in December 1988, when the Court had complained of double-counting by beef farmers: an EP committee had reported in late January that in three areas of West Germany, 80 per cent of all cattle were apparently being slaughtered more than once (for earlier cases see pp. 35915; 36493).
It was announced on Dec. 11 that the value of the so-called "food mountain" , the buffer intervention stocks maintained by EC agencies to maintain prices, had been reduced from 4,660 million ECU to only 1,600 million ECU in the year ended September 1989.
While this was partly due to a steep reduction in beef stocks and improved exports of cereals, milk products and olive oil, it was also attributable to a change in accounting practices (see pp. 35534; 35915 for earlier measures).
Agreement on fishery quotas
The Council of (Agriculture) Ministers agreed on Dec. 19, 1989, on a sharp reduction of the 1990 catch quotas for several North Sea species.
The cod catch was to be reduced to 98,270 tonnes, from 118,700 in 1989, and the haddock quota was to fall from 62,500 tonnes to 41,700.
Plaice catches were to be reduced from 182,700 tonnes to 176,900, but sole catches were increased from 16,000 to 25,000 tonnes.
The Council also commissioned an expert report on the conservation of North Sea fish stocks, for presentation by June 1, 1990.
The UK had objected strongly to the particularly sharp cuts originally proposed in its own allocations; in the final agreement, a compromise had been reached in which the UK's cod catches were reduced from 55,800 tonnes to 46,180, while haddock quotas fell from 62,500 tonnes to 36,280 (see p. 36493 for 1989 quotas).
EP vote on its location
Members of the EP voted on Jan. 18, 1989, by 222 votes to 172 that the Parliament should be allowed to transfer about half of its total staff of 2,100 to Brussels and to hold "exceptional" plenary meetings elsewhere than in Strasbourg, ie in Brussels.
The vote was seen as marking another step towards ending the EP's nomadic existence between Luxembourg, where the secretariat was based, Strasbourg, where its annual monthly plenary sessions were held, and Brussels, where committee meetings were held.
On Jan. 24 Jacques Poos and Roland Dumas, the Luxembourg and French Foreign Ministers respectively, declared, however, that they would contest the vote in the European Court of Justice.
(For April 1984 Court decision concerning EP secretariat in Luxembourg see p. 33042.)
EUROPE
LOME CONVENTION
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Relations between the European Communities (EC) and 68 developing countries from Africa, the Caribbean and the Pacific (the ACP countries) are regulated by a series of agreements on economic assistance and trade.
The first Lome Convention was signed in February 1975 and came into effect in April 1976 (see pp. 27050; 28047-48); its successor, Lome II, was signed in October 1979 and came into effect in January 1981 (see pp. 30700-02); and Lome III was signed in December 1984 and became fully operational in February 1985 (see pp. 33485-87).
Lome IV was signed in December 1989 (see p. 37133) and was to come into effect in March 1990 for a 10-year period (unlike the previous conventions, whose duration had been five years).
The financial elements would be renegotiated in 1994.
The 68 ACP signatories of Lome IV were: Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Benin, Botswana, Burkina, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Gambia, Ghana, Grenada, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Kiribati, Lesotho, Liberia, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Papua New Guinea, Rwanda, Sao Tome and Principe, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Solomon Islands, Somalia, St Kitts and Nevis, St Lucia, St Vincent and the Grenadines, Sudan, Surinam, Swaziland, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu, Uganda, Vanuatu, Western Samoa, Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe.
In addition to the 65 signatories of Lome III, Angola had acceded to the convention in April 1985 (see p. 33683) and the Dominican Republic and Haiti were new members (see p. 37133).
Namibia would be invited to accede once it became independent in April 1990.
Negotiations on renewal of Lome Convention
Negotiations to renew Lome III opened at a meeting of EC and ACP ministers in Luxembourg on Oct. 12-13, 1988, following a preparatory meeting in Mauritius on May 10-11 (see p. 35737).
Further ministerial meetings were held in Brazzaville, Congo, on Feb. 16-17, 1989, and in Brussels, Belgium, on June 3-4.
At the fourth meeting, in Luxembourg on Oct. 27-30, the ACP countries formally rejected the EC's proposals on the amount of financial aid to be provided under the new convention and on trade concessions on agricultural products and other exports.
After a further session on Nov. 25-27 a compromise agreement was reached on Dec. 6, when the ACP countries accepted a new EC offer involving a small increase in the overall aid package and more generous arrangements on access to EC markets.
At the start of the negotiations the ACP countries called for a wide-ranging revision of the convention to take account of developments in recent years which had adversely affected their economies, in particular rising debt (currently estimated at USdollars 200,000 million for the sub-Saharan countries alone) and falling commodity prices.
They pointed out that Lome III had not stimulated trade between the EC and the ACP countries (since 1985 trade in both directions had actually fallen in both absolute and relative terms), or lessened the ACP countries' economic dependence on the production of primary commodities, or encouraged industrialization.
The ACP countries also expressed concern that the aims of the convention would be jeopardized by the planned introduction of a single market in the Community by 1992, the opening towards East European countries, and the EC's willingness to grant concessions to third countries under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), all of which were expected to lead to a dilution of aid and benefits for ACP countries and to weaken the EC's commitment to the convention.
The EC responded to some of these concerns by offering to increase the proportion of grants to loans (in order to ease the ACP countries' debt commitments), to allocate funds to short-term structural adjustment rather than to long-term aid projects (to help ACP countries overcome acute balance-of-payments and other problems), and to relax the regulations on the rules of origin for manufactured products (with the aim of encouraging industrialization in ACP countries).
While the ACP countries had sought an overall package totalling 15,500 million European currency units (1 ECU=USdollars 1.11661 as at Oct. 27, 1989) over five years, the EC's offer had stood at 10,800 million ECU when talks broke down on Oct. 30.
(At this point agreement had already been reached on a number of issues, including revised provisions on human rights, environmental protection and birth control measures; the admission of new members; and the doubling of the new convention's duration to 10 years.)
ACP representatives considered this allocation incommensurate with both the additional needs of the ACP recipient countries and the overall gross domestic product of the EC donor countries, but were only able to secure an overall increase of 1,200 million ECU in subsequent negotiations.
Terms and key innovations of Lome IV
The main provisions of Lome IV are summarized below (for detailed terms of Lome III see pp. 33486-87).
Of the total amount of financial aid of 12,000 million ECU, 10,800 million ECU (compared with 7,400 million ECU under Lome III) was to be channelled through the European Development Fund (EDF):(i) 7,995 million ECU as general grants (comprising 350 million ECU for emergency aid, 280 million ECU for interest-rate subsidies, 1,150 million ECU for structural adjustment and 6,215 million ECU for other grants);(ii) 1,500 million ECU for the system of stabilization of export earnings from agricultural and fishery products (Stabex);(iii) 480 million ECU for the special facility for mining products (Sysmin); and (iv) 825 million ECU risk capital.
(Under Lome III the comparable figures for these four headings had been 5,460 million ECU (for grants and special loans), 925 million ECU, 415 million ECU and 600 million ECU).
The remaining 1,200 million ECU (compared with 1,100 million ECU under Lome III) would be disbursed in the form of soft loans by the European Investment Bank (EIB).
In addition, and formally outside the scope of Lome IV, an extra 165 million ECU (compared with 100 million ECU under Lome III) would be made available under the EDF for aid to the overseas territories and dependencies of EC member countries, these territories themselves not being party to the convention.
The convention's first section on the main areas of co-operation was headed by a chapter on environmental issues, in which both sides committed themselves not just to respecting the environment in the planning and execution of aid projects, but also to ensuring that"economic and social development is based on a sustainable balance between economic objectives, management of natural resources and enhancement of human resources'.
The movement of hazardous and radioactive waste between the EC and the ACP countries was specifically banned (see also pp. 36788-89).
This section included details on the following areas of co-operation:(i) agriculture and food security, which stressed the regional dimension of food-security policies and the key role of women in rural development;(ii) development of services, which stressed support for foreign trade, the business sector and regional integration, and also included provisions on tourism, communications and information technology;(iii) industrial development, which stressed the need for stimulating private enterprise;(iv) cultural and social co-operation, which stressed the need to achieve a better balance between population and resources in accordance with people's choices, and included provisions on nutrition, birth control, health, and the promotion of cultural identities and intercultural dialogue; and (v) regional co-operation, which stressed the need for greater economic integration at regional level.
The section on structural adjustment detailed means of supporting ACP countries in their efforts to adjust to short-term economic fluctuations.
Such support would be based on the following principles: adjustment should be economically viable as well as socially and politically bearable; it should conform with long-term development objectives; it should be based on a joint assessment by the EC and the country concerned; and it should be undertaken in close co-operation with the international financial institutions (primarily the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank).
The section on debt contained provisions on support for indebted ACP countries, mainly in the form of technical support for debt management and (through structural adjustment support) for tackling the imbalances which were the root causes of indebtedness.
In a declaration annexed to the convention the EC reiterated its readiness to exchange views with the ACP countries on the debt issue.
The section on investment included new provisions on the promotion, financing and support of investment, clarifying in particular the range of projects eligible for financial support and the respective roles of the European Commission and EIB in this regard.
The section on development projects included more detailed provisions than previously on technical co-operation, implementation procedures, monitoring and evaluation of projects, and the allocation of responsibility for management and execution of projects.
As regards trade preferences, concessions on access of ACP agricultural products to the EC market (the only area still subject to restrictions) were increased for around 40 products, including sorghum, millet, yams, rice, molasses, tomatoes, citrus fruit and processed foods.
The concessions provided for a total dismantling of customs duties for some products and for major reductions in duties for others.
Specific protocols on beef and veal, rum and bananas also took account of the effects of the coming introduction of the single market on ACP countries highly dependent on exports of these products.
The regulations on the rules of origin of ACP products were simplified to make them more transparent and more rapid.
Requirements concerning the degree of processing or working were made more flexible by doubling the tolerance of non-originating components to 10 per cent, abolishing the double threshold rule for some products and lowering the percentage of added value required for others, and reducing the threshold for obtaining derogations (that is , waiving of the rules-of-origin requirements) from 60 per cent to 45 per cent of local added value in finished products.
Criteria for fishing products were also liberalized by allowing the chartering of third-country vessels.
The section on trade in services reaffirmed the importance of the implementation of consistent and dynamic trade-promotion operations, and provided for further negotiations on more detailed provisions once the outcome of the "Uruguay Round" of GATT multilateral trade negotiations had become known (see also p. 37227-28).
The section on commodities extended the provisions of the convention in this area to minerals and metals (in addition to agricultural products), and stressed the need to reduce the dependence of ACP economies on unprocessed products by means of diversification and the development of processing, marketing, distribution and transport activities.
A joint EC-ACP committee would be set up to discuss co-operation on international commodity agreements and specialized working parties.
A number of changes were made to the system of stabilization of export earnings (Stabex) regarding agricultural and fishery products.
These included:(i) extension of coverage to octopus, cuttlefish, primary cocoa products and essential oils;(ii) lowering of dependency thresholds (that is, the importance of an ACP country's exports of a relevant product as a proportion of its total exports) from 6 per cent to 5 per cent and from 1.5 per cent to 1 per cent in the case of the least developed countries (LDCs);(iii) abolition of the principle of repayment of interest-free loans granted under Stabex when export earnings permitted (under Lome III only the LDCs had been exempted);(iv) abolition of the Lome III mechanism for correcting exchange-rate fluctuations (often called the "tunnel" ) in favour of a system of calculations based on the ECU.
Various changes to the technical procedures were also introduced with the aim of making the system more effective and rapid.
The special facility for mining products (Sysmin) was extended to cover gold and uranium (in addition to bauxite and alumina, cobalt, copper, iron ore, manganese, phosphates and tin).
Greater stress was put on securing the viability of the mining sectors in the relevant ACP countries and on diversification where this seemed unattainable.
Sysmin's rules of application were extended to cover situations where a country's export earnings suffered substantially as a result of disruption of production without necessarily affecting viability.
The dependence threshold, the proportion of an ACP country's total export earnings derived from an eligible product, remained unchanged at 15 per cent.
EUROPE
COUNCIL OF EUROPE
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Date of foundation: May 5, 1949.
Status: Regional grouping aimed at co-ordinating legislation on economic, social, cultural, scientific and legal concerns.
Members: 23-Austria, Belgium, Cyprus, Denmark, Finland (a full member since May 1989-see p. 36668), France, West Germany, Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, San Marino, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey and the United Kingdom.
Organization: There is a Committee of Ministers (consisting of the Ministers of Foreign Affairs of all member states) which decides with binding effect all matters of internal organization, makes recommendations to governments and may also draw up conventions and agreements; a Parliamentary Assembly of 170 members who are elected or appointed by their national parliaments from among the members thereof to speak for public opinion, not to represent their governments; and a Secretariat, the current Secretary-General being Catherine Lalumiere (since May 1989-ibid.).
Activities: The Council has concluded a number of Conventions and Agreements covering particular aspects of European co-operation, not least the promotion and development of human rights.
The 21-member European Commission of Human Rights examines complaints that the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms has been violated by a contracting party.
In the event that the Commission has acknowledged the failure of efforts for a friendly settlement of such a complaint, the European Court of Human Rights may deal with the case.
Convention on international broadcasting
A European convention laying down ground rules for television broadcasting by satellite across national frontiers was opened for signature on May 5, 1989, and would enter into force once ratified by seven signatory countries.
The European Convention on Transfrontier Television covered programme standards, advertising and sponsorship, and included regulations to protect audiences from the broadcasting of pornography, excessive violence and programmes inciting racial or religious hatred.
As regards content, the convention established that, where practicable, a majority of European works should be screened; as regards advertising, it established that advertisements should not account for more than 15 per cent of daily transmission time.
The new convention had been the subject of detailed negotiation over a number of years, with the incompatibility of legislation on advertising in the various countries and the amount of European-made programmes in particular providing obstacles to agreement (see also p. 36494).
Other conventions
The European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhumane and Degrading Treatment or Punishment (opened for signature in November 1987-see p. 36231) took effect on Feb. 1, 1989.
As of Oct. 31, 1989, it had been ratified by 15 states (see pp. 35984; 36565 for Turkey's ratification in February 1988).
The seventh protocol to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (opened for signature in November 1984 and covering various judicial procedural guarantees-see p. 33882) entered into force on Nov. 1, 1988.
The convention's eighth protocol, which was opened for signature in March 1985 and was intended to speed up procedures before the Commission of Human Rights and the Court of Human Rights (see p. 33881), came into force on Jan. 1, 1990.
The Convention on Spectator Violence and Misbehaviour at Sports Events, opened for signature on Aug. 19, 1985 (see pp. 33882; 33799), entered into force on Nov. 1, 1985.
Cases brought before Commission of Human Rights
According to a report in the Neue Zurcher Zeitung of Jan. 10, 1990, the European Commission of Human Rights, to which plaintiffs turned in the first instance, had registered 1,445 cases brought by individuals or private organizations in 1989 (a 40 per cent increase on the previous year).
Of these 95 had been declared admissible and, if no negotiated settlement could be reached by the Commission, would go on to the European Court of Human Rights, which had issued 25 judgments in 1989.
Of the cases brought by individuals the highest number overall had been brought against the United Kingdom (with 23), followed by Belgium (14), Italy (13), Austria (12), and Sweden and the Netherlands (10 each).
Opening to East European countries
On June 8, 1989, the bureau of the Parliamentary Assembly granted Hungary, Poland, the Soviet Union and Yugoslavia"special guest status', which accorded them the right to attend and address the Assembly's sessions.
The unanimous decision was intended to signal the Council's willingness to establish closer relations with those East European countries embarking on political reforms.
Following an address on July 6 to the Council's Assembly by the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, the first by an East European leader (see pp. 36821-22), the Council and the Soviet Union set up a joint working group to develop contacts and co-operation which met in September and October.
On a visit to Hungary in November 1989 a delegation led by the Assembly's president, Anders Bjorck, indicated that it would support applications from East European countries provided that they (i) adopted a democratic constitution;(ii) held free, multiparty elections; and (iii) reformed the penal code to conform with various European conventions.
On Jan. 30, 1990, Poland applied to join the Council of Europe (for Hungarian formal application for membership in November 1989 see p. 37048).
Address by Pope John Paul II
In speeches to the Parliamentary Assembly and the Court and Commission of Human Rights on Oct. 8, 1988, Pope John Paul II called on the countries of Europe to "remember their common Christian heritage" and to apply it to all aspects of life, particularly to policies governing family life, genetic engineering, education and employment.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN DEFENCE COLLABORATION
Western European Union
BASIC DATA Date of foundation: May 6, 1955.
 "Reactivation" : 1984.
Status: European regional security alliance.
Membership: Belgium, France, Italy, Luxembourg, West Germany, Netherlands, UK, and (since 1989) Portugal and Spain.
Secretary-General:Willem van Eekelen.
Foreign and Defence Ministers of the WEU met in London on April 3-4, 1989.
Spain and Portugal took part for the first time, having signed accession protocols on Nov. 14, 1988 (see pp. 36105-06; 36429).
It was agreed that Turkey's April 1987 application for membership should be the subject of ministerial discussions, together with prospective Greek membership (Greece having relaxed in January its former insistence on a non-nuclear defence posture), but neither was likely to become a member before 1992.
The ministers also approved the appointment of a former Dutch Defence Minister, Willem van Eekelen, to succeed Alfred Cahen of Belgium as WEU Secretary-General.
The WEU Assembly (consisting of delegates of the member countries to the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe-see p. 37211) held sessions in Paris on June 5-8 and Dec. 4-7, 1989, adopting unanimously on the latter occasion the Caro Report advocating strengthening of the WEU's role as the sole West European institution competent in defence matters.
This so-called "realist" position was contrasted with the "maximalist" view that the development of political co-operation within the European Communities would eventually extend to all defence-related matters and render the WEU superfluous.
Franco-German joint troop brigade
As agreed bilaterally in January 1988 (see pp. 35665; 35913), France and West Germany proceeded with the formation of a joint troop brigade, which was established at partial strength on Oct. 2, 1989.
Its complement was to rise from the initial 3,000 to 4,200 (ie full peacetime strength) one year later.
Formally outside the NATO military command structure, it was headquartered at Boblingen near Stuttgart, West Germany, and its first commanding officer was a French Army general; it was due to be fully operational by late 1991.
European joint armaments programmes
West German participation in the European fighter aircraft (EFA or Eurofighter) project with the UK, Italy and Spain (see pp. 36106; 36429-30), already resisted by the opposition Social Democrats, came under further political pressure when in mid-January 1990 the Free Democrat Party executive decided that its platform in the December 1990 elections should include withdrawal from the project.
Although the current arms control negotiating agenda would not directly encompass defensive aircraft, it was argued that the current climate of detente made the project an unjustifiable expense (of over dollars 35,000 million for some 800 EFAs to come into service in 1997).
One area of dispute over the EFA's development was apparently overcome, however, when the West German and UK Defence Ministers met on Jan. 22, 1990, and reportedly agreed to back the use of the proposed ECR-90 radar system to be developed by the British company Ferranti International, rather than the alternative West German-built MD-2000 system using technology under licence from the US company Hughes.
Ferranti's capacity to deliver had been in doubt because of its financial problems following the September 1989 revelation of a major alleged fraud scandal, but on Jan. 23 a deal was announced for the sale of Ferranti's radar division Ferranti Defence Systems to GEC, which would merge it into GEC-Marconi.
European collaboration on surface-to-air missiles was widened when the UK government in early January 1990 approved participation in a French and Italian joint project for naval and land-based medium-range missiles for the late 1990s.
The British had hitherto favoured the US-led NATO system NAAWS.
There were French hopes that Spain would also switch from NAAWS (in which Canada, West Germany and the Netherlands were also involved).
On Jan. 11 the French government gave its approval for a joint venture known as Eurodynamics to be formed by merging the missile development divisions of British Aerospace and the French group Thomson-CSF, as announced by the two companies on Oct. 16, 1989.
French and UK Defence Ministers had discussed in Paris on Feb. 28, 1989, a joint development of an air-launched nuclear missile, extending the range of a French 300-km missile in service since 1986, and providing a replacement for the free-fall bombs carried by British Tornado aircraft.
A rival US SRAM-2 project had been backed by NATO's nuclear planning group, however, and the British side remained concerned about costs of a separate development unless the USA could be associated with it.
In early March 1989 it was reported that the UK, Italy, Netherlands and Spain had agreed to study costings for a joint army Light Attack Helicopter (LAH) project; a Franco-German joint project had been under way since late 1987 (see p. 35665).
In late May 1989 it was reported that Spain, Belgium and the Netherlands were to join France, West Germany and the UK in a project for a new generation of medium- and long-range anti-tank missiles for the late 1990s.
Euclid programme
The 13-nation Independent European Programme Group (IEPG, involving all the European members of NATO except Ireland) meeting on June 28, 1989, in Estoril, Portugal, agreed to set up a joint programme known as Euclid to promote research and development among European defence contractors.
AFRICA
CHAD
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 1,284,000 sq km(incl.
Aouzou strip).
Population: 5,273,000 (1987).
Capital: Ndjamena.
Languages: French and Arabic (official); some 25 indigenous languages.
Religion: Islam and animism; Christianity (6%).
Av. life expectancy: 46 yrs (1987).
Armed forces: 17,000 plus 5,000 military police.
The regime is bolstered by a French military presence some 1,400 strong.
GNP: USdollars 805 m. (1987).
GNP per capita: USdollars 150 (1987).
Currency: franc of the Communaute financiere africaine (USdollars 1.00=292.6197 francs CFA as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Republic of Chad became independent from France on Aug. 11, 1960.
The provisional basic law promulgated on Sept. 29, 1982, provided for an executive presidency governing through a Council of Ministers.
Hissene Habre, President since 1982, was sworn in for a further seven-year presidential term on Dec. 22, 1989, after endorsement by a referendum on Dec. 10 (see p. 37114).
The sole legal political party, the National Union for Independence and the Revolution (Union nationale pour l'independance et la revolution-UNIR), was set up by Habre in 1984; in line with Habre's "national reconciliation" policy, several former opponents of his regime were brought into the UNIR central committee when the membership of this body was expanded from 80 to 120 at the second UNIR national congress on Nov. 23-26, 1988.
A new Constitution approved in the December 1989 referendum provides for maintenance of the single party framework, and for the creation of an elective National Assembly with a maximum term of five years.
Hissene Habre President of Council of Ministers; National Defence, War Veterans and Victims of War Djidingar Dono Ngardoum Minister of State Acheikh bin Oumar Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Djime Togou Interior and Territorial Affairs Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue Justice and Keeper of the Seals Mbailem Bana Ngarnayal Finance and Computers Gouara Lassou Agriculture and Rural Development Assilek Halata National Education Ibn Oumar Mahamat Saleh Planning and Co-operation 
Principal Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
The end of active hostilities between Chad and Libya in September 1987 (see pp. 35876-79), and the formal declaration of Oct. 3, 1988, that their war was at an end (see p. 36256), made it possible for the Habre regime to pursue what it described as a policy of "national reconciliation" with the many groups and factions which had come into being during the country's protracted civil war.
The December 1989 referendum and new Constitution were designed as major elements in this process, while in the preceding two years several former opposition leaders were given Cabinet posts.
Former opposition leaders joining the cabinet.
By August 1988: the leading southerner Wadal Abdelkader Kamougue (Mouvement revolutionnaire du peuple-MRP), another southern leader Alphonse Kotiga Guerina (Commandement des groupements des troupes offensives-CGTO), Mohammed Senoussi Khatir (Conseil democratique revolutionnaire-CDR), Djibril Negue Djogo (Front democratique tchadien-FDT), and Djibrine Grinky (another CDR member).
In March 1989: Acheikh Ibn Oumar, the former CDR and Front national tchadien (FNT) leader and two of his supporters (see pp. 36322; 36519).
Other opposition factions accepting reconciliation.
In addition to the reconciliation during 1988 of members of the Forces populaires revolutionnaires tchadiennes, the Forces armees populaires, the Frolinat originel and the Forces armees occidentales, Goukouni Guet of the Forces armees populaires announced on May 1, 1989, in Lagos, Nigeria, that he would return to Ndjamena; and Abdoulgassin Gamar of the Premiere armee volcan announced the dissolution of that group in August 1989 (see p. 36519).
Goukouni Oueddei, former leader of the Libyan-backed Gouvernement d'unite nationale tchadienne (GUNT) and the most prominent remaining exile, had remained in the background following the end of Chad-Libyan fighting.
Variously reported as living in Algeria or in Gabon (mid-1989), he returned to Tripoli (the Libyan capital) in October 1989, however.
Interviewed in January 1990, he referred to the impact of the Darfur rebellion (see below) in weakening Habre's position, and to the renewed possibility of a "military solution" rather than reconciliation with the regime.
Opposition groups still active.
In south-eastern Chad, Mosanat (Mouvement pour la salvation nationale tchadienne) claimed military victories in early March 1989 (see p. 36519) and denied the government's claims that fighting in that region had involved a Libyan-backed Islamic Legion (a force of some 2,000 whom the Sudanese authorities said had crossed from Libya into Sudan in early August 1988, and on whom the Habre government claimed to have inflicted defeats in December 1988 some 100 km west of the Sudanese border).
Mosanat's ethnic base was the Hadjerai from mountainous central Chad.
The Hadjerai suspected that Habre's Gorane people had murdered the Hadjerai leader Idriss Miskine in 1984, and that (prior to the April 1989 coup attempt-see p. 36581) the Hadjerai in government were being forced out to make way for a Gorane-Zaghawa alliance; an apparent instance of this was the arrest in June 1988 of Public Works minister Moussa Khadam and three others.
A group formed in exile in Lagos in late 1988, the Mouvement pour la democratie et le socialisme au Tchad (MDST) issued in November 1989 a communique blaming the Habre government for "the concentration of power and suppression of democracy and freedom" , and calling for genuine national reconciliation.
According to a report on Jan. 8, 1990, MDST president Mahamat Saleh Ahmat was replaced by Ngarba Tombalbaye.
In exile in Tripoli, non-reconciled CDR factions were suspected of forming links with Zaghawa rebels in Darfur after the April 1989 coup attempt and seeking Libyan sponsorship for an anti-Habre coalition; prominent individuals included Adoum Togoi, Moctar Moussa and Rakhis Mananny (who in a statement on Oct. 7, 1989, described himself as CDR secretary-general).
The Darfur fighting
Idriss Deby, having evaded capture after the failed coup, was by August 1989 the effective leader of the main military challenge to Habre, based on the Zaghawa people and operating in Darfur, an area straddling the border with Sudan.
This conflict gave rise to repeated friction between the Chad and Sudan governments, the latter protesting that it was not allowing rebel groups to operate from its territory and insisting (notably in a statement on Nov. 20, 1989) that Chadian troops (who claimed rights of pursuit) should themselves withdraw.
Deby's forces in late August raided Abeche and captured the Chadian Chief of National Armed Forces, Allafouza Koni Worimi, who was reportedly severely injured when Chadian forces freed him in an Oct. 30 battle at Bamissi on the border.
Chadian forces had previously mounted an attack on a rebel base near Kutum, 200 km inside Sudan, on Oct. 16, and on Nov. 13-14 they claimed to have destroyed a second base at Inosorro.
On each occasion they claimed to have inflicted casualties running into several hundreds killed, and also that the supposed Libyan-backed Islamic Legion was involved.
ECONOMY
Chad's budgets for 1989 and 1990 were adopted respectively in January 1989 and on Dec. 31, 1989.
The 1990 budget provided for investment spending of 106,300 million francs CFA, compared with 93,170 million in 1989, and for recurrent expenditure of 41,300 million as against revenue of 29,300 million.
In line with the priority given to tax reforms, income tax was raised (reportedly for the first time since 1967) from 7.2 per cent to 10.5 per cent.
The IMF had in late June 1989 approved a drawing of 9,180,000 special drawing rights (approximately USdollars 11,460,000) under the second annual structural adjustment programme (ie part of a three-year plan agreed with the IMF in October 1987), with objectives including tax reform, reform of the cotton sector, liberalization of price controls and foreign trade, reduction of the balance-of-payments deficit (currently some USdollars 64,000,000), the control of inflation within a 5 per cent ceiling, and boosting of real economic growth to 3 per cent.
Dependent on the backing of Iraq (see p. 36841), the USA and above all France, the Habre regime was concerned over French announcements (i) on Jan. 16, 1989, that their "Epervier" unit was to lose some 200-300 of its 1,400 personnel and to close its radar station at Moussoro;(ii) on Sept. 7 that French troops would leave Faya-Largeau (although remaining in Ndjamena and Abeche); and (ii) in mid-November that France would return Libyan Mirage aircraft impounded since 1983.
Habre met French President Mitterrand during a private visit to Paris on Oct. 21, 1989, which followed a visit to Belgium and the European Community headquarters primarily concerned with aid and development matters.
The intention to resolve disputes with Libya, notably over the Aouzou strip, although formalized in the agreement on Aug. 31, 1989 (see p. 36841), was obstructed by repeated allegations that Libya was supporting anti-regime forces and factions (although in the wake of that agreement some anti-Habre groups in Tripoli reported that they had been asked to leave), and by the Libyan insistence that Chad should return some 2,000 Libyan prisoners of war (see also p. 37114).
Libya accused Chad of training these men at a camp near Ndjamena, with US backing, to form a rebel National Front for the Salvation of Libya.
On Jan. 21, 1990, the Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU), Salim Ahmed Salim, paid his first visit to Chad, primarily to promote a negotiated settlement of outstanding disputes with Libya.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 1,775,500 sq km.
Population: 4,080,000 (1989).
Capital: Tripoli.
Languages: Arabic (official); English and Italian.
Religion: Islam (Sunni Moslems).
Av. life expectancy: 69 yrs (women), 64 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 85,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 5,410 (1988 est.).
Currency: Libyan dinar (USdollars 1.00=LD 0.2933 as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahariyah became independent (as the United Kingdom of Libya) in 1951.
In 1969 Col. Moamer al-Kadhafi led a military coup which overthrew the monarchy (see p. 23569).
Kadhafi himself is referred to as "the leader of the revolution" , and as such wields considerable authority, although he holds no official post, in common with Maj. Abdel Salem Jalloud, widely known as "the Libyan number two" .
Officially, authority is vested in the Libyan people, with local"basic people's congresses' forming an electoral base for the General People's Congress (GPC-parliament), which is serviced by a Secretariat.
The Congress exercises a degree of control over the General People's Committee, which is broadly equivalent to a Council of Ministers or Cabinet.
Secretariat of General People's Congress Muftah al-Usta Umar Secretary-General Ibrahim Bukhizam Assistant Secretary-General Salmin Ali al-Uraybi Assistant Secretary-General Umar Ishkal Secretary for People's Congress Affairs Soleiman Sasi al-Shuhumi Secretary for People's Committees Affairs Bashir Huwayj Huwaydi Secretary for Affairs of Vocational Congresses Members of the General People's Committee Umar Mustafa al-Muntasir Secretary-General (Prime Minister) Jadallah Azouz al-Talhi Secretary for Foreign Liaison Fawzi al-Shakshuki Secretary for Petroleum Mubarak al-Shamikh Secretary for Communications and Transport Ahmed Ibrahim Secretary for Higher Education Farhat Sharnanah Secretary for Economy and Foreign Trade Mohammed Lutfi Farhat Secretary for Planning Mustafa Mohammed al-Zaydi Secretary for Health Fatih Hamad bin Shatwan Secretary for Strategic Industries Mohammed Madani al-Bukhari Secretary for the Treasury Rajab Muftah Abu Dabbus Secretary for Information and Culture Mifta Mohammed Kuaybah Secretary for Maritime Resources Matooq Mohammed Matooq Secretary for Vocational Training Ali al-Shairi Secretary for Mass Mobilization; Revolutionary Guidance Nuri al-Fayturi al-Madani Secretary for Scientific Research Abd al-Majid al-Qa'ud Secretary for Agrarian Reform and Land Reclamation Izz al-Din al-Hinshiri Secretary for Justice Fatimah Abd al-Hafiz Mukhtar Secretary for Education Amin Halimi Uthman Kamil Secretary for Light Industries 
POLITICS
Cabinet reshuffle
A session of the GPC, held in Benghazi, on the north coast, on March 2-9, 1989, ended with the creation of eight new Cabinet portfolios and the abolition of three others; the Congress approved various measures aimed at achieving greater economic efficiency and aligning Libya's economy with those of its partners in the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) created in February (see p. 36474).
Among the new Secretaries (Ministers) named were Libya's first woman Cabinet member, Fatimah Abd al-Hafiz Mukhtar (Secretary for Education), and Amin Halimi Uthman Kamil, an Egyptian citizen appointed to the newly created Light Industries portfolio.
The ministries of Public Service, Education and Scientific Research, and Industry were abolished.
20th anniversary of revolution
Seventeen heads of state, as well as the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Yassir Arafat, attended celebrations in Tripoli on Sept. 1, 1989, to mark the 20th anniversary of the 1969 coup.
Other delegates included the Italian Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti, and a French junior minister, the Financial Times commenting that the Libyan leader's new-found international respectability was the reward for his decision to return to more conventional foreign and economic policies over the previous 18 months.
Replacement of Armed Forces General Command
On Sept. 1, 1989, Kadhafi issued a decree setting up the General Committee for Defence, which would be responsible for organizing "the armed people" and would replace the Armed Forces General Command.
The new committee would exercise all the powers formerly vested in the armed forces Commander General.
SECURITY
Action against Islamic fundamentalists
Several confrontations occurred in 1989 between the security forces and Islamic fundamentalists and other radical opposition groups.
According to Libyan opposition groups in exile, thousands of people were arrested during the year and 20 had been secretly executed in early May, after a speech by Kadhafi on April 8 urging his supporters in the revolutionary committees to purge "reactionary elements', and not to be inhibited in doing so by the" International Green Document for Peace and Human Rights in the Era of the Masses' adopted in June 1988 (see p. 36570).
Opposition sources also claimed that there were two assassination attempts against Kadhafi in 1989, including one during the visit in March by President Assad of Syria (for which see p. 37101).
Kadhafi told a session of the GPC on Oct. 7 that security forces had clashed with what he called "an extremist Islamic group" near the town of Ajdabiya, about 725 km south-east of Tripoli, some of whom had been killed and others captured.
Under interrogation, they said that they had received training in Pakistan and Afghanistan, and had supporters in Benghazi and Misratah, the latter being 200 km east of Tripoli.
According to Kadhafi, this group held Libya to be "an infidel, heretical society" ; he accused them and similar groups of being in the pay of foreign intelligence services and working for the overthrow of pan-Arabism.
He said that no one should be allowed to rule in the name of religion, and warned that such groups would be "liquidated" .
He also called for the passage of measures to outlaw "religious hypocrisy" .
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GNP growth 0% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$1,260 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$1,100 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,100 m.
(December 1988)
Gross national product US$20,000 m. (1988 est.)
Inflation rate 20% (1988 est.)
Unemployment 2% (1988 est.)
Principal trading partners Exports: Italy, West Germany, Soviet Union; Imports: Italy, West Germany, United Kingdom 
Call for abolition of state import-export organizations
The GPC session in Benghazi in March 1989 dealt with various economic issues raised by Kadhafi in September 1988, such as the need for increased efficiency in state enterprises and an end for government control over trade (see p. 36571).
Addressing the GPC on March 2, Kadhafi repeated his suggestion that Libyans generally should be free to organize all import and export trade by themselves, adding that "any organization which takes care of this should be disbanded because it is officially a burden on the state" .
On March 6, in a GPC debate broadcast by Libyan television, Kadhafi heard from a delegate who claimed that Libya faced a great problem because of the large number of people who had switched from production to retailing, alleging that prices had risen four- or five-fold "and everyone is complaining" .
Figures released during the GPC session indicated that efforts had been made to cut spending on imports.
Only three-quarters of the amount budgeted for buying foreign goods in 1988 was actually spent.
Great Man-Made River project
A contract worth USdollars 5,300 million for the second phase of the Great Man-Made River project was awarded to South Korea's Dong Ah construction company in August 1989.
It involved the building of a 1,100-km pipeline from underground reservoirs in the Fezzan desert, in the south west of Libya, to supply 1,000,000 cubic metres of water a day to the Tripoli area.
The first phase of the project, to supply Benghazi, was due to be completed by the end of 1991.
Opening of Misratah steel plant
The new iron and steel complex in Misratah was opened on Sept. 9, 1989, at an estimated cost of dollars 6,000 million and after years of delays resulting from shrinking oil revenues in the mid-1980s.
It had a designated capacity of around 1,100,000 tonnes of steel a year, of which about half was destined for domestic use and the rest for export.
FOREIGN
Relations with Chad
Chad announced that on Oct. 30, 1989, its troops had killed at least 600 members of the so-called Libyan Islamic Legion and had destroyed an important military base belonging to that force on the Sudan-Chad border.
The Chadian government accused Libya of direct involvement in the "aggression" by the Islamic Legion, in violation of the border agreement of Aug. 31 (see p. 36841).
Libya denied any involvement, claiming that the clashes were between rival Chadian factions.
End to aid for "terrorist" groups
Kadhafi said in an interview for the Egyptian political weekly Al-Musawar in October 1989 that in the past Libya had funded some groups without examining their aims and role in detail, but that "when we discovered that these groups were causing more harm than benefit to the Arab cause, we halted our aid to them completely and withdrew our support" .
In mid-December Palestinian sources reported that the Libyan authorities had expelled the Fatah Revolutionary Council, led by Sabri Khalil al Banna ( "Abu Nidal" ), from its offices in Tripoli, placing Abu Nidal and his closest aides under a form of house arrest.
The organization had been based in Libya since 1987, following its expulsion from Syria (see p. 35414).
US concern over supply of Soviet jets
The United States announced in April 1989 that it was concerned about the Soviet Union's decision to sell Libya up to 15 supersonic Sukhoi Su-24D bombers, with a range of over 1,200 km, six of which had already been delivered to an air base in eastern Libya.
US intelligence sources, who revealed the deal at a time which coincided with a visit to the USA by Israeli Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir (see p. 36599), alleged that Libyan pilots were receiving training in the Soviet Union to fly the planes and that a Libyan Il-76 transport plane was being converted into a refuelling tanker.
Libya rejected the USA's criticism, saying that the planes were for self-defence and asking how the USA could justify its military supplies to Israel.
(For December 1989 developments over Rabta chemical plant see p. 37224.)
Renewed demand for compensation from Italy
In September 1989 the Libyan news agency JANA said that Italy could make up for its "wrongdoing" during the colonial period-particularly the deportation to Italy between 1911 and 1942 of some 5,000 Libyans as forced labour-by speedily paying the compensation demanded by Libya, which regarded as inadequate a settlement of dollars 6,700 million reached in 1956.
Over 800 Libyans who sailed for Naples in a former cruise liner to mark the 78th anniversary on Oct. 26 of the invasion of Libya by Italy in 1911, were not allowed to disembark; however, a group of some 250 Libyans visited the Italian island of Ustica for a commemorative ceremony.
During protests in Tripoli against the period of Italian rule, an Italian technician, Roberto Ceccato, who worked in Libya was murdered.
The Italian Foreign Affairs Minister, Gianni De Michelis, said that the death was linked with the anti-Italian feeling whipped up during the anniversary; Libyan officials, however, said that preliminary inquires indicated that death was "a common crime" .
Agreements with Turkey, Tunisia and Egypt
Agreement was reached with Turkey in September 1989 after a dispute lasting several years over unfinished building contracts valued at USdollars 100,000,000.
The agreement meant that further contracts worth dollars 1,500 million, frozen during the dispute, could go ahead.
Turkey also agreed to buy 3,000,000 tonnes of oil from Libya in 1990, half to be paid for in cash and the rest to be paid into a joint account for payment to contractors.
Libya would also sell Turkey 1,500 million cubic metres of liquefied natural gas annually under a 25-year agreement, starting in 1992.
(For September 1988 protocol see p. 36572.)
On April 12, 1989, Libya and Tunisia signed an agreement on exploitation of the Bourri oil and gas field, in the Gulf of Gabes (Tunisia).
Although situated entirely in the Libyan section of the continental shelf, 10 per cent of the revenue from the field would be devoted to joint projects, including one to connect the two countries' power grids, a 300-km motorway between Ras Jedir on the border and Sfax in Tunisia, and a pipeline linking the Libyan refinery in Zuwarah, 200 km west of Tripoli, with the Tunisian port of Zarzis.
At their meetings in October 1989 (see p. 36987) Kadhafi and President Mubarak of Egypt agreed on a new framework for economic co-operation to bring Libya and Egypt closer together.
This envisaged, among other things, the connection of the two countries' electricity grids, giving priority to providing direct telecommunications links, joining railway lines at the border, and joint agricultural and water conservation projects.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
TUNISIA
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 154,530 sq km.
Population: 7,916,106 (1989).
Capital: Tunis.
Languages: Arabic (official); Berber and French.
Religion: Islam; Christian and Jewish minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (women), 68 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 38,000 (26,400 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 1,300 (1988).
Currency: Tunisian dinar (USdollars 1.00=0.9166 dinars as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Republic of Tunisia was declared in 1957, a year after the country achieved independence from France.
Between 1963 and 1981 the ruling Destour Socialist Party (PSD) was the sole legal party, although since then several other parties have been legalized.
The PSD was renamed the Constitutional Democratic Rally-Rassemblement constitutionnel democratique-(RCD) in February 1988.
According to the 1959 Constitution executive power is held by the President, elected every five years, who appoints the Prime Minister and the Council of Ministers.
The unicameral legislature, the National Assembly, is also elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage.
Habib Bourguiba was declared President-for-Life by the National Assembly in 1985, but was removed in November 1987 after being declared unfit for office on grounds of ill-health and senility.
He was replaced by the Prime Minister, Gen. Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali, and in July 1988 the National Assembly voted to limit the President's maximum period in office to three five-year terms.
Presidential and legislative elections were held on April 2, 1989 (see p. 36603).
Ben Ali, the sole presidential candidate, was re-elected with over 99 per cent of the votes cast, and the RCD won all 141 National Assembly seats despite competition from six opposition parties.
In late September Hamed Karoui replaced Hedi Baccouche as Prime Minister (see p. 36905).
POLITICS
Demotion of former Prime Minister
Hedi Baccouche, replaced as Prime Minister by Hamed Karoui on Sept. 27, 1989,(see p. 36905), was dropped from the RCD political bureau in a limited reshuffle on Oct. 9.
Karoui was appointed to Baccouche's post of RCD deputy chairman, and the Secretary General for the Presidency, Mohamed Jeri, joined the bureau.
Refusal to register Islamic movement
In June 1989 the government refused to grant the fundamentalist Islamic Nahdah movement (Mouvement de la renaissance) legal recognition as a political party, on the grounds that by law founders and leaders of parties must not have been convicted of offences warranting more than three months' imprisonment or six months' suspended sentence; 15 Nahdah leaders, although at liberty, still had current convictions dating from September 1987 (see p. 36633).
The movement was, however, allowed to publish a newspaper.
Nahdah candidates, standing as independents in the April elections, won an estimated 13 per cent of the national vote, getting as much as 30 per cent in Tunis and other cities.
On Oct. 7 three of the movement's leaders, including the secretary-general, Abdelfatah Mourou, were briefly detained for issuing a communique accusing the Education Minister, Mohamed Charfi, of having belittled Islamic values and of seeking to reintroduce a policy of secularization.
In a speech on Nov. 7 President Ben Ali said that there was no place in Tunisia for a religious political party, because "Islam is the religion of all and cannot become an object of competition or sensationalism and cannot be a springboard to coming to power" .
The only defender of Islam in Tunisia was the state itself, he added.
He ruled out further help for the legalized opposition parties, saying that they needed time to win supporters, and that was why they had fared badly in the April elections.
He said: "No effort was spared to support the opposition parties at various levels.
They over-estimated their representativeness, and were wrong to blame the electoral code for their low poll."
Retirement of Mestiri as MDS leader
Ahmed Mestiri retired as secretary-general of the Mouvement des democrates socialistes (MDS) in July 1989.
On Sept. 10 Mohamed Moada was appointed as his successor.
The party had officially received less than 3 per cent of the votes in the April general election (see p. 36603), and before the poll Mestiri had turned down a proposal by the ruling RCD for a national coalition.
New trade union leadership
The Tunisian General Workers' Union (UGTT) held a two-day session in April 1989 at the end of which it elected a new 13-member executive bureau with Ali Sabahni as new secretary-general.
Islamic independent candidates failed to secure election to the executive bureau.
SECURITY
Release of prisoners
On March 18, 1989, Ben Ali ordered the release of over 1,500 prisoners to mark the 33rd anniversary of independence.
Proceedings were also dropped against 35 of the 90 Islamic fundamentalists previously charged with planning terrorist acts against the regime of former President Bourguiba in November 1987.
The remaining 48 fundamentalists from the same group were released on May 3, to mark the end of Ramadan, the Islamic month of fasting.
In November 1989 Ben Ali granted a presidential pardon for humanitarian reasons to two of Bourguiba's close aides, Mansur Skhiri and Mahmoud Belhassine, who had been sentenced in 1988 to seven years' imprisonment and 10 years' forced labour respectively for misappropriation of public funds, bad management and embezzlement (for their arrest see p. 35801).
He also granted reductions in prison sentences varying between three months and three years for 1,354 common prisoners.
Clashes with Islamic militants
In February 1989 university authorities suspended classes for three days after clashes on several campuses between Islamic and leftist student groups.
In December 1989 riot police fought with Moslem militants demonstrating in Tunis in support of the Palestinian uprising.
There were further clashes between police and fundamentalists on Dec. 29 at a mosque in a Tunis suburb, and for the first time the official news agency, Tunis Afrique Presse (TAP), reported the incidents.
Islamic demonstrators on Jan. 25, 1990, stoned the headquarters of the provincial government in Sidi Bouzid, 200 km south of Tunis and one of the areas worst affected by that month's floods (see below); an official statement blamed"religious extremists' for the attack.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.5% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$424 m. (1989 est.)
Trade balance -US$1,200 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$212 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$132 m. (1989 est.)
Total external public debt US$7,800 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 23% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$8,847 m. (1988)
GDP per capita US$1,231 (1987 est.)
Inflation rate 7.2% (1988)
Unemployment 15% (1989 est.)
Principal trading partners France, Italy, West Germany
In 1989 the economy was adversely affected by a second year of drought as well as a plague of locusts, resulting in a much-reduced grain harvest and increased food imports; unemployment rose and foreign investment fell.
However, the continuing prosperity of the tourist sector, following the boom of 1988, helped to maintain a healthy state of foreign exchange reserves, augmented by substantial expatriate remittances.
The appointment of Karoui as Prime Minister in September 1989 (see p. 36905) was intended in part to accelerate the economic reforms which his predecessor, Baccouche, fearing the political and social risks of further austerity measures, had been reluctant to implement.
Ben Ali said after Baccouche's dismissal that Tunisia would pursue the economic structural adjustment plan recommended by the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), while adapting it by increasing investment and employment.
A World Bank loan of USdollars 58,000,000 was approved in May 1989 to help finance the dollars 200,000,000 fifth urban project, aimed at creating more low- and medium-income housing and greater participation by the private sector in land and housing development.
The United States Agency for International Development (USAID) would provide a further dollars 15,000,000 with dollars 68,000,000 coming from Banque de l'Habitat.
The World Bank also approved in May 1989 a dollars 95,000,000 loan to help finance a dollars 183,000,000 education and training scheme.
In June the World Bank agreed to provide dollars 84,000,000 to back further agricultural reforms, to be allocated in two equal tranches, and in July the bank granted a dollars 130,000,000 loan to support the restructuring of three major state companies in the phosphate, chemicals and railways sectors.
1990 budget
On Dec. 12, 1989, Karoui presented a budget for 1990 which projected a deficit of dollars 422,500,000.
The deficit would be financed from dollars 182,300,000 borrowed abroad and dollars 240,200,000 raised on the domestic money market.
The 1990 draft budget tabled in November 1989 had set total expenditure at dollars 3,899 million, compared with dollars 3,500 million in the 1989 budget, an increase of 11.4 per cent.
State expenditure on agriculture was set to rise to dollars 294,000,000, from dollars 230,000,000 the previous year.
From January 1990 the maximum rate of income tax for private individuals and businesses was cut to 35 per cent in a bid to give a boost to the stock exchange and investment; the new simplified system was also intended to reduce tax evasion.
Price increases
Significant increases were announced in August 1989 in the price of bread, sugar, flour, semolina and cooking oil; projected subsidies of these foodstuffs in 1989 totalled over dollars 400,000,000-an increase of more than one-third over 1988.
Referring to the burden which subsidies placed on the state budget, Ben Ali said that "we can no longer do nothing in the face of the growth of the compensation costs, which alone absorb one-quarter of state expenditure" .
Floods
Floods in central and southern areas in late January 1990 killed at least 24 people, damaged over 14,000 houses and 3,000 km of roads, and destroyed bridges and railway lines estimated at millions of dinars.
Some parts of the south had over 300 mm of rain on Jan. 2 to 24, more than the average for a whole year.
Relief aid was sent by Algeria, Egypt, Libya, France and the UN, and Ben Ali postponed an official visit to Egypt to deal with the disaster.
FOREIGN
Presidential visit to Iraq
Ben Ali, accompanied by the Ministers of Foreign Affairs, National Defence and National Economy, paid a three-day visit to Iraq on Dec. 16-18, 1989.
Credit and aid from France
Planning and Finance Minister Mohamed Ghanouchi signed agreements on Aug. 21, 1989, with the visiting French Economy Minister, Pierre Beregovoy, for three new lines of credit and a grant totalling dollars 161,000,000, as well as food aid of 50,000 tonnes of cereals.
Visit by Austrian President
The Austrian President, Kurt Waldheim, paid a three-day official visit on Dec. 4-6, 1989, at the invitation of Ben Ali, during which he also had talks in Tunis with the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Yassir Arafat.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 2,381,741 sq km.
Population: 24,946,073 (1989).
Capital: Algiers.
Languages: Arabic (official); French and Berber.
Religion: Islam (state religion).
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (women), 63 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 138,500 (70,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 2,680 (1987).
Currency: Algerian dinar (USdollars 1.00=AD 8.0583 as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria, became independent from France in 1962.
The head of state is the President (a post held since 1979 by Col. Chadli Bendjedid), who is nominated by the congress of the ruling National Liberation Front (Front de liberation nationale-FLN) and is elected by universal adult suffrage every five years.
The President appoints and presides over the Council of Ministers.
Legislative power is shared by the President and the 281-member National Assembly, which is also elected every five years.
National referendums held in November 1988 (see pp. 36505-06; 36320) and February 1989 (see p. 36475) overwhelmingly approved amendments to the country's 1976 Constitution, transferring power away from the presidency and effectively marking the end of one-party state socialism.
The referendums had been called by Chadli following anti-government riots in early October 1988 (see pp. 36506-07; 36257).
Laws approving the formation of new political parties and outlining new electoral regulations were passed by the National Assembly in July 1989 (see p. 36834).
Mouloud Hamrouche, appointed Prime Minister by Chadli on Sept. 9, 1989, formed a new Cabinet on Sept. 16 (see p. 36905).
Mouloud Hamrouche Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali Foreign Affairs Mohammed Saleh Mohammedi Interior Said Chibane Religious Affairs Ghazi Hidouci Economy Mohamed el-Mili Brahimi Education Abdelkader Boudjemaa Youth Ali Benflis Justice Mohamed Ghrib Social Affairs Hassan Kahlouche Industry Cherif Rahmani Equipment Saddek Boussena Mines El-Hadi Khediri Transport Abdelkader Bendaoud Agriculture Akli Kheddis Public Health Hamid Sidi Said Posts and Telecommunications Benali Henni Minister Delegate for Local Authorities Abdessalem Ali-Rachedi Minister Delegate for Universities Abdennour Keramane Minister Delegate for Professional Training Smail Goumeziane Minister Delegate for the Organization of Commerce Amar Kara Mohamed Minister Delegate for Employment Abdelaziz Khellef Secretary of State for Maghreb Affairs Ahmed Medjhouda Secretary-General of the Government Responsibility for defence rested 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
New political parties
One of the first opposition parties to be legalized (on Sept. 12, 1989-see p. 36905) was the fundamentalist Front islamique du salut (FIS), which claimed to have 3,000,000 members.
The party was led by Abassi Madani (imprisoned by the French in 1954 for terrorist activities), with a radical wing led by Ali Belhadj, who had been convicted in 1987 of collaboration with the Islamic fundamentalist leader Mustapha Bouiali (for whose death in January 1987 see p. 35097).
The first edition of the party journal El Mounqid (The Saviour) appeared in October.
Increasing concern was expressed throughout the year by women's groups, academics and journalists about the extremist views of the FIS and the lawlessness of its shorta Islamiya (Islamic police), and about intimidation of women and young people by Moslem extremists.
In July FIS militants were reported to have burned down a divorced woman's house"to purge her sins', resulting in the death of her three-year-old son.
The party was thought to wield considerable influence through local mosques, and was reported to have distributed water free of charge in poor urban areas and to have provided considerably more assistance than the local authorities to the victims of a double earthquake in the coastal resort of Tipaza in October (see also below).
Another legalized opposition party considered to be a potential danger to the FLN was the Front of Socialist Forces (Front des forces socialistes-FFS).
Its leader, Hocine Ait Ahmed, returned from exile in Switzerland on Dec. 15, 1989, to a rapturous reception from a crowd estimated at 15,000.
(Ait Ahmed had been imprisoned by President Ben Bella after the unsuccessful Kabylie rebellion of 1964-see pp. 20963-64-but had escaped and fled abroad in 1966-see p. 22987.)
Other parties to be legalized (see also p. 36905) were the Parti algerien populaire (PAP), the Union des forces democratiques and the Front national de renouvellement.
However, the Parti du peuple algerien (PPA), led by Mohammed Memchaoui (nephew of the veteran independence fighter, Messali Hadj) was refused legal status.
Introduction of new information code
In July 1989 a new information code was adopted, which established a semi-official "national council for information and communication" to oversee the media, although the state in effect retained its overall control over the press and broadcasting.
FLN extraordinary congress
The ruling FLN held an extraordinary congress-the third in the party's history-on Nov. 28-30, 1989 (it had originally been scheduled for the end of October).
A large number of delegates called for the replacement of the entire central committee (at the time consisting of 120-160 full members and 30-40 alternate members) in a secret ballot, a move believed to have been prompted by President Chadli and his reformists in an attempt to bring in younger and more reform-minded deputies.
However, the new central committee, enlarged to 267 members, retained almost all of its current members and in addition returned a number of hardliners who had been prominent during the rule of President Boumedienne (1965-78).
Among them was Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who had served as Foreign Minister for 16 years, Belaid Abdessalam, a former Energy Minister who had publicly criticized Chadli's energy policy, and Kasdi Merbah, the previous Prime Minister.
Chadli was elected for a further term as chairman of the FLN.
Withdrawal of Army from government — Retirement of military adviser
In March 1989 all representatives of the Army withdrew from the FLN central committee, and thus from any direct participation in government, in order to allow the Army to "devote itself completely" to its duties under the new Constitution.
The President's senior military adviser, Maj.- Gen. Abdallah Belhouchet, retired in August at the age of 65.
Postponement of local elections
In September 1989 Chadli announced the postponement of local elections, originally scheduled for December, following complaints from the opposition parties that they had not had enough time to prepare for them.
It was later announced that the elections would take place in March 1990.
SECURITY
Anniversary of 1988 riots
The first anniversary of the October 1988 riots (for which see pp. 36506-07) passed off much more quietly than expected, with peaceful demonstrations by the victims' families, and by women's groups and students.
The Ministry of Social Affairs announced that compensation and pensions would be paid to victims' dependents.
Abandonment of retrial of Islamic extremists
On Oct. 15, 1989, a controversial retrial of 15 Islamic extremists (who had been associates of Bouiali-see above) was abandoned after the defence had successfully argued that a regional court was not competent to try their case following the Supreme Court's refusal to do so.
Forty-six other prisoners convicted for association with Bouiali were pardoned by Chadli in November, while a further five had their sentences reduced by five years.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -2.7% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$2,029 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$304 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$2,500 m. (1987)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 3.9% (1987)
Total external public debt US$24,500 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 70.5% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$59,000 m. (1986)
Gross national product US$63,600 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 10% (1988)
Unemployment 22% (1988)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: Netherlands, Czechoslovakia, Romania; Imports: France, Italy, West Germany 
Economic situation
The new government's economic programme, approved by the National People's Assembly on Sept. 30, 1989, was designed to combat inflation and to reform economic management and agriculture.
Hamrouche declared his intention of submitting a joint venture bill-allowing foreign companies to participate in Algerian enterprises-to the next session of the National Assembly.
He said that Algeria would not seek to reschedule its estimated USdollars 24,500 million foreign debt.
Revised estimates drawn up by the government and central bank towards the end of 1989 showed the country's economic situation to be worse than previously thought, with a current-account deficit of dollars 2,029 million for 1988, although the situation was expected to improve in the early 1990s as a result of increased oil revenues.
Pending the adoption of the long-awaited joint venture bill, a number of Algerian companies entered into deals with foreign firms.
It was announced in December that the country's first joint venture bank was to be set up in early 1990 in a deal with the Dallah-Al-Baraka group, led by Saudi businessman Saleh Kamel.
Two French banks, Banque Nationale de Paris and Societe Generale, set up liaison offices in Algiers in the summer of 1989, and Credit Lyonnais was expected to follow suit shortly.
In November the Industrial Development Consortium, based in Dubai (United Arab Emirates), which included the construction firms Wimpey and Asea Brown Boveri, announced plans to build an aluminium smelting plant at a cost of dollars 1,000 million with an annual capacity of 220,000 tonnes in Arzew, about 325 km west of Algiers, beginning in late 1990.
Efforts to expand hydrocarbons sector
Both Merbah and his successor, Hamrouche, placed considerable emphasis on expanding the hydrocarbons sector, the country's biggest export earner.
The state oil and gas corporation SONATRACH concluded new agreements to supply its major European clients-France, Spain and Belgium-with liquefied natural gas (LNG).
On Oct. 23, 1989, the United States Anadarko Petroleum Corp. concluded a dollars 100,000,000 contract with Sonatrach to prospect for oil in a 21,000-sq km area of the Sahara.
New central bank governor
Hadj Nasser, a former director of monetary policy for the presidency, replaced Badereddine Nouioua as director of the Central Bank of Algeria on Oct. 18, 1989, promising to fight inflation and to "reunify" the dinar exchange rate.
World Bank and EC loans
The World Bank granted Algeria a total of dollars 341,000,000 in loans during its fiscal year ending June 30, 1989, including a dollars 63,000,000 loan for improvements to the ports of Algiers, Oran and Annaba was approved on June 29 (see also pp. 36749; 36905).
In May the European Communities (EC) Commission approved loans worth dollars 23,000,000, including dollars 15,000,000 for scientific research.
In September Algeria and the EC signed four financial agreements worth 26,000,000 European currency units (Ecu 1.00=USdollars 1.06567 as at Sept. 20, 1989), covering cereal production, scientific co-operation and management training.
The EC also granted dollars 500,000 for relief work after the Tipaza earthquake in October (see also above).
FOREIGN
Relations with France and Italy
President Francois Mitterrand of France arrived in Algeria on March 9, 1989, for a 24-hour visit, spent mainly in private talks with Chadli which were described as "friendly and relaxed" .
Among the subjects discussed by the two leaders were bilateral trade prospects, Algeria's foreign debt and the problems of the remaining French settlers in Algeria.
The French Minister of State for the Economy, Pierre Beregovoy, visited Algeria in July.
The then Italian Treasury Minister, Giuliano Amato, visited Algeria on March 4-5, 1989, to discuss credit arrangements, energy and commercial co-operation.
Planned projects included a joint venture with Fiat to build a car plant near Tiaret, about 225 km south-west of Algiers, capable of producing 40,000 cars per year.
On Oct. 21 Italy and Algeria signed a three-year protocol on co-operation in television and radio broadcasting, covering training, technical assistance, coproductions and exchange of programmes.
During a visit by the Italian President, Francesco Cossiga, in November, the two countries' Foreign Ministers signed a protocol on the construction of a fourth gas pipeline across the Mediterranean and on increased co-operation in the petrochemicals sector.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 710,850 sq km.
Population: 25,605,579 (1989).
Capital: Rabat.
Languages: Arabic (official); Berber, Spanish and French.
Religion: predominantly Islam; Christian and Jewish minorities.
Av. life expectancy: 65 yrs (women), 62 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 192,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 610 (1987).
Currency: Moroccan dirham (USdollars 1.00=MD 8.0156 as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Kingdom of Morocco achieved complete independence from France and Spain in 1956.
It is a constitutional monarchy, with the Prime Minister (currently Azzedine Laraki) and Cabinet appointed by the monarch (currently King Hassan II).
Legislative authority is vested in a Chamber of Representatives elected for a six-year term and comprising 306 members, of whom 206 are directly elected by universal adult suffrage, and the remainder by an electoral college composed of local councillors and representatives of professional bodies.
The government is a coalition of seven of the 10 political parties represented in the Chamber following legislative elections in September 1984 (see pp. 33247-48).
Azzedine Laraki Prime Minister Moulay Ahmed Alaoui Minister of State Haj Mohamed Bahnini Minister of State Osman Dimnati Agriculture and Land Reform Abdallah al-Azmani Trade and Industry Mohamed Benissa Culture Mohamed Fatteh Energy and Mines Mohamed Kabbaj Supply and Vocational Training Mohamed Berrada Finance Abdel Latif Filali Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Mohamed Labied Traditional Industries, Social Affairs Tayeb Bencheik Public Health Abdelrahman Bouftas Housing Driss Basri Interior and Information Abdelkebir Alaoui M'Daghri Religious Endowments and Islamic Affairs Moulay Mustapha Ben Larbi Alaiou Justice Hassan al-Abbadi Labour Tayeb Chkili National Education Bensalem Smili Maritime Fishing and Merchant Marine Mohand Laensar Posts and Telecommunications Moussa Saadi Tourism Mohamed Bouamoud Transport Abdel Latif Semlali Youth and Sport Abbes Kissi Secretary-General of the Government *Excluding Minister Delegates.
Cabinet*
POLITICS
Cabinet change
It was announced on Nov. 16, 1988, that Tayeb Chkili was to replace Mohamed Hilali as the National Education Minister.
Hilali's replacement was believed to be related to problems encountered in the organization of a new national examination system.
Postponement of legislative elections
A referendum on Dec. 1, 1989, approved King Hassan's decision to extend by two years the term of the current Chamber of Representatives.
According to Rabat radio on Dec. 2, 98.83 per cent of the Moroccan electorate voted in the referendum, of whom 99.98 per cent favoured the two-year extension.
Hassan claimed that the extension was needed to give the UN more time to organize a referendum on the future of the disputed Western Sahara.
Both the Moroccan government and the Polisario Front (which sought the independence of Western Sahara as the Saharan Arab Democratic Republic-SADR) had agreed in August 1988 to the holding of a referendum offering Western Saharans a choice between independence or integration with Morocco (see p. 37014).
Progress towards a peaceful settlement of the 13-year conflict had faltered in October 1989 when Polisario launchd a fresh offensive against Moroccan forces (see pp. 36988; 37221).
SECURITY
Prison hunger strikes
Two separate hunger strikes involving a total of eight political prisoners in Rabat and Casablanca (about 75 km south-west of Rabat) began in April 1989 and resulted in the death on Aug. 19 of a 28-year-old student, Abdelhak Chbada.
Chbada was among four hunger strikers protesting against alleged brutality and a lack of medical and sanitary facilities in Rabat's El Alou prison.
They had been moved from the prison to Avicennes hospital in June after a serious deterioration in their condition.
One of the four prisoners in the Casablanca protest reportedly ended his hunger strike on July 18 and no further deaths were reported.
Hassan issued a public statement on Sept. 13, 1989, declaring that the hunger strikers were "not political detainees at all" but "common law detainees who were indicted for violent acts which harmed public security" .
The statement followed the outbreak on Sept. 12 of a fresh hunger strike by six prisoners at different prisons.
It had also been reported that 37 prisoners in the Central Prison at Kenitra (50 km from Rabat) took part in a 24-hour hunger strike on Dec. 10, 1988, in protest against prison conditions and alleged repression of prisoners' families.
Pardon and release of prisoners — First OMDH congress
Hundreds of prisoners were unconditionally released or had their prison terms reduced after a series of six public pardons issued by Hassan.
Pardons were granted, among others, to (i) 212 prisoners on Oct. 24, 1988;(ii) 884 prisoners on Jan. 11, 1989; and (iii) 347 prisoners on Aug. 20, 1989, 178 of whom had been "public" or "semi-public" employees involved in the widespread disturbances in 1978-79 and 1981 (see pp. 29803; 31377-78) and 50 of whom were reportedly supporters of the Ila al Amam Marxist-Leninist grouping.
The newly formed independent human rights organization Organisation Marocaine des Droits de L'Homme (OMDH)(see p. 36244) claimed on July 26, 1989, that there remained a total of 226 political prisoners in Morocco, 12 of whom had been condemned to death and 33 of whom were in indefinite solitary confinement.
The Moroccan government finally permitted the OMDH to hold its first congress on Dec. 10, 1988, having initially banned the organization in May 1988 (ibid.) and having prohibited attempts to hold its congress on three subsequent occasions.
Arrest of Kadour
A leading left-wing exile, Mohamed Ait Kadour, was arrested on March 29, 1989, after landing at Rabat airport with the intention of attending a congress of the Socialist Union of Popular Forces (Union Socialiste des Forces Populaires-USFP).
Kadour, who held French refugee status, had been sentenced to death in absentia following a coup attempt in July 1971 (see pp. 24797-98; 25156).
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 10% (1988)
Current-account balance +US$60.3 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$1200 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$19,800 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 50% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$20,000 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 2.3% (1988)
Unemployment 15% (1988)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: EC (58%), India (7%), Japan (5%); Imports: EC (53%), USA (11%), Canada (4%)
1989 budget — Economic trends
The Finance Minister, Mohamed Berrada, presented the 1989 budget to the Chamber of Representatives on Nov. 5, 1988.
Projecting total government revenues for 1989 to be MD 67,663 million and expenditure to be MD 74,627 million, Berrada envisaged a 21.4 per cent reduction in the overall budget deficit in comparison with 1988 (for 1988 budget see p. 36244).
Looking ahead with "prudent optimism" (with a projected growth rate of 3-4 per cent for 1989), Berrada declared in his budget speech that there could be"no relaxation of our adjustment and restructuring efforts'.
The budget was approved on Dec. 21.
The reduced deficit was to be achieved by (i) a 13.2 per cent reduction in investment spending (although unused investment allocations for 1988 were to be carried over into 1989; and (ii) the raising of direct and indirect taxes by 29.7 per cent and 23.3 per cent respectively (although this was largely a reflection of the fact that actual tax yields in 1988 exceeded 1988 budget projections by some 20 per cent).
Meanwhile, external debt service payments formed an increasing proportion of projected expenditures, rising by 24.6 per cent to MD 14,762 million.
Following the economic stagnation of 1987, the economy had grown (in nominal gross domestic product-GDP-terms) by some 10 per cent in 1988 (according to government estimates), aided by a good harvest, while inflation had fallen to 2.3 per cent.
A rapid increase in exports, especially of phosphates, and of earnings from tourism, as well as a reduced food import bill, resulted in a sharp improvement in the trade balance, whose deficit stood at MD 9,560 million in 1988 (for 1987 trends, ibid.).
Industrial unrest
The legal minimum wage was raised by 10 per cent on May 1, 1989, following a wave of strikes by miners, oil workers and bank and public-sector employees.
The most serious industrial disruption was a strike by 1,700 miners in Morocco's largest coalfield at Jerada, 450 km east of Rabat, which began in mid-December 1988 with demands for a 20 per cent wage increase.
The miners returned to work on Feb. 13, 1989, after the government agreed to discuss the demands presented by the (left-wing) Confederation Democratique du Travail, to which the miners reportedly belonged.
It was widely reported that armed police had besieged the state-owned Jerada colliery, which had been occupied for 10 days in late December 1988-early January 1989 by 400 miners.
Nine miners were sentenced to three months' imprisonment on Jan. 26 for "obstructing the freedom to work" .
The Union Marocaine du Travail reported that two 24-hour and one 48-hour stoppage had affected lead mines in February and March 1989.
A strike by some 1,000 oil workers at Morocco's largest oil refinery began on April 19 and was extended for 48 hours at a time until early May.
One-day stoppages took place in March among the country's commercial bank employees and among Royal Air Maroc technicians.
Debt rescheduling and loan agreements
It was announced on Oct. 27, 1988, that an agreement had been reached with 11 "Paris Club" creditor countries for the rescheduling of USdollars 940,000,000 of Moroccan debt.
The agreement provided for the repayment over 10 years (with an initial five-year grace period) of (i) all interest and principal falling due between July 1, 1988, and Dec. 31, 1989, amounting to USdollars 685,000,000; and (ii) 80 per cent of principal outstanding from the 1983-88 period, amounting to dollars 255,000,000.
The agreement was preceded on Oct. 21 by (i) a debt-rescheduling agreement worth dollars 63,000,000 with Japanese commercial banks; and (ii) a DM 84,000,000 (approximately dollars 45,000,000) rescheduling agreement with West Germany on Feb. 10, 1989.
Morocco and the World Bank reached an agreement on Dec. 1, 1988, for the disbursement of a dollars 200,000,000 loan (repayable over 20 years) to help finance the country's medium-term adjustment programme and enable Morocco to reduce import procedures and encourage exports.
Two new loans to promote rural education and to finance agricultural projects worth dollars 273,000,000 were announced by the World Bank president, Barber Conable, after a meeting on July 19-21, 1989, with Moroccan government officials, bankers and businesspeople in Casablanca.
FOREIGN
Relations with Spain, UK and Portugal
The Spanish Prime Minister, Felipe Gonzalez, met Hassan during a visit to Morocco on May 21, 1989.
Gonzalez described the talks as "fruitful and constructive" and praised the Moroccan government for its efforts regarding the Middle East peace process (see p. 36437).
Relations between Spain and Morocco had worsened following Spain's support on Oct. 25, 1988, of a UN General Assembly decolonization resolution on Western Sahara.
Hassan's first visit to Spain since the death of Gen. Franco in 1975, scheduled for Nov. 8, was cancelled on Oct. 28.
A statement released by Hassan on Jan. 22, 1989, describing as "provocative" a series of legal and administrative measures taken by Spain with regard to the status of the Spanish enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, was followed by the postponement of the imminent visit of the Spanish Foreign Minister, Francisco Fernandez Ordonez, to Morocco, the trip finally taking place on Feb. 3.
Hassan's visit to Spain eventually took place on Sept. 25-27, 1989, when three bilateral accords were signed.
Five co-operation agreements were signed by the Morocco-Portugal joint economic committee during a visit to Morocco by the Portuguese Prime Minister, Anibal Cavaco Silva, which ended on Oct. 19, 1988.
Relations with Algeria and Libya
Hassan's announcement on March 3, 1989, that Morocco would soon ratify the country's 1972 border agreement with Algeria (see p. 25372) followed the restoration of diplomatic relations between the two countries in May 1988 (see p. 36507).
The announcement was preceded on Feb. 6-8, 1989, by a state visit to Morocco by the Algerian President, Chadli Bendjedid, when an agreement was signed enabling the transportation of Algerian natural gas to Europe by pipeline through Morocco (see p. 36507 for September 1988 discussions); 1,500 km of the 2,000-km pipeline would cross Morocco to Tangier, 225 km north-east of Rabat; in return Morocco would receive subsidized oil and natural gas from Algeria.
The Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, met Hassan during an unscheduled visit to Morocco on May 13-14, 1989, to discuss bilateral relations and issues related to the newly formed Arab Maghreb Union (AMU-see p. 36474).
Restoration of diplomatic relations with Syria and India
An agreement to resume diplomatic relations with Syria after a 30-month break was announced on Jan. 9, 1989 (for severance of relations in July 1987 following Hassan's meeting with Israeli Prime Minister see pp. 34832-33).
The restoration of diplomatic relations with India was announced in New Delhi on Oct. 21, 1988.
Morocco had severed relations with India in October 1985, following the latter's recognition of Western Sahara as the SADR (see pp. 34203-04).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Controlled by Spain since the 19th century, Western Sahara was divided between Morocco and Mauritania under the tripartite Madrid agreement of 1975 following Spain's decision to withdraw from the territory (see pp. 27575-77).
However, the dismembering of Western Sahara was opposed by the Algerian-supported Polisario Front, which in February 1976 proclaimed an independent Saharan Arab Democratic Republic (SADR), supported by Algeria and (later) Libya, and intensified hostilities against both countries (see p. 27747).
In 1979 Mauritania concluded a peace agreement with Polisario, declared its neutrality in the conflict and withdrew from the southern sector (see pp. 29565-67).
Morocco immediately occupied the area and has since been harassed by Polisario guerrillas on a broad front in Western Sahara and also inside Morocco proper.
In 1980 a majority of the member countries of the Organization of African Unity (OAU) recognized the Polisario as the rightful government of Western Sahara, which took its seat as the SADR at the 1989 OAU summit, whereupon Morocco, which had become increasingly isolated in the Maghreb region over the issue, resigned from the OAU in protest.
The restoration of diplomatic relations between Morocco and Algeria in May 1988 (see p. 36245) raised fresh expectations of a peaceful settlement of the conflict.
Government changes
A SADR Ministry of Information communique issued on Dec. 4, 1989, announced the appointment of Sid-Ahmed Batal as the new Health Minister and of Mohamed Salem Ould Salek as the new Education and Teaching Minister (Salek had been replaced by Abdelkader Teleb Omar as Minister of Information in a reshuffle in May 1989-see p. 36672).
The principal Cabinet posts were held by Mahfoud Ali Beiba (Prime Minister; Interior; Justice), Mohammed Lamine (Defence) and Mohammed Sidati (Foreign Affairs).
Renewed Polisario offensive
The Polisario Front on Sept. 24, 1989, launched its first offensive against the 2,500-km Moroccan "defence wall" across Western Sahara since its unilateral declaration of truce at the end of 1988 (see p. 36409).
The small-scale attack on a Moroccan observation post in the Dahlou region resulted in the death of four Moroccan soldiers, according to a Polisario statement issued on Sept. 30, and was followed by much heavier fighting in the first half of October (see p. 36988).
A fresh Polisario attack was launched at Amgala on Nov. 8, and it was claimed by their forces that 250 Moroccan soldiers had been killed, a further 325 wounded and 36 taken prisoner.
Polisario also claimed to have shot down a Moroccan Mirage F-1 fighter and to have succeeded in occupying a 25-km section of the Moroccan wall.
Morocco maintained that it had "crushed" the offensive with the loss of only 45 soldiers, and a further 56 wounded, its estimate of Polisario losses amounting to 87 soldiers and a "large number" wounded or taken prisoner.
Polisario also claimed success in a Nov. 16 attack on the region between Mgala and Guelta Zamour, during which it claimed to have inflicted"significant human and material losses' on the enemy.
Morocco countered Polisario's estimate of 75 Moroccan deaths and 75 wounded with a claim that it had lost only five soldiers in comparison with 37 deaths among the guerrillas.
A Polisario communique of Dec. 3 claimed that it had carried out a total of 23 assaults on the Moroccan defence wall between Nov. 2 and Nov. 23, although it gave no details of casualties.
UN resolutions on Western Sahara
The 44th session of the UN General Assembly in New York adopted by consensus on Dec. 11, 1989, a resolution recognizing the joint efforts of the UN and the Organization of African Unity (OAU) to achieve a peaceful solution to the Saharan conflict but noted the importance of bringing about direct negotiations between Morocco and the Polisario Front.
The resolution was on the same lines as that put forward on Oct. 23 by the UN Special Committee on the Implementation of the Declaration on Decolonization, which expressed its"conviction that the pursuit of a direct dialogue between the two parties to the conflict naturally contributed to the (peace) process'.
A meeting of the SADR Cabinet, chaired by the SADR President, Mohammed Abdelazziz, and held at an unspecified location on Nov. 4, called on Morocco "once again to begin direct dialogue (with Polisario) as soon as possible to implement the resolutions of the international community" .
Reaction to Hassan's announcement of a referendum to postpone elections
A referendum on Dec. 1, 1989, approved the decision by King Hassan of Morocco, to extend the term of the partially elected Moroccan legislature by two years (see p. 37219).
A Polisario statement issued on Nov. 23 described the decision as a manoeuvre to delay the chances of peace in Western Sahara, saying that it "amounted to a rejection of the best possible solution" to the Saharan problem-direct negotiations, and "an impediment to the (peace) efforts of the UN and the OAU" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Area: 997,738 sq km.
Population: 54,777,615 (1989).
Capital: Cairo.
Languages: Arabic (official); some English and French.
Religion: Islam (more than 80%-mainly Sunni Moslems); Christianity (mainly Copts).
Av. life expectancy: 60 yrs (women), 59 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 448,000 (250,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: USdollars 680 (1987).
Currency: Egyptian pound (USdollars 1.00=Epounds 2.5983 as at Jan. 22, 1990).
The Arab Republic of Egypt achieved full independence in 1936.
The unicameral People's Assembly, which is elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term, nominates the President (currently Mohammed Hosni Mubarak), who is confirmed by popular referendum for a six-year term.
There is also a 210-member consultative council, the Shura, which has advisory powers.
The President appoints the Council of Ministers.
Egypt's multiparty electoral system is dominated by the National Democratic Party (NDP), which held 346 of the 448 elected seats in the People's Assembly after the April 1987 elections (see pp. 35224-25).
Atef Sidki Prime Minister Youssef Sabry Abu Taleb Deputy Prime Minister; Defence and Military Production Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Kamal Ahmed Ganzouri Deputy Prime Minister; Financial and Economic Affairs; Planning Yusuf Amin Wali Deputy Prime Minister; Agriculture and Land Reclamation Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa Interior Mohammad Ahmed Al Razaz Finance Amal Abdel-Rahim Osman Social Insurance and Social Affairs Hasaballah Mohammed al-Kafrawi Housing, Utilities and New Urban Complexes Youssri Mustapha Economy and Foreign Trade Farouk Seif al Nasr Justice Soleiman Metwali Soleiman Transport, Communications and Maritime Transport Mohammed Mahir Osman Abazah Electricity and Energy Farouk Hosni Culture Sawfat Sharif Information Mohammed Raghib Duwaydar Health Ahmad Salamah Mohammed Local Government Fuad Abdel Latif Sultan Tourism and Civil Aviation Mohammed Galal Abdul-Dahab Supply and Internal Trade Isam Radi Abdul Hamid Radi Irrigation Mohammed Mahmud Faraj Abdul Wahab Industry Abdul Hadi Mohammed Qandil Petroleum and Mineral Resources Atif Mohammed Mohammed Ubayd Cabinet Affairs and Administrative Development Ahmed Fathi Surur Education Asim Abdul-Haq Salih Manpower and Training Mohammed Ali Mahjub Waqfs (Religious Endowments) Ministers of State Mohammed Abdel Hamid Radwan People's Assembly and Shura Affairs Fouad Iskandar Emigration and Egyptians Abroad Boutros Boutros-Ghali Foreign Affairs Gamul al-Sayed Ibrahim Military Production Adil Abdel Hamid Izz Scientific Research Maurice Makramallah International Co-operation 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Appointment of new Interior Minister
The President, Hosni Mubarak, on Jan. 12, 1990, appointed Mohammed Abdel-Halim Moussa as Interior Minister, replacing Maj.- Gen. Zaki Badr.
Badr's departure followed a sustained campaign by the opposition for his dismissal for publicly insulting prominent intellectuals and politicians.
Badr had also frequently criticized the mainstream Moslem Brotherhood in addition to attacking Islamic extremist groups which advocated violence.
During his four-year term the police had acquired significantly more political and executive power, and Badr had been responsible for the arrests of thousands of Moslem militants and alleged leftists.
In December 1989 he had survived a car-bomb assassination attempt in Cairo.
SECURITY
Arrests and trials — Torture claims
Police shot dead three men in a raid on a Cairo flat on Dec. 19, 1988, one of whom was an Islamic militant wanted for the killing of a police officer in the Cairo district of Ain Shams earlier that month.
More than 300 people had been arrested after violent confrontations with the security forces in Ain Shams after the policeman's death.
The then Interior Minister, Badr, on Dec. 21 accused religious extremists of having committed over 100 crimes of arson against shops and property, and attacks on mosques and churches, adding that they had turned some 25 mosques "into dens from which to launch their attacks against national security" .
Later in December police arrested 57 Moslem fundamentalist students at Asyut University for alleged anti-state activities.
The arrests of Islamic fundamentalists in April 1989 (see p. 36603) were followed by a security clampdown in mid-May at the end of the Islamic month of Ramadan which included a ban on open-air prayer meetings outside mosques in many potential trouble spots including slum areas of Cairo and fundamentalist strongholds in Upper Egypt.
A sit-in by strikers at the Helwan iron and steel complex, about 20 km south of Cairo, in early August was violently broken up by police, with one worker shot dead and hundreds arrested.
Later in August 52 members of the outlawed Egyptian Communist Workers' Party (ECWP) were arrested (see p. 36861), some of whom were prominent members of the Egyptian Organization for Human Rights (EOHR), who had helped to publicise the arrests and alleged torture of workers from the Helwan plant.
Although accused of plotting to overthrow the state, they were released in September.
On Sept. 3 a court sentenced 26 Moslem militants to lengthy terms of imprisonment on charges of attempting to murder two former Interior Ministers and a journalist.
Moussa said on Jan. 19, 1990, that police were holding 2,411 people under emergency laws, but promised a policy review to reduce the number.
He said that the figure included only 812 political detainees.
The authorities categorically rejected a report by the human rights organization Amnesty International in May 1989 which accused them of torturing political prisoners by subjecting them to beatings or sexual abuse.
The EOHR in a report published in January 1990 repeated allegations that the security forces "routinely" used whips, electric batons and sexual abuse against political detainees and suspects during 1989.
Introduction of death penalty for drug traffickers
On June 22, 1989, a new law was ratified providing for the public execution of drug traffickers and dealers as well as of cultivators of plants used for drug production.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.7% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$554 m. (1987-88)
Trade balance -US$5,905 m. (1987-88)
Overall balance of payments -US$1,200 m. (1988 est.)
Total external public debt US$50,000 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$32,400 m. (1988-89)
Gross national product US$25,570 m. (1988 est.)
Inflation rate 30% (1989 est.)
Unemployment 21% (1989 est.)
Principal trading partners USA, EC, Japan 
1989/90 budget
The People's Assembly on June 28, 1989, approved a budget of Epounds 33,600 million for the fiscal year beginning July 1, an increase of 16.9 per cent on the previous year's figure.
The projected budget deficit of Epounds 6,900 million (approximately 8 per cent of gross domestic product-GDP) would be partially made up by savings of Epounds 6,200 million, leaving a net deficit of Epounds 660 million.
The new budget granted greater financial autonomy to the public sector, and sought to encourage the private sector, both local and foreign, to invest and to increase employment.
On June 7 the Cabinet approved the 1989/90 draft socio-economic development plan as part of the second five-year national development plan.
It provided for total investments of Epounds 14,500 million, of which Epounds 9,600 million would be allocated to the public sector and the balance to the private sector.
The plan also envisaged land reclamation amounting to 175,000 feddans (25,000 by the private sector-one feddan being approximately equivalent to half a hectare), an increase in cement output to 15,500,000 tonnes, an increase in sugar production to 1,000,000 tonnes, and the building of 200,000 flats.
Impasse in talks with IMF
Talks with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) remained deadlocked throughout 1989 by disagreement over the timescale and extent of reforms needed (see also p. 36435).
The Minister of Cabinet Affairs and Administrative Development, Atif Ubayd, speaking in January 1990 about Egypt's view on the IMF proposals of a devaluation of the Egyptian pound to boost exports and an increase in the interest rate to encourage savers, said that the amount proposed was "not justified and bigger than needed" , but added that Egypt was willing to reach a compromise agreement on both issues.
Exchange rate reform
Under pressure from the IMF "the established Central Bank rate" for the Egyptian pound was raised in September 1989 from Epounds 0.70 to Epounds 1.10 to the United States dollar as part of a planned six-year phaseout of the rate; the "new bank rate" introduced in May 1987 (see p. 35225) remained at Epounds 2.55.
However, the two state-run foreign-exchange earners, the Suez Canal Authority and the Egyptian General Petroleum Company, continued to be paid at the old Central Bank rate, allowing the extra Epounds 0.40 to be retained in special accounts to subsidize the price of such staple foods as wheat, flour and cooking oil.
New investment law
A new investment law in July 1989 aimed to simplify bureaucratic controls by uniting procedures within a new investment authority and by providing improved tax incentives for new projects.
Mohieddin al-Ghareeb, head of the new authority, said that he did not foresee the reimposition of price controls on private-sector companies, although prices might be fixed in very rare cases and for basic commodities which tended not to be produced by the private sector.
Price rises — Oil prospecting
Staggered price rises of up to 40 per cent for electricity and some petroleum products came into force in April 1989 in advance of a further round of IMF negotiations.
While industry faced rises of up to 40 per cent for power supplies, increases for consumers of less than 950 KW per month were kept to 7 per cent.
Prices of fuel oil, diesel and kerosene were also raised.
Over the 11 months to mid-November 1989 more than 35 concession agreements for oil exploration in the Gulf of Suez, Sinai, the Western Desert, the Delta and the Mediterranean Sea, were signed making 1989 a record year for new agreements; on June 13 the People's Assembly ratified 14 concession agreements.
FOREIGN
Restoration of relations with Lebanon
Full diplomatic relations with Lebanon were formally restored on June 29, 1989, following approval earlier in the month by both the Lebanese governments.
Relations had been severed by Lebanon in April 1979 following the Egypt-Israel peace treaty (see p. 29953).
Resumption of US aid disbursement
On Aug. 17, 1989, the USA agreed to release USdollars 115,000,000 of withheld cash aid allocated for 1988, but said that the release of further cash aid for 1989 still withheld would depend on further reform measures.
In March 1989 the USA had voiced its concern that Egypt was developing a chemical weapons plant with Swiss help at the Abu Zaabal military complex north of Cairo, an allegation denied by Egyptian officials (see also p. 37224).
Egypt's debt to the USA was estimated at dollars 10,000 million, of which dollars 4,500 million was for military purchases.
Deal with Soviet Union on Sinai power plant
A soft loan agreement valued at dollars 200,000,000 was signed on May 15, 1989, during a visit by the Soviet Minister for Foreign Economic Relations, Konstantin Katushev, for the construction of a 600-MW power station in the Sinai desert.
The Soviet Union also offered funds for the modernization of Soviet-supplied steel works and power plants built in the 1950s and 1960s.
Visits
King Fahd of Saudi Arabia began a visit to Egypt on March 27, 1989, the day after the 10th anniversary of the 1979 treaty between Israel and Egypt.
Mubarak visited Jordan and Iraq in May, and Algeria and Tunisia in September.
During 1989 he also visited the United Arab Emirates (UAE), Kuwait and Japan, amongst others, as well as Western Europe and the USA.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
START
The 10th, 11th and 12th rounds of the United States-Soviet Strategic Arms Reduction Talks (START), otherwise referred to by the negotiating parties as the Nuclear and Space Talks (NST), were held between July 1988 and December 1989 in Geneva, Switzerland.
The pace of the talks was slowed by the January 1989 change-over in the US administration (see pp. 36391-92) and by fundamental differences on weapons systems to be included in a treaty as well as on numerical sub-limits on categories of missiles.
However, greater consensus was reached on verification procedures and on linkages (or de-linkage) between space-related and earth-based defence and arms control issues.
An official briefing on the state of the NST was issued by the US Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) on Nov. 15, 1989.
According to the briefing the main areas of broad agreement, as specified by the evolving joint US-Soviet draft treaty texts, were:(i) a 1,600 numerical ceiling on the total number of "strategic nuclear delivery vehicles' (SNDVs), comprising intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs) and heavy bomber aircraft;(ii) a 6,000-warhead overall ceiling;(iii) a set of basic verification procedures including exchange of data, on-site inspection and ongoing monitoring of agreed reductions and the right to inspections at short notice of a variety of specified sites;(iv) the provision of advance notification of one major strategic exercise involving heavy bombers per calendar year;(v) the permitting of mobile ICBM deployment, contingent upon US congressional funding of the MX (rail-based) and/or the Midgetman (road-based) systems (as announced in Wyoming, USA, in September 1989-see p. 36909), with sub-limits to be agreed; and (vi) the de-linking of completion and implementation of a START treaty from a" Space and Defence"agreement, implying an end (conditionally for the Soviet Union) to a commitment by the two sides not to withdraw from the (1972) Anti-Ballistic Missile (ABM) treaty (an agreement also reached in Wyoming-ibid.).
The ACDA text reported that the main areas of continuing disagreement between the negotiating teams consisted of (i) definitions of and counting rules covering air-launched cruise missiles (ALCMs): the USA wished only to include nuclear-armed missiles with a range in excess of 1,500 km with the assumption that a specified average number of missiles be attributed to each bomber, while the Soviet Union included "dual-capable" (conventional/nuclear) missiles with a range in excess of 600 km with the assumption that the maximum number of missiles be attributed to each type of bomber;(ii) whether submarine-launched cruise missiles (SLCMs) should be limited under START (or under a separate agreement, as had been suggested by the USA) and if so whether on-site SLCM verification procedures should be deployed (as the Soviet Union was suggesting) or "non-binding declarations' of numbers be issued (as proposed by the USA); and (iii) a" ban on the production, flight testing or modernization"of existing types of heavy ICBMs (suggested by the USA), although a ban on new missile development was agreed, as were warhead and missile sub-limits in this category.
It was widely understood that these areas of disagreement were directly attributable to the relative strengths of the superpowers in different categories of weapons.
In particular, US naval and air superiority was paralleled by Soviet superiority in land-based missile systems.
NST rounds
The 10th round of the NST opened on July 12, 1988, and ended on Nov. 16, 1988, when the outgoing US President, Ronald Reagan, issued a statement admitting that "major areas of disagreement remained" but declaring that the new US administration had inherited "a solid foundation upon which to build" .
The US negotiating team, led by Max Kampelman until his retirement in December, had on Oct. 30 proposed that anti-missile tests in space be permitted but that a limit be placed on their scope, with a specific assurance that the USA would limit to 15 the number of satellites deployed in a Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI, or"Star Wars'-see p. 36760) test.
The proposal was condemned on Nov. 2 by Soviet Vice-Minister for Foreign Affairs Victor Karpov, who said that the USA was attempting to introduce "activities already forbidden in the ABM treaty" .
The 11th round had been scheduled to begin on Feb. 15, 1989, but the change-over in the US administration caused it to be postponed until June 19, five days after the US Senate confirmed the appointment of Richard Burt (a former Assistant Secretary of State for European and Canadian Affairs) as the new NST delegation leader.
The White House spokesperson, Marlin Fitzwater, had provided an implicit explanation for the delay on Feb. 14, when he announced that "the entire strategic posture" of the USA was under review.
At the end of the 11th round on Aug. 7, Burt admitted that "no major achievements' had been made but claimed that there had been" solid progress' on all issues except those relating to space weapons on which the sides remained "too far apart" .
An indication of progress on the subject of SLCMs was provided on July 14, when the US National Security Adviser, Brent Scowcroft, commented that (Soviet) proposals to ban SLCMs altogether (in the light of perceived verification problems associated with ascertaining their numbers) were"one of the open areas in the strategic arms negotiations' (the USA had formerly wanted to exclude SLCMs from the talks).
It was also reported that US proposals to conduct reciprocal verification measures prior to the conclusion of START had been accepted in principle by the Soviet Union.
The 12th NST round opened on Sept. 28, 1989, and ended on Dec. 8, when Burt and Yuri Nazarkin (who replaced Alexei Obukhov as the Soviet delegation leader in November 1988) held an unprecedented joint press conference at which they reaffirmed the undertaking given at the Malta summit meeting on Dec. 2-3 between President Bush of the USA and President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union (see p. 37111) that they would aim to conclude a START treaty by the time of the scheduled Washington summit of June 1990.
Nazarkin commented that the Soviet Union was prepared to sign a START treaty "with the understanding that, by that time, both sides (would) comply with the ABM treaty" .
An agreement was signed at the press conference allowing the inspection of each other 's strategic bomber aircraft.
issue
Soviet decision to dismantle the Krasnoyarsk radar station — Status of US SDI programme — Mobile ICBM
The Soviet announcement in September 1989 that it was to dismantle the Krasnoyarsk radar station in Siberia (see p. 36909) was followed by a statement on Oct. 23, 1989, by the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, who admitted for the first time that the location and orientation of the radar station constituted "a violation of the ABM treaty" .
However, he went on to demand "clarity on the question of US installations in (Thule,) Greenland and (Flyingdales,) England, modernized, as we understand, in violation of the ABM treaty" .
The USA had constantly insisted that the Krasnoyarsk radar station should be dismantled, calling it a major obstacle to the conclusion of a START treaty, and had rejected as inadequate a Soviet decision on Oct. 27, 1988, to turn the complex over to the Soviet Academy of Sciences for civilian use.
However, it had welcomed the announcement made on the same day that two other Soviet radar stations, also seen by the USA to violate the ABM treaty, were to be dismantled.
While it was widely believed that Bush was not as emotionally committed to the SDI programme as Reagan, his administration was proceeding with the development of revised versions of the concept, notably"Brilliant Pebbles'.
In contrast to the idea of a comprehensive and static defence shield, Brilliant Pebbles envisaged the deployment in space of multitudes of robot vehicles equipped with sensory systems and having the preparedness to launch laser attacks at on-coming Soviet missiles.
The US Defence Secretary, Dick Cheney, said on Oct. 13, 1989, that the technology had placed an effective anti-missile system within US reach and described it as "the single most important military bequest this generation could make to the future" .
In July 1989 Burt issued a statement in Geneva (during the 11th NST round) that the USA was willing to revise its existing demand for a ban on mobile ICBMs if the US Congress were to approve funding for"the deployment of US mobile missiles', the multi-warhead rail-based MX and the single-warhead road-based Midgetman systems, a proposal finalized in Wyoming in September 1989 (see above).
Speaking on July 22 during a visit to Washington, the then Soviet Armed Forces Chief of Staff, Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev, responded to the suggestion saying that the Soviet Union would be willing to scrap its rail-mobile SS-24 missiles provided that the USA did"not do anything in this category of weapons'.
Chemical weapons
UN Conference on Disarmament
The Ad Hoc Committee on Chemical Weapons of the 40-nation UN Conference on Disarmament (UNCD) held its regular 1989 spring and summer sessions in Geneva on Feb. 7-April 27 and on June 13-Aug. 30 (see p. 36477 for opening of spring session; p. 36861 for closing of summer session).
They were accompanied and followed by regular bilateral US-Soviet meetings (also in Geneva) on the proposed global treaty banning the production, storage and transfer of chemical weapons.
A number of countries which were suspected (principally by the USA and other Western countries) of developing chemical weapons-including Libya, Iraq and Syria-were among a total of 22 countries taking part for the first time in the committee's deliberations since the opening of the spring session, albeit as observers.
They were reportedly joined by Israel in the summer session (for proliferation accusations see below).
At the end of the 14th round of the US-Soviet talks on Dec. 15, the US ambassador to the UNCD, Max Friedersdorf, commented that the two countries' positions were"fairly close together on most issues' and that there was a good chance that a chemical weapons treaty would be signed within two years.
He identified the main obstacles in the 40-nation talks to be:(i) the acceptance of the"intrusiveness' associated with the idea of challenge inspections; and (ii) disagreement on technical details, including the list of substances to be banned and monitored under a treaty.
A number of Arab countries thought by the USA to possess or to be developing chemical weapons objected to mandatory, short-notice, on-site inspections, arguing that insufficient efforts were being made to ensure Israel's compliance with these procedures.
US chemical weapons programme
A Washington Post report of Oct. 9, 1989, quoted US administration officials as saying that a decision had been made during an unusually secretive policy review that the USA would continue to produce chemical weapons over a 10-year phaseout period after the conclusion of an international treaty to ban the weapons (see negotiations above).
The "decision" followed Bush's initiative, unveiled at the UN General Assembly in September (for Bush and Shevardnadze speeches see pp. 36906-07) and which was at variance with the existing chemical weapons treaty draft, which called for an immediate halt to production.
The Washington-based newsletter Defence Week reported in April 1989 that the US administration was seeking USdollars 7,000,000 in the 1990 financial year and a further dollars 27,700,000 in 1991 for the development of "incapacitating chemical material" .
According to the report the administration was to develop two new "binary" weapons systems to augment three systems already in various stages of manufacture and deployment.
Alleged chemical weapons development by Egypt, Libya and Iran
A widely publicised New York Times report of March 9, 1989, quoted"official US and Swiss sources' expressing their governments' concerns about the development of a chemical plant at the Abu Zaabal military-industrial complex near Cairo, the Egyptian capital.
The plant, which was being manufactured by a Swiss engineering firm Krebs AG ostensibly for pharmaceutical production, was alleged to have a "dual-use" capability including chemical weapons production.
According to the report Egypt had made a "major effort to improve its ability to produce poison gas by acquiring the main elements of a plant from a Swiss company" (see also p. 37222).
A US State Department official, Charles E. Redman, on March 10 admitted US "concerns about the possible uses of this (Egyptian) equipment" , but the Egyptian President, Hosni Mubarak, speaking on the same day at a news conference in Brussels, Belgium, denied that Egypt was building a chemical weapons plant, adding that"we are all against chemical weapons'.
Nevertheless Krebs AG announced on March 10 that it was withdrawing from the project at the request of the Swiss government.
The chairman-designate, Uwe Kuntze, of a West German company alleged to have been involved in the manufacture of a chemical weapons plant in Rabta, Libya, admitted that the firm, Imhausen-Chemie, had appeared "not to have respected regulations' during the affair but protested that the company had not acted" intentionally or maliciously".
Kuntze was to take over the company's chairmanship from Jurgen Hippenstiel-Imhausen, who resigned in March and who on May 10 became the first person to be arrested over the affair.
Announcing the arrest, which was made during a raid on the offices of an Imhausen-Chemie subsidiary in Bochum near Cologne, the Cologne state prosecutor, Holger Presiendanz, said that Hippenstiel-Imhausen was "strongly suspected" of a "significant personal role in the planning and building" of the Rabta plant (for previous report on the investigation see p. 36477).
A Libyan offer made to the USA during December 1989 through Italian officials, allowing an international inspection of the Rabta plant, was on Dec. 29 rejected as inadequate by a US State Department official; she said that a "one-time inspection would not be conclusive" .
West German police carried out a raid on the offices of Rheineisen Chemical Products in Dusseldorf, near Cologne, on June 28, 1989.
The raid was immediately followed by the company's announcement that it would cancel a contract concluded with Iran on June 1 for the sale of 257 tonnes of thionyl chloride, allegedly a precursor of mustard gas.
The West German government's investigation into the affair had reportedly followed information passed to it on June 24 by the US Secretary of State, James Baker.
It also followed the announcement on May 10 that Krebs AG was withdrawing from negotiations with Iran for the sale of a highly toxic pesticide to that country.
Conventional weapons talks — Unilateral Warsaw Pact cuts
CFE negotiations
The 16 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and seven Warsaw Pact countries took part in an entirely new set of negotiations during 1989, the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) talks in Vienna, Austria, aimed at reducing the conventional force levels deployed by each side in Europe (for decision to inaugurate CFE-first referred to as Conventional Stability Talks-see p. 36413).
The first CFE round opened on March 6 (see p. 36539) and ended on March 23.
Subsequent rounds were held on May 5-July 13, Sept. 7-Oct. 19 and Nov. 9-Dec. 21.
The fifth round of negotiations began on Jan. 12, 1990 (for developments in the first three rounds see pp. 36644; 36835; 36909).
The determination of the two superpowers to reduce their huge military budgets and the upheavals in Eastern Europe towards the end of 1989 translated themselves into special efforts to conclude a conventional weapons treaty (see Bush's NATO summit plan for a CFE agreement p. 36642-44).
NATO and Warsaw Pact negotiators in Vienna were indeed moving towards broad agreement on (i) the exchange of military data (which began to flow far more freely than it had done in the past);(ii) intrusive verification regimes; and (iii) "asymmetric" force reductions owing to Warsaw Pact superiority.
However, serious differences continued to present obstacles to an agreement:(i) the Soviet Union insisted that not all combat aircraft be included in the treaty, although it made an important concession on this point in September (see p. 36909);(ii) of the five categories of weapons to be included in a treaty-aircraft, helicopters, tanks, armoured vehicles and artillery (with troops being the sixth element in an agreement) -consensus on the definition of the weapons system and the items in that category to be included was only reached on artillery (see below);(iii) the Warsaw Pact insisted on an undertaking by NATO to conduct separate negotiations on the reduction of naval forces (see Malta summit disagreement on naval forces p. 37111); and (iv) the Warsaw Pact demanded that no modernization of short-range missiles by NATO take place (see also p. 37227).
The third CFE round ended on Oct. 19 with the presentation by the Warsaw Pact of a new set of proposals on "stabilization measures' and" information exchange and verification measures' in response to NATO verification proposals presented earlier in the round (see p. 36909).
The Warsaw Pact proposal (i) called, among other things, for "continuous or regular inspections at temporary and permanent entry/exit points' through which troops and equipment would be observed during demobilization resulting from a treaty; and (ii) stipulated that" inspection teams shall have the right of free access to aircraft, including their weapons systems' and might use "optical and electronic means of observation" .
This latter provision was seen as means to assure NATO that certain Warsaw Pact aircraft could not be used for offensive purposes.
NATO and the Warsaw Pact had on Oct. 17 reached agreement on the definition of artillery in a forthcoming treaty, setting 100 mm as the minimum diameter of artillery pieces to be included.
On Dec. 14, a few days before the end of the fourth CFE round, the two sides presented their separate draft treaty texts.
The presentations had been delayed on the NATO side by the re-emergence of a Greek-Turkish dispute on the inclusion or non-inclusion of the Turkish port of Mersin in the treaty.
The NATO text was finally approved with an ambiguous reference to this question.
The texts still contained an important difference on the issue of maximum overall foreign troop deployments allowed to the two military blocs.
NATO insisted on placing a limit of 275,000 each on US and Soviet personnel only, while the Warsaw Pact wished to include foreign deployments by all countries up to a maximum of 300,000 each by NATO and the Warsaw Pact.
However, in his annual State of the Union address in Washington on Jan. 31, 1990,(see also p. 37177) Bush cited the changes in Eastern Europe as the reason for proposing a new maximum level of 195,000 foreign troops deployed by each superpower in the European "central zone" , with the USA to be permitted an additional 30,000 troops in the UK, Italy and Turkey.
announcements on troop cuts
Unilateral Soviet and East European cuts — Reduced Soviet military expenditures — US, Belgian and Dutch
In an interview with Pravda on Nov. 5, 1989, the Soviet Armed Forces Chief of Staff, Col.- Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev, said that of the unilateral cuts in conventional forces announced by the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, in December 1988 (see pp. 36412; 36440), the Soviet Union had thus far withdrawn 50,320 personnel, 3,118 tanks and 351 aircraft from Eastern Europe and Mongolia (see p. 36657) and from forward Soviet deployments.
The removal of 10,000 troops and some 1,000 tanks from East Germany, begun on May 11 and reportedly completed in mid-August, had heralded the East European withdrawals.
Moiseyev further announced on Oct. 27 (while Gorbachev was visiting Finland-see p. 36984) that the Soviet Army was to institute an additional cut of 40,000 troops and 1,200 tanks, as well as"substantial cuts' in artillery, in its north-western group in the Baltic area.
The rapid changes in Eastern Europe towards the end of 1989 began to culminate in independent calls for foreign troop withdrawals from the countries concerned.
The East German Communist Party leader, Gregor Gysi, issued a proposal, "Security 2000" , which included (i) the halving of East and West German troop levels by the end of 1990; and (ii) the withdrawal of all foreign troops from the two countries by end-1999.
Although the proposal reportedly received widespread support from within the West German political parties, the official NATO reaction to the idea, contained in a statement of Jan. 8, was to reject suggestions for the"creation of special zones' as distinct from an overall CFE treaty.
A Czechoslovak Foreign Ministry statement issued on Jan. 9, 1990, called for the complete removal of Soviet troops from Czechoslovakia by the end of 1990 (see p. 37195).
Soviet Defence Ministry spokesperson Col.- Gen. Nikolai Chervov announced on Dec. 15, 1989, that Soviet military spending was to be cut by 8.2 per cent in 1990 (falling from 77,300 million roubles in 1989 to 71,000 million roubles in 1990) as a result of"new political thinking on defence doctrines'.
He announced that over one-half of the force reduction promised by Gorbachev (see above) had been completed and he issued the most detailed breakdown on Soviet force levels that had thus far been provided.
He said that as from January 1990 the Soviet Union would deploy 3,993,000 military personnel equipped with 4,045 missile launchers, 10,000 missile warheads, 63,900 tanks, 8,207 combat aircraft and 157 large surface ships.
Speaking at a press conference at the UN in New York on the same day, Soviet Deputy Foreign Minister Vladimir Petrovsky gave the Soviet Union's first public disclosure of its total foreign troop strength, putting the figure at 627,000.
He said that the Soviet Union's aim was to withdraw all these troops by 2000.
Cheney announced on April 24, 1989, that the USA would withdraw 4,000 troops from West Germany as part of an effort to cut US defence expenditure.
He further announced on Jan. 29, 1990, that 2,750 military and civilian personnel (including their dependants) would be withdrawn from a number of bases in the United Kingdom and elsewhere (for other announcements of US defence expenditure cuts and for European concerns about reduced US miliary commitment to Europe see p. 37226).
NATO leaders were apparently taken by surprise when the Belgian Defence Minister, Guy Co me, announced on Jan. 25, 1990, that his government was studying plans for "the withdrawal of Belgian troops (numbering 26,000 in total) from West Germany" .
The announcement was followed on the same day by the presentation to the Netherlands parliament of proposals to reduce the country's troop levels in West Germany by 750 (out of a total of 5,500) between 1991 and 1992.
INTERNATIONAL
NATO
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Full title: North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Date of foundation: April 4, 1949.
Status: Regional alliance for collective defence.
Member countries: 16-Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, West Germany, Greece, Iceland, Italy, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States.
Secretary-General: Manfred Worner (West Germany).
Developments since June 1989
NATO responses to changes in Eastern Europe
Amidst all the changes which took place in Eastern Europe during 1989, the opening of the borders between East and West Germany on Nov. 9, 1989 (see p. 37025) was perhaps the most significant event to NATO members in that it confirmed that such changes, in particular the evolving relationship between the two Germanies, demanded an assessment of how NATO should respond and what its future role would be.
In the weeks which followed NATO representatives, presenting NATO as a vital factor in the maintenance of stability within Europe, put forward the alliance's views on the developments in Eastern Europe and plans for NATO's future.
On Dec. 12 the United States Secretary of State, James Baker, who was visiting Bonn (the West German capital) prior to attending the ministerial meeting of the North Atlantic Council (NAC-the supreme decision-making body of NATO) held in Brussels on Dec. 14-15, presented four specific new roles for the NATO alliance.
They were (i) the establishment of a permanent arms control verification staff to help monitor compliance with arms control agreements;(ii) the assumption of an active role in the settlement of regional conflicts, even outside Europe;(iii) redefinition of Western efforts to prevent proliferation of ballistic missile technology as well nuclear and chemical weapons;(iv) promotion of initiatives through the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE-for May-June 1989 session see pp. 36749-50) to build new economic and political ties with Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union.
At a meeting, also on Dec. 12, in East Berlin with Hans Modrow, the recently appointed Prime Minister of East Germany, Baker predicted a more political role for NATO, with the alliance contributing to the building of a new security structure in Europe.
Baker further suggested that as "NATO's military role (was) reduced, the European Security Conference (would) become the most important forum of East-West co-operation" .
At a meeting between the United Kingdom Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, and the US President, George Bush, on Nov. 24 at Camp David (USA), both leaders agreed that the most effective way to establish stable democracies in Eastern Europe was to maintain the European continent's present division of two military alliances, together with a strong US military presence.
Thatcher further stated that "…a stable security structure in Europe is best guaranteed by the maintenance of NATO and the Warsaw Pact" .
It was vital, both leaders said, to reassure the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, that NATO"…would not undermine Soviet security interests'.
The need for stability was also stressed by the NATO Secretary-General, Manfred Worner, in The Times of Nov. 28, when he suggested that the Warsaw Pact, if it reformed itself, could, like NATO, form "…part of an overall security structure, not preventing political change but giving political change military stability" .
Commenting on the possibility of German reunification, Worner said that a debate within the alliance on that issue was a matter of time, and that NATO was ready for eventual reunification if it was the expressed will of the German people.
In a statement issued on Nov. 10 Worner had said in reference to the opening of borders between East and West Germany (see p. 37024) that"…we see this as part of an inevitable process'.
Soviet officials assembled for the Malta summit meeting between President Bush of the USA and President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union on Dec. 2-3 (see pp. 37110-12) confirmed on Nov. 30 that the Warsaw Pact was to be remodelled along the lines of NATO, and would become an instrument for political dialogue with the Western nations.
(For December NAC ministerial meeting see p. 37112.)
 "Burden-sharing" — Proposals for US military reductions
The role of "burden-sharing" among NATO allies in terms of costs and responsibilities, an issue which developed further during June-December 1989, was dominated by consideration of the future level of US forces stationed in Western Europe, principally in West Germany.
Strong domestic pressure to reduce the US budget deficit and calls for a reassessment of NATO's military relationship with the Warsaw Pact countries, led to a number of proposals for US force reductions (for 1990 US budget, and defence budget see pp. 37177; 37178).
On Aug. 3 the US Senate approved an amendment, first approved on July 29 by the Senate armed services committee, chaired by Senator Sam Nunn (Democrat), to the Defence Department budget which stated that the USA should reduce its troop numbers in Europe if any of its NATO allies undertook unilateral cuts.
The amendment was intended to increase pressure on US allies to pay more of their common defence costs, and to prevent cuts in European armed forces before any formal agreement was reached with the Warsaw Pact at the Conventional Forces in Europe (CFE) talks in Vienna (for proposals put forward in July see p. 36835).
The amendment stated that the USA would attempt to dissuade any NATO ally from making force reductions, and that, should this attempt fail, the USA would seek to persuade other NATO allies to compensate for the resultant shortfall in overall NATO force levels.
Should both of these strategies fail, the USA would reduce its own forces stationed in Europe by a ratio equivalent to the force reduction undertaken by the NATO ally.
On Nov. 18 the US Defence Secretary, Richard Cheney, announced a plan to reduce US defence spending by USdollars 180,000 million over a three-year period.
Cheney emphasized that any reductions in US forces in Europe would be within the context of the CFE talks.
He further stated that the military threat from the Soviet Union was at its lowest level since 1945.
The US administration, in an attempt to reassure NATO allies, stated on Nov. 20 that defence spending cuts would be concentrated on US-based personnel.
The administration pointed out that Cheney had referred specifically to "force structures, bases and weapons systems affecting the US-based military" , and had also said that "defence contracts would be terminated" .
At his meeting with Thatcher on Nov. 24 (see above) Bush stated that although cuts in the US defence budget were politically inevitable, the changes in Eastern Europe underscored the need for a united and powerful NATO alliance.
US Defence Department officials reported on Nov. 28 that the proposed cuts up to 1994 were a "worst case projection" and the maximum possible, based upon a projected CFE agreement and signing of a Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START-for June 1989 session see p. 36751), with 50 per cent cuts in Soviet and US strategic nuclear arsenals.
In a further development on Dec. 12 the New York Times reported on a plan put forward by the US Army Chief of Staff, Gen. Carl Vuono, called "Strategic force for the 1990's and beyond" , which envisaged a cut of one-third of US forces in Europe by 1995, from 305,000 to 200,000.
The Army plan anticipated possible involvement in sporadic Third-World conflicts rather than in the European theatre.
On Dec. 18, as part of the first round of the CFE talks, the US Defence Department announced proposals to cut US forces by 55,000, an increase of 22,000 on Bush's initial proposals in July 1989.
The Defence Department also proposed a possible reduction to a level of 150,000 of US troops stationed in Europe over the five years to 1995, provided that the Warsaw Pact reciprocated and on the assumption that the Soviet Union could no longer depend upon its Warsaw Pact allies to support any military action it may take.
The West German government on Dec. 6 announced that it planned to reduce the size of its armed forces to 420,000 by 1995, a reduction of 75,000, or 15 per cent.
DPC meeting — US statement on arms spending
A communique issued by NATO Defence Ministers at the end of a biannual meeting of the 14-country Defence Planning Committee (DPC) in Brussels, Belgium, on Nov. 28-29, 1989, expressed NATO's determination "not to make any unilateral reductions (in conventional force levels) that could risk undermining the prospect of reaching a CFE accord" .
The statement declared that a CFE treaty would have "major implications for NATO's collective defence planning" .
It confirmed that the alliance's High-Level Task Force would intensify efforts to reach a formula whereby force reductions emanating from a treaty would be allocated among the allies in such a way as to maintain NATO's overall conventional capability.
Speaking in Brussels on Nov. 29 Cheney expressed the hope that the Soviet Union would be persuaded "ultimately to withdraw all its forces from Eastern Europe" .
He went on to reassure the UK and other European members of NATO that there would be "no slackening in the US commitment" to the alliance.
Restrictions on low-level flying — Reduction in number of troops taking part in "Autumn Forge" 
The West German Defence Minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, announced in the Bundestag (Federal Parliament) in Bonn on Sept. 28, 1989, that agreement had been reached among NATO air forces on new restrictions to reduce by up to 45 per cent noise caused by low-level military training flights over West Germany.
These were that the maximum speed of flights was to be reduced from 835 kmph to 778 kmph and that the amount of time permitted at the lowest level of 75 metres was to be cut from 28 to 15 minutes, with the rest of the flight being made at no lower than 150 metres.
The number of towns over which low-level flying was banned was increased from 25 to 61 and the hours of low-level flying conducted by the West German Air Force was to be reduced from 23,000 to 21,000 each year, although the number of hours for other NATO air forces remained at 45,000.
Stoltenberg said at a press conference on Sept. 28 that "a complete ban would put our commitment to the NATO alliance in question" .
The opposition Social Democratic Party (SPD) had restated that if they won the next election they would seek a complete ban on low-level flying.
On Dec. 18 two US Air Force F-16 fighter bombers collided over West Germany.
Wreckage fell through the roof of a market hall near the town of Ludwigshafen and a pilot was reported killed.
In separate developments it was confirmed at a UK House of Commons defence committee on Nov. 8, that low-level flying in the UK after 11 pm was to be increased during 1990.
Although the actual number of hours of low-level flying would not be increased, the introduction of the Harrier GR7 aircraft with night-flight radar meant that a greater percentage of the total would be conducted at night.
In what was seen as an attempt to reduce public hostility to the environmental impact of regular NATO military exercises, NATO headquarters on Aug. 11, 1989, announced that there would be a reduction in the number of troops taking part in the "Autumn Forge 89" series of exercises.
The exercises, conducted from the Arctic Circle to the Mediterranean Sea by air, sea and land multinational divisions, would involve 205,000 personnel, a reduction of 45,000 from the previous year.
A number of exercises would be conducted using computer simulation, rather than actual troops.
Nuclear modernization
Much of the debate on short-range nuclear modernization took place prior to the opening of the borders between East and West Germany on Nov. 9, 1989 (see p. 37025), and other subsequent changes in Eastern Europe (for June 1989 short-range nuclear modernization see p. 36716).
NATO Defence Ministers attending a meeting of the Nuclear Planning Group (NPG) in Vilamoura, Portugal, on Oct. 24-25 (see p. 36989) announced the setting up of a study group on NATO nuclear weapons policy.
Following the meeting, different views were expressed on the path which the study would follow.
Stoltenberg said on Oct. 25 that the study, to be conducted by the High Level Group (HLG-set up by the NPG in 1979 to look at theatre nuclear weapons), would report possibly in 1991 (ie before the 1992 deadline which NATO had set itself for a decision on short-range nuclear weapons), and could form the basis of a mandate for a short-range nuclear forces (SNF) treaty.
The Financial Times on Oct. 26 reported a senior US official as saying, however, that the study would be purely conceptual and would not assess numbers of nuclear weapons or whether there should be disarmament negotiations.
He said in addition that there was no date set for the completion of the study.
In meetings with Bush and Baker in Washington on Nov. 21, the West German Foreign Minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, said that there was little possibility of modernization.
He had received support for his view on modernization when Lord Carrington, the former NATO Secretary-General, said on Nov. 20, in an interview with the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBC) in London, that he was unable to imagine any circumstances "in which NATO would deploy new nuclear weapons which would fall on East German soil" .
Withdrawal of UK from NATO warship project
The UK Ministry of Defence (MOD) announced on Sept. 19, 1989, that, because of disagreements over specifications and delays in expected delivery dates, the UK was withdrawing from the NATO Frigate Replacement for the 1990s (NFR90) project.
The other countries involved in the project were France, Canada, West Germany, Italy, Spain and the Netherlands.
The UK had been expected to be the second largest customer for the NFR90, after the USA.
INTERNATIONAL
GATT
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Full title: General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade.
Year of foundation: 1948.
Status: Multilateral trade agreement and an autonomous agency within the UN system.
Objective: To liberalize world trade and by so doing to raise standards of living, to ensure full employment, to expand the production and exchange of goods, and to promote economic development.
Membership: 96 contracting parties as well as one country-Tunisia-which has acceded provisionally.
Director-General: Arthur Dunkel.
Membership
Protocols of accession to GATT were signed by Bolivia on Aug. 4, 1989, and by Costa Rica on Nov. 27, 1989; accession (as the 97th and 98th contracting parties) was in each case to take place 30 days after ratification by the respective country's legislature, which had not, however, been completed by the time of the 45th session of the GATT contracting parties held in Geneva, Switzerland, on Dec. 4-5, 1989.
(For previous four accessions in 1987-88 see p. 36508; three of those four countries concerned had applied the GATT provisions on a de facto basis since the achievement of independence and were able to accede by simple declaration.)
At the GATT Council meeting on June 21-22, 1989, two further countries-Nepal and Venezuela-submitted requests for accession.
Other Latin American countries at various stages of the full or provisional accession process at the end of 1989 were El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Paraguay (for this last country see p. 36688), while working parties had also been established on requests for accession by Tunisia (which had acceded provisionally in 1960), Bulgaria (see p. 35030) and Algeria.
In addition, another working party examining China's status as a contracting party gave further consideration to this issue during 1989, although the shootings in Tiananmen Square on June 4 (see pp. 36720-22) led to a postponement until December of talks due during the middle of the year.
(For background to China's position see p. 35030; for Taiwan issue see p. 36872.)
At the United States-Soviet summit meeting off Malta on Dec. 2-3 (see pp. 37110-12), the US President, George Bush, indicated that he would support an application by the Soviet Union for observer status at GATT, and this support was reaffirmed by the US delegation to the immediately following 45th session of GATT contracting parties.
(For earlier expression of Soviet interest in observer status, in 1986, see pp. 34588; 34754; 35992.)
Uruguay Round
Work continued throughout 1989 in the various negotiating groups within the framework of the GATT "Uruguay Round" of multilateral trade negotiations (MTNs) which was launched at Punta del Este in September 1986 (see pp. 35026-28) and whose mid-term review was completed in April 1989 (see pp. 36508-09; 36605-06).
The Trade Negotiations Committee (TNC-the highest-level body involved in the Uruguay Round) agreed on July 27 that the final ministerial meeting of the Uruguay Round should be held in the last weeks of 1990, and accepted an invitation from the European Communities (EC) and Belgium that the meeting should be in Brussels, the Belgian capital.
It further announced on Dec. 20 that this meeting would be held between Dec. 3 and 7, 1990.
Also on Dec. 20 the general view was expressed within the TNC that the scene was now set for the major effort necessary to secure a substantial result over the next 11 months, although both within the TNC and (on Dec. 19-20) within the Group of Negotiations on Goods (GNG) various participants voiced concern at a lack of balance in the progress achieved in certain negotiating groups, at developments in the market access groups (especially relating to tariff reductions) and at the devotion of insufficient attention to development issues in many parts of the negotiations.
Tariffs.
The EC and Japan on July 18 each proposed separate formulas for the reduction of tariffs across the board; a new broad and systematic approach was proposed by Canada on Sept. 27.
Tariffs were also considered, outside the framework of the negotiating group itself, at two "informal" meetings.
The first, held in Hakone, Japan, on Nov. 12-14 was between Carla Hills (US Representative for Trade Negotiations), Frans Andriessen (European Commission Vice-President with responsibility for external relations and trade policy), John Crosbie (Canadian Minister for International Trade) and Hikaru Matsunaga (Japanese Minister for International Trade and Industry).
The second, held in Tokyo on Nov. 15-17, was a meeting of ministers from 27 GATT member countries.
Non-tariff measures.
Japan on June 27-30 proposed a package of rules on origin, including non-discriminatory treatment, predictability, and transparency of procedure, while the EC suggested that such matters should be dealt with in the Customs Co-operation Council (CCC).
Further proposals on rules of origin were tabled on Sept. 28 by Hong Kong and by the USA-in the latter case involving work in the CCC and later in GATT on a timetable which would run past the proposed end of the Uruguay Round.
On Oct. 24 discussion continued on rules of origin, on pre-shipment inspection (PSI) procedures, and on fees, dues and other charges on imports, and a draft agreement on PSI was tabled by Zaire on Nov. 30.
Natural resource-based products.
On July 13-14 both Australia and the USA called for the addition of energy-related products to the three categories agreed for negotiations (forestry, fisheries, and non-ferrous minerals and metals).
On Nov. 6 the USA further suggested that fish and forestry products should be negotiated in the agriculture group, while tariffs, non-tariff measures and subsidies on natural resource-based products should be dealt with in the relevant groups.
On Dec. 12 Australia proposed an overall reduction of at least one-third in trade barriers to natural resource products, Bangladesh called for special treatment of the natural resource-based exports of the least developed countries (LDCs), while proposals relating to phosphates and fisheries products were submitted by Senegal and to aluminium by the USA.
Textiles and clothing.
Throughout the latter part of 1989 discussions continued on modalities for the integration of the textiles and clothing sector into GATT on the basis of strengthened GATT rules and discipline, and, particularly at the instigation of exporting countries, on proposals for the phasing out of restrictions under the Multifibre Arrangement (MFA-see pp. 35028-29-which was due to expire in July 1990).
In the context of discussions on the MFA some importing countries, including the EC, sought to make any such changes dependent upon action by exporting countries in other areas under negotiation (see also p. 36606).
Five new proposals were tabled on Dec. 14-15: by the USA, by the four Nordic countries (Finland, Iceland, Norway and Sweden-but excluding Denmark as a member of the EC), by members of the International Textiles and Clothing Bureau, by the five contracting parties of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN-Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand, but not Brunei which was not a contracting party although it maintained a de facto application of GATT following its achievement of full independence at the end of 1983), and by Bangladesh on behalf of the LDCs.
Agriculture.
Major sets of proposals were submitted by the EC on Sept. 25-26 and by the USA on Oct. 25-26.
The EC proposal, which met considerable opposition from a number of other countries, envisaged that the particular status of agriculture should be maintained, the objective being to improve existing rules rather than fundamentally alter them.
The USA proposal, in turn opposed by the EC, covered among other aspects import access, export competition and sanitary and phytosanitary (not psytosanitary as given on p. 36508) measures, and envisaged a phased dismantling of the entire structure of subsidies and other forms of agricultural support.
Five new negotiating proposals were submitted on Nov. 27-28: by the "Cairns Group" of agricultural exporting countries (both developed and developing-see also p. 36508), by Japan (relating particularly to food security and subsidies), by South Korea, jointly by Brazil and Colombia as developing countries, and by Bangladesh on behalf of the LDCs; another three proposals were submitted on Dec. 19-20: by the four Nordic countries, by Austria and by the EC.
Tropical products.
Examination was made of seven principal products or groups of products: tropical beverages; spices, flowers and plants; certain oilseeds, vegetable oils and oilcakes; tobacco, rice and tropical roots; tropical fruits and nuts; tropical wood and rubber; and jute and hard fibres.
The five ASEAN contracting parties tabled proposals on Nov. 29-Dec. 1 aimed at giving effect to the mid-term review decision in the tropical products sector (see p. 36508).
GATT Articles.
Particular attention was paid to a proposal by New Zealand, relating to Article II:1 (b), which was designed to ensure greater transparency and security in tariff bindings (ie undertakings not to increase tariffs) by clarifying the other duties and charges, in addition to ordinary customs duties, levied on imports.
MTN agreements and arrangements.
The main areas covered by this negotiating group included anti-dumping, technical barriers to trade and government procurement.
Japan and Hong Kong called on July 17-19 for stricter control of anti-dumping measures, which they claimed were sometimes being applied in violation of normal price competition procedures.
On Nov. 20-22 South Korea elaborated a previous submission aimed at strengthening Anti-Dumping Code disciplines on importing countries, and the USA emphasized the need to extend the Code coverage to practices used in evading anti-dumping duties.
Safeguards.
A paper tabled on June 26-29 by the group's chairman, George Maciel, as a basis for negotiating represented a synthesis of proposals already made by participants.
Papers were also presented by the USA and the EC.
Subsidies and countervailing measures.
Submissions were presented by Canada on June 29 and by Switzerland and Japan on Sept. 26-27, within the framework agreed in April.
The issue of countervailing measures was a particular point at issue during discussions.
Six further separate sets of proposals were presented on Nov. 30-Dec. 1 by the USA, by the EC, by the Nordic countries, by India, by Australia and by Bangladesh (this last on behalf of the LDCs).
Trade-related aspects of intellectual property rights (IPRs).
This group focused discussion on the applicability of the basic provisions of GATT and of relevant international intellectual property agreements; on the provision of effective and appropriate means for the enforcement of trade-related IPRs, taking into account differences in national legal systems; on the development of a multilateral framework to combat trade in counterfeit goods; and on the norms and principles concerning IPRs.
India in particular, on July 12-14, emphasized the developing countries' claim for special, ie more favourable, treatment in this field.
While New Zealand and Canada based their positions broadly on existing agreements, South Korea and Peru stressed the need for a balance between protection and the use of IPRs.
(For the issue of US action against alleged infringements of patents see below.)
In December, 12 new proposals were submitted by members or by groups of countries, and GATT stated that by the end of 1989 a total of 14 proposals (from 28 countries) had been put forward on the question of standards and norms alone and nine (from 23 countries) on the question of enforcement of IPRs, while a large number of other proposals dealt with further important aspects of the negotiating brief.
Trade-related investment measures.
On July 10-11 proposals were submitted by the USA for a comprehensive agreement including adequate disciplines to eliminate or minimize the adverse trade effects of trade-related investment measures, and by Switzerland for disciplines to be established according to the typical trade effects of such measures in specific trade or macroeconomic circumstances.
On Sept. 14-15 India called on the group to focus on those investment measures whose adverse trade effects were direct and significant; Japan proposed the prohibition of such measures which had trade restrictive and distortive effects and which were either inconsistent with or relevant to GATT provisions.
Further proposals were submitted on Nov. 27-28 by the EC and by the four Nordic countries.
Dispute settlement.
Particular attention was paid on Sept. 28-29 to compensation for the aggrieved party; to non-violation complaints under Article XXIII:1; and to binding arbitration as an option of settling disputes.
The group also discussed certain issues related to the implementation of panel reports, while on Dec. 7 Bangladesh proposed various measures in favour of LDCs (although some participants argued that generally dispute settlement rules should apply equally to all GATT members).
Functioning of the GATT system.
On June 29 participants adopted the text of the format for country reports under the new trade policy review mechanism (see also below).
The group subsequently held a preliminary exchange of views on a report by the Director-General, Arthur Dunkel, on ways of achieving greater coherence in global economic policy-making through strengthened relationships with other relevant international organizations, particularly the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank.
Trade in services.
Areas considered by this group included the telecommunications and construction sectors, transport and tourism services, and financial and professional services.
Proposals for overall structures and mechanisms for an agreement on trade and services were submitted by Switzerland and New Zealand on Sept. 18-22, while on Oct. 23-25 the USA presented a near-complete draft legal text of a framework agreement, in which context India stressed the necessity of a balance between the interests of developed and developing countries.
Further proposals, statements and communications were submitted on Nov. 20-24 by Brazil, Peru, Indonesia, Malaysia and Japan, while on Dec. 18 a draft document was adopted aimed at fulfilling the mid-term review mandate and designed to permit negotiations to take place for the completion of all parts of the multilateral framework relating to services and to its entry into force by the end of the Uruguay Round.
Other developments in 1989
The new format for country reviews (see above) was adopted by the GATT Council on July 19, together with a programme for examining the trade policies of Australia, Morocco and the USA in late 1989, of Colombia and Sweden in early 1990, of Canada, Hong Kong, Japan and New Zealand in mid-1990 and of the EC, Hungary and Indonesia in late 1990.
The first round of reviews were considered by the GATT Council at its regular meeting on Dec. 12-14.
A major subject of discussion within GATT in 1989 was the application of the so-called "Super-301" procedure under the US 1988 Trade Act, providing for retaliatory unilateral sanctions against countries which themselves applied allegedly unfair trade practices against US goods and services, unless those countries modified their own practices within a given period of time.
Three countries-Brazil, India and Japan-were initially identified in May as candidates for such retaliatory action (see p. 36926); at a special GATT Council meeting on June 21 and at the subsequent regular meeting on June 21-22 these three all expressed the apprehension that eventual US action under this provision would undermine GATT and the Uruguay Round, whereas the USA maintained that no trade action had yet been taken and assured the Council of its continuing strong commitment to both GATT itself and to the Uruguay Round.
Further criticism of the USA in this respect was made (i) by the EC in particular as well as by the above three countries at a meeting on July 3 of the GATT Surveillance Body, a constituent body of the TNC (see above); and (ii) by the 26 member countries of the Latin American Economic System (SELA) on Aug. 3 at a ministerial meeting in Cartagena (Colombia) for having identified six countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela) as not providing adequate protection for IPRs.
The Super-301 procedure was particularly criticized in discussion at the GATT Council on Dec. 14 of US trade policy under the new review mechanism (see above).
A working group was set up on July 19 to examine trade aspects of domestically prohibited goods and hazardous substances (for the issue of trade in toxic and hazardous wastes see pp. 36788-89); a progress report from this working group was noted by the Dec. 4-5 session of the contracting parties.
GATT annual trade report
The first volume of the annual GATT trade review, entitled International Trade 1988/89 and published on Sept. 15, 1989, reported an 8.5 per cent growth in the volume of global merchandise trade in 1988, the most rapid increase since 1984 (and compared with a 5.5 per cent increase in 1987).
A "similarly healthy" 7 per cent growth rate was projected for 1989.
The 1988 trade expansion had been boosted, according to the review, by accelerated import demand, led by Japan, and by strong growth in domestic investment rates in industrialized countries and in the newly industrializing economies (NIEs).
The report concluded that the world might have"entered a period in which the average growth rates for output and trade over the business cycle (would) be higher than they (had) been since the outset of economic difficulties in the late 1960s and early 1970s'.
Measured in value terms, world trade in 1988 had grown by 14 per cent to USdollars 2,880,000 million during 1988.
The value of exports of manufactured goods rose by 16.5 per cent(and the volume by 10 per cent ), with capital goods exports up by 20 per cent to a total of dollars 850,000 million.
The value of agricultural exports increased by 14.5 per cent in 1988, even though the volume was only 5 per cent up, mainly as a result of drought-induced shortages.
The accelerated trade growth pattern over the past few years was explained in terms of such factors as (i) faster technological innovation;(ii) an increased tendency towards mergers, joint production, technology sharing and market agreements;(iii) a "quantum leap" in the interdependence of national financial markets;(iv) the "improved" functioning of markets through deregulation and denationalization; and (v) falling oil prices.
Preliminary details of international trade published by GATT on Feb. 28, 1989, had shown that of the world's three major trading countries the USA experienced in 1988 a 2.5 per cent increase in merchandise trade exports by volume in 1988 and a 6.5 per cent rise in imports; corresponding respective figures for West Germany were 7.5 and 6.5 per cent and for Japan 4 and 16.5 per cent.
Other developed countries as a group showed growths of 8 per cent in exports by volume and of 9 per cent in imports.
The members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) as a whole increased exports by 8.5 per cent, but largely as a result of the weakening of crude petroleum prices (see pp. 36056-59; 36573) showed a decline of 1.5 per cent in imports, whereas other developing countries' exports grew by 10 per cent and their imports by 12 per cent .
The 15 most heavily indebted developing countries (see p. 37017) in 1988 as a group increased the surplus of their merchandise exports over their imports to nearly dollars 28,000 million; the dollar value of their exports rose above the 1981 peak for the first time since the onset of the Third-World debt service problem, although the GATT report pointed out that this trade performance needed to be seen against the background of rising interest charges and continued lack of fresh capital inflows.
On a geographical basis, merchandise trade within the West Pacific region increased by over 30 per cent in 1988, that between North America and the West Pacific by over 20 per cent, that between Western Europe and the West Pacific and within North America each by about 15-16 per cent , transatlantic trade and trade within Western Europe each by about 14-15 per cent , and other trade flows by about 7 per cent .
INTERNATIONAL
OPEC
BASIC DATA
BASIC DATA Full title: Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
Date of formation: 1960.
Status: Intergovernmental organization of 13 major oil producers.
Objective: To co-ordinate and unify petroleum policies among member countries in order to secure fair and stable prices for petroleum producers; an efficient, economic and regular supply of petroleum to consuming countries; and a fair return on capital to those investing in the industry.
Member countries: Algeria, Ecuador, Gabon, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kuwait, Libya, Nigeria, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates (UAE) and Venezuela.
Secretary-General: Subroto (Indonesia); President: Rilwanu Lukman (Nigeria).
Quotas and output
Aggregate quotas for the 13 OPEC countries were increased progressively from 16,600,000 barrels per day (bpd) for the second half of 1988 to 18,500,000 bpd for the first half of 1989, to 19,500,000 bpd for the second half of 1989 (and further to 20,500,000 bpd for the fourth quarter of the year) and to 22,086,000 bpd for the first half of 1990 (see pp. 36573; 36751; 36910; 37053).
However, despite the existence of these theoretical quotas agreed at OPEC Conferences or at meetings of the Ministerial Monitoring Committee (MMC-see p. 36573), actual aggregate output was generally understood to have been well in excess of quota; thus according to the Petroleum Economist OPEC production was estimated to have averaged 21,672,000 bpd in the second half of 1988, 21,266,000 bpd in the first half of 1989 and about 23,000,000 bpd in the third quarter of 1989.
Kuwait and the UAE in particular were reported to have exceeded their quotas during 1989, and it was pointed out in the press that apart from these two countries, together with Iran, Iraq and Saudi Arabia, the other eight OPEC members were currently producing at or around their ceiling capacity, so that any further additions to output would come from those five major Gulf producers.
Following the 86th OPEC Conference, Air Vice-Marshal Ginandjar Kartasasmita, the Indonesian Minister of Mines and Energy, commented on Nov. 30 that OPEC output in the first half of 1990 would probably be not less than about 22,500,000 bpd, and that the 22,086,000 bpd ceiling agreed for that period reflected a pragmatic approach which "assumed overproduction" .
In terms of world production, OPEC output was estimated over the second half of 1988 and the first half of 1989 to have represented about 34 per cent of the total; in addition approximately 20 per cent was produced by the Soviet Union and about 15 per cent by the United States, around 5 per cent each by Mexico and China, and about 3 per cent each by the United Kingdom and Canada.
Prices
Throughout 1989 the OPEC reference or target price for crude petroleum remained at USdollars 18 per barrel as first set in December 1986 (see p. 35101).
In February 1989 six non-OPEC (NOPEC) countries agreed to limit exports with a view to helping stabilize oil markets (see p. 36478), while in early March the Soviet Union also indicated that it would reduce exports by 5 per cent in the first half of 1989.
Moreover, in March-April two other factors contributed to a sharp upturn in world petroleum prices: the Exxon Valdez oil tanker spill in US Alaskan waters and the temporary closure of a production platform in the North Sea (see pp. 36541; 36606).
As a result in part of these factors, and also of firm demand, spot petroleum prices on the world market as characterized by the marker (North Sea) Brent crude, which had risen from a low of about dollars 12 in September 1988 (see p. 36573) to dollars 16-dollars 17 around the turn of 1988-89 (see p. 36411) and to over dollars 18 by mid-March 1989 (see p. 36573), increased further to over dollars 21 by mid-April.
Thereafter prices evened out around the dollars 18 level (the "minimum" reference price for OPEC oil confirmed in November 1989-see p. 37053), but in December the world market was again temporarily affected (this time by exceptionally cold weather in North America and by the US military operation in Panama-see pp. 37112-13) and in the latter part of that month the Brent crude price rose to over dollars 20.