

EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Pressure on Lithuania to revoke independence declaration
In the weeks following Lithuania's March 11 unilateral declaration of independence from the Soviet Union [see pp. 37299-300], the Soviet authorities began to apply political, military and economic pressure on Lithuania to revoke it.
After the expiry of a 48-hour Soviet ultimatum issued on April 13, implementation of an economic blockade began on April 18 and was described by Lithuanian officials as near-total by April 23.
Congress ruling on March 15 on illegality of Lithuanian declaration — Lithuanian rebuttal
The Congress of People's Deputies, in its resolution of March 15 [see p. 37300], had declared the Lithuanian independence declaration unlawful, "whilst confirming the right of every union republic to free secession from the USSR [Article 72 of the USSR Constitution]" .
Lithuania's unilateral decision, to abrogate USSR constitutional articles concerning USSR sovereignty and the validity of the Constitution on Lithuanian territory, would be null and void until such time as "the procedure for and consequences of secession from the composition of the Soviet Union are established by law" .
The resolution gave the USSR President, Supreme Soviet and Council of Ministers the responsibility of ensuring "the legal rights of every person living in Lithuania" and the observance on Lithuanian territory of "the rights and interests of the USSR and the union republics" .
It also ordered the Lithuanian authorities to "adopt all measures to ensure that law and order are not violated" .
The text of the resolution was forwarded to Lithuania's President Vytautas Landsbergis, accompanied by a telegram from Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev demanding within three days a report on measures to implement the Congress decisions.
Gorbachev nevertheless appeared to have modified his earlier rejection of negotiations with Lithuania, telling reporters that there would be "mutually respectful dialogue" .
He reiterated that a planned new law on secession [see below]would allow Lithuania to secede on the basis of a referendum and "the realization of interests both of Lithuania and the USSR" , but commented: "My idea is to preserve the union on the basis of a different approach to each republic [and]a new union treaty." 
Responding to the Congress resolution, Landsbergis on March 15 announced that a decision taken in a "foreign" country was not binding on Lithuania.
A formal reply was delivered to Gorbachev in Moscow on March 19 by a Lithuanian Supreme Council delegation led by Algirdas Brazauskas (the independent Lithuanian Communist Party leader and formerly Lithuania's President, and since March 17 a Deputy Premier in the new Lithuanian government).
It declared that the Congress resolution on the invalidity of Lithuania's independence declaration was "devoid of legal foundation" ; that human rights were guaranteed by Lithuanian laws and defended by the Lithuanian government and courts; and that the "legitimate interests of the USSR" would be "diligently observed" but must be "specifically determined through negotiations" .
Soviet declaration on Lithuanian economic facilities
Reporting the Lithuanian response, the official Soviet news agency Tass on March 19 announced that Gorbachev had ordered the Soviet government to implement "a number of immediate measures" in the light of information which "bears witness to the fact that the present leadership of the republic has embarked on a path of crude violations of constitutional order and of arbitrarily deciding matters which affect the interest of the USSR" .
On March 20 Soviet Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov issued a statement affirming that all economic facilities currently subordinate to central bodies in Moscow remained the property of the USSR.
Their management was placed directly in the hands of USSR ministries.
Central bodies were not to negotiate on the transfer of facilities to Lithuanian jurisdiction (on March 13 the Lithuanian Supreme Council had passed a bill establishing the principle of Lithuanian jurisdiction over all economic facilities in the republic currently held solely by the USSR central authorities or jointly with Lithuania).
The responsible USSR ministries were to ensure uninterrupted transport through Lithuania, especially to the major Lithuanian port of Klaipeda and to Kaliningrad, a strategically important exclave of the Russian Federation on the Baltic coast, cut off by Lithuanian territory from the rest of the Soviet Union.
Soviet customs regulations were to be maintained in Lithuania (the Lithuanian government on March 17 had announced plans to curb exports from the republic, including introduction of Lithuanian-run border checkpoints), and guards were to be posted around nuclear power stations and "other very important sites which are all-union property" .
Soviet military manoeuvres — Firearms ban
The Soviet authorities meanwhile began what commentators described as a "war of nerves" against Lithuania.
Shortly before a pro-independence rally on March 17 outside the Supreme Council building, military helicopters flew over Vilnius, the Lithuanian capital, dropping leaflets advertising an anti-independence rally.
This rally, on March 18, drew a predominantly Russian and Polish crowd of at least 30,000, and a similar exercise preceded further anti-independence demonstrations on March 27 and April 4.
On March 18 Soviet military transport planes circled over Vilnius and other Lithuanian towns for most of the day, while from March 22 convoys of armoured vehicles were regularly driven through the centre of Vilnius.
On April 1 there were reports that the Vilnius military garrison was being reinforced.
Gorbachev, making the first use of his new powers of presidential decree [see pp. 37297-98], on March 21 ordered Lithuanian citizens to surrender within seven days all firearms in their possession, and banned the sale of hunting weapons.
Some observers linked the order with the formation since March 16 of a Lithuanian volunteer defence force under the auspices of the nationalist Sajudis movement.
Gorbachev in a telegram to Landsbergis on March 22 demanded the force's disbandment within two days.
Gorbachev's March 21 decree also ordered reinforcement of the Soviet border in Lithuania and tightening of entry visa regulations.
Two days later the Soviet authorities ordered all foreigners, including diplomats, to leave Lithuania, and announced that Moscow-based foreign journalists would not be allowed to go there.
Seizure of Army deserters — Occupation of Communist Party buildings and Procurator's office
Following the declaration of independence there was a sharp rise in the number of Lithuanian conscripts deserting from the Soviet armed forces.
On March 14 the Lithuanian Supreme Council passed a resolution saying that Lithuanians would no longer be required to serve in the Red Army and that conscripts who deserted would not be held criminally responsible.
A special committee was set up by the Supreme Council to register deserters in order to try to ensure their legal protection.
Draft evasion had already been going largely unpunished by Lithuanian authorities for more than a year, and had been steadily increasing: on Feb. 16 more than 5,000 conscripts attending independence day rallies had publicly returned their call-up cards.
On March 21 Col.-Gen.
Fyodor Kuzmin, the commander of the Baltic Military District, ordered Lithuanian deserters from the Red Army to return to their units within four days or face being returned by force.
The threatened clampdown actually began in the early hours of March 27, when Soviet troops seized at least 23 Lithuanian deserters who had taken refuge in two hospitals in Vilnius and another in Kaunas.
However, the Soviet Defence Ministry on March 29 offered an amnesty to other deserters, saying that they would not be punished if they rejoined their units immediately.
Also on the night of March 26-27 Soviet troops occupied the Lithuanian Communist Party (CPL) central committee headquarters in the centre of Vilnius, having already seized the premises of two party training schools two days earlier.
Officials in Moscow claimed that communist party buildings in Lithuania were rightfully the property of the Soviet Communist Party (CPSU) since the CPL's declaration of independence in December 1989 [see pp. 37128-29].
Initially no effort was made to evict CPL officials and staff from the occupied buildings, but on April 20 a communist party printing works under military guard since March 30 was stormed by troops who evicted the staff, beating up some of them in the process.
The first seizure of a Lithuanian government building occurred on April 5 when Soviet troops occupied the State Procurator's offices in Vilnius, refusing entry to state procurator Arturas Palauskas (appointed by the Supreme Council on March 22) and expelling staff loyal to him.
Since March 30 officials from the USSR Procurator General's office had been trying to install their own chosen state procurator on the grounds that Palauskas was failing to enforce Soviet laws in Lithuania.
Landsbergis on March 27 denounced the military actions against the deserters and the Communist Party headquarters as "barbaric" and a "gross violation of Lithuanian sovereignty" , and he renewed his government's appeal for Western recognition and support [see p. 37300].
Reporters in Vilnius noted meanwhile that the Lithuanian population remained calm and apparently unperturbed by what were widely regarded as Soviet provocations: a pro-independence rally on April 7 organized by Sajudis drew a crowd of up to 300,000 people.
Gorbachev's March 30 call for repeal of independence declaration as condition for negotiations
Gorbachev on March 30 issued an appeal to the Lithuanian Supreme Council calling for the immediate repeal of its "illegal acts" , which would "open up the possibility of discussing the whole package of problems which have arisen" .
In a separate appeal issued on the same day to the Lithuanian people Gorbachev said that developments in their republic were causing "extreme concern and bewilderment" throughout the Soviet Union, and that people were calling on the Soviet government to use "economic, political and administrative measures" to defend the USSR Constitution and the country's integrity.
Replying formally on April 5, the Supreme Council repeated the call for immediate negotiations, but in conciliatory statements it acknowledged the Soviet leadership's concern at events in Lithuania, and stressed that it did not seek to sever economic relations and "cultural and human ties" with the Soviet Union.
On the same day, however, it passed a highly controversial law by which all residents of Lithuania would be given certificates of citizenship provided they signed a pledge to uphold Lithuania's independence constitution.
Those who did not sign would forfeit some legal rights.
Meanwhile, the Supreme Council had dispatched to Moscow on April 3 a delegation led by Romualdas Ozalas (also appointed a Deputy Premier on March 17), which was received by Aleksandr Yakovlev, a close Gorbachev ally and a member of the Presidential Council and the CPSU politburo.
Start of economic blockade
An ultimatum issued by Gorbachev and Ryzhkov on April 13 ordered the Lithuanian Supreme Council to rescind within 48 hours its declaration of independence and all laws passed subsequently, or face economic sanctions.
Although self-sufficient in basic foodstuffs, Lithuania imported 90 per cent of its fuel and nearly 100 per cent of its industrial raw materials from the rest of the Soviet Union.
Receiving this ultimatum calmly, Landsbergis told a press conference on April 14 that it was impossible for Lithuania to comply.
The Supreme Council, returning from its Easter recess on April 17, passed on April 18 a resolution reaffirming the March 11 independence declaration and again calling for negotiations, but offering to refrain from passing any new laws until after May 1 to allow for preliminary consultations.
The resolution also called on Lithuanian citizens to be ready for "strict economies" if an economic blockade went ahead.
The blockade began on April 18 when crude oil supplies to the major refinery at Mazeikiai were cut off.
On the following day oil supplies to the rest of Lithuania were cut off, and natural gas supplies were reduced by almost 85 per cent.
By April 23 Lithuanian officials were claiming that a near-total economic blockade was in operation, with almost all supplies of fuel, foodstuffs, raw materials and manufactured goods having been suspended.
Enterprises began to close for lack of fuel or materials, and officials warned that 35,000 people could be laid off work by the end of the month.
In retaliation, Lithuania halted the supply of some manufactured goods to the rest of the Soviet Union (Lithuania had a near-monopoly in the Soviet Union on the manufacture of certain electrical equipment, electronic components and textiles).
The Lithuanian Supreme Council set up an "anti-blockade commission" headed by Prime Minister Kazimiera Prunskiene, and on April 25 declared a "state of economic siege" , including rationing of food, petrol and other essential goods.
[International reaction to the economic blockade, a Franco-German initiative for negotiations, and Prunskiene's quest for foreign aid and recognition, will be covered in the May News Digest.]
Apparently acting in protest at the economic blockade, a 52-year-old Lithuanian factory worker, Stanislovas Zhamaitis, committed suicide by setting fire to himself outside the Bolshoi Theatre in the centre of Moscow on April 26.
Landsbergis was among around 5,000 mourners at Zhamaitis's funeral on April 30.
Chronology of Lithuanian statehood
1386 Lithuania, Europe's last pagan state, unites with Poland and converts to Roman Catholicism by marriage of Grand Prince Jogaila to Poland's Queen Jadwiga.
At its height in early 17th century, Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth is largest state in Europe.
1795 Lithuania is annexed by Russian Empire by third partition of Poland.
Feb. 16, 1918 Lithuania, under German occupation since 1914-15, is declared independent from Russia; upon German withdrawal in December 1918, a soviet republic is proclaimed, but is overthrown by Polish, German and Lithuanian nationalist forces in mid-1919.
May 15, 1920 Democratic republic is declared by Constituent Assembly.
July 12, 1920 Lithuanian independence is recognized by Soviet Russia.
December 1926 Democratic government is overthrown by army, claiming to forestall communist coup.
Military-backed dictatorship lasts until June 1940.
August-September 1939 Secret protocols attached to Nazi-Soviet non-aggression pact agree division of Eastern Europe, assigning Lithuania first to German but later to Soviet sphere.
Oct. 10, 1939 Following Soviet occupation of eastern Poland, Soviet Union concludes pact with Lithuania, ceding to it the city of Vilnius (Vilna) and surrounding area (captured by Poland from Lithuania in 1920).
June-July 1940 Occupation by Soviet Red Army is followed by Soviet ultimatum of June 16 leading to formation of Lithuanian government acceptable to Soviet Union.
Assembly elected under Soviet supervision on July 14-15 proclaims a Soviet Socialist Republic on July 21 and requests accession to Soviet Union.
Aug. 3, 1940 Lithuania formally joins Soviet Union.
1988-89 Lithuanian Supreme Soviet restores to official use Lithuanian language and flag of independent republic, and declares Lithuanian sovereignty.
Feb. 7, 1990 Lithuanian Supreme Soviet condemns July 1940 request for accession to Soviet Union.
March 11, 1990 Freely elected Lithuanian Supreme Council declares restoration of independence from Soviet Union.
Passage of Soviet law on secession of a republic
The new law "on procedures for resolving matters connected with a union republic's secession from the USSR" was passed by the USSR Supreme Soviet and signed by President Gorbachev on April 3.
A republic might secede subject to a referendum called by the republic's Supreme Soviet either on its own initiative or in response to a petition signed by at least 10 per cent of USSR citizens permanently resident in that republic.
A vote in favour of secession would be carried subject to a two-thirds majority of the republic's total electorate.
There would then follow a transitional period of up to five years during which "matters arising" from secession would have to be resolved, such as the status of USSR military facilities on the republic's territory, ownership of economic plant and infrastructure, material and financial settlements (including compensation to citizens wishing to remain in the USSR and therefore requiring resettlement outside the seceding republic), and the status of any territories ceded to the republic after its original accession to the Soviet Union.
In the final year of the transitional period a repeat referendum to confirm the decision to secede might be held on the initiative of the republic's Supreme Soviet or of 10 per cent of its permanent Soviet residents.
A two-thirds majority of eligible voters would again be required.
Completion of the secession process would be subject to ratification by the USSR Congress of People's Deputies.
If a referendum in a union republic failed to endorse secession, a new referendum on secession could not be held for 10 years.
Within a union republic holding a referendum on secession, an autonomous republic, oblast or okrug (district) would have the right, subject to referendum, to remain within the Soviet Union should the rest of the union republic choose to secede.
Similarly, areas within a seceding union republic which were populated predominantly by an ethnic group forming a minority in the republic, but which did not enjoy regional autonomy, might be allowed, subject to a referendum and negotiation, to remain within the Soviet Union.
Commentators noted that the requirement of a two-thirds majority of the electorate in favour of secession left Lithuania, with its 80 per cent Lithuanian population, with a realistic chance of seceding under the new law.
However, it presented a major hurdle for Estonia (64 per cent Estonian) and Latvia (only 53 per cent Latvian).
Outlawing of nationalist extremists — State of emergency regulations
A law "on enhanced responsibility for encroachment on the national equality of citizens and forcible violation of the integrity of USSR territory" entered into force on April 2.
It banned all political parties, social organizations or mass movements involved in inciting ethnic or racial hostility, using violence on ethnic, racial or religious grounds, or agitating for violation of the territorial integrity of the USSR or any of its union or autonomous republics, autonomous oblasts or okrugs.
It set out legal penalties for such activity.
The Supreme Soviet on April 2-3 approved a law defining the conditions for imposing a state of emergency [see also p. 37298].
ASIA — PACIFIC
NEPAL
Victory for pro-democracy movement
A major political upheaval brought an end to Nepal's non-party Panchayat political system in April.
Mass agitation for political reform had been launched on Feb. 18 by the Movement for the Restoration of Democracy (MRD), which embraced Nepal's main opposition groups, the Nepali Congress and the United Left Front (composed of several communist groups)[see pp. 37246-47].
From the beginning the movement received widespread support among students and youth in the Kathmandu valley.
On March 29 some 200 protesters were arrested in the course of student demonstrations, and the following day police opened fire on demonstrators, killing two and wounding four.
This provoked the resignation of the Foreign Minister, Shailendra Kumar Upadhyaya, who indicated his opposition to the government's handling of the crisis.
On March 31 police again opened fire on demonstrators in several places in the Kathmandu area, killing four, according to unofficial sources.
On April 1 King Birendra, at the request of Prime Minister Marich Man Singh Shrestha, dismissed nine ministers who were reported to be unhappy with the government's tough line.
On April 2 an estimated 50,000 people demonstrated their support for the democracy movement in Kathmandu, while doctors and other professionals joined a general strike, in defiance of legislation prohibiting strikes in "essential services" .
Police fired on a crowd of 4,000 demonstrators who were marching from the suburb of Kirtipur to the city centre, killing at least five.
On April 3 mass demonstrations protesting at the killings took place throughout the Kathmandu area.
The suburban centres of Kirtipur and Lalitpur (Patan) were particularly affected, with residents constructing barricades against the police.
Strikes by 165 pilots of Royal Nepal Airlines on April 4, and by telecommunications workers on April 5, demonstrated support for the democracy movement.
The King moved to defuse the crisis on April 6 by dismissing Shrestha, and appointed in his place a former Prime Minister, Lokendra Bahadur Chand, with a specific brief to open negotiations with the MRD.
King Birendra also announced the setting up of a commission of inquiry to look into allegations of police violence and a commission on constitutional reform.
Later that same day the opposition rejected these concessions, insisting on the legalization of political parties as a precondition to negotiation.
A crowd estimated at between 100,000 and 200,000 gathered near the royal palace, and police opened fire; the resulting death toll was estimated at between 35 and 150 (including three foreign tourists), while more than 200 were wounded.
On April 7 the Army took charge of public order in Kathmandu, which was placed under curfew, as was the western city of Pokhara.
On April 8 the King lifted the ban on political parties and the MRD responded by calling off its campaign.
The curfew was lifted on April 9, and on the same day the opposition groups had a meeting with the King in which they affirmed their commitment to the establishment of "full democracy" .
The main opposition demands were the dissolution of the government and the Rashtriya Panchayat (parliament), release of all political detainees, compensation for the victims of police action, the representation of the opposition on the commission dealing with constitutional change, and the establishment of an independent committee to look into alleged abuses committed by the security forces.
Disagreement hinged on the new Prime Minister's insistence that the opposition should join the existing administration.
Leaders of the (banned) Nepali Congress suggested as a compromise that the King could personally head the interim government, but the King declined such direct political involvement.
The government announced on April 12 that all charges against demonstrators would be dropped and that controls over the press would be relaxed.
Meanwhile the opposition threatened to resume mass demonstrations if an acceptable political agreement was not reached.
On April 13 the King, in a meeting with Nepali Congress leader Ganesh Man Singh, accepted the principle of an opposition-led government.
Negotiations were opened with the Prime Minister (Chand) on April 15, but the parties displayed their discontent with the slow progress by sending only junior officials to the meeting.
A crowd of 15,000 gathered outside the meeting place, refusing to allow Chand to leave until an agreement had been reached, and that night he offered his resignation.
On April 16 the King announced that he had accepted the Prime Minister's resignation and was dissolving the Rasthriya Panchayat.
A new government was sworn in on April 19, headed by Nepali Congress President Krishna Prasad Bhattarai, who also assumed the portfolios of Defence and Foreign Affairs.
Other Cabinet members included: Nepali Congress members Marshal Zullum Sakya, Mahendra Narayan Nidhi, and Yog Prasad Upadhyay, who became Home Minister; United Left Front members Sahana Pradhan (the Nepali Communist Party leader, who took on the portfolio of Industry and Commerce), Jhal Nath Khanal, and Nilambar Acharya; two prominent non-party opposition figures, Devendra Raj Pandey (an economist and leader of the Human Rights Organization of Nepal, who became Finance Minister), and Mathura Shrestha (a professor of medicine, who was appointed Minister of Health); and two members nominated by King Birendra, one of whom was Rai Majhi, who became Minister of Education, despite protests by students and teaching staff.
While major political reforms had been secured, discontent remained among young supporters of the democracy movement.
In particular, there was widespread resentment against the police for the role which they had played in repressing the movement.
Pro-monarchist police were suspected of involvement in a wave of violence and arson which broke out after the inauguration of the new government.
On April 23, police fired upon demonstrators who attacked a Kathmandu police station, and six policemen were lynched by angry crowds.
Many police went on strike in protest and on April 25 a mass funeral was held for the six.
A group of policemen were arrested after raiding an armoury to acquire weapons for the funeral march and the Army had to be called in to restrain demonstrating policemen who surrounded the Bir Hospital in Kathmandu and threatened medical staff for allegedly failing to give their colleagues adequate medical attention.
On April 26 the central executive committee of the Nepali Congress met and adopted a resolution calling for the immediate dissolution of the district and local non-party panchayats, and for the establishment of a constitutional monarchy and elections within a year.
On April 27 the government announced the dissolution of the local panchayat system.
Relations with India
A delegation of Indian officials headed by Foreign Secretary S. K. Singh arrived in Kathmandu on April 1 for a three-day round of talks over disputed issues between the two countries.
The talks addressed trade, transit and security matters and were designed to pave the way for a forthcoming visit by Indian Foreign Minister I. K. Gujral.
The Indian delegation submitted a draft agreement for consideration, and a joint statement affirmed the commitment of both sides to find a "comprehensive solution" to outstanding problems "in a spirit of mutual understanding" .
According to the Far Eastern Economic Review of April 19, India was proposing a single "agreement on mutual co-operation" which "could well provoke anti-Indian nationalism" in Nepal.
Its draft proposal would give Indian nationals preferential treatment over other foreigners in Nepal — guaranteeing their rights to buy land, hold assets and engage in trade — and give India a first option in the supply of military hardware and training to the Nepalese Army, in the development of Nepal's water and hydroelectric resources, and in other "economic and industrial cooperation" projects.
On April 22 Bhattarai, the new Nepalese Prime Minister, held a meeting with the Indian ambassador.
According to All-India Radio, Bhattarai proposed a meeting with the Indian Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, in order to resolve the problems between the two countries.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Extraordinary Dublin summit
On April 28, at an extraordinary meeting of the European Council in Dublin, the Irish capital, the heads of state and government of the 12 member countries of the European Communities (EC) welcomed the prospect of German unification.
On the joint initiative of France and West Germany, they also set in motion a process expected to lead by the end of 1990 to the holding of an intergovernmental conference on EC political union.
Such a conference would be in addition to another on economic and monetary union (EMU) already convened for December 1990, as agreed at the last European Council summit in Strasbourg in December 1989 [see pp. 37131-33].
The summit was originally called by Charles Haughey, the Irish Prime Minister and President of the Council for the first six months of 1990, to discuss the Communities' response to the prospect of German unification and to the rapid changes in the rest of Eastern Europe.
By the time it met, however, the momentum for greater political co-operation within the EC, not least in response to East European developments, was such that more radical reform was put in motion.
Kohl-Mitterrand proposals for political union — Eyskens report
In a joint letter to Haughey on April 19 President Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany proposed the introduction of political union within the EC by January 1993.
 "In view of the profound transformations in Europe, of the establishment of the internal market [due to come into effect on Jan. 1, 1993]and of the achievement of economic and monetary union," the letter declared, "we think it necessary to accelerate the political construction of the 12-member Europe." 
The proposals envisaged (i) reinforcing democratic controls to give legitimacy to political union;(ii) making EC institutions more effective;(iii) ensuring the economic, monetary and political cohesion of the EC; and (iv) establishing a common foreign and security policy.
The move was described by the Independent of April 20 as marking "a renewal of close co-operation between France and [West]Germany after a period of uncertainty generated by the speed of German unification" .
This improvement in relations was reinforced at the biannual Franco-German summit in Paris on April 25-26, when the two leaders also agreed to set up a joint study on the "future architecture of Europe's security" .
For her part Margaret Thatcher, the UK Prime Minister, told the UK House of Commons on April 19 after publication of the Kohl-Mitterrand letter that the EC had enough on its plate without getting involved in such "esoteric things" .
The UK government reportedly favoured the principle of "subsidiarity" [see also p. 36741], which it took to mean that decisions should only be made in Brussels which could not better be taken at national level.
British proposals for institutional reform were less far-reaching; they reportedly included greater accountability to the European Parliament regarding the EC budget, and increased Commission and Court powers to ensure that member countries implemented EC legislation.
Earlier in the month the Belgian Foreign Minister, Mark Eyskens, had presented detailed proposals envisaging genuine participation in decision-making by the European Parliament (which would itself elect the Commission President) and a common foreign and security policy.
At the Franco-German summit Kohl and Mitterrand had called on the April 28 summit to convene an intergovernmental conference on political union for December 1990, to coincide with the planned summit on economic and monetary union.
Jacques Delors, the President of the EC Commission, cautioned against this on the grounds that political discussions might impede progress on monetary union, and advised that EC leaders should wait several months before calling a conference, to "strengthen the Communities' political dimension" .
[For Delors proposals for institutional reform see p. 37133.]
Dublin summit communiqué
 "The European Council expresse[d] its deep satisfaction at developments in central and eastern Europe since the Strasbourg European Council" in December and "warmly welcome[d] German unification" .
 "A point has now been reached," it declared, "where the continued dynamic development of the Community has become an imperative not only because it corresponds to the direct interests of the 12 member states but also because it has become a crucial element in the progress that is being made in establishing a reliable framework for peace and security in Europe." 
German unification.
 "Integration of the territory of the German Democratic Republic [East Germany]into the Community" was to "become effective as soon as unification is legally established, subject to the necessary transitional arrangements…[and]without revision of the treaties [establishing the three European Communities — Economic (EEC), Coal and Steel (ECSC) and Euratom]" .
Until then East Germany was to have "full access to the European Investment Bank, Euratom and ECSC loan facilities" .
(A proposal by Delors that a special "fraternity" payment should be made to East Germany was dropped after Kohl said that this was unnecessary.)
Internal and external development of the Community.
The European Council was "satisfied with progress achieved so far towards establishing the single market" and declared its commitment to the intergovernmental conference on EMU to be held in December 1990 "with the objective of ratification [of the necessary treaty changes]before the end of 1992" .
The leaders declared that "the CSCE process…will serve as a framework for reform and stability in our continent" .
They proposed that a preparatory committee should start work in July, to prepare for "a summit meeting of the CSCE participating states before the end of this year" in Paris to "mark the starting point for a more advanced stage of the Helsinki process" [see p. 37386].
 "New institutional arrangements within the CSCE process" included the "possibility of regular consultative meetings of foreign minsters and the establishment of a small administrative secretariat." 
Central and eastern Europe.
The summit welcomed "the agreement on the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [reached earlier in the month and]the conclusion of trade and co-operation agreements between the Community and most of those countries" [see also p. 37132].
They agreed that assistance provided by the "Group of 24" industrialized countries (from which only Poland and Hungary currently benefited — see pp. 36802; 36961), ought to be extended to Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Romania, and Yugoslavia.
Further association agreements would be negotiated as soon as possible with these countries, and would offer regular political dialogue, financial aid and eventual free trade, but would not refer specifically to possible EC membership.
Political union.
Following examination of the Kohl-Mitterrand and Eyskens proposals the European Council agreed to an immediate "detailed examination [by EC Foreign Minsters]of the need for possible treaty changes with the aim of strengthening the democratic legitimacy of the union, enabling the Community and its institutions to respond efficiently and effectively to the demands of the new situation, and assuring unity and coherence in the Community's international action" .
The Foreign Ministers' proposals were to be discussed at the June European Council summit "with a view to a decision on the holding of a second intergovernmental conference to work in parallel with the conference on economic and monetary union with a view to ratification by member states in the same timeframe" .
Drugs and international organized crime.
A report on "measures to bring about more effective co-ordination and on priorities for action by the Community member states" was to be prepared for the June summit.
Italian decision to lift remaining controls on capital movements
The Italian government approved on April 27 the lifting from May 14 of all remaining controls on capital movements, several weeks before the deadline of July 1 as required for the first stage of EMU to be implemented [see also pp. 37132; 36598].
As a result Italians would, for instance, be allowed to open bank accounts abroad and to bank unlimited amounts of foreign currency within Italy.
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
De Klerk's statement on majority rule
Two weeks before the scheduled start of "talks about talks" with the African National Congress (ANC), President F. W. de Klerk on April 17 strongly rejected the possibility of majority rule, describing it as "not suitable" for South Africa "because it will lead to the domination and even the suppression of minorities" .
Speaking in the budget debate in the House of Assembly, he asserted that majority rule would lead to "a power struggle and domination" and was not "the right model for a country with a tremendously diverse population" .
De Klerk instead proposed a form of power-sharing entailing "full participation" by all South Africans, with "a vote of equal value for every adult citizen" .
In a clear indication that he favoured a future constitutional dispensation based on the concept of protected "group rights" , he declared that a new system would need to provide guarantees of protection against domination by any group, by means of constitutional checks and balances, a decentralization of power and "the requirement of consensus on controversial matters" .
De Klerk insisted that such a system would not provide for preferential treatment for any group at the expense of any other.
This was the first time that the government had confirmed that all votes would be of equal value; de Klerk did not specify, however, whether there would be a common voters' roll or separate rolls.
He proposed a reduction in the State President's powers, and reaffirmed that while the Separate Amenities Act would be repealed in 1990, and the Group Areas Act replaced with a non-discriminatory law the following year, other apartheid legislation would remain on the statute book until a new constitution was drawn up.
On April 23 the government tabled a bill providing for indemnity against prosecution, detention or arrest for political activists — including exiles who wished to return home — facing criminal or civil charges.
The bill sought to remove one of the obstacles to full negotiations with the ANC, and had become necessary, according to the preamble, because "world events and domestic realities [had]created opportunities for reconciliation" .
Deployment of controversial Army unit in Natal
Following the heightened unrest in March, there was further controversy over the government's security policy in the troubled Natal townships when the notorious 32 Battalion, also known as the "Buffalo Brigade" of the South African Defence Forces (SADF) was deployed in Natal in mid-April, following de Klerk's announcement on April 2 of a crackdown on the continuing violence.
The unit was part of a 1,000-strong force sent in to try to control intense fighting between ANC supporters and militants of the (mainly Zulu) Inkatha movement [see also p. 37305].
The battalion, which had operated in Namibia and Angola, was composed largely of Angolan rebels who had fought in the Angolan civil war, and also a number of white mercenaries; its members had since been given South African citizenship.
The deployment of troops had been welcomed by the ANC leadership, on the grounds that local people had lost faith in the police, but the ANC nonetheless criticized the government for lack of consultation over the deployment.
Four blacks were killed by police at Rammulotsi near Viljoenskroon in the Orange Free State on April 19, and on the previous day de Klerk announced an inquiry into the deaths of 11 people at a rent protest demonstration in Sebokeng, near Johannesburg, in March [p. 37305].
The police "daily unrest report" for April 15 recorded one of the most violent days since the fighting began in Natal in 1986, with 20 deaths in the region, in spite of the latest security measures.
Death of PAC militants
The Pan-Africanist Congress (PAC), the ANC's smaller and more radical rival, suffered setbacks in April with the deaths of several prominent members in separate incidents.
Jafta Masemola, a founder member of the PAC (which split from the ANC in 1959 over the latter's policy of alliance with sympathetic left-wing whites and Indian organizations), was killed in a car crash near Pretoria on April 17.
He had served 27 years on Robben Island along with Mandela and other political prisoners, for his part in launching the PAC's armed resistance in the early 1960s.
He was released in October 1989 [see p. 36964], and resumed political activity, strongly opposing the ANC policy of negotiation with the government.
In other incidents (i) Sam Chand, a PAC activist, was among six people assassinated in a bomb explosion in Botswana on April 23;(ii) his brother Ishmael Chand died in an accident on his way to the funeral; and (iii) the secretary of the PAC internal wing, Benny Alexander, and other PAC members travelling with him were seriously injured in a car crash in the northern Cape on May 3.
Arms theft
A right-wing organization, the Boerestaat (Boer Homeland), claimed that it was behind the theft of a large quantity of arms and ammunition from Air Force headquarters in Pretoria on the night of April 13-14.
Three national servicemen were later arrested in connection with the raid.
EC mission
A European Communities (EC) mission held talks with de Klerk and senior ministers on April 12.
Led by the Irish Foreign Minister and Chair of the EC Council of Ministers, Gerard Collins, the delegation also comprised the EC Commission Vice-President Frans Andriessen and the French and Italian Deputy Foreign Ministers.
The purpose of the mission, according to Collins, was "to encourage dialogue between the two sides [in South Africa]" .
He confirmed that existing EC sanctions would remain in place "until such time as irreversible change can be clearly seen." 
Coup in Venda homeland
The volatile situation in South Africa's tribal homelands [see pp. 37305-06]persisted with the announcement on April 5 of the overthrow of the President of the nominally independent Venda homeland, Frank Ravhele by the deputy chief of the homeland's Defence Force, Col. Gabriel Ramushwana.
There were celebrations in the streets following the radio announcement, with no reports of the looting and violence, engendered by hatred of the deposed regime, which had followed the coup in Ciskei in March [ibid.].
A curfew was imposed in Venda, the smallest of the "independent" homelands, but was lifted on April 7 after the situation was described as stable.
Ravhele's forced resignation, amid allegations of corruption, was the culmination of six weeks of popular demonstrations and of strikes by public servants.
At a special session of the homeland parliament on March 13, Ravhele had succumbed to popular demands for a multiparty system and a referendum on reintegration into South Africa, in line with African National Congress (ANC) policy which favoured a united, non-racial South Africa.
The new military leader confirmed that Venda's situation would be put to a referendum.
AFRICA
NAMIBIA
Opening of Lubowski murder trial — Relations with South Africa
The trial of Donald Acheson, accused of assassinating the prominent Namibian nationalist and lawyer Anton Lubowski in September 1989 [see p. 36885], opened in Windhoek on April 18.
Four former South African police officers were sought by the Namibian authorities to testify at the trial, but had refused to come forward, despite being offered immunity from prosecution.
Two other former policemen were wanted in connection with the murder.
All were believed to have belonged to the secret Civil Co-operation Bureau, whose activities were currently under investigation in South Africa [see p. 37234].
The problem of securing state witnesses was compounded by the non-existence of extradition agreements between the two countries.
The trial was adjourned until May for discussions on this issue.
Adriaan Ecksteen, who had been compelled to resign as director-general of the government-owned South African Broadcasting Corporation (SABC) in April 1988 [see p. 36069], was named as South Africa's representative in Namibia on April 12.
Earlier Namibia's Foreign Minister, Theo-Ben Gurirab, had confirmed that diplomatic relations as such would not be established; however, a "pragmatic" approach to bilateral relations would be adopted.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Talks between MPLA and UNITA
In the first direct contact between the MPLA government and the rebel UNITA movement since the summit at Gbadolite (Zaïre) in June 1989 [see p. 36726], high ranking delegations from each side met secretly in the Portuguese town of Evora on April 24-25.
The talks were described as exploratory, with the aim of establishing a basis for negotiations.
The Portuguese Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, José Durao Barroso, chaired the meetings, but stressed that he was not acting as mediator, a role still officially held by Zaïre's President Mobutu.
Barroso disclosed that an agenda and timetable for talks had been drawn up, but that a ceasefire had not been discussed.
Western press reports attributed the holding of the MPLA-UNITA meeting to an earlier encounter between US Secretary of State James Baker and his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, who met in Namibia during the independence ceremonies in March [p. 37297].
According to the reports, the Soviet Union and the USA then agreed to co-operate in bringing about a negotiated settlement to the 15-year-old civil war by encouraging face-to-face meetings without preconditions, in the hope that mutual compromise might bring about reconciliation.
A UNITA communiqué of April 29 described the talks as "extremely positive" , and announced the cessation of "all hostile propaganda against the Luanda government and its leadership" , although "objective criticism" of the government's economic and social policies would continue.
It later declared that while recognizing President Eduardo dos Santos as head of state, it continued to deny the legitimacy of the MPLA government.
Meanwhile government forces had consolidated their positions deep inside UNITA territory near Mavinga, a strategic UNITA base, which the government claimed to have captured in February following heavy fighting, and sought to penetrate as far as the rebel headquarters at Jamba.
UNITA cut power and water supplies to the capital on several occasions during March-April.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Post-election Cabinet
President Robert Mugabe on April 9 formed a new Cabinet following ZANU-PF's success in the March 1990 general election [see p. 37307].
Joshua Nkomo, leader of ZAPU, now dissolved and merged with the ruling party, was reappointed one of three Senior Ministers in the President's Office and was expected to be made vice-president along with Simon Muzenda under forthcoming legislation providing for the creation of two vice-presidencies with equal rank.
Three whites were appointed: Dennis Norman, who had been Minister of Agriculture in 1980-85; Chris Anderson, the outgoing Minister of State for Public Service; and Timothy Stamps, one of five ministers new to the government.
Sixteen of the Cabinet members were also on the 22-member ZANU political bureau, including Didymus Mutasa, in charge of the Political Affairs portfolio, which organized ZANU activities.
Meanwhile Edward Tekere, leader of the breakaway Zimbabwe Unity Movement (ZUM), on April 6 challenged the fairness of the elections, rejecting the findings of the electoral commission which had declared them to be "free, fair and impartial" .
Tekere alleged that four of his supporters had been killed in Harare, and that others had been harassed; he also claimed there had been administrative irregularities in the polling.
+Joshua Nkomo Senior Minister in the President's Office *Didymus Mutasa Senior Minister, Political Affairs Bernard Chidzero Senior Minister, Finance, Economic Planning and Development Nathan Shamuyarira Foreign Affairs Emmerson Munangagwa Justice, Legal and Parliamentary Affairs +Richard Hove Defence +David Karimanzima Higher Education +Fay Chung Education and Culture Moven Mahachi Home Affairs +Joseph Msika Local Government, Rural and Urban Development +Enos ChikoworeConstruction and National Housing +Witness Mangwende Lands, Agriculture and Rural Resettlement +Victoria Chitepo Information, Posts and Telecommunications John Nkomo Labour, Manpower Planning and Social Welfare +Kumbirai Kangai Industry and Commerce +Herbert Ushewokunze Energy, Water Resources and Development +Chris Anderson Mines *Dennis Norman Transport and National Supplies *Timothy Stamps Health Joyce Mujuru Community Development and Co-operatives *Herbert Murerwa Environment and Tourism Ministers of State: +Sydney Sekeramayi (Defence), +Eddison Zvogbo (Public Service), Joseph Culverwell (National Scholarships), +Simbi Mubako (Regional and International Organization Co-ordination), +David Kwidini (Sports Liaison), Ernest Kadungure (Political Affairs — Youth), +Brig.
Felix Muchemwa (Political Affairs — National Service), *Tichaendepi Masaya (Finance, Economic Planning and Development) *New appointment.
+Altered portfolio.
New Zimbabwe Cabinet
AFRICA
ZAIRE
Political reforms
Long-awaited political reforms were announced by President Mobutu Sese Seko on April 24, in the face of mounting social tension.
In early April students had rioted in Kinshasa, the capital, showing frustration over lack of political reform, corruption in politics, and low levels of grants; they set fire to 25 buses and called for Mobutu's resignation.
Schools and colleges were closed on April 7 in response to the unrest, but on April 12 Mobutu announced large increases in student grants and civil service wages.
The April 24 reforms included the separation of the roles of head of state and head of government, and the abolition, after a transitional period, of the single-party system.
Declaring the beginning of the "Third Republic" , Mobutu in his televised speech said that a new constitution would be drawn up and a transitional government appointed.
Mobutu had been head of state and head of the sole legal party, the Mouvement populaire de la révolution (MPR), since taking power by means of a coup in 1965.
While remaining head of state, he resigned forthwith as head of the MPR, declaring that henceforth he would be above party politics and not subject to political or legislative control, but would act as "arbiter and final judge" on important matters.
Mobutu also announced the "depoliticization" of the civil service, the police, the armed forces and paramilitary forces; additionally, free trade unions were to be established.
The reforms, according to Mobutu, were based on the people's aspirations as expressed in a recent nationwide "popular consultation" exercise.
The Constitution was to be revised in two phases during a one-year transitional period, ending in April 1991, during which time two new parties would be created; the MPR would continue to operate.
The use of "citizen" as a form of address, and the wearing of traditional costume were no longer compulsory.
Some opponents of the regime expressed scepticism at the proposed reforms and the adoption of liberalism, apparently at the expense of the long-held official ideology of "Mobutism" under which the President embodied the party and the state.
The Union démocratique pour le progrès sociale (UDPS), was expected to become one of the three legal parties.
Its leader in Zaïre, Etienne Tshisekedi Wa Mulumba, was released from house arrest on April 25.
On April 30, however, security forces broke up a rally by supporters of the UDPS, and unofficial reports claimed that two people were killed.
Appointment of interim Prime Minister
Lunda Bululu was on April 25 named as First State Commissioner (Prime Minister) and head of government during the transitional period, replacing Kengo Wa Dondo.
Bululu, a former legal adviser to Mobutu, was currently Secretary-General of the Economic Community of Central African States.
AFRICA
SENEGAL
Party and government changes
Jean Collin, generally considered to be President Abdou Diouf's closest aide, on April 13 lost his posts as political secretary of the ruling Parti socialiste (PS) and as chair of the organizing committee for the forthcoming party congress in June 1990.
His abrupt departure from positions of influence in Senegalese politics had been signalled in an extensive Cabinet reshuffle carried out on March 27, when he was dropped from the post of Secretary-General to the Presidency and Minister of State, a post he had held since January 1981.
His dismissal as "number two" in the party hierarchy was described as part of the PS policy of "renewal and openness" in a communiqué issued by the executive committee, itself created by Collin in 1989 when the PS was restructured, in a bid to secure his and Diouf's position against opposition from within the party [see p. 36519].
His downfall indicated that he had lost the power struggle with the PS "barons" .
He was replaced by the president of the National Assembly, Abdoul Azizi Ndaw.
French-born Collin, 65, a former colonial administrator, had held government office continuously since 1963.
He was elected to the National Assembly in 1968, and became Interior Minister in 1970; as Secretary-General to the Presidency he had supervised all government departments.
In recent months opposition parties, hostile to his pervasive influence, had called for his resignation.
In the March reshuffle a total of 11 ministers and secretaries of state left the Cabinet, now reduced from 27 to 21 members as part of a streamlining process in line with an IMF and World Bank economic restructuring programme.
Collin was replaced by André Sonko, hitherto Interior Minister.
Djibo Ká was transferred from Planning and Co-operation to Education, where it was expected that he would be required to find a solution to three years of student unrest.
Ibrahima Fall, Minister for Foreign Affairs since October 1984, was replaced by Seydina Oumar Sy, who had hitherto held the Commerce portfolio.
Medoune Fall Armed Forces Serigne Lamine Diop Justice; Keeper of the Seals André Sonko Minister and Secretary-General at the Presidency Seydou Madani Sy Minister and special adviser to the President Seydina Oumar Sy Foreign Afairs Famara Ibrahima Sagna Interior Moussa Toure Economy and Finance Djibo Ka National Education Robert Sagna Equipment, Transport and Housing Cheikh Abdou Khadre Cissokho Rural Development and Water Resources Alassane Dialy Ndiaye Industry and Crafts Jacques Baudin Tourism and Environmental Protection Assane Diop Health and Social Development Moustapha Ka Culture and Communication Moctar Kebe Labour and Professional Training Abdoulaye Makhtar Diop Youth and Sports Mbaye Diouf Animal Resources Cheikh Ahmidou Kane Minister-Delegate for African Economic Integration Ndioro Ndiaye Minister-Delegate for Women and Child Welfare Coumba Ndoffene Bouna Diouf Minister-Delegate for Relations with the Assemblies Mata Sy Diallo Minister-Delegate for Emigration
Senegalese Cabinet
AFRICA
BURKINA
Senior government changes
President Blaise Compaore on April 18 dropped his second-in-command, Clément Oumarou Ouedraogo, from the influential post of secretary for political affairs in the ruling Popular Front's executive committee.
A few days earlier Ouedraogo had been dismissed as secretary-general of the Organization for People's Democracy-Labour Movement (ODP — MT), the dominant grouping within the Front, reportedly for having displayed "serious failures of principle and party policy" .
It was not clear whether he would retain his Cabinet post of Minister-Delegate to the Co-ordinating Committee of the Front.
Ouedraogo was replaced as secretary for political affairs by Roch Christian Kabore, whose portfolio as Minister of Transport and Communications went to Jacques Ouedraogo, hitherto permanent secretary in that ministry.
In a further change, Salif Diallo, the ODP — MT political secretary, was appointed Secretary of State to the Presidency.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Increasing scale of revolt
The rebellion in Nimba county gained momentum during March, and by mid-April posed a serious threat to the government of President Samuel Doe.
Reports from the troubled area indicated that large sections of the county bordering on Côte d'Ivoire were now inaccessible to the regular armed forces [see map on p. 36610].
A rebel army of political dissidents calling itself the National Patriotic Forces of Liberia (NPFL), believed by the United States State Department to be supported by Libya, and led by Charles Taylor, had staged a rebellion in December 1989 [p. 37174]; by April, however, the uprising appeared to be at least partly a reaction by local people to the behaviour of the armed forces, accused of brutality in their actions to suppress the rebellion earlier in the year.
Recruits to the rebel cause were also thought to include students and survivors of the failed 1985 uprising led by Brig.
Thomas Quiwonkpa.
Between 1,000 and 3,000 civilians were thought to have died in fighting since December 1989, with similar numbers of dead among the regular and rebel forces.
Over 140,000 refugees had fled abroad.
In February US military advisers had accompanied the Liberian troops in operations in Nimba, ostensibly to monitor the Army's behaviour.
Following the murders in late March of an elderly US missionary and his British wife in a village attacked by rebel forces, the UK and US embassies urged their respective nationals to leave the country.
On April 6, after earlier threats by the rebel movement to attack economic targets, a train servicing the iron ore mine at Yekepa in the north-east was ambushed on the line between the mine and the port of Buchanan.
The mine itself was attacked one week later.
A British journalist was taken prisoner in the train ambush but was released after five days.
Communications between eastern and western areas of Liberia were severely hampered when a road running through Nimba county which linked Monrovia (the capital) with the south-eastern parts of the country fell into rebel control.
By late April the rebellion appeared to be spreading south-west in the direction of the capital.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Coup attempt
Dissident middle-ranking Army officers apparently led by a Maj. Gideon Okar of the 2nd Mechanized Ibadan Division attempted to depose President Ibrahim Babangida in the early hours of April 22.
The mutineers' objectives, broadcast before the armed forces regained control of the situation, appeared to indicate that they were motivated by religious and regional considerations.
The coup attempt was the bloodiest in Nigeria's history, with at least 10 killed in heavy fighting.
The attempt began at 2 a.m. with an assault on Dodan Barracks on Ikoyi Island in Lagos, the headquarters of the military government.
Soon after 6 a.m. the rebels took control of Radio Nigeria (situated 300 metres from the barracks), announcing that Babangida had been deposed and the governing Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC) dissolved, and stating their political objectives.
At noon however, after 10 hours of fighting, a message was broadcast declaring that the coup had been foiled.
Soon after 1 p.m., as sporadic gunfire continued to be heard in the capital, Gen. Sani Abacha, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Chief of Army Staff, declared that the Chiefs of Staff had pledged their loyalty to the President, and that "most of the disloyal elements have been arrested and are already undergoing interrogation" .
He reaffirmed the government's commitment to its programme to return the country to democratic civilian rule on schedule in 1992.
Babangida had been in the President's lodgings, which suffered heavy damage, when the attack started.
His personal bodyguard, Lt.-Col. U. K. Bello, was among the dead.
Fourteen officers, including Okar, and over 200 lower ranking soldiers were arrested in the immediate aftermath.
In his radio broadcast, Okar claimed to be acting on behalf of the "oppressed and enslaved people of the Middle Belt and the south" against the "dictatorial, corrupt, drug-baronish, inhumane, sadistic, deceitful, homosexually-centred, polygamistic and unpatriotic" Babangida government.
He announced that the five northern (largely Islamic) states — Sokoto, Bornu, Katsina, Kano and Bauchi — were to be excised from the federation, until the "rightful heir" to the Sultanate of Sokoto was installed [see p. 36325 for controversy over the appointment in November 1988 of an ally of Babangida as successor to the late Sultan, the spiritual leader of Nigeria's 60,000,000 Moslems].
Okar also referred to the "dishonourable treatment" meted out to former Defence Minister Lt.-Gen.
Domkat Yah Bali [for whose controversial departure from the government in December 1989 see pp. 37115; 37175].
Okar claimed to have the support of several bodies which had been critical of the present government, particularly the Nigerian Labour Congress, the Bar Association and the unions of journalists and students.
Commentators suggested that the attempt had had the support of wealthy former politicians, whose ambitions had been foiled by Babangida's refusal to allow the "old guard" of politicians to stand for office on the return to party politics.
The coup leader's motives and demands, however naive and divisive, nonetheless expressed deeply-felt north-south, Christian-Moslem rivalries, and resentments exacerbated by the economic situation.
Depressed living standards had affected ordinary Nigerians, while certain sectors of society had visibly profited, particularly some elements of the armed forces.
AFRICA
SUDAN
Alleged attempted coup — Cabinet reshuffle — Unity agreements with Libya
A total of 31 Army and police officers were executed in the wake of an alleged coup attempt on April 23 against the military government of Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir.
According to an Army spokesman, rebel soldiers "tried to take over the airport and [Omdurman]radio station in a rather pathetic way" , before being overpowered by loyalist troops.
Journalists and diplomatic sources, however, cast doubt on the government's version.
They suggested that no coup attempt had actually occurred, and implied that the government had made the claim of armed insurrection as a pretext for executing officers whose loyalty to the regime was in doubt.
Earlier, in the last week of March, 28 officers and civilians had been arrested for reportedly planning a coup against the government.
Among those executed, several of whom had been detained before the "coup attempt" , were the former Air Force commander, Maj.-Gen.
Khalid al Zayn Ali, the artillery corps commander, Maj.-Gen.
Abdul Kader, and the ex-Governor of the Eastern Region, Brig.
Mohammed Osman Hamed Karar.
Bashir described the "coup" as the work of "the alliance in coalition with the outlaws" — references to the signatories of the National Democratic Alliance Charter, drawn up in October 1989 by political parties, trade unions and professional associations [see p. 37114], and to the southern rebel grouping, the Sudanese People's Liberation Army (SPLA).
In the continuing civil war, there had been heavy fighting in late March around the government-held garrisons of Yei and Rumbek, in south-western Sudan.
Convoys carrying supplies to the area were attacked by the SPLA, as part of its effort to control the roads to the main government base at Juba.
Both sides claimed substantial victories.
Human rights report — Suspension of US aid — Arrests of journalists
The human rights organization Africa Watch published a report on March 18 which described Sudan as "a human rights disaster" .
The report claimed that more than 500,000 people had been killed in the civil war and resulting famine, with both the SPLA and government using starvation as a weapon, while thousands of women and children in the south had been sold into slavery.
The report added that human rights violations in northern Sudan had increased dramatically since the June 1989 coup which brought Bashir to power [see p. 36728], with purges in the judiciary, civil service and Army, the banning of trade unions, and the torture of hundreds of political detainees.
Earlier, on March 1, the United States government had banned all further economic and military aid to Sudan in accordance with a policy that military regimes which acceded to power via a coup would be denied aid unless they demonstrated signs of preparing a return to a democratic system within eight months.
A Reuters correspondent in Khartoum, Hamza Hendawi, was deported to Egypt on April 3, after three weeks in detention.
The Financial Times correspondent, Julian Ozanne, was arrested on April 1 on charges of espionage and sedition.
Alfred Taban, a Sudanese journalist who worked for Reuters and the BBC, was also arrested in early April.
Cabinet reshuffle — Strengthening of fundamentalist influence — Proposed union with Libya
A Cabinet reshuffle on April 10 had the effect of strengthening Islamic fundamentalist presence in the government [Cabinet list as of July 1989 see p. 36805.]
Abdul Rahman Mahmoud Hamdi, a banker and leading member of the National Islamic Front (NIF), became Finance Minister in place of Sayed Ali Zaki, who had enjoyed close contacts with the World Bank and IMF.
The new Information Minister was Mohamed Khojali Saliheen, who was known for his religious broadcasts under the Nemery regime.
Abdullah Mohamed Ahmed, a member of the fundamentalist wing of the Umma Party, became Education Minister.
A leading member of the Democratic Unionist party, Hussein Soleiman Abu Salih, took over as Public Works and Housing Minister.
On a visit to Libya on March 2-3 Bashir had concluded various agreements with the Libyan leader, Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, including the framework for a possible union between the two countries.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
Famine relief operations — Continuing war — Israeli role
Problems of supply and distribution of food and emergency supplies were compounded after the fall of the port of Massawa to separatist Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) forces in February [see pp. 37239-40].
Regarding Massawa as an essential channel for aid to northern Ethiopia, Western government representatives at the UN on April 24 called for a ceasefire around the port, which had come under a series of government bombing attacks [ibid.].
The Ethiopian government responded by pressing for airlifting of relief supplies to the Eritrean provincial capital, Asmara, effectively surrounded by rebel forces.
Using a southern route, supplies landed at the government-held Red Sea port of Asab were transported by lorry inland to Dese and thence northwards into Tigre, to both government-controlled and rebel-held areas.
These convoys had begun on March 20, under the auspices of a Joint Relief Partnership formed by Ethiopian Orthodox, evangelical and Catholic church agencies.
The EPLF claimed to have killed 6,500 government troops in repelling an offensive launched on April 19 on the Ginda front north-east of Asmara.
The Tigre People's Liberation Front (TPLF) claimed further military successes [see also p. 37240]as heavy fighting was reported in March and late April to the north of Addis Ababa.
Reduction in Soviet support — Role of Israel
The Ethiopian government's military problems were compounded by Soviet reluctance to sustain military support.
When Ethiopian Foreign Minister Tesfaye Dinka visited the Soviet Union on March 7, the Soviet side laid particular emphasis on promoting talks on peace and national reconciliation, while on March 21 the Western press reported comments by the Soviet ambassador in Sudan, that all Soviet military advisers had been withdrawn by late February to Addis Ababa or back to the Soviet Union.
As relations with Israel grew in importance [for restoration of diplomatic relations in November 1989 see p. 37035], an Ethiopian delegation visited Israel on March 27-31, en route for Washington.
Tesfaye Dinka, visiting London, said on April 2 that "there is no military co-operation right now" with Israel and that "we did not restore relations with Israel for military reasons" .
The EPLF, however, continued to claim that Israel was a major arms supplier, notably of cluster bombs, Kfir aircraft and Soviet-made tanks, and that Israel sought to develop military base facilities.
The Israeli press had reported on March 23 that several hundred Israeli military advisers were now in Ethiopia; this involvement also prompted radical Arab regimes to support the EPLF, which was receiving artillery from Syria and Iraq, and weapons including SAM-7s from Libya.
A bomb exploded on March 30 at the Addis Ababa Hilton hotel near the apartment of the new Israeli ambassador (who had presented his credentials on March 23), and two Libyan diplomats, reportedly held responsible, were expelled from Ethiopia on March 31.
Moves towards negotiations
The government on April 1-21 held talks in North Yemen with the Eritrean Liberation Front (ELF) and other smaller Eritrean groups.
A joint communiqué said that procedural matters had been resolved, opening the way for substantive negotiations, but both parties agreed on the need for other "opposition groups or factions" to participate if lasting peace were to be achieved.
The EPLF, however, had confirmed on March 28 that it would not be attending talks with the government, tentatively scheduled for April 8 in Nairobi, until its demand for the involvement of UN observers was accepted.
A third round of preliminary talks in Rome between the TPLF and the Ethiopian government on March 20-29 had broken down over the TPLF's insistence that "substantive talks" should involve a joint delegation of the TPLF and its ally, the Ethiopian People's Democratic Movement (EPDM).
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Conviction of Poindexter
Former National Security Adviser John M. Poindexter, 53, was found guilty on April 7 on all five felony counts arising from his role in the Iran-contra affair.
The District Court jury deliberated for almost 25 hours over a six-day period before arriving at its unanimous decision on charges involving conspiracy, lying to Congress and obstructing congressional inquiries.
The defendant was the highest-ranking White House official to be convicted of criminal offences since 1975 when Bob Haldeman and John D. Ehrlichman were found guilty of attempting to cover up the burglary of the Democratic headquarters in the Watergate.
Due to be sentenced on June 11, Poindexter faced a maximum prison term of 25 years and fines of up to $1,250,000.
Poindexter was the last and most senior of the Iran-Contra defendants to face trial on charges arising from an operation which involved the clandestine sale of United States arms to Iran and the illegal diversion of the profits to assist the right-wing contra rebels in Nicaragua.
The most serious charges against him, including all reference to the illegal support of the contras, were dropped in June 1989 because of the Bush adminstration's refusal to release classified documents [see p. 36809].
Nevertheless, the jury's finding that Poindexter was part of a conspiracy involving members of the Reagan administration amounted to the clearest judicial verdict yet rendered upon the Iran-contra scandal.
The trial, which had begun on March 5, was shorter than had been anticipated both because Poindexter chose not to give evidence himself, and because the prosecution was successful in eliciting incriminating evidence from its chief witness, Oliver North, Poindexter's subordinate at the National Security Council.
North, who had himself been convicted in May 1989 of three Iran-contra felonies [see pp. 36649-50], was reluctant to give evidence against his former superior and, during his four days in the witness box, he clashed repeatedly with chief prosecuting counsel Dan K. Webb.
The attitude adopted by North was criticized by Judge Harold Greene who suggested that questioning the witness was "like drawing teeth" .
Nevertheless, North did testify that Poindexter had supervised the November 1985 shipment of US arms to Iran, an important statement given that four of the five felony charges against the defendant arose from statements to Congress that he had not learnt of the shipment until January 1986.
North also testified that Poindexter had destroyed a document signed by the then President, Ronald Reagan, which had characterized the shipment as an arms-for-hostages arrangement.
Poindexter destroyed the document on Nov. 21, 1986, as the scandal was about to become public, allegedly in an effort to protect Reagan, whose public position was one of opposition to the payment of ransom for US hostages.
After intensive questioning North also conceded that Poindexter had ordered him to lie to the intelligence committee of House of Representatives when he appeared before it on Aug. 6, 1986, as part of its investigation into the affair.
The prosecution also alleged that in the early hours of Nov. 24, 1986, when investigators began searching the National Security Council offices for documents relating to the affair, Poindexter had erased more than 5,000 files from the memory of his computer.
Poindexter acknowledged that he had deleted computer messages, but claimed that this was part of his normal routine.
In his testimony to Congress in July 1987 — which had been given under immunity and was, therefore, inadmissible at his trial — Poindexter had said that he alone had authorized the Iran-contra operation and that Reagan had known nothing of it [see pp. 35828-29].
During his subsequent trial, however, Poindexter's central line of defence was that he had acted with the general authorization of the President.
Although the jury heard eight hours of videotaped testimony by Reagan [see p. 37241], the former President was often confused and vague about operational details and did little to shed any further light on his involvement in the affair.
The defence also claimed that Poindexter had never intended to mislead Congress and that any inaccuracies in his testimony were accidental.
Although the defence had demanded the release of extracts from Reagan's diaries as a means of circumventing the memory lapses suffered by the former President, Reagan had cited executive privilege in order to resist the move [see pp. 37240-41].
Greene ruled on March 21 that Reagan should not be forced to release the diaries.
After the verdict was announced Poindexter's chief lawyer, Richard W. Beckler, stated that his client would appeal against the conviction and would "keep fighting it as long and as hard as we can" .
For Independent Counsel Lawrence E. Walsh, the head of the three-year investigation into the scandal, the Poindexter verdict was the eighth conviction of an Iran-contra participant.
Following the trial Walsh was reported to be considering forcing North and Poindexter to testify before a grand jury in order to determine if there were others within the Reagan administration who had made false statements to Congress but had not yet been charged.
Such a process could attempt to investigate the last major unresolved aspect of the scandal: the precise role played by Reagan.
Gubernatorial primaries in Texas
Ann Richards, 56, the Texas state Treasurer, won the Democratic nomination for governor on April 10 after one of the most bitter primary contests ever staged.
No candidate secured the necessary overall majority on March 13, and a runoff was thus necessary on April 10, in which Richards won 57 per cent of the total vote against 43 per cent for Jim Mattox, 46, the state District Attorney.
In the runoff campaign both candidates used negative campaign tactics, personal attack and innuendo.
Richards, a reformed alcoholic, was plagued by allegations that she had used marijuana and cocaine; she maintained that she had used no "mood altering chemical" for the last 10 years, but refused to state whether she had ever used illegal drugs.
Mattox's campaign presented her silence on this subject as an expression of guilt, although the drugs issue backfired on him in the final days of the campaign when witnesses claimed to have seen him smoking marijuana in the early 1970s, a claim which he vehemently denied.
Richards counterattacked with allegations against Maddox of ethical and financial impropriety.
In both instances the allegations against the candidates lacked hard evidence and relied upon repetition through television advertising.
Negative campaigning (the concentration of campaign resources upon the discrediting of opponents rather than the presentation of policy initiatives) had become a national issue, with widespread criticism of George Bush's 1988 presidential election campaign.
Most commentators suggested that the main beneficiary of the ferocious Democratic campaign was Clayton Williams, who comfortably won the Republican nomination on March 13.
Williams, a right-wing, self-made multimillionaire with interests in oil, telecommunications and ranching, who had never before held elected office, presented himself as a Texan cowboy who was "as comfortable on the back of a horse as…in a corporate board room" .
His carefully contrived reputation for blunt speaking caused controversy shortly after he secured the nomination, however, when he compared the experience of being drenched by a rainstorm with that of a woman being raped.
 "If it's inevitable, just relax and enjoy it," he suggested, a comment which provoked widespread condemnation and for which he later apologized.
The only woman ever elected governor of Texas was Miriam Ferguson in 1924.
The Texas governorship was generally considered to be one of the most significant of the country's gubernatorial prizes.
The state had the third largest Congressional representation, and was expected to gain seats as a result of the reapportioning process due to follow the 1990 census.
The party in control of the governorship would, therefore, exercise considerable influence on the redrawing of the state's congressional district boundaries for the next decade, a process which could affect the outcome for five seats in the House of Representatives.
Blocking of Californian execution
On April 2 the Supreme Court ruled by six votes to three to uphold a stay of execution in the case of Robert Alton Harris, a convicted murderer who was due to die in the gas chamber of San Quentin Prison.
Harris's death, scheduled for 3 a.m. on April 3, was to have been the first execution in the state of California since 1967.
Sentenced to death for the casual murder of two teenage boys in San Diego in 1978, Harris had lodged numerous appeals, several of which had been considered by the Supreme Court.
The most recent, involving the claim that his mental state might not have been adequately conveyed to the jury during his original trial, had been upheld by Judge John Noonan of the Court of Appeals of the ninth US Circuit based in San Francisco, on March 30, 1990.
The appeal was based upon the consideration that Harris could have suffered foetal brain damage as a result of alcohol abuse by his mother, or from blows inflicted by his father who had tried to abort the foetus, but had succeeded only in causing it to be born three months prematurely.
It was also alleged that, as a child, Harris and his siblings were systematically abused by their father.
Governor George Deukmejian stated his "disappointment" and "great frustration" with Judge Noonan's decision.
An attempt by the District Attorney to overturn it resulted in the Supreme Court's consideration of the case on April 2.
Following the Supreme's Court's endorsement of Noonan's ruling, the case was due to return to the Appeals Court to be reviewed by a panel of judges, a process which was expected to take several months.
At the end of March 1990 there were an estimated 277 prisoners awaiting execution in California.
Death of Ralph Abernathy
The Rev. Ralph David Abernathy, one of the foremost black civil rights leaders in the 1950s and 1960s, died in hospital in Atlanta, Georgia, on April 17 after suffering a heart attack, at the age of 64.
A close friend and confidant of the Rev. Martin Luther King, Abernathy helped to organize the 1955 Montgomery bus boycott which marked the beginning of the modern US civil rights movement: he was with King when the latter was assassinated in Memphis on April 4, 1968, and succeeded him as president of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference (SCLC), the organization which the two men had founded in 1957.
Abernathy's inability to fulfil the legacy of his charismatic predecessor, together with increasing differences with the King family, however, resulted in the gradual eclipse of the SCLC and his resignation as president in 1977.
Abernathy attempted unsuccessfully to secure a Democratic nomination to the House of Representatives in 1978, and thereafter spent his remaining years as pastor of the West Hunter Street Baptist Church in Atlanta.
His estrangement from many of his former colleagues became complete in 1980 when he endorsed the presidential candidacy of Ronald Reagan.
After suffering strokes in 1983 and 1986, Abernathy caused controversy in 1989 when he published his autobiography And the Walls Came Tumbling Down, in which he expressed regret for having been seen as "no more than an appendage to Martin" .
He was also bitterly denounced by former colleagues for having betrayed King's memory by detailing instances of his colleague's adultery, including incidents which were alleged to have occurred during the last night of King's life.
AMERICAS
CUBA
Transmissions by TV Martí
Anti-United States demonstrations were held throughout Cuba on April 19 to celebrate the anniversary of the 1961 "Bay of Pigs" invasion, when Cuban forces loyal to President Fidel Castro defeated a US-backed invasion attempt.
On the Havana seafront several thousand citizens fired blank cartridges, arrows and catapults out to sea in a symbolic gesture of defiance aimed at the USA.
The celebrations had a particular relevance in 1990 as they occurred within a context of deteriorating relations between Cuba and the USA resulting from the activities of Television Martí, a new Florida-based, Spanish-speaking television station created to beam anti-Castro propaganda at Cuba.
TV Martí had begun test transmissions in the early hours of March 27, and had been immediately jammed by electronic equipment in Cuban aircraft and naval vessels.
The television station had been conceived by the Reagan administration as an extension of the propaganda service currently provided by the US-funded Radio Martí, based in the Florida Keys and established in 1985 [see p. 33917].
The television experiment was given greater significance, however, by the recent radical changes in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union; at the time when TV Martí began transmitting the Castro regime appeared more beleaguered and vulnerable to outside subversion than at any time since the early 1960s.
In the early months of 1990 Cuba had made intensive diplomatic efforts to prevent the new station from beginning its broadcasts, and had taken its case to the UN Security Council, the Non-aligned Movement, UNESCO and the International Telecommunications Union (ITU).
Cuban objections to TV Martí focused upon the violation of national sovereignty involved in its illegal use of the frequency of an established Cuban television station in contravention of the ITU code and other international agreements.
Cuba also threatened to retaliate by disrupting channels of communication within the US, although by the end of April no such action had been reported.
AMERICAS
MEXICO
Ending of town hall occupations
On April 5 the government authorized an estimated 10,000 troops, supported by tanks, to bring forcibly to an end the occupation of 19 town halls in the state of Michoacán by militant supporters of the opposition Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD).
No casualties were reported during the operation, whereas in similar operations in March in the neighbouring state of Guerrero three policemen and four civilians were reported killed and hundreds more wounded.
The occupiers had set up "popular administrations" and established their own armed police forces in December 1989 in response to the alleged electoral fraud practised by the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) during the July 1989 municipal elections [see p. 37274].
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
New Cabinet
The decision of President Violeta Barrios de Chamorro, inaugurated on April 25, to retain the Sandinista leader Cdr.
Humberto Ortega Saavedra as interim Chief of the Armed Forces provoked the immediate resignation of the newly appointed Ministers of Construction and of Agriculture, Gilberto Cuadra and Jaime Cuadra, and led to a contest between rival factions in the 14-party ruling National Opposition Union (UNO) coalition government for control of the directorate of the 90-seat National Assembly.
In an eventual compromise agreement, Miriam Arguello, the right-wing leader of the Conservative Party (PC), was chosen as Assembly president while UNO moderates dominated the other six directorate seats as well as the Cabinet.
An agreement signed on March 27 by Humberto Ortega on behalf of the Sandinista government and by Chamorro's chief aide Antonio Lacayo had prohibited active members of the armed forces from holding positions in political parties, and made the peaceful handover of power and the subjection of the armed forces to civilian authority conditional on the disarming of the contra guerrillas by April 25 [see below].
Ortega had subsequently had his membership of the Sandinista front suspended.
Violeta Barrios de Chamorro Defence Carlos Hurtado Cabrera Interior Enrique Dreyfus Morales Foreign Emilio A. Pereira Alegria Finance Sonfonias Cisneros Leiva Education Roberto Rondón Sacasa Agriculture and Livestock Silvio de Franco Montalván Economy and Development Jaime Icabalceta Mayorga Construction and Transport Ernesto Salmerón Bermúdez Health Francisco Rosales Arguello Labour Antonio Lacayo Oyanguren Presidency
Nicaraguan Cabinet
In her inaugural address Chamorro announced an end to military conscription; plans to reduce state bureaucracy, strength of the Army and the size of the defence budgets; the recognition of titles to land redistributed under the previous Sandinista government; and a thorough review of economic policy.
On May 10 the currency, the córdoba, was devalued by 50.9 per cent against the United States dollar, so that as at May 14 US$1.00=110,085.043 córdobas.
Contra demobilization
Contra leaders were threatening by late April that they would refuse to disarm and demobilize their forces until the Sandinista Popular Army (EPS) had begun to be demobilized and its High Command retired.
This threatened the violation of two agreements, witnessed by Cardinal Miguel Obando y Bravo, the Archbishop of Managua, and signed on April 19.
The first, signed by the outgoing Sandinista government and contra leaders, had agreed that an "effective and definitive ceasefire" was to take immediate effect and that the estimated 10,000-12,000 contras who had recently flooded into Nicaragua were to enter five security zones supervised by the 700-strong force of the UN Observer Group of Central America (ONUCA) and the staff of the International Commission of Support and Verification (CIAV).
The second, signed by the incoming UNO administration and the contras, had agreed that the voluntary demobilization of contra forces should begin on April 25 and be completed by June 10.
The first contra demobilizations, in the Honduran base camps of La Kiatara on April 16 and Yamales on April 18, reportedly only involved wounded rebels, including 260 Miskito Indians, who handed over old and unserviceable arms to UN forces.
AMERICAS
PERU
Presidential and congressional elections
In presidential elections held on April 8, Mario Vargas Llosa, 54, the internationally acclaimed novelist and candidate of the Democratic Front (FREDEMO), won 27.61 per cent of the vote but failed to gain the necessary overall majority.
His candidacy thus went forward to a second round run-off scheduled for June 3, in which his opponent would be an unexpected late entrant Alberto Keinya Fujimori, 52, of the newly formed Change 90 (Cambio 90) movement who received 24.62 per cent of the vote.
The incumbent President, Alan García Pérez, was barred by electoral law from seeking re-election.
Among the other principal candidates (out of a total of nine) Luis Alva Castro of the ruling American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) won 19.17 per cent of the vote, Henry Pease of the United Left (IU), with 6.97 per cent and Alfonso Barrantes Lingán of the Socialist Left (IS) 4.07 per cent, APRA and the IU suffering severe losses compared with the 1985 elections [see pp. 33836-37].
Turnout was about 64 per cent of the 10,000,000 people eligible to vote, and of the total votes cast 15.35 per cent were either blank or invalid.
Despite an intensified terror campaign by, predominantly, the Maoist Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path) guerrillas to disrupt the elections, the deployment of an estimated 300,000 soldiers and police ensured that polling day passed off relatively peacefully, although at least 55 people were reported to have been injured in bomb attacks on April 7-8.
 "Armed strikes" decreed by Sendero Luminoso throughout Central Andean provinces had reportedly paralysed business and transport and led to the voting period being extended by two hours.
A state of emergency, which already existed over two-thirds of the country (representing more than 50 per cent of the population), had been reimposed for 30 days in the capital Lima on March 23 in an effort to protect candidates, following the murder of a FREDEMO congressional candidate, Julio Gálvez.
The same day Sendero Luminoso were accused of murdering Julio Flores a leading APRA functionary in the province of Santiago de Chuca and an APRA congressional candidate, José Daga del Castillo, in Huancayo.
Another FREDEMO congressional candidate, Julian Huamani, had been killed on March 3.
An "armed strike" decreed by Sendero Luminoso in Lima on March 28 was reported to have seriously disrupted public transport.
In a campaign dominated by the current economic crisis Vargas Llosa, long the pre-poll favourite, had called for "a clear mandate" to allow him to introduce radical economic measures to tackle recession and inflation (then running at 30 per cent per month).
These included steep reductions in import tariffs, a drastic devaluation of the inti to boost exports, removal of subsidies and controls on food and services with an emergency safety net for the poorest sectors and the wholesale privatization of state industries.
In addition universal free education for those over 14 years would be replaced by a credit system and increased indirect taxation would finance an accelerated counterinsurgency campaign.
Llosa's clear lead in the opinion polls, which had reportedly been eroded by public hostility to his saturation US$10,000,000 media campaign, was sharply reduced by the unexpected last-minute surge of support for the previously ignored Fujimori, a former rector of the Agrarian University in Lima and an independent newcomer, whose self-financed campaign promising "honesty, hard work and technology" was judged to have benefited from deep voter disillusionment with the traditional parties.
Although lacking a formal programme, Fujimori had rejected "shock" adjustments at a time when he claimed that the buying power of the majority of people had been halved over the previous year and that the needs of the poorest sectors had still to be met.
He had also opposed the complete privatization of state industries and instead proposed temporary protection for industry to allow for a process of revitalization, through exports and improvements in agriculture (especially increased foreign aid for crop substitution programmes to replace cocaine-producing coca plants), mining and fishing.
He also stated that subversion had its roots in social injustice and that while he trusted the armed forces, they had to act within the Constitution and to respect human rights.
On April 8 Fujimori, who was expected to attract APRA and left-wing support in the second round, rejected Llosa's offer to form a joint government to avoid a run-off ballot "damaging" to the country.
Widespread rumours that Llosa had drawn up a withdrawal statement, an eventuality not catered for by the Constitution, were ended on April 16 when he confirmed his candidacy in the second round.
Parallel congressional elections reflected trends in the presidential race, with no party gaining an overall majority in either the 60-seat Senate or the 180-seat Chamber of Deputies.
Voters also elected new regional councillors.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Congressional approval of austerity plan
On April 11 President Fernando Collor de Mello, whose National Reconstruction Party (PRN) held only 31 of the 570 seats in the Congress, succeeded in dividing the opposition by winning approval for his economic re-adjustment plan announced on March 15 [see p. 37312].
By a 45-vote majority the Congress supported the continuation of the monetary reform policy freezing an estimated US$115,000 million in private financial assets.
The government claimed that the policy had brought inflation down from 84 per cent per month to 5 per cent.
On April 8-9 the Congress, with qualifications, had sanctioned stringent government cuts, including the closure of 11 ministries, and plans to sell federally owned companies worth an estimated $18,000 million.
To offset the recessionary effects of the measures, which had led to the lay-off of an estimated 350,000 industrial workers, the government announced $2,000 million in official loans to companies within the capital goods sector on April 26, with similar "soft credits" planned for the car, civil construction and agricultural sectors.
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Murder of presidential candidate
Carlos Pizarro León-Gómez, 39, the leader of the guerrilla April 19 Movement (M-19) and its presidential candidate in the elections scheduled for May 27, was shot dead by a contract killer on April 26 while on board a commercial flight from the capital Bogotá to the northern Caribbean port of Barranquilla where he was to address an election rally.
He was the third presidential candidate shot dead since August 1989 [see pp. 36844; 37312].
On April 28 Antonio Navarro Wolff announced that he would replace Pizzaro as M-19's presidential candidate.
The Medellín drug cartel in a message broadcast on Inravision Television, Bogotá on April 27 denied responsibility for the assassination, stating that Pizarro had been opposed to the government's current policy of extraditing drug traffickers to stand trial in the United States.
Pizarro had been instrumental in launching on April 2 a new alliance of 13 left-wing groups, Democratic Convergence (Convergencia Democrática), whose leaders were now expected to support Navarro's presidential campaign.
Escalation of drug violence
Interior Minister Horacio Serpa Uribe on April 17 confirmed that the government would not negotiate with the drug cartels or give in to their violence and would continue the policy of extradition.
This was taken to contradict an April 4 offer made by President Virgilio Barco Vargas promising the Medellín drug cartel leader Pablo Escobar Gaviria an "impartial trial" in Colombia in return for his surrender.
A communiqué released on April 15, allegedly by a group of drug traffickers opposed to Escobar's recent "terrorist acts" , was claimed by the government as evidence of a split in the leadership of the drug cartels.
On March 31 Escobar had announced a resumption of a campaign of violence, offering rewards of US$4,000 and US$100,000 respectively for the killing of regular police and elite anti-drugs police, threatening to kill judges and the owners of the newspaper El Espectador, and threatening to explode 5,000-kg bombs in residential areas of Bogotá for every person extradited.
He claimed that the government had "betrayed" agreements reached in peace talks.
The government publicly denied direct involvement in such talks, which had allegedly produced in January the release of the son of Germán Montoya Vélez, the General Secretary of the Presidency, and the offer to "surrender" made by leaders of the cartels in return for government guarantees [see p. 37182].
Bomb attacks between April 3 and April 25 killed an estimated 29 policemen and 33 civilians, wounding 145 others.
Also killed were three congressional delegates and a journalist.
The Liberal Party Senator Frederico Estrada Veléz, 63, a supporter of extradition, was kidnapped on April 3 but released unharmed on April 5.
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Summit meetings — Peace talks
Montelimar summit
On April 2-3 the Presidents of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, together with the Honduran and Nicaraguan Presidents-elect and a representative of the Venezuelan government, met in Montelimar, 60 km south-east of Managua, the Nicaraguan capital.
Major commitments in the concluding joint statement (i) ratified previous commitments made under the 1987 Esquipulas II or "Arias" peace process [see pp. 35440-42]and welcomed new peace dialogues in El Salvador and Guatemala [see below];(ii) re-affirmed commitments to strengthen and consolidate democracy in the region and to respect human rights;(iii) expressed satisfaction with the running of the recent Nicaraguan elections [see p. 37236]and demanded an immediate start to the demobilization and disarming of the contra rebels under UN supervision which was to be completed by April 27 [but see pp. 37370-71];(iv) agreed on a meeting of a joint regional security commission to take place in Costa Rica on May 15;(v) undertook to reorganize, strengthen and reactivate regional economic integration, to review foreign debt conditions and to urge the international financial community to provide additional resources under favourable terms; and (vi) agreed on regional co-operation to eliminate illegal drug trafficking.
The Presidents agreed to reconvene later in the year in Guatemala.
In a joint communiqué issued on April 1 from Mexico City, the Foreign Ministers of Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela had announced the end of the mission for which the Contadora peace group had been created.
Dublin Foreign Ministers' meeting
Meeting as the San José VI Group [see p. 35892]Foreign Ministers of the five Central American countries as at Montelimar, with the addition of Panama and with Foreign Ministers from Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela in attendance, met with their counterparts from the 12 European Community (EC) member countries in the Irish capital, Dublin, on April 9-10.
The Foreign Ministers signed an accord granting approximately US$53,000,000 in immediate EC aid (which was expected to have risen to a total of approximately $147,000,000 by 1993) to help reactivate Central American trade as a means to strengthen the region's current peace initiatives.
El Salvador peace dialogue
At a meeting hosted by the UN in Geneva on April 4, representatives of the government of El Salvador and guerrilla leaders of the Farabundo Martí National Liberation Front (FMLN) agreed on "direct dialogue" under UN supervision to find a possible political solution to end 11 years of civil war.
The next meeting between the two sides was expected to take place in early May.
Following the meeting FMLN leader Shafik Handal stated that the basis for a ceasefire rested on the "democratization of the country" and "the restructuring of the armed forces and judicial reforms" .
On April 5 the government decided not to renew the state of siege imposed in November 1989 [see p. 37037], which was thus suspended on April 11.
On April 23 President Alfredo Cristiani Burkard stated that the government would be willing to guarantee the integration of the FMLN into national life.
On March 30 in a joint news conference in Caracas, the Venezuelan capital, with President Carlos Andrés Pérez (who had been instrumental in initiating the peace process) Cristiani had offered the FMLN guerrillas a "broad amnesty" and a "plot of land" and confirmed that the government would legalize an FMLN political party should the latter wish to participate in elections.
Guatemala peace talks
A meeting in the Norwegian capital, Oslo, between representatives of the National Reconciliation Commission (CRN) and leaders of the Guatemalan National Revolutionary Unity (UNRG) guerrillas ended on March 30 with an agreement to continue peace talks to end 30 years of intermittent conflict.
The talks were seen to have opened up the possibility of a June meeting between the UNRG, political parties, church groups, employers and popular movements as a preliminary to possible direct talks between the government, the armed forces and the guerrillas.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA
Group of Rio meetings
A meeting on April 12 in the Hungarian capital, Budapest, between the Foreign Ministers of the Group of Rio countries (comprising Argentina, Uruguay, Venezuela, Brazil, Peru, Mexico, Colombia) and their East European counterparts (representing the Soviet Union, Czechoslovakia, East Germany, Poland, Hungary, Bulgaria, and Yugoslavia) resulted in joint agreements to increase political, economic, cultural, scientific and technological exchanges between the two regions.
The Argentine Foreign Minister Domingo Cavallo supported moves to decentralize East European economies and envisaged that opportunities in Eastern Europe for Latin American industrial and manufactured goods would widen trade opportunities from the existing commercial exchanges in agricultural products and agricultural by-products.
The ministers agreed to hold "regular meetings" , the next being scheduled for September 1990 at the next session of the UN General Assembly.
The Group of Rio had suggested at a meeting with Foreign Ministers of the European Community (EC) member countries, held in the Irish capital, Dublin, on April 10, that the EC should "institutionalize" the dialogue between the two blocs in order that commercial and technological co-operation could be encouraged with those countries forming the Latin American Association for Industrial Development (ALADI) which, in addition to the Rio countries, included Chile, Bolivia and Ecuador.
Expulsion of Panama from G-8
The Group of Rio in its meeting in Mexico City on March 30-31 had agreed to expel Panama from the Latin American Group of Eight (G-8) countries.
It called for "popular consultation without foreign interference" to determine the legitimacy of the current Panamanian government installed following the December 1989 United States invasion [see p. 37112-13], and called on the US government to confine its military activities to its military bases in the Canal zone.
It also condemned the invasion of Cuban airspace by the US-financed TV Martí [see p. 37370].
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
National People's Congress session
The third session of the seventh National People's Congress (NPC — the Chinese unicameral legislature) was held in Beijing from March 20 to April 4.
It was preceded by a meeting of the NPC Standing Committee at which former NPC Member Hu Jiwei was dismissed from the committee.
Hu Jiwei had been recalled earlier by the Sichuan provincial people's congress for his "illegal role in the turmoil" of May and June 1989 when he had attempted to call an emergency meeting of the NPC Standing Committee.
Also absent from the congress were Deng Xiaoping [see p. 37318 for Deng's retirement from his last remaining post]and former party secretary Zhao Ziyang, who had reportedly asked for leave.
Government work report
Premier Li Peng delivered the government work report on the first day of the 16-day NPC session.
He dwelt on the "great historic victory" of 1989, which he summed up as the "three great victories" : suppression of the counter-revolutionary riot in June, rectification of economic order, and "a new favourable turn on the ideological and political front" .
Looking forward to 1990, he stressed that "sustained, steady and co-ordinated development of the national economy" would continue.
To this end, the role of planning and central controls would be strengthened, although, in order to stimulate the market, the credit supply would be increased, restrictions on capital investment would be relaxed and rural enterprises encouraged.
Li Peng said that the preservation of stability was "of paramount importance" , and that China was "concerned" about events in Eastern Europe; it would not interfere, but "socialist China will stand rock-firm in the East" .
1990 budget and socio-economic reports
On March 21 Finance Minister Wang Bingqian presented what he described as a "grim" 1990 state budget for approval.
He warned against running a deficit, and termed the 1989 deficit an "outstanding contradiction" resulting from the June rebellion, the non-implementation of measures to generate income and over-spending on agriculture, education, science and technology, and disaster relief.
A slightly smaller deficit was budgeted for 1990.
Government spending was to increase in the areas of agriculture (up 7.9 per cent), education (up 9.8 per cent ), and science and technological development, but the biggest rise was in defence spending, up 15.2 per cent .
Moreover, China would be entering the peak repayment period for foreign debts.
1989 1990 (million yuan*)(million yuan*) Revenue 291,920 323,653 Expenditure, 301,455 332,546 of which Capital construction 61,258 65,945 Enterprise development 15,005 14,912 Agriculture 19,907 21,481 Urban construction 11,860 11,856 Culture, education, science and public health 55,868 59,745 Defence 25,146 28,970 Administrative spending 26,708 27,234 Subsidies 37,034 40,558 Domestic debt repayment 2,673 12,400 Foreign Loans repayment 4,583 7,000 Reserve Funds 2,500 *US$1.00=4.7191 yuan as at March 19, 1990.
1989 and 1990 budget figures
The Minister in charge of the State Planning Commission, Zou Jiahua, delivered the 1990 socio-economic plan on the same day.
He said that the growth targets for 1990 were 5 per cent for gross national product (as compared with 3.6 per cent in 1989), 6 per cent for industrial output value (8.3 per cent in 1989) and 4 per cent for agricultural output value (3.3 per cent in 1989).
Inflation was to be further lowered, investment in fixed assets limited to 410,000 million yuan, the state deficit reduced and a balance maintained in foreign exchange revenue and expenditure.
The main tasks were to reinforce agriculture, promote market sales, develop foreign trade, promote scientific, educational and cultural development, and control population growth.
The plan stressed the role of central planning in the allocation of key materials and products, and in finance.
The provincial authorities were to turn over more revenue to the state while receiving reduced subsidies, in order to centralize resources.
The NPC session approved these reports with minimal alteration, and also passed the Draft Basic Law for what would be the Hong Kong Special Autonomous Region [see pp. 37248; 37376].
It also approved a law easing restrictions on joint ventures, which was criticized by foreign investors as not addressing the problem that joint ventures were expected to be self-sufficient in foreign exchange.
Uprising in Xinjiang
A "counter-revolutionary armed rebellion" by "a small number of ruffians…under the cloak of religion" was put down on April 5-6 in Baren, near Kashgar in Xinjiang.
The oasis towns of Kashgar, Khotan and Aksu were closed to foreigners while troops were sent into the area to suppress the rebellion, according to Western press reports.
According to an April 22 official report, 15 rebels and seven others were killed in clashes between rebels and security forces.
A Xinjiang television broadcast carried pictures of weapons, riot damage and injured and dead security personnel.
It warned that "national splittism is the main threat to Xinjiang's stability" and called for "high vigilance" .
According to Western reports, officials in Xinjiang had acknowledged the impact of rising nationalist sentiment across the border in the Soviet Union.
Unofficial reports said that the incident might have been sparked off by a dispute over permission to build a mosque.
Li Peng's visit to Soviet Union
On April 23 Li Peng began a three-day official visit to the Soviet Union, which, he said, aimed to give "new impetus" to Sino-Soviet relations [see pp. 36641-42 for Gorbachev's May 1989 visit to China; see p. 37340 for internal Chinese criticism of Gorbachev].
Li Peng's visit was the first by a Chinese Premier for 26 years.
Protocol, however, would have required that a Chinese return visit, after President Mikhail Gorbachev's visit to China in May 1989, be at the level of President and party general secretary.
Li Peng was accompanied by Foreign Minister Qian Qichen; Tomur Dawamat, chairman of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region people's government; Gan Ziyu, Vice-Minister of the State Planning Commission; and Xu Xin, Deputy Chief of General Staff of the People's Liberation Army (PLA).
The visit met some Soviet opposition on human rights grounds; The Times reported a demonstration in Moscow on April 23 by Soviet human rights activists, and The Guardian reported that the Moscow city council had tabled a resolution protesting at the visit.
On April 23 and 24 Li Peng held talks with Nikolai Ryzhkov, Chairman of the USSR Council of Ministers, on ways to increase the efficiency of Sino-Soviet economic co-operation.
In a meeting on April 24, Li Peng and Gorbachev noted that progress was being made in troop reductions on the border, and on the settlement of border issues.
According to Tass, the official Soviet news agency, the two leaders agreed that "there were no compulsory models or stereotypes for realising socialist ideas and principles" .
At a press conference on April 25, Li Peng said that he believed perestroika to be of a socialist orientation, and "earnestly hoped" that stability would prevail in the Soviet Union.
Seven agreements were signed during the visit:(i) a long-term programme for economic, scientific and technical co-operation;(ii) co-operation in research and the use of space for peaceful purposes;(iii) guiding principles for mutual reductions in armed forces and confidence-building in the military sphere in the border region;(iv) a protocol on consultations between the foreign affairs ministries;(v) an intergovernmental agreement on state credit for deliveries of consumer goods from China;(vi) a memorandum on co-operation in building a nuclear power station in China; and (vii) agreements for Soviet state credits for Chinese projects, including two 1,000,000-MW power engineering facilities.
No further details on troop reductions were revealed.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Extraordinary MPRP congress
In a speech to the first extraordinary congress in its 69-year history of the ruling Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP), held in the capital Ulan Bator on April 10-13, general-secretary Gombojavyn Ochirbat called on the estimated 926 delegates to acknowledge the party's previous mistakes and the shortcomings of its leadership which, he stated, had been "crucial in plunging society into its present crisis" [see pp. 37317-18 for details and consequences of March unrest].
The congress was reported to have unanimously endorsed proposals to (i) establish a multiparty system in the country which also guaranteed respect for human rights, freedoms and democracy;(ii) replace centralized economic planning by a "state controlled market economy" based on diverse forms of ownership in order to stimulate basic industrial development and modernize agricultural production;(iii) reform taxes;(iv) create new welfare benefits and increase wages and pensions during the next five-year-plan period of 1991-95; and (v) pursue an independent non-aligned foreign policy.
Delegates also approved a draft programme and rules designed to replace centralized bureaucracy and promote true democracy and the voice of minorities within the MPRP.
It was reported that some delegates demanded the replacement of between 70 and 90 per cent of the 91-member central committee, but almost 80 per cent of the outgoing central committee members were estimated to have been re-elected.
The five members of the old politburo [see p. 37317], with the addition of Budyn Sum'yaa (hitherto Minister of Culture), made up the new party presidium.
Ochirbat was elected as chairman, with Sum'yaa, Nyamyn Mishigdorj and Tseveenjavyn Öold as central committee secretaries.
The congress also agreed for the first time that in order to ensure a separation of the MPRP and state bodies, the Chairman of the Presidium of the People's Great Hural (i.e. effective head of state) should not be a member of the supreme governing body of the MPRP.
Ochirbat stated that the reforms were intended to "develop socialism into a humane democratic society" and as such were based on what already had been achieved and did not mean that the country "must go over to capitalism" .
He added that "indications of chaos" and "lack of discipline" were present in the campaign of opposition groups against state bureaucracy and warned that their sustained attacks on the MPRP would hinder future political co-operation.
Reorganization of Council of Ministers
In measures seen as evidence of MPRP efforts to streamline government in response to opposition criticism, seven ministries and three state committees, at an estimated saving of 3,600 million tugrik (US$1.00=3.3495 tugrik as at March 26, 1990), were disbanded on April 7, some being reorganized [see p. 37344 for previous full list of Council of Ministers].
Nadmidyn Babuu Trade and Co-operation Begziyn Balijinnyam Culture Sodovyn Bathuyag Heavy Industry Pagbaiavyn Nyamdavas Health and Social Security Luvsanbaldangiyn Nyamsambuu Construction Dandzangiyn Radnaaragchaa Agriculture, Light and Food Industry Norobyn Urtnasan Education Jamyangiyn Batsuuri Chair of State Committee for Technological Progress and Standards 
Reorganized ministries
Opposition party congress
The first congress of the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP) held in Ulan Bator on April 8-9 was attended by an estimated 865 delegates representing 17 provinces and three cities.
The event was marked by the first issues of two new newspapers, the MDP's Democracy and the Mirror of the umbrella organization Mongolian Democratic Union (MDU).
Erdenijn Bat-Uul was elected as general secretary of a 15-member political consultative committee, with Dambijn Dorligshaw as his deputy and Achmedijn Murat becoming committee secretary.
Delegates approved new party statutes and a political programme to contest parliamentary and presidential elections which the government had confirmed would take place in July and August respectively.
The programme emphasised the development of a market economy, the improvement of living standards, the regeneration of traditional Mongolian culture and a neutral foreign policy guaranteed by the permanent members of the UN Security Council.
Delegates also demanded the representation of democratic forces in a provisional People's Hural until the parliamentary elections.
At a joint MDP-MDU news conference on April 7, MDP leader Sanjaasurengiyn Dzorig had stated that an opposition bloc composed of the MDP-MDU, the Social Democratic Movement and the Social Democratic Party, the New Progressive Movement and the Party of National Progress and the Union of Mongolian Students would "probably" confront the MPRP in the elections.
An estimated 20,000-30,000 people staged a pro-democracy demonstration in Ulan Bator on April 27, despite a government ban on such rallies.
The demonstration followed the failure of talks between the government and the MDU on April 26 to reach agreement on the establishment of a temporary People's Hural and of an extraordinary all-party commission before the elections.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Military successes by government forces — Diplomatic activity
In March and early April, the closing weeks of the dry season, the forces of Cambodia's Phnom Penh-based government launched a series of successful offensives using tanks and heavy artillery, reportedly recapturing most of the 3,240 sq km of territory in western Cambodia hitherto held by guerrilla forces of the tripartite coalition government-in-exile.
On April 4 they retook the town of Thmar Puok, which had fallen in October 1989 in the guerrilla offensive which followed the withdrawal of Vietnamese forces [see pp. 36881-82].
Khmer Rouge guerrillas, the most powerful element of the exile coalition's forces, were reported to have suffered major defeats in the Battambang and Pailin regions near the border with Thailand.
Heavy enemy shelling on April 11 forced Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the titular head of the exile coalition government, to evacuate the official residence in western Cambodia which he had established in February [see p. 37249].
Meanwhile, there was no confirmation of extravagant guerrilla claims concerning the recapture of territory in a counteroffensive launched on April 6 and centred upon the government-held town of Sisophon.
Continuing diplomatic activity
Sihanouk responded to the defeat by proposing peace talks with the Phnom Penh government to be held in Bangkok on April 15.
Premier Hun Sen accepted the proposal on April 6, but on the following day claimed that he would be unable to attend because he was due to undergo unspecified medical treatment.
On April 9 Sihanouk proposed a new nine-point peace plan involving the creation of a joint council which, together with a partial UN administration, would govern the country prior to the holding of elections.
Several aspects of the plan, including its proposal for an immediate ceasefire guaranteed by UN Security Council forces, were rejected by the Cambodian government.
A fresh, if unpromising, avenue of negotiation was opened on April 7 when the Prime Minister of Thailand, Chatichai Choonhaven, proposed that his Japanese counterpart, Toshiki Kaifu, host a meeting in Tokyo between Sihanouk and Hun Sen.
The subsequent invitation to attend such a meeting in early June was rejected by Sihanouk on April 19.
After pressure from Chatichai, however, the Prince announced on April 24 that he would attend the meeting, but warned that it could achieve nothing of value because the invitation had not been extended to representatives of the Khmers Rouges.
ASIA — PACIFIC
VIETNAM
Party and governmental changes — Central committee plenum
A State Council communiqué broadcast on April 1 announced the streamlining of Vietnam's Council of Ministers through the merger of several previously separate portfolios.
A new Ministry of Culture, Information, Sports and Tourism was allocated to Tran Hoan, hitherto Minister of Information.
A new Ministry of Education and Training was created under Tran Hong Quan, hitherto Minister of Higher Vocational Education and Job Training.
A new Commerce Ministry was established to incorporate the ministries of Foreign Economic Relations, Internal Trade, and Supply, headed by Hoang Minh Thang, hitherto Minister of Internal Trade.
Two other ministries were renamed: Engineering and Metals became the Ministry of Heavy Industries, whilst Communications and Transport became the Ministry of Communications, Transport, Posts and Telegraph.
The attempt to rationalize various spheres of state control through increased centralization was consistent with the Vietnamese government's widely perceived caution concerning the pace of political reform.
The Council of State meeting on March 29-31 (at which the Cabinet changes were decided) had been preceded by a 15-day Communist Party central committee plenum, which concluded on March 28 and issued a communiqué emphasizing that the party would continue to play a dominant role in government.
Rejecting the possibility of moves towards a multiparty political system, the plenum's final document referred to the collapse of communist regimes in Eastern Europe, warning that'socialism is experiencing a difficult period "which" imperialists and reactionaries"were seeking to exploit.
The process of economic liberalization undertaken since 1986 would be possible, it suggested, only within the context of "political stability" .
During the course of the "extremely vigorous" plenum the central committee also decided to expel Tran Xuan Bach, one of the party's 13 politburo members.
Tran, who was the party's most outspoken advocate of the notion that political and economic reforms had to proceed in tandem if either was to succeed, was expelled for "grave violations of organization, principles and discipline of the party" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH KOREA
Elections to national legislature
Elections to the ninth Supreme People's Assembly (SPA — the unicameral North Korean legislature) were held on April 22.
Kim Il Sung, the country's President since 1948, was amongst the 687 deputies reportedly elected, as was his son Kim Jong Il.
Although some deputies represented minor parties and associations, as had happened in the past, all candidates were approved by the ruling communist Korean Workers' Party led by Kim Il Sung.
The turnout was reported to be 99.78 per cent of the electorate; 100 per cent of total votes cast were for the successful candidates.
The decision to hold the elections eight months before they were constitutionally due increased speculation that the aged President was preparing to transfer power to his son.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
By-election reverses for ruling party — Economic expansion package — Pardon for condemned North Korean bomber
The newly formed Democratic Liberal Party (DLP), the ruling party of South Korea, suffered a significant reverse on April 3 in its first electoral contest.
In two by-elections for the National Assembly, the DLP lost a seat in the North Chungchong province and only narrowly held a seat in the southern city of Taegu, a traditional conservative stronghold, after an intensive and expensive campaign.
The DLP had been formed in February 1990 [see p. 37247]as a result of a merger between the ruling conservative Democratic Justice Party (DJP) and two of the country's three main opposition parties, the Reunification Democratic Party (RDP) and the New Democratic Republican Party (NDRP).
The main opposition force, Kim Dae Jung's Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), which remained outside the DLP merger, did not field a candidate in either of the April 3 by-elections.
The challenge on this occasion came from an opposition grouping known tentatively as the Democratic Party, based around those members of the RDP who had chosen not to join the DLP.
This group increased its representation in the National Assembly to eight seats as a result of the election of Ho Tak in Chungchong.
The nature of the DLP's creation was a prominent campaign issue and most observers interpreted the party's unexpectedly poor showing as indicative of a high degree of popular resentment over the merger.
Unveiling of economic expansion package
Following a Cabinet reshuffle in late March during which all economic ministers were replaced [see p. 37319], the new Deputy Prime Minister and head of the Economic Planning Board, Lee Seung Yoon, unveiled a package of expansionary economic measures on April 4.
The widely anticipated move, designed to stimulate economic growth through increased exports, included the easing of credit restrictions and the provision of increased funds to assist with capital investment.
Lee stated that the economy had reached a "stagnant situation that cannot be left alone" .
In 1989 exports increased by only 3 per cent, and gross national product (GNP) by 6.7 per cent , compared with 12.4 per cent in 1988.
Government concern over the country's economic performance had been increased by a current-account deficit of $646,000,000 in the first two months of 1990, compared with a surplus of $888,000,000 in the same period a year earlier.
The package was less comprehensive than had been expected, however, for observers agreed that the options available to Lee were restricted by sharply rising inflation (consumer prices rose by over 3 per cent in the first quarter of 1990) which precluded any general reduction in interest rates.
The most controversial aspect of the package was its postponement of plans to force the use of real names in financial transactions, a measure due to become operational on Jan. 1, 1991.
Supporters of the reform insisted that it was necessary in order to reduce financial malpractice, and to effect a more equitable distribution of wealth through the imposition of progressive taxes on interest income and capital gains.
The measure had been strongly opposed by powerful interest groups (including the chaebol, the large conglomerates which dominate the country's economy) and its imminent imposition was held responsible for the recent removal abroad of funds from the Korean stock exchange.
The stock market, whose index had fallen throughout 1990, lost a further 7.5 points in response to the package.
Pardon for North Korean bomber
Kim Hyon Hui, 27, a convicted North Korean saboteur, received a presidential pardon on April 12 which exempted her from the death penalty.
Kim had been sentenced to death at her trial in April 1989 after confessing to having planted a bomb on a South Korean airliner which disappeared near the coast of Burma in November 1987 with the loss of all 115 passengers and crew [see p. 35905].
The appeals process against her execution had been concluded on March 27, 1990, when the Supreme Court had upheld the death sentence.
A government statement explained that the Cabinet had decided to spare Kim's life because of her remorse and her value as a living testament to the nature of the North Korean regime which had brainwashed her.
The real criminals, the statement suggested, were the North Korean President Kim Il Sung and his son, Kim Jong Il, who allegedly ordered the bombing in an effort to disrupt Seoul's hosting of the 1988 Olympics Games.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Escape of rebels implicated in coup attempt
Lt.-Cdr.
Bilbastro "Billy" Bibit, an alleged leader of the December 1989 coup attempt against the government of President Corazon Aquino, escaped from a Manila prison in the early hours of April 8.
Bibit and four companions were assisted in their escape by 15 soldiers from the Young Officers' Union, a shadowy, dissident group within the armed forces which was believed to have played a leading role in organizing the coup attempt.
Several hours before the escape there had been a drinking session at the prison, paid for by Bibit, involving inmates, guards and female visitors.
The party continued after Bibit had returned to his cell, and at 2.45 a.m. the gates had been opened to allow the delivery of further stocks of alcohol.
At this point the rebel soldiers entered the prison, overpowered the guards and freed Bibit who fled from the compound by car.
A police station adjacent to the jail was simultaneously attacked by the rebels, its occupants disarmed and its telephone wires severed.
Aquino immediately ordered a nationwide operation to recapture Bibit.
The prestige of the government suffered a further blow, however, when it was revealed on April 9 that a second rebel had escaped from custody.
Capt. Rogelio Seradoy, the helicopter pilot of the August 1987 coup attempt leader Col. Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan, apparently fled from a Manila airbase after obtaining a two-day leave pass.
For both Bibit and Seradoy it was their second successful escape.
A second of Honasan's pilots, Capt. Christopher Mecias, was captured on April 10, within hours of Bibit's escape.
Another of the December rebels, Leovic Dioneda, a police captain, was arrested on April 16 near the eastern city of Legazpi.
Honasan himself, however, had remained at large since his escape from a Navy prison ship in April 1988.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
Chinese parliamentary approval of Basic Law — British Nationality (Hong Kong) Bill
China's parliament, the National People's Congress, approved on April 4 the Basic Law which was to be Hong Kong's "mini-constitution" after 1997, with 2,600 votes in favour, 16 against and 37 abstentions.
[For draft see pp. 37248-49.]
Hong Kong's partially elected Legislative Council passed on the same day a motion calling for amendments, particularly to increase provisions for democratic representation and to limit the circumstances in which emergency powers could be assumed by the Chinese authorities.
Demonstrators on a march in Hong Kong on April 5, organized by the Hong Kong Alliance in Support of the Democracy Movement in China, were urged by leading liberal Yeung Sum to cherish freedom of speech while they could, and to continue drawing attention to the denial of such freedom in China.
Members of the main liberal lobby groups (Meeting Point, the Hong Kong Affairs Society, and the Association for Democracy and People's Livelihood) were involved in the founding of a political party, the United Democrats of Hong Kong, which on April 8 published a manifesto and elected an executive committee with Martin Lee as its chairman.
The British Nationality (Hong Kong) Bill was introduced in the United Kingdom House of Commons on April 4, and approved at its second reading on April 19, following the announcement in December 1989 by Douglas Hurd, the Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, that full British citizenship would be given to some 225,000 people in the colony in order to restore confidence there in the wake of the military repression of pro-democracy demonstrations in China in May-June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22; 37122].
Up to 50,000 heads of households and their families would fall into one of four categories of eligibility for full British citizenship: there would be a general allocation for 36,200 people and additional allocations for key entrepreneurs (500); disciplined services (7,000); and sensitive services (6,300).
Selection would depend on points allocated for criteria including age and experience, proficiency in English and British links.
Spouses or children under 18 would be eligible to seek registration as British citizens; children born after the registration of a head of household, including those born after June 30, 1997, would automatically become British citizens.
Opponents of the bill (passed by 313 votes to 216) included 44 Conservatives, led by Norman Tebbit, former Conservative Party chairman and Cabinet minister, on the grounds of the party's election manifesto commitments to reject large-scale immigration.
Some 30 Conservatives abstained, as did a significant number of Labour backbenchers.
Meeting of Joint Liaison Group
The Sino-British Joint Liaison Group, which had been created to ease the transfer of power in Hong Kong to China in 1997, met in the Chinese capital Beijing on April 24-27 [for September 1989 meeting see p. 36894].
In a joint communiqué issued after the meeting both sides agreed that Hong Kong should continue to participate in the activities of two international satellite communications bodies.
They agreed future extradition arrangements for fugitive criminals, and decided that talks would be held on the creation of a final Court of Appeal.
Following the talks senior Chinese officials described the British proposals on passports as not conducive to the prosperity and stability of Hong Kong, and criticized the UK for its lack of consultation with China over the colony's Bill of Rights [see p. 37319].
ASIA — PACIFIC
JAPAN-UNITED STATES
Trade agreements
Trade relations between Japan and the United States improved at the start of April as the so-called "Structural Impediments Initiative" (SII) talks [see p. 37319]produced an agreement by the two sides on a number of the outstanding points of conflict.
Consequently it seemed likely in early May that Japan would avoid the mandatory trade sanctions which would follow if it were named as an unfair trader under the so-called "Super 301" clause of the 1988 Trade Act [see pp. 36925-26].
The talks, held in Washington and originally scheduled for April 2-3, were extended by two further days as the two countries discussed broader issues.
Japan's trade surplus with the USA in 1989 had been $49,000 million (exports of less than $100,000 million against imports just exceeding $50,000 million).
In the first agreement, Japan agreed to allow foreign manufacturers of satellite equipment (mainly meteorological and communications systems) equal access to the Japanese market.
It was announced on April 5 that Japan had further agreed to revise, within one year, certain laws on the retail sector which the USA had claimed were monopolistic in character.
US producers had complained that access to Japanese retail markets was hampered by the fact that most large retail outlets in Japan were supplied by a small number of wholesalers who discriminated against foreign products.
Japan also agreed to intensify the enforcement of its existing anti-monopoly legislation, to introduce tax reforms aimed at encouraging property development, and to increase spending on housing and public works, in an effort to increase Japanese domestic demand.
In return, the US negotiators agreed to Japanese demands for action on its spiralling budget deficit, which Japan blamed for excessive US consumer demand and for an excessively strong US dollar.
The chief US negotiator, Carla Hills (the Special Representative for Trade Negotiations), said on April 6 that she hoped in the near future (i) for an amendment of Japan's Large Retail Store Act, which currently made it difficult start up new retail outlets; and (ii) a restructuring of Japan's Patent Office, which was accused of taking an average 37 months to approve new products for the Japanese market, and thus of effectively hampering the import of new products.
The early April agreements came in marked contrast to the generally poor atmosphere during March, when a visit to Washington by Toshiki Kaifu, the Japanese Prime Minister, had produced a tentative agreement on the sale of supercomputers to Japan [ibid.]— the first of three major trade areas for which Japan had been named under the "Super 301" rule.
Meanwhile, talks were continuing on opening the Japanese market to foreign producers of lumber, the third area where Japan had already been cited under "Super 301" , and where punitive tariffs were due to be introduced on June 16, 1990.
Japan was reported to be considering a liberalization of its market for amorphous metals, used in power generation, which US producers claimed to be closed to foreigners.
It was agreed that a final report on the Structural Impediment talks would be issued in July 1990.
The European Communities (EC) issued a statement on April 6 welcoming the new agreement, and hoping that its scope would be extended to cover other countries besides the USA.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Further violence in Kashmir — Increasingly strained relations with Pakistan
On April 6 the student wing of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) seized three hostages — H.L. Khera, general manager of the state-owned Hindustan Machine Tools plant, Mushir ul-Haque, deputy chancellor of Kashmir University, and Abdul Ghani, the latter's secretary.
They threatened to kill the hostages if three imprisoned militants were not released, and on April 10, shortly before the expiry of their deadline, they killed Khera, and the following day the bodies of the remaining two hostages were found.
A spokesman for the kidnappers insisted, however, that Ghani had been released alive and that the Indian security forces were responsible for his death.
Allegations of Pakistani involvement in the conflict featured prominently in the central government's response to the crisis, and concern that the conflict could lead to a full-scale war was widespread in diplomatic and media circles.
On April 9 the national executive of the right-wing Hindu militant Bharatiya Janata Party called on the government to engage in "hot pursuit" of terrorists and to strike at training camps in Pakistan.
On April 11 the Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, warned in a speech in the Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament): "Our message to Pakistan is that you cannot get away with taking Kashmir without a war." 
He indicated that India was prepared to match Pakistan's nuclear capability if necessary.
On April 13 there were reports of exchanges of fire between Indian and Pakistani forces, and two days later the Times of India carried a report that the Home Minister, Mufti Mohammed Sayeed, was of the view that a war with Pakistan would be justified if it would break "the stranglehold of the secessionists" .
On April 13 the Soviet Foreign Ministry expressed its "concern and anxiety" and called for "peaceful political dialogue on the basis of the Simla agreement" [of 1972, which required that all Indo-Pakistani disputes be resolved by bilateral negotiations].
On April 15 the Iranian government expressed its concern, stating that the use of force could not solve the issue, and was also reported as having offered to mediate in the conflict.
On April 16 the United States government called on both countries to "take immediate steps to reduce the tension" .
The Jammu and Kashmir state administration imposed and maintained an around-the-clock curfew in the Kashmir valley on April 6-21, with a few short relaxations to allow people to obtain essential supplies.
On April 15, eight political groups were banned, including the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front, the People's League, the Jamaat-i-Islami Jammu and Kashmir, the Hizbul Mujahidin, and the Islamic Student's League.
Three daily newspapers were closed down, and prosecutions begun against 11 papers for "inciting violence and terror" .
Some 200 militants were arrested in house-to-house searches beginning on April 13.
On April 15 a group of doctors threatened to strike against the curfew, which they alleged was preventing them from attending patients.
At the beginning of May a delegation of Indian civil rights groups, headed by a former judge, V. M. Tarkunde, issued a report complaining of "a large number of excesses" and condemned the curfew as an attempt to tame the populace "by reducing them to starvation level" .
Kashmiri militants also extended their campaign beyond the state.
An organization calling itself the Mujahidin Kashmir claimed responsibility for planting bombs which exploded at two New Delhi police stations on April 10, injuring nine policemen.
There were further bomb attacks in a train on the outskirts of Bombay on April 11, injuring 34, and in a New Delhi bus on April 13, killing two.
A meeting took place in New York on April 25 between the Indian External Affairs Minister, I. K. Gujral, and his Pakistani counterpart, Sahibzada Yakub Khan, while both were attending the UN Special Economic Session.
They issued a joint communiqué calling for continuing contacts between their military chiefs, exercise of restraint and maintaining channels of communication.
On his return Gujral made a statement to the Lok Sabha in which he indicated that he had rejected a Pakistani proposal for the UN to assume an observer role, and appeared to impose on Pakistan the responsibility for easing relations.
Punjab — Violence in Gujarat
President's rule was extended in Punjab for a further six months on April 5 when the bill proposing its extension was passed by the Lok Sabha (lower house of Parliament).
The measure was supported by all major parties except the Akali Dal (Mann), which had withdrawn parliamentary support from the National Front coalition government in protest at the proposal.
An earlier attempt to extend President's rule, on March 30, had resulted in an embarrassing debacle when the government failed to ensure that there were enough members present to constitute a quorum for a constitutional amendment.
On April 3 a bomb which police suspected had been planted by Sikh separatists exploded near a Hindu religious procession in Batala, killing some 35 people.
On the same day 15 other people were killed in violence elsewhere in the state.
Communal violence in Gujarat
Communal violence broke out in the Gujarat city of Ahmedabad on April 4 after an incident in which a Moslem was stabbed to death.
Clashes between Moslems and Hindus ensued and spread to several other towns, resulting in 60 deaths and extensive damage to property.
Expansion of Cabinet
A minor reorganization of departmental responsibilities took place on April 30 when portfolios were allocated to ministers of state and deputy ministers.
Altogether 18 new junior ministers were inducted into the government, bringing the total number in the Council of Ministers to 40.
As a result of the reorganization Nilamani Routray became Minister of Environment and Forests; his former portfolio, of Health and Family Welfare, went to Rashid Mashood as Minister of State (Independent Charge).
K. P. Unnikrishnan relinquished the Communications portfolio to Janeshwar Mishra as Minister of State (Independent Charge), retaining Surface Transport.
As a new Minister of State Chimanbhai Mehta took responsibility for Human Resources Development from M. G. K. Menon.
There were in addition 10 new Ministers of State and five new Deputy Ministers.
Phone tapping charges
On April 6 the government ordered an inquiry into the charges made by Chandra Shekhar, leader of a faction in the ruling Janata Dal hostile to the Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, that the telephones of several prominent political figures including his own were being tapped.
The Minister of Parliamentary Affairs, P. Upendra, assured the house that no phone tapping of political leaders was currently taking place.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
Appointment of new Cabinet
Prime Minister Bob Hawke made sweeping changes in his Cabinet, appointed on April 3 following the re-election by a narrow margin of his Australian Labor Party (ALP) government on March 23.
Hawke's new Cabinet involved numerous changes in ministerial responsibility, and six new junior ministers were appointed, although the overall balance of representation between the ALP's left and right wings remained largely unchanged.
In addition to retaining his post as Treasurer, Paul Keating was appointed to the largely ceremonial post of Deputy Prime Minister following the retirement of Lionel Bowen.
The move was widely interpreted as a confirmation of Keating's position as Hawke's successor, and fuelled speculation that the Prime Minister might step down before the next election.
Amongst those ministers not reappointed to the Cabinet was Peter Walsh, hitherto Finance Minister and an important member of Hawke's Cabinet since 1983.
Walsh announced his decision to retire from the government on April 2; although he gave no reasons, he had earlier suggested that the government lacked sufficient political will to confront the country's grave economic problems.
Bob Hawke Prime Minister *Paul Keating Deputy Prime Minister; Treasurer John Button Industry, Technology and Commerce Gareth Evans Foreign Affairs and Trade *Neal Blewett Health and Community Services *Ralph Willis Finance *Michael Duffy Attorney General John Dawkins Training; Employment; Education *Kim Beazley Transport and Communications John Kerin Primary Industry and Energy *Brian Howe Community Services and Health *Graham Richardson Social Security *Robert Ray Defence *Gerry Hand Immigration, Local Government and Ethnic Affairs *Ros Kelly Arts, Sport, Environment, Tourism and Territories *Peter Cook Industrial Relations *Nick Bolkus Administrative Services Junior Ministers not in the Cabinet **Simon Crean Science and Technology **David Bedall Small Business and Customs *Michael Tate Justice and Consumer Affairs **Peter Baldwin Employment and Education Services **Robert Tickner Aboriginal Affairs **Bob Collins Shipping *Bob Brown Land Transport **Alan Griffiths Resources Peter Staples Housing and Age Care Ben Humphreys Veterans' Affairs *Altered portfolio.
**New appointment.
New Australian Cabinet
Replacement of opposition leaders
Also on April 3 the opposition Liberal Party elected John Hewson, 43, as its federal leader in place of Andrew Peacock, whose resignation followed the Liberal Party's fourth successive electoral defeat.
Hewson, a former professor of economics at the University of New South Wales, with only three years' experience in the federal parliament, was generally considered competent but lacking in charisma.
Peter Reith, an unsuccessful contender for the leadership, was elected as deputy leader.
The National Party leader, Charles Blunt, also resigned in the aftermath of the election defeat, announcing his decision on April 6 when it became clear that he had lost his seat in the federal parliament.
He was replaced on April 10 by Tim Fischer, who was thereupon allocated responsibility for energy and resources in Hewson's newly appointed coalition shadow Cabinet.
Most observers held the poor performance of the National Party, the junior partner in the country's conservative opposition coalition, to be the chief reason for the defeat of the coalition.
EUROPE
EAST GERMANY
Formation of grand coalition
Nearly four weeks after the general election on March 18, in which the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) won a landslide victory [see pp. 37300-03], Lothar de Maizière, the CDU leader, reached agreement with the other principal parties on the formation of a "grand coalition" .
At the same time a report by the West German Bundesbank (central bank), calling for a 2:1 conversion rate between the East and West German Marks when monetary union was introduced, aroused great controversy until the West German government eventually agreed to a more favourable offer.
Formation of government
The Social Democratic Party (SPD) was initially opposed to joining any coalition which included the right-wing German Social Union (DSU), not least because the DSU and especially its chairman, Hans-Wilhelm Ebeling, had sought during the election campaign to associate the SPD with the former Communist regime.
Le Monde of April 11 attributed the compromise to the "pragmatism" of Peter-Michael Diestel, the DSU general secretary, who received the post of Deputy Premier and Interior Minister, while Ebeling was given the lesser portfolio of Economic Co-operation.
The new five-party government, which was sworn in on April 12, comprised those three parties which campaigned jointly in the election as the Alliance for Germany (the CDU, the DSU and Democratic Awakening — DA), the SPD and the League of Free Democrats (BFD, as the Liberal Democratic Party had renamed itself after the election — see p. 37302).
De Maizière, a Protestant lay official, had only recently and apparently reluctantly entered politics.
In November 1989 he took over as CDU leader [see p. 37024]and then in February 1990 replaced Wolfgang Schnur as the leading Alliance for Germany candidate in the general election [see p. 37302].
Descended from a Huguenot family, he was originally a professional viola player until in 1975 a neurological problem affecting his arm obliged him to stop.
As a lawyer he became known for his defence of dissidents and conscientious objectors.
His uncle Gen. Ulrich de Maizière was a former Chief of Staff of the Bundeswehr, the West German army.
The Cabinet included three pastors, Ebeling, the SPD leader Markus Meckel as Foreign Minister, and Rainer Eppelmann of DA, the new Disarmament and Defence Minister, who had spent eight months in prison in the early 1960s for refusing to do military service, after which his church in East Berlin became a centre of dissident opposition.
There were four women ministers.
Under the coalition agreement the new government aimed "to achieve the unity of Germany swiftly and responsibly for the whole of the German Democratic Republic [East Germany or GDR]at one time after negotiations with the Federal Republic of Germany [West Germany]on the basis of Article 23 of the [West German]Basic Law" [see also p. 37259].
Conditions of unification included a 1:1 exchange rate for the East and West German Mark for savings, wages and pensions (rather than the less favourable proposals put forward by the West German Bundesbank — see below), and the safeguarding of rights to employment, housing and education.
On security issues Meckel maintained during a debate in the Volkskammer (unicameral parliament) on April 26 that membership of NATO was not the government's aim, and would be conditional upon a change in the structures of the Western Alliance.
At the same session Eppelmann announced a 49 per cent cut in the defence budget compared with the previous year and advocated the retention of conscription.
*Lothar de Maizière (CDU) Prime Minister Peter-Michael Diestel (DSU) Deputy Premier, Internal Affairs Markus Meckel (SPD) Foreign Affairs *Rainer Eppelmann (DA) Disarmament and Defence Gerhard Pohl (CDU) Economics *Walter Romberg (SPD) Finance Sybille Reider (SPD) Trade and Tourism **Kurt Wünsche (BFD) Justice Manfred Preiss (BFD) Regional and Local Affairs Peter Pollack (independent, proposed by SPD) Food, Agriculture and Forestry Regine Hildebrand (SPD) Labour and Social Affairs Cordula Schubert (CDU) Youth and Sport Christa Schmidt (CDU) Family and Women's Affairs Jürgen Kleditzsch (CDU) Health Horst Gibtner (CDU) Transport Karl-Hermann Steinberg (CDU) Environment, Nature Protection, Energy and Reactor Safety Emil Schnell (SPD) Post and Telecommunications Axel Viehweger (BFD) Construction, Town-planning and the Housing Sector Frank Terpe (SPD) Research and Technology Hans-Joachim Meier (independent, proposed by CDU) Education and Science Herbert Schirmer (CDU) Culture Gottfried Müller (CDU) Media Policy Hans-Wilhelm Ebeling (DSU) Economic Co-operation Klaus Reichenbach (CDU) Minister in the Prime Minister's Office Matthias Gehler (CDU) Government Spokesperson Günter Krause (CDU) Parliamentary State Secretary to the Prime Minister *Member of outgoing Cabinet.
**Justice Minister in 1967-72 and in outgoing Cabinet.
East German coalition government
Parliament's inaugural session — Election of Volkskammer President
The newly elected Volkskammer held its inaugural session on April 5.
About a dozen deputies had been members of the outgoing parliament; the average age of the new members was 45.
As well as formally requesting that de Maizière negotiate the formation of a new government, deputies elected Sabine Bergmann-Pohl as President of the Volkskammer (Speaker) after two rounds of voting.
She replaced Günther Maleuda who had held the post since November 1989 [see p. 37025].
Six Deputy Speakers were elected.
A constitutional amendment was approved abolishing the State Council and providing for the election of a State President; on an interim basis, Bergmann-Pohl assumed the post of acting head of state on April 9 (replacing Manfred Gerlach who had held the post since December 1989 — see p. 37108).
The phrase in the preamble to the East German Constitution describing the country as "a socialist state of workers and peasants" was revoked.
[For December 1989 constitutional changes see p. 37107.]
As envisaged before the election the chamber approved the establishment of a committee to investigate MPs' alleged involvement with the former security police or "Stasi" [see p. 37302].
Statement of guilt for holocaust — Commitment to Oder-Neisse border
At a Volkskammer session on April 12 "the first freely elected parliament of the GDR recognise[d] joint responsibility for the humiliation, expulsion and murder of Jewish men, women and children" .
The deputies unanimously declared: "Immeasurable sorrow was caused by Germans to the peoples of the world during the time of National Socialism.
Nationalism and racial delusion led to genocide, in particular of Jews from all European countries, of the people of the Soviet Union, of the Polish people and of the Romanies and Sintis.
This guilt should never be forgotten."
Le Monde reported on April 26 that the government had decided to reverse previous government policy and for the first time to pay 6,200,000 marks to an Israeli foundation for holocaust survivors.
In addition the Volkskammer affirmed "the inviolability of the Oder-Neisse frontier" between the GDR and Poland, and "confesse[d] to the GDR's shared guilt for the suppression of the" Prague Spring "in 1968 by Warsaw Pact troops" .
Controversy over conversion rate for monetary union
Negotiations on the formation of an East German government were accompanied by great controversy in both East and West Germany over the terms for the introduction of German monetary union.
A Bundesbank report leaked on March 31 recommended that a conversion rate of two East German marks for one West German deutschmark be used when German monetary union was introduced, although the report advocated a 1:1 conversion rate for East German savings up to 2,000 Marks.
On April 5 some 100,000 people protested outside the Volkskammer with such banners as "Without one for one Germany will not be one" .
Although the West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl denied ever promising a 1:1 rate during the election campaign [see p. 37301], he was widely perceived as having breached an election promise.
De Maizière remonstrated that he could not "accept the halving of wages" , which in East Germany were anyway one-third less on average than those in West Germany, and he warned of a renewed influx of East Germans to West Germany if the Bundesbank proposals were followed.
On the other hand Helmut Schlesinger, the vice-president of the Bundesbank, explained that under the Bundesbank proposals wages in East Germany would be increased first by around 30 per cent before the 2:1 rate was applied.
He warned that any more favourable rate would have inflationary consequences which would cause the Bundesbank to "step hard on the monetary brakes" .
Likewise Theo Waigel, the West German Finance Minister, described the Bundesbank's proposals as "economically and financially well-founded" .
Nevertheless, the West German coalition decided on April 23 to offer the East German government a 1:1 conversion rate for savings up to 4,000 Marks and for wages and pensions (which latter would also be raised, from less than 50 per cent of wages to the West German level of 70 per cent).
In a three-hour meeting in Bonn between Kohl and de Maizière the following day the two leaders agreed to aim for economic and monetary union on July 2.
Formal negotiations on this issue and on a state treaty between the two countries were accordingly begun on April 25.
Differences over a united Germany's possible membership of NATO
After a meeting on April 27 near Cologne between Eppelmann and Gerhard Stoltenberg, the West German Defence Minister, a joint statement declared: "Our goal is a united Germany as a member of the Atlantic Alliance without NATO's military structures or equipment being extended on to the territory of East Germany.
The details of how this happens must take account of the security interests of our neighbours and especially those of the Soviet Union."
During a working visit to the Soviet Union on April 28-29, de Maizière announced after talks with Soviet President Gorbachev that the latter continued to insist that "East Germany should not become a member of NATO, whereas our position is that this is possible if NATO develops a new strategy and structures" .
This interpretation appeared to differ from that given on April 6 by James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, after talks with Eduard Shevardnadze, the Soviet Foreign Minister [see also p. 37393].
At that time Baker had announced that "there was a recognition that perhaps neutrality is not the best route" , although "they [the Soviets]were quite clear…that a unified Germany as part of NATO presented a problem to them" .
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Second round of general election
The centre-right Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF or MDF) and its allies emerged as the clear winners of the Hungarian general election after the second round of voting on April 8 [for first round on March 25 see pp. 37325-26].
The turnout in the second round of voting was about 40 per cent.
With 164 out of 394 seats, the HDF, led by Josef Antall, was by far the largest single party, ahead of the liberal Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) with 92 seats.
Antall declared that "after decades of dictatorship the political reflexes of the Hungarian people have not changed" , since the centrist alliance of the HDF, the Christian Democratic People's Party and the Independent Smallholders' Party had together "achieved the same result as the Smallholders in 1945" (which had then won 57 per cent of the vote).
On policy Antall stated: "The European Community is our most important target and we want to concentrate all our means to join as an associate member as soon as possible, and later to become a full member." 
[For Bratislava summit on "return to Europe" of Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland see p. 37382.]
Of the 176 single-member constituencies, only five had been settled by overall majority in the first round [ibid.]and the remaining 171 were thus settled in the April 8 poll.
In this second round the candidate with most votes would win the constituency seat provided that participation was above 25 per cent.
The electoral rules also provided for a second round poll for county list seats in counties where the first round turnout was less than 50 per cent, and allowed for such a second poll to be valid provided that turnout exceeded 25 per cent .
A number of prominent politicians failed to win election at constituency level but nevertheless entered parliament on their party's national lists (where "scrap votes" , i.e. those cast for unsuccessful constituency candidates or county lists, were added together to form a national total).
They included Gyula Horn, the outgoing Foreign Minister, of the Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP — i.e. the successor to the former ruling communist party), and Péter Tölgyessy, a constitutional lawyer and leading SzDSz candidate in Budapest.
Hungarian National Assembly
Distribution of 386 elective seats* Hungarian Democratic Forum (HDF or MDF) 164 Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) 92 Independent Smallholders' Party (FKgP) 44 Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP or MSZP) 33 League of Young Democrats (FIDESZ) 21 Christian Democratic People's Party 21 Independents 6 Joint candidates 4 Agrarian Alliance 1 *In addition to the 386 elected deputies, provision was reportedly to be made for representatives of the minorities living in Hungary (the Croatians, Germans, Romany gypsies, Jews, Romanians, Serbs, Slovaks, and Slovenes) each to take up one seat.
After the first round on March 25 interest centred on how party alliances would be drawn up.
As expected, FIDESZ allied with the SzDSz.
The position of the Independent Smallholders' Party was less predictable.
It had already formed local pacts with the SzDSz in five counties, but on March 30 Antall announced that the HDF had formed an electoral pact with the Smallholders and the Christian Democratic People's Party whereby the three parties would support the best placed candidate in each constituency.
At a meeting on April 29 the Independent Smallholders' Party political bureau elected Ferenc Nagy as party chairman in place of Istvan Prepeliczay, a proponent of alliance with the SzDSz, who was excluded from the session.
The Assembly was to hold its constituent session on May 2.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Scheduling of elections
Round table talks resumed on March 29-30 between the Bulgarian Communist Party (BCP) and the democratic opposition Union of Democratic Forces, the Bulgarian Agrarian People's Union and other political and public organisations.
During these talks, which began in January [see p. 37193], agreement was reached on an election law, a constitutional amendment law and a political parties law.
This latest session of the talks had been suspended on March 28 because of sharp disagreement over when and how the new Bulgarian President should be elected.
Although both the BCP and the UDF were in agreement in principle over the election of a head of state, the UDF wanted the President to be elected by the future Grand National Assembly, whereas the BCP wanted the President to be elected directly, at the same time as the forthcoming parliamentary elections.
As a compromise, the BCP proposed that the President should be elected by the present parliament, but with a mandate extending to the period of office of the next Grand National Assembly.
At the resumed talks it was agreed that Petur Mladenov, the State Council President and former Foreign Affairs Minister, would be elected President of Bulgaria (his formal election being carried out by the Assembly on April 3), but would be replaced when a newly elected legislature approved a new constitution.
After Mladenov's election, the National Assembly terminated its powers, an act unprecedented in Bulgarian history.
The State Council, a largely ceremonial body, was dissolved after the round table participants had decided that it was an "unnecessary institution" .
Two-stage elections for members of the Grand National Assembly (to be made up of 400 representatives) were scheduled for June 10 and 17.
They would be the first free multiparty elections since 1946.
Election law
An election law, agreed during the round table talks, gave every voter the right to two votes.
Half of the 400 national representatives would be elected on a constituency basis and the other half by proportional representation.
The law also allowed for foreign observers to be present at elections, and set up a 20-member central election committee.
Local elections were planned to be held before the end of 1990.
Candidates could be nominated by political parties, party coalitions, or groups of 500 voters.
To win a seat on the first round in the constituency elections, a candidate would need an overall majority in a turnout of at least 50 pere cent; if this was not achieved, a run-off vote would be held one week later.
BCP name change
The Bulgarian Communist Party renamed itself the Bulgarian Socialist Party on April 3, calling the decision a clean break with "the dictatorship of the time before Nov. 10, 1989, which was a dictatorship not only over the people, but over the party as well" .
The opposition Bulgarian Socialist Party denounced the name change and vowed to fight for the right to continue to use its name.
Its party chairman, Ivan Velkov, declared that it had existed as a "political circle" since the end of 1988 and as a party since Dec. 30, 1989, and that it currently had 10,000 members and adherents.
Prison camp revelations
A special commission of the Bulgarian government uncovered the existence of concentration camps which had operated in the 1950s and 1960s in which some prisoners were tortured and killed.
Although more than 40 camps were revealed to have existed, the largest was at Lovech in northern Bulgaria.
Lovech was open from 1959 until April 1962 and interned 12,035, people according to official estimates.
Documentary proof of 147 deaths had been found so far.
Former officers at the camp were arrested after the revelations and the Deputy Minister of the Interior, Col.-Gen.
Mircho Spasov, was expelled from the BCP on March 29 for his connection with the camps; he was arrested on April 16.
Spasov denied any knowledge of mistreatment of the prisoners, but surviving camp inmates reported that he had visited the camp often and ordered guards there to "work them [the prisoners]to death" .
On March 28 an Interior Ministry spokesperson said that it was possible that former Communist leader Todor Zhivkov himself might be implicated in the crimes committed in the camps.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Multiparty elections in Slovenia and Croatia
Elections to the assemblies in the northern republics of Slovenia and Croatia in the course of April and early May were Yugoslavia's first contested multiparty elections for 51 years.
The issue of the republics' future within the Yugoslav federation dominated the electoral campaigns.
Opposition victories over the ruling communist parties in both republics threatened to deepen Yugoslavia's political and ethnic crises, the victors having put forward manifestos featuring demands for greatly increased autonomy for the republics, even to the point of secession from Yugoslavia.
Slovenia
The six-party centre-right DEMOS opposition coalition won the direct elections on April 8 to the Slovene Assembly's main Socio-Political Chamber and on April 8 and 22 to the less powerful Chamber of Municipalities.
(Elections to a third chamber also with lesser powers — the Chamber of Associated Labour — were also held on April 8 and 22, but on a non-party basis.)
A separate direct election for the President of the Slovene presidency, held in two rounds on April 8 and 22, was won by Milan Kucan of the ruling LCS — Party of Democratic Renewal (the former Slovene League of Communists — see p. 37255).
DEMOS (the Democratic Opposition of Slovenia) comprised the Christian Democratic Party, the Peasants' Union, the Democratic Alliance, the League of Social Democrats, the Liberal Democratic Party and the Green Party.
Its election campaign, focusing not so much on criticism of communist rule as on demands for a redefinition of Slovenia's status within Yugoslavia, was attuned to the resentment felt by many Slovenes of the lack of political reform elsewhere in the country, of the hostility of the military leadership to Slovene reforms, and especially of Slovenia's subsidizing the economies of the "backward" southern republics: with only 8 per cent of Yugoslavia's population, Slovenia produced 20 per cent of its national product and 25 per cent of its exports, while paying nearly 4@1/2 times more in federal taxes to subsidize other republics than it received in federal finance programmes.
DEMOS advocated a new Yugoslav confederation in which Slovenia would enjoy virtually full sovereignty and economic independence, but did not rule out holding a referendum on secession if the Yugoslav federal authorities would not accept its plans for a new Slovene constitution, a separate currency, and withdrawal of all Slovene conscripts from the Yugoslav People's Army.
DEMOS took just under 55 per cent of the vote in the Socio-Political Chamber elections, which according to a proportional representation system gave it 47 of the 80 seats.
(Of the six DEMOS parties, the Christian Democrats performed best with 12.98 per cent of the vote and 11 seats, followed by the Peasants' Union with 12.55 per cent and 11 seats.)
The LCS — Party of Democratic Renewal emerged as the largest single party in the Chamber, taking 17 per cent and 14 seats, while the ZSMZ — Liberal Party (formerly the Slovene Socialist Youth Federation) took 14.49 per cent and 12 seats.
A total of 17 parties competed.
The turnout was over 80 per cent of the around 1,500,000 electorate.
Kucan's victory in the presidential election reflected the great personal popularity he had earned while serving as president of the Slovene League of Communists in 1986-89 for his defence of Slovenia's political reform process in the face of fierce opposition by the hardline leadership in Serbia.
In the first round of voting on April 8 Kucan took 44.5 per cent of the vote, compared with 26.2 per cent for DEMOS leader Joze Pucnik (of the Democratic Alliance), 18.9 per cent for Ivan Kramberger (independent), and 10.5 per cent for Marko Demsar (ZSMZ — Liberal Party).
In the second round run-off on April 22 Kucan defeated Pucnik by 58.4 per cent to 41.7 per cent.
Immediately after his election Kucan announced that he would renounce his party membership for the duration of his four-year term.
Croatia
The elections to the three chambers of the Croatian assembly, all conducted on a multiparty basis in two rounds on April 22 and May 6-7, were won overwhelmingly by the right-wing nationalist Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ), led by Franjo Tudjman.
The hitherto ruling Croatian League of Communists — Party of Democratic Change came second in a field of more than 30 political parties [the full results will be published in the next News Digest].
The HDZ fought an extreme nationalist and frequently anti-Serbian campaign based on demands for greater Croatian autonomy and economic independence, but also featuring statements by Tudjman calling for Croatia's annexation of parts of neighbouring Bosnia-Hercegovina, for Serbs in Croatia to be removed from influential positions, and for Croatia's secession from Yugoslavia.
Exploiting traditional Croat-Serb animosity, the HDZ staged provocative election rallies in localities inhabited by members of Croatia's Serb minority, prompting Serb nationalist protests and an attempt on Tudjman's life at one such rally in March.
Opponents claimed that HDZ policies were reminiscent of the fascist ustasha government which had ruled Croatia during the Second World War, and that it was receiving funds from ustasha emigré organizations.
Nevertheless, in a conciliatory statement following the announcement of the first round results heralding the HDZ victory, Tudjman professed caution on the issue of Croatian separatism, suggesting that a HDZ government would be content with Croatian sovereignty and greater independence within a confederal Yugoslavia, and would respect Serb interests.
Unlike in Slovenia, there was no separate direct election for the Croatian President, who was instead to be elected by the Croatian Assembly.
New Macedonian President
The State Presidency in Macedonia on April 28 elected Vladimir Mitkov as its President from among its members.
His mandate was to last until Macedonia's first multiparty general election due no later than April 1991.
End of Kosovo "special measures" — Resignation of Kosovo politicians — Release of Vlasi
It was announced on April 18 that the Federal Collective Presidency had agreed to lift the "special measures" in the autonomous province of Kosovo, a part of the Serbian republic, where disturbances involving the ethnic Albanian majority had been continuing for more than a year.
During the period of special measures, which had first been imposed in February 1989 [see pp. 36470; 36514-15; for additional special measures imposed in January 1990 see p. 37173], Serbian police and Serbian troops (the latter first being put on active service on Feb. 20 — see p. 37255) had faced widespread accusations of using excessive force to quell the strikes and demonstrations.
The Albanian protesters were claiming that constitutional changes introduced by the Serbian authorities in 1988-89 would lead to a diminution of Albanian influence, and to a growth of aggressive pro-Serbian policies.
On the day before the April 18 announcement, the President of the Serbian state presidency, Slobodan Milosevic, had declared that Serbia's own internal affairs secretariat had now taken over from the federal authorities in administering public security in the province.
(Serbia denied press reports that the move had entailed suspending the Kosovo police itself.)
It was also announced on April 18 that some 108 persons arrested or imprisoned for their part in the 1990 demonstrations would be released from custody.
The official news agency Tanjug had reported on April 3 that Yusuf Zehjnulahu, the Chairman of the Kosovo provincial assembly (i.e. the provincial Premier), had resigned his post in protest at what he described as the excessively brutal tactics employed by the Serbian authorities towards the ethnic Albanians in the province.
The Deputy Premier and the provincial Ministers for Education, Health, Agriculture and Transport had also resigned.
(For the resignation of the Interior Minister on March 26 see p. 37325.)
Azem Vlasi, the former leader of the League of Communists in Kosovo, was released from custody on April 24, together with 13 other persons, after being acquitted on charges of instigating counter-revolutionary demonstrations in the province.
Vlasi, whose trial had started in October 1989 [see p. 37156], had been arrested in March 1989 during the first round of riots.
It was reported on April 13, however, that charges had been brought against Fadilj Hodza, a prominent former state and party official, for inciting racial intolerance and religious hatred in connection with the 1989 riots.
Official statistics released on April 17 showed that 2,188 people, of whom the overwhelming majority were Serbs, had emigrated from Kosovo during 1989.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Renaming of state — Cabinet changes
The Federal Assembly on April 20 voted by a large majority to accept a proposal to rename the state the Czech and Slovak Federative Republic (CSFR), thereby ending weeks of controversy over the issue.
The Federal Assembly had accepted a compromise only on March 29, whereby different versions of the same title were to be used in the Czech Lands and in Slovakia [see p. 37326].
However, the compromise had led to protests in Slovakia.
The new title gave equal weight to both nationalities in the republic.
Cabinet changes — Controversy over Interior Minister
A series of changes in the federal government, involving demotions, dismissals and appointments, was announced on April 6.
Valtr Komarek and Jan Carnogursky were demoted from First Deputy Premier to Deputy Premier (because there was no point in differentiating between the two levels of post, according to Marian Calfa, the Federal Premier).
Frantisek Reichel was dismissed as Deputy Premier and Chairman of the State Commission for Scientific, Technical and Investment Development and replaced in both posts by Armin Delong.
Oldrich Bursky was also relieved of his post as Deputy Premier, but remained Minister of Agriculture and Food.
Jiri Dienstbier and Vaclav Vales were both appointed Deputy Premier (the former retaining his post of Foreign Minister).
Komarek said on April 9 that Reichel had been relieved of his posts because he wanted to concentrate on election work for the Czechoslovakian People's Party, of which he was a member.
However, Reichel himself claimed that he did not know the true reason for his dismissal, saying that he thought it might be due to disagreements over scientific policy.
Viliam Ciklamini and Jaroslav Prochazka, Federal Deputy Interior Ministers, were dismissed on April 20 after being accused by Richard Sacher, the Federal Interior Minister, of acting without his knowledge to have parliamentary deputies screened for connections with the former Statni Bezpecnost (StB — State Security, or secret police).
The two officials alleged that Sacher himself was engaged in vetting deputies and persons in state positions, and was employing former officers of the StB.
The dismissals followed calls from many quarters for Sacher to resign on the grounds that he was not doing enough to dismantle the StB structure (although officially the organization had been abolished on Feb. 1 — see p. 37255).
It was also suggested that he was using Interior Ministry files to discredit political opponents, and thereby promote the Czechoslovakian People's Party to which he belonged, in the lead-up to the June elections.
EUROPE
CENTRAL EUROPE
Bratislava summit of central European states
A summit meeting of Czechoslovak, Hungarian and Polish leaders, was held in Bratislava, Czechoslovakia, on April 9 to discuss the "return to Europe" of the three Warsaw Pact countries — i.e. their integration into European structures such as the European Communities (EC).
The Austrian, Italian and Yugoslav Foreign Ministers, Aloïs Mock, Gianni De Michelis and Budimir Loncar, also attended as observers.
Czechoslovakia was represented by President Vaclav Havel, Federal Premier Marian Calfa, Foreign Minister Jiri Dienstbier and the Czech and Slovak Premiers; Hungary by acting President Mátyás Szürös, Prime Minister Miklós Németh and Foreign Minister Gyula Horn, and Poland by President Wojciech Jaruzelski, Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki and Foreign Minister Krzystof Skubiszewski.
The summit dealt with the Czechoslovak proposal for a European security commission made up of the 35 states participating in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), as a first step towards a European confederation, as well as a similar Polish proposal.
It was agreed that a joint group of experts or deputy foreign ministers from Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Poland would prepare a joint stand at the next Helsinki conference in 1991, while another group would work out a plan of action for "entering Europe" .
De Michelis said that Italy (which was to assume the EC presidency for six months at the end of June 1990) would work to accelerate the process whereby the three countries drew closer to the EC.
The summit also discussed regional economic and ecological problems and the establishment of a Central European university.
In a separate bilateral meeting held on the fringes of the summit, Havel and Szürös discussed problems connected with the Hungarian minority in southern Slovakia and the Slovak minority in Hungary, which had been a source of tension between the two states.
Agreement was reached on setting up a joint commission of experts to deal with minority questions and on working towards guaranteeing minority rights.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Postponement of visit by former King
The ruling National Salvation Front (NSF) decided on April 11 to bar former King Michael, 68, who lived in exile, from entering the country.
It revoked the decision taken two weeks earlier to grant him a visa, on the grounds that he had refused to postpone until after the May 20 elections his planned departure from Switzerland with his wife Queen Anne and eldest daughters Princess Margerita and Princess Anne.
At a press conference held in the terminal of Zurich Airport on April 12 King Michael denied any political motive for the visit, claiming that it was based purely on "personal and spiritual reasons connected with my wish to spend Easter in my own country" .
The NSF claimed that during his planned 10-day visit over the Easter period the former King could be the unintentional subject of "obscure manipulations" which might threaten his dignity and safety, and that the publicity surrounding his presence could be seen "as a political gesture of a nature to bring unwanted elements into the election campaign" .
As such, this could "fan new passions" and result in violence.
The decision raised speculation that the NSF government believed the visit might benefit opposition parties.
On March 13 King Michael had written to interim President Ion Iliescu stating that he was prepared to lead the country to democracy through a constitutional monarchy.
This ran counter to the electoral law adopted on March 17, which decided that a president would preside over the executive and legislature [see p. 37327-28].
Approximately 150 monarchists gathered in the centre of Bucharest and an estimated 300 more at the capital's Otopen airport on April 12 shouting slogans denouncing the government and supporting the King, who had been forced to abdicate in 1947.
Two other daughters of the King, Princess Helen and Princess Sophie, whose arrival in Romania with relief convoys from the United Kingdom and Switzerland on April 10 had attracted widespread publicity, stated that they regretted the government's decision.
Prime Minister Petre Roman insisted on April 13 during an official visit to France that the King's intention to attend a demonstration in the Transylvanian city of Timisoara, which he claimed "would have been covered by about 80 journalists flown in by chartered plane" , invalidated the claim that his visit would have been only a "private" one.
The Group for Social Dialogue, a non-partisan organization of respected intellectuals, stated that the decision to deny the King entry "was not in accordance with the revolution of 1989" .
Major opposition parties in the Provisional Council of Unity (CNU), who had also reportedly opposed the visit as being "inopportune" , claimed that the NSF had acted unilaterally and that the decision was undemocratic.
An estimated 150 anti-monarchists demonstrated in Bucharest on April 16 in support of the NSF's decision, and became involved in brawls with hundreds of passers-by.
Reinstatement of Patriarch
On April 4 the Holy Synod of the Romanian Orthodox Church was reported to have voted unanimously for the reinstatement of its former head, Patriarch Teoctist Arapas, whose known complicity with the former regime of Nicolae Ceausescu had led to his "withdrawal" on Jan. 18 to the monastery of Sinaia, 120 km north of Bucharest [see p. 37192].
The decision, taken in the presence of the current Minister of Religion Nicolae Stoicescu (an old acquaintence of Teoctist who had shared responsibility for religious affairs under Ceausescu), was not universally welcomed.
On April 2 Anania Bartolomeu, a founder member of a study group for the renovation of the Orthodox Church, had reportedly visited Teoctist in an attempt to dissuade him from returning.
As reported on April 13, articles in the independent daily newspaper Romania Libera attacked the Synod's decision, and a letter of protest was signed by 138 prominent writers, professionals and dissident priests.
EUROPE
POLAND
Solidarity conference
The trade union Solidarity held a major national conference at Gdansk on April 19-25, at which the delegates discussed the growing need for policy development in the light of the country's rapidly changing political and economic character.
The conference was the first to be held by the union since the 1981 convention which had followed its first registration as a legal union [see p. 31213].
Although the union's supporters dominated the Polish government (formed in September 1989 by Tadeusz Mazowiecki — see pp. 36896-97), there had recently been a perceptible strain of resistance among the membership to its increasingly political role.
Consequently, the conference spent much of its time discussing the vexed question of whether or not to develop a specifically political platform from which to contest future parliamentary elections, alongside its normal trade union activities.
The conference decided on April 23, however, not to proceed with the establishment of a new Solidarity political party, in deference to the many delegates who had expressed reservations about the increasing politicization of the union.
Recent opinion polls had shown a dramatic decline in public support for the union, as it had become identified with government policy.
On April 22 the conference backed a call by Mazowiecki for the holding of free elections to the Sejm (parliament) in early 1991 — the next poll being due only in 1992 — and for changes to the Constitution which would abolish the right of the communist Polish United Workers' Party (PUWP) to make up 85 per cent of the Sejm's membership.
The delegates had, however, gone further than the Premier by demanding on April 22 that the country's President should henceforth be elected by popular vote, rather than by the two Houses of the Sejm, as at present.
There was fierce controversy surrounding the conference's decision on April 22 to invite, as guests, members of the 1981 Solidarity leadership who had since split away from the union — most notably the former national co-ordinating commission member Andrzej Gwiazda, who had left after accusing Solidarity's chairman, Lech Walesa, of generating a personality cult.
Gwiazda subsequently issued a statement, however, declaring his support for the union's aims.
Further statements of support came on April 27 from the non-Solidarity All-Poland Trade Union Accord (OPZZ).
The OPZZ declared, however, that its co-operation with Solidarity extended only to trade union matters, and stopped short of support for its role as a political movement.
The vote for presidential reform was seen as expressing impatience on the part of Walesa at the speed of political change in Poland.
Mazowiecki had appealed on April 19 for moderation in the speed of political reform, stressing that it was essential to be methodical in transferring state structures, and claiming that his policies were "already yielding results in the Prosecutor's Office, and in the Interior and Defence Ministries" .
Leszek Balcerowicz, the Finance Minister, called on the conference on April 23 to take a leading role in implementing the government's free-market economic policy, and to participate in training, in employment centres, and in direct talks with foreign investors.
He said that the economy was now stabilizing; inflation had fallen to around 5 per cent, and unemployment had gone no higher than 2 per cent .
Walesa was re-elected on April 22 as chairman of Solidarity, winning 362 of the of the 467 votes cast (77.5 per cent, compared with only 55 per cent in the 1981 elections).
He was widely believed to be preparing to run for the post of President of the Republic, a post which would entail his departure from the trade union leadership.
The Solidarity newspaper Gazeta Wyborcza reported on April 15, however, that a survey had found that 51 per cent of the population would "rather not" or "decidedly not" see Walesa as President.
Arson attack on Solidarity journalist
Warsaw police confirmed on April 24 that arsonists had been responsible for a fire on April 22 at the home of Jerzy Jachowicz, a journalist on Gazeta Wyborcza, in which his wife had been killed and his daughter injured.
Jachowicz had published numerous articles alleging abuses by the secret police.
A commission headed by the newly appointed First Deputy Prosecutor General was set up to examine the incident.
EUROPE
POLAND-SOVIET UNION
Admission of Soviet responsibility for Katyn massacre
The Soviet authorities on April 13 finally admitted Soviet responsibility for the massacre in 1940 of around 15,000 Polish Army officers, including over 4,000 whose remains had been discovered in mass graves in Katyn forest near the Soviet city of Smolensk.
The admission came on the eve of a visit to Katyn by Polish President Wojciech Jaruzelski.
Historical background
The massacre victims had been in a contingent of officers deported from eastern Poland following the September 1939 Soviet occupation and interned in camps run by the NKVD (the Soviet security service) at Kozelsk and Ostashkov in western Russia and at Starobelsk in the Ukraine.
In April 1943 Nazi German forces occupying the Smolensk area had disinterred what wartime and post-war international investigators concluded to be the remains of former Kozelsk camp inmates, who apparently in early 1940 had been taken to Katyn forest and shot.
The inmates of Ostashkov and Starobelsk were assumed to have suffered a similar fate, although their remains were never discovered.
The Soviet version of events had been that the Nazis themselves had committed the Katyn massacre after overrunning the Smolensk area in 1941.
However, on the strength of findings by a joint historical commission formed in 1987 to resolve "blank spots" in Polish-Soviet relations, in March 1989 the Polish authorities for the first time had contradicted the official Soviet line and had openly accused the Soviet Union of responsibility [see p. 36535].
Official Soviet announcement — Polish reaction
The official admission came in a statement by the Tass news agency.
This said that Soviet historians had recently discovered documents revealing that in April-May 1940 all but 394 inmates of the three camps had been turned over to NKVD administrations in Smolensk, Voroshilovgrad and Kalinin, and had been "never again mentioned in NKVD statistical accounts" .
Avoiding mention of exactly what befell the victims, the statement added that the archive material led to the conclusion that "direct responsibility for the crime committed in Katyn forest" fell to NKVD chief Lavrenti Beria and his subordinates.
It concluded: "The Soviet side, expressing profound regret over the Katyn tragedy, declares that this is one of the gravest crimes of Stalinism." 
At a meeting in Moscow on April 13 Jaruzelski received from President Gorbachev copies of the NKVD lists of the names of Polish internees in the three camps.
A statement by the Polish government said that the question of responsibility for the Katyn massacre had "weighed particularly painfully" on Polish-Soviet relations, and that the "long-awaited" Soviet admission made possible a relationship based on "partnership and true friendship" .
It continued: "Reconciliation can only be built on truth." 
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Appointments
Central government
President Gorbachev on April 18 appointed Igor Denisov as Minister of Health and Boris Panyukov as Minister of Civil Aviation [see also p. 37323].
The Soviet of the Union, one of the two USSR Supreme Soviet chambers, on April 3 elected Ivan Laptev as its chairman (Speaker), replacing Yevgeny Primakov (appointed in March to the new Presidential Council — see p. 37298).
Laptev was editor-in-chief of the government newspaper Izvestiya.
Gorbachev on April 3 named Arkady Maslennikov as his first presidential press spokesman.
Republican leaderships
In Kirghizia on April 10 and Tadjikistan on April 12 the newly elected republican Supreme Soviets elected the first secretaries of their republican Communist Parties (CP), respectively Absamat Masaliyev and Kakhar Makhkamov, to the post of Chairman (i.e. President of the republic).
In Kazakhstan on April 24 the new Supreme Soviet re-elected as its Chairman the Kazakh CP first secretary Nursultan Nazarbayev, who had held the post since Feb. 22.
The new Supreme Soviet in Estonia on April 3 elected Edgar Savisaar, an Estonian Popular Front leader, as Prime Minister.
In Byelorussia Vyacheslav Kebich was appointed Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime Minister) on April 7.
Vladimir Movsisyan was named as CP of Armenia first secretary on April 6, replacing Suren Arutyunyan [for new Latvian CP leader see above].
Economic relations between union and republics — Local government powers
Important legislation on republican and local government powers was passed in April by the USSR Supreme Soviet.
Fundamentals of economic relations between the USSR and the Union and Autonomous Republics, approved on April 26 and due to enter into force on Jan. 1, 1991, empowered union and autonomous republics among other things to own and utilize their land and natural resources; to set their own budgets; to levy taxes; and to conduct their own foreign economic relations.
They were specifically barred from introducing their own import and export restrictions without the consent of other republics, however, and from impeding the transit of goods and financial resources across their territory to or from another republic.
The central authorities would continue to exercise jurisdiction over such areas as the functioning of the all-union market; the all-union budget; all-union planning and development programmes; pricing policy; money supply; definition of minimum wages, pensions and other welfare benefits; administration of transport, major pipelines, defence installations, the power grid and telecommunications; and definition of norms and regulations for environmental protection.
A union or autonomous republic could appeal to the USSR Committee for Supervision of the Constitution or to the President of the USSR against USSR economic legislation or Council of Ministers resolutions.
While an appeal was being examined the republic could suspend the application on its territory of the acts in contention.
General principles of local self-government and local economy, approved on April 9 and due to enter into force progressively from July 1, granted local soviets (councils) "broad powers to decide matters relating to social and economic development and environmental protection" , including full control of their own budgets.
The law also laid down "new principles for forming the power structure" of local authorities, specifying that only those functions which could not be performed by the lower tiers of government should be delegated to higher bodies.
Threat of Communist Party split
The Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) politburo on April 9 published in the name of the party central committee an open letter to all Soviet communists entitled For consolidation on a foundation of principle.
It featured strong condemnation of the radical party faction known as the "Democratic Platform" , and appeared to give notice to faction members to leave the party or face expulsion.
The letter, and the reactions to it, confirmed that the CPSU was afflicted with deep factional divisions as it prepared for its 28th congress in July, and that an imminent party split was a very real prospect.
Contents of central committee open letter
It was noted by the central committee that ahead of the congress there had been "broad and free" debate on the draft platform published in February [see pp. 37234-35]which had shown "the multifaceted nature of views and positions existing in the party and in society" .
However, the central committee declared that it could not ignore "attempts being made by certain people to lead the party away from the strategic course it has adopted and, if this does not succeed, to provoke a split in it" .
These people, it stated, were to be found on both the right and left wings of the party.
The attack on factionalism nevertheless was concentrated on the Democratic Platform.
This was accused of having "unleashed a struggle against the party from pseudo-radical positions under the flag of perestroika" .
An alternative draft platform for the forthcoming congress, drawn up at the Democratic Platform's founding conference in January and from which it took its name [see p. 37235], was criticized for not attempting to make "a constructive contribution to the formulation of party strategy" and for concealing designs to turn the CPSU into a "shapeless association with complete freedom for factions and groupings, i.e. practically to dismantle it" .
The letter asked whether there could remain within CPSU ranks people who encouraged splits, engaged in factionalism and who "by their views and conduct have in effect placed themselves outside the party" .
It called for "communists, party organizations and their committees" to decide.
President Mikhail Gorbachev, commenting on the letter in a speech to a meeting of Komsomol (Young Communist League) activists in Moscow on April 10, stated that it should not be regarded as a call for a party purge, but that people at odds with CPSU policy should leave the party voluntarily.
However, at a session of the Komsomol's 21st congress on April 16 CPSU central committee ideology secretary Vadim Medvedev read out a central committee resolution which called for the expulsion from the CPSU of Democratic Platform leaders, albeit not those rank-and-file communists whom they had "led astray" .
A central committee official on April 12 reportedly speculated that the Democratic Platform commanded the support of nearly one-third of CPSU members.
Reaction by Democratic Platform leaders — Expulsions and resignations from CPSU
The Democratic Platform at a conference on March 18-19 had begun discussing whether it should prepare to set up a new political party immediately after the July congress, if its policies were not adopted.
The open letter, in part a response to this development, galvanized that discussion.
Vyacheslav Shostakovsky, a Democratic Platform leader, on April 11 denounced the letter as an attempt to restrict political debate ahead of the congress and said that the Platform could not be accused of trying to steer the party off course since that course was still being defined.
Insisting that the Platform was not fighting against the party but rather for its "democratic renewal aimed at adapting it to a multiparty system" , Shostakovsky called on Platform supporters to remain inside the CPSU until after the congress (a view endorsed on April 12 by leading radical Boris Yeltsin), and criticized a call made by fellow Democratic Platform leader Igor Chubais on April 11 for Platform supporters to resign their CPSU membership immediately.
Chubais claimed that the letter represented a coup inside the CPSU leadership by conservatives led by politburo member Yegor Ligachev (who in recent weeks had made several public statements attacking the Democratic Platform), while Yury Afanasyev said that it showed the party to be "beyond redemption" .
At a meeting on April 21-22 the Democratic Platform's co-ordinating council was divided over the question of whether to begin creating a new party immediately, with those in favour of an immediate split from the CPSU forming a steering committee chaired by Nikolai Travkin.
Chubais on April 10 was expelled from the CPSU by his district party committee in Moscow, and it was reported on April 12 that the Byelorussian and Ukrainian Communist Parties had begun expelling Democratic Platform members from their ranks.
On April 18 Afanasyev resigned his CPSU membership.
Latvian Communist Party split
An extraordinary Latvian Communist Party (CP) congress on April 6-7 resulted, as predicted, in a split into independent and pro-Moscow parties.
In contrast to the recent splits at CP congresses in Lithuania and Estonia, where majorities had favoured party independence [see 37128-29; 37168; 37323], a majority of the 792 Latvian CP congress delegates rejected a draft party programme hailed by the pro-independence lobby as the basis for achieving a consensus on the party's future, and instead voted to remain an integral part of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
This prompted a walkout by the 263-strong pro-independence minority, which on April 14 founded an independent Communist Party of Latvia.
The congress had been called specifically to resolve a crisis evident since November 1989 concerning factional splits over the independence question.
Its outcome largely reflected the Latvian CP's ethnic balance, nearly 60 per cent of members being drawn from Latvia's Russian and Byelorussian populations.
Following the walkout the remaining delegates elected hardliner Alfred Rubiks as first secretary in place of Janis Vagris, who had tried to steer the party on a middle course between the factions.
In the light of the failure to adopt the draft programme, it was decided to give the new party central committee the task of reworking it, and to suspend proceedings until after the 28th CPSU congress in July.
The April 14 constituent congress of the Independent Communist Party of Latvia elected Ivan Kezbers as party chairman, and announced a programme featuring a call for the restoration of Latvia's independence from the Soviet Union.
Ruling on controversial corruption investigators
The controversy surrounding the work of Telman Gdlyan and Nikolai Ivanov, chief corruption investigators with the USSR Procurator General's office, came to a head on April 18 when the USSR Supreme Soviet voted to refuse a request by the Procuracy that it rescind the mandates of the two men to sit in the Congress of People's Deputies, so that they might face criminal charges relating to coercion of suspects and witnesses.
However, it agreed to a demand that Gdlyan and Ivanov be dismissed from working in the Procuracy, and in a resolution it warned them that their parliamentary immunity from prosecution could yet be withdrawn if they persisted in making "groundless" statements attacking the country's leaders.
They had already been expelled in February from the Communist Party (CPSU) by the Procuracy's party branch committee for "slander, violating the law, political extremism and gross abuses of party rules" .
The Supreme Soviet decisions were based on findings by an official commission set up in May 1989 to examine the investigators' work.
The commission, chaired by former dissident Roy Medvedev, was set up after the press had reported allegations of malpractice in pursuit of convictions, while Gdlyan and Ivanov counter-alleged that senior officials implicated in corruption, including CPSU politburo member Yegor Ligachev, were backing a smear campaign against them [see pp. 36660-61; 36898].
The commission confirmed that the investigators had committed "gross violations of the law" , but shifted the ultimate blame on to the Procuracy for failing to exercise proper supervision.
Their pursuit of high-level official corruption, and the perception that they were being victimized for it, had earned Gdlyan and Ivanov significant public support.
While their case was being debated in the Supreme Soviet on April 17, around 10,000 of their supporters demonstrated outside the Kremlin, part of a series of rallies in Moscow and Leningrad which since February had attracted crowds of up to 30,000 people.
Anniversary of Tbilisi massacre
An all-night vigil on April 8-9 followed by a demonstration by at least 60,000 people in Tbilisi, the Georgian capital, marked the first anniversary of the violent suppression by Soviet troops of a peaceful nationalist demonstration in which 20 demonstrators had been killed [see pp. 36592-93; 36661; 36743; 36899].
The commemorative demonstration featured calls for the dozens of Georgian nationalist groups to unite in a struggle to achieve Georgia's independence, and for Georgians to boycott compulsory military service.
A group of about 5,000 demonstrators marched on the Tbilisi military headquarters bearing banners denouncing the Red Army as "occupiers" .
On March 9 the Georgian Supreme Soviet had declared illegal the treaties of 1921-22 by which Georgia had joined the Soviet Union, calling the Red Army occupation which had preceded them "an international crime" .
It demanded that the authorities in Moscow enter negotiations on restoring Georgia's independence.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Relaxation of isolationist policies
Ramiz Alia, President of Albania and first secretary of the ruling Party of Labour, speaking at the 10th plenum of the party's central committee in Tirana on April 17, declared an end to opposition to diplomatic ties with the Soviet Union and with the United States.
He added that Albania would also benefit from full diplomatic ties with the member countries of the European Communities (EC), saying that "we want friendly relations with all countries, irrespective of their social system" .
The two-day plenum approved limited economic reforms, and acknowledged internal problems, including corruption, and shortages of food and consumer goods.
Alia had also let it be known that Albania intended to take part in the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE), from which it alone had stood aside until now.
Diplomatic relations with the USA had been broken off after World War II, following Albanian suspicions that attempts were being made to subvert the communist regime of Enver Hoxha, who had taken power in 1944; relations with the Soviet Union were severed in 1961 following ideological disputes.
Relations with the United Kingdom had been severed in 1946, when two British destroyers were struck by mines in the Corfu Channel.
The UK continued to demand that Albania should pay the compensation awarded by the International Court of Justice, and refused to return Albanian gold (recovered from the Nazis) until such compensation was paid.
EUROPE
CSCE
East-West economic co-operation
For the first time since economic co-operation was established as one of the three "baskets" under the 1975 Helsinki Final Act, an economic meeting of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) was held in Bonn on March 19-April 11.
Over 600 economists, businessmen and politicians discussed ways to improve the commercial, legal and administrative framework of East-West economic co-operation.
The final document stressed the relationship between political pluralism and market economies and committed the 35 member nations to "endeavour to achieve" (i) free and competitive market economies with prices based on supply and demand;(ii) fiscal and monetary policies which promoted economic growth and enhanced the ability of markets to function efficiently;(iii) policies aimed at expanding the free flow of trade, capital and investment; and (iv) the repatriation of profits in convertible currencies.
Mention was also made of the importance of reliable economic data, for private capital to become the principal source of external finance and support for the proposed European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Alan Holmer, head of the United States delegation, said that the adoption of these principles made it "more likely that current trends towards market economies and political pluralism will continue" , and was a signal to the West that Eastern Europe was now "open for business" .
One issue not on the agenda, on US insistence, was the COCOM list [see pp. 37021; 36822].
Commentators also made the point that while the Bonn meeting referred to East-West co-operation, effective agreements and trade treaties came within the sphere of activity of the European Communities, which preferred to negotiate with the East European countries individually.
Nevertheless, the results of the meeting, although not legally binding, carried considerable moral and political force and marked a formal commitment by the East European countries to Western-style free markets and convertible currencies.
EUROPE
UK, FRANCE-UNITED STATES
Thatcher-Bush and Mitterrand-Bush meetings
The United States President George Bush and the United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher held talks in Bermuda on April 13 which focused on the future of NATO and the defence arrangements for a united Germany.
At the talks, Thatcher played down her previous insistence on updating NATO's ground-launched, short-range Lance missiles, but still wanted NATO to retain a nuclear capacity on German soil in the shape of a modernized air-launched nuclear missile system.
Bush was more cautious about such a possibility, but accepted her view that the UK must not become the only European NATO member to provide bases for air-launched nuclear weapons.
Both were agreed that nuclear weapons and US forces should stay in Europe, and that NATO should be the core of the Western alliance, with a united Germany being a full member of NATO, including its military structure.
Other NATO matters, such as the introduction of a multinational command structure with a European as supreme commander, and new ideas on changes which might enable France to rejoin NATO's military command [see below], were also understood to have been raised.
The two leaders exchanged ideas on developing the role of the 35-nation Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE) to build democracy and safeguard human rights throughout Europe without downgrading the role of NATO.
Thatcher was reported as wanting the CSCE to set out the conditions for free elections, provide observers to monitor their observance, define the rule of law and human rights, set out the essential principles for sound legal systems and help to resolve minority rights issues.
It was reported that among other items under discussion were the questions of US support for the mandatory repatriation of Vietnamese boat people and of US passports for Hong Kong citizens, issues on which the two countries had had differences of opinion during the past year.
In general, both leaders stressed their unanimity on all the main subjects, including the last-minute question of the Soviet ultimatum to Lithuania [see p. 37361], which came at the end of the summit and which both leaders roundly condemned.
The evolution of the European security system, and specifically the future of NATO and France's role within it, was also the main item on the agenda at a one-day summit meeting between Bush and President François Mitterrand of France in Key Largo, Florida, on April 19.
In the period preceding the summit, observers had noted the French government's willingness to take part in a broad discussion on NATO's future aims and organization within the context of a general rethinking of European security needs and a commitment to greater European self-reliance in defence matters.
This was widely regarded as indicating a warmer attitude towards NATO, in which France's position had been ambiguous since it withdrew from its integrated military structure in 1966.
At the concluding press conference, both leaders stressed the importance of maintaining cohesion within NATO and of maintaining US troops in Europe.
Mitterrand, however, said that France would remain outside the alliance's military structure, noting that this policy had worked successfully for his country for a quarter of a century.
He also stressed that NATO must "seek out areas of complementarity with the other bodies within which the allies find themselves together in Europe" , notably the European Communities (EC) and the CSCE, to which he accorded particular importance as "the only place where all European countries can meet" .
 "To prepare the Europeans for the idea of playing an increased role in working for their own defence," he said, "I suggested to President Bush, and he agreed, that we propose to our allies to hold a NATO summit before the end of the year." 
Asked to comment, Bush said that his views of Europe's future security were "very close" to Mitterrand's, and denied that there was a danger of a rift between the USA and its European allies.
EUROPE
IRELAND
Controversies over non-extradition
On April 6 the Irish Supreme Court in Dublin upheld an appeal against the extradition to Northern Ireland of Owen Carron, the former Anti-H Block/Armagh MP for Fermanagah and South Tyrone (in 1981-83) who was wanted in the province for alleged firearms offences [see p. 34318].
The ruling followed the Court's refusal in March to extradite Dermot Finucane and James Pius Clarke, two escaped prisoners who were members of the Irish Republican Army (IRA)[see pp. 37329-30], and further strained Irish-United Kingdom relations.
The Supreme Court, overturning a ruling by the High Court on March 16, 1989, ruled that such offences constituted political offences under Section 50 of the Extradition Act 1965, and that the principles laid down in the case of Finucane also applied in Carron's case.
The release of the three reinforced the prospect of others using the political defence against extradition, seeking to persuade Irish courts not to extradite those charged with terrorist offences if it could be proved that such offences had been committed in the cause of the reunification of Ireland.
Haughey's visit to Northern Ireland
In what was reported to be the first visit by an Irish Prime Minister to Northern Ireland for 25 years, Charles Haughey, the Taoiseach, visited Belfast on April 11.
During the visit, which he made in his capacity as President of the European Council of the European Communities, he addressed a conference of the Institute of Directors.
Afterwards he stated that both the Irish and the UK governments were doing everything possible to combat terrorism.
Although large-scale protest against the visit had been expected, only a few hundred demonstrators gathered outside the hotel, led by the Rev. Ian Paisley, the Democratic Unionist Party MP.
Proposed abolition of capital punishment
An Irish government bill published on April 25 proposed the formal abolition of the death penalty and the introduction of 40-year mandatory terms of imprisonment for treason and for the murder of police officers, prison officers, foreign diplomats and heads of state.
Although no one had been hanged in Ireland since 1954 and capital punishment had been abolished for most categories of murder in 1964 [see p. 19227], it had been nominally retained for those categories specified above.
In practice, those convicted of the murder of police officers had had their automatic death sentences commuted to 40-year prison sentences [see for example p. 34760].
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Prison riot
Violence broke out among some of the 1,600 prisoners at Strangeways Prison in Manchester on April 1, initially during a service in the chapel.
Prisoners rapidly occupied large parts of the prison, and caused massive damage to the building.
The death of a remand prisoner was confirmed on April 3 and on April 5 a prison officer who had been on duty on April 1 died of a heart attack.
After a sustained rooftop protest publicising their complaints about prison conditions, the last group of five prisoners finally surrendered on April 25.
In general a controversial relatively low-profile approach was adopted by the authorities, although on occasions prisoners were drenched with water from hoses, and siren and other loud noises were used.
Widespread but unconfirmed reports suggested that the prison governor, Brendan O'Friel, who later spoke of the riot originating in "an explosion of evil" , had been overruled when about to launch an assault on the prison on the second day of the occupation.
In a statement on April 5 in the House of Commons David Waddington, the Home Secretary, announced that an inquiry into the riot would be conducted by Lord Justice (Sir Harry) Woolf, an Appeal Court judge.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
Approval of abortion law — Constitutional crisis over King's refusal to give royal assent
The Chamber of Deputies, by 126 votes to 69, with 12 abstentions, on March 29 approved a law allowing abortions during the first 12 weeks of pregnancy for women who were deemed by doctors to be "in a state of distress" .
Although the issue split the centre-left coalition, with most of the Christian Democrats (CVP/PSC) voting against and most Socialists (SP/PS) voting for the bill, the parties had previously agreed to allow a free vote and not to let the result lead to a government crisis.
The more liberal law replaced one from 1867 which declared abortion a criminal offence punishable by up to 10 years' imprisonment.
(This had, however, not been fully enforced for some years, and it was estimated that around 15,000 abortions were performed annually in Belgium.)
King's moral objections
Passage of the new measure (which had already been approved by the Senate in September 1989) precipitated an unprecedented constitutional crisis because of King Baudouin's refusal to give it the royal assent.
In a letter to Prime Minister Wilfried Martens, the King, a devout Catholic, declared that his conscience barred him from signing the abortion bill into law.
"I am aware that…
I am not taking an easy road and that I risk not being understood by many fellow countrymen, "he wrote," but this is the only road I can follow in conscience.
Is it normal that I am the only Belgian citizen who must act against his conscience in such important matters?
Do all have freedom of conscience except the King?"
He said that he did not wish to block the legal process, however, and asked the government to find "a legal solution in which the need of the good functioning of parliamentary democracy can be reconciled with the right of the King not to act in violation of his conscience" .
Such a solution was found by the government by invoking, with the King's agreement, a clause in the Constitution dealing with the sovereign's "incapacity to reign" which empowered parliament to suspend the sovereign and execute his functions.
Accordingly, parliament at a joint session suspended King Baudouin on April 4, and itself signed the abortion bill into law.
The following day the King was reinstated as the head of state by 245 votes to none, with the opposition Liberals (PVV/PLP) abstaining.
The legality of the move was widely questioned by constitutional experts, who claimed that the constitution envisaged the removal of the sovereign only in case of physical or mental inability to rule and not on moral grounds.
The King was also widely criticized for in effect putting his conscience above his role as head of state.
Opinion polls, however, suggested widespread popular sympathy for his predicament.
The crisis also raised wider issues concerning the role of the sovereign.
Politicians across the spectrum called for a change in the legal process to avoid a repeat of the suspension.
During a debate on a vote of confidence over the government's handing of the crisis on April 26, Martens announced that the government intended to propose a "structural change" in the Constitution.
Although he did not elaborate, it was thought likely that this would involve curtailing the sovereign's already largely ceremonial powers even further, possibly by abolishing the need for the royal assent.
EUROPE
SPAIN
Vote of confidence
Prime Minister Felipe González, the leader of the Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE), on April 5 won a vote of confidence in the Congress of Deputies, concluding five months of uncertainty over the exact distribution of seats in the 350-seat Congress resulting from the October general election, after which recounts and repeat elections had been necessary in a number of constituencies.
The final distribution of seats among the three major parties was: PSOE 175, Popular Party (PP) 107, United Left (IU) 18.
With exactly half the seats in the Congress the PSOE was without an absolute majority for the first time since it came to power in 1982.
However, the four Basque deputies elected in October for United People (HB) had still not taken up their seats, and the Constitutional Court confirmed in a ruling on March 29 that they would not be permitted to do so unless they swore the conventional oath of allegiance to the Constitution [see p. 37135].
The 14 Democratic and Social Centre (CDS) deputies abstained in the April 5 confidence vote.
Major ETA arrests
A French Basque, Henri Parot, arrested at a routine roadblock outside Seville on April 2 with 300 kg of explosives in his car, admitted that he was the leader of the "itinerant commando" of the Basque separatist organization ETA which had killed at least 33 people in Spain over the past 12 years, including Gen. Victor Lago Roman in Madrid in 1982 [see p. 32803]and the Madrid prosecutor Carmen Tagle on Sept. 12, 1989.
The commando had been planning a car bomb attack in Seville during its April fair.
As the result of information provided by Parot, 17 others were arrested on April 4-5 in south-west France including two other members of the commando, Jacques Esnal and Frederic Haramboure, who had slipped through the Seville roadblock, and a Benedictine monk; nine were transferred to Paris for interrogation.
An arrest warrant was also issued for Francisco Mugica Garmendia (Artapalo), leader of ETA's military wing to whom Parot's commando was directly responsible.
Almost exactly two years before the World Fair (Expo-92) was due to open, ETA on April 22 formally declared war on the event and claimed responsibility for sending a parcel bomb which seriously injured a secretary at the Expo offices on April 19.
EUROPE
WEST GERMANY
Stabbing of Lafontaine
Oskar Lafontaine, the opposition Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) candidate for chancellor and Minister President of Saarland, was stabbed in the neck and seriously injured by an apparently mentally disturbed women at an election rally in Cologne on April 25.
As the rally closed, the woman went up to Lafontaine to offer him a bouquet of flowers and to ask for his autograph.
She then stabbed him with a butcher's knife hidden in the bouquet.
A vein in Lafontaine's neck was cut, and he lost a large amount of blood, but the knife just missed a main artery.
After a two-hour operation doctors announced that his life was no longer in danger.
The 42-year-old suspect, Adelheid Streidel, admitted trying to kill Lafontaine so that "she would get in the news" , according to the regional prosecutor.
He said that the woman, who had been diagnosed as a schizophrenic in 1986 after an attempted arson attack, would probably not be fit to stand trial because of her mental condition.
There were no signs that the attack had been politically motivated.
Lafontaine made a quick recovery and was released from hospital on May 2.
SPD officials subsequently confirmed that he intended to remain the party's candidate for chancellor in the federal elections scheduled for Dec. 2.
EUROPE
GREECE
Narrow election victory for New Democracy — Formation of majority government
An early general election held on April 8, the third within a year, broke the deadlock which followed the inconclusive polls of June and November 1989 [see pp. 36738; 37050].
The right-wing New Democracy (Nea Dimokratia — ND) won 150 seats in the 300-seat Assembly (Vouli), a net gain of two seats, and increased its share of the vote by 0.7 per cent.
When the results became known the party leader, Konstantinos Mitsotakis, met with the single member of a small centre-right party, Democratic Renewal (Komma Dimokratikis Ananeosis — DIANA), who agreed to give external support to an ND government to break the deadlock and avoid a fourth general election.
This enabled Mitsotakis to form the first single-party government since 1981.
The DIANA deputy, Kostis Stefanopoulos, had been a member of ND but had left it to form his own party after a leadership dispute with Mitsotakis in September 1985 [see p. 34441].
The major left-wing party, the Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement (Panellinion Sotsialistikou Kinema — Pasok), which had been in government from 1981 until June 1989, lost 2.1 per cent and four seats.
The communist-dominated Coalition of the Left and Progress (Synaspismos) lost 0.8 per cent and two seats.
The election of four independent candidates supported by both Pasok and Synaspismos, however, meant that the left's net losses amounted to only two seats.
The three remaining seats were won by two representatives of the Turkish Moslem minority in Thrace (a gain of one), and one environmentalist candidate.
Although voting was compulsory, the turnout was only 77 per cent, widely considered by observers an indication of voters' "election fatigue" .
The election campaign
The election had become necessary after the all-party government of Xenofon Zolotas, formed after the previous inconclusive election, collapsed in March over disagreements on how to tackle the country's worsening economic problems.
As in the two previous elections, campaigning was dominated by economic issues, in particular the problems of the public-sector deficit, external debt and high inflation (currently running at 17.8 per cent, by far the highest in the European Communities).
ND argued for more free-market economic policies and deep cuts in government spending, while Pasok and Synaspismos called for the preservation of welfare provisions and for a higher productivity in the public sector.
A second major issue concerned the fate of the United States military bases in Greece; ND wanted to maintain them, while Pasok called for a referendum on the issue, and Synaspismos wanted the bases closed.
In addition, the year-long political deadlock had itself become an election issue because the weak coalitions formed after the previous elections had been unable to deal with the economic crisis and the growth of urban terrorism.
New government
Mitsotakis and his 38-member Cabinet (including alternate and junior ministers) were sworn in on April 11.
The major appointments included Antonis Samaras (Foreign Affairs) and Miltiades Evert (Minister to the Prime Minister), both widely regarded as possible future party leaders.
Two senior ND members, Tzannis Tzannetakis (who had briefly been Prime Minister in 1989) and Athanassios Kanellopoulos, were appointed Deputy Prime Ministers.
The two key economic portfolios went to Georgios Souflias, who had held the Finance portfolio in the previous government, and Yannis Palaiokrassas, the ND campaign manager.
The composer Mikis Theodorakis, a former communist, was appointed Minister without Portfolio.
In presenting his administration's programme to parliament on April 24, Mitsotakis stressed his desire for consensus and reaffirmed the economic platform on which ND had been elected.
The government duly gained a vote of confidence on April 26, winning 152 votes (ND, DIANA and one of the independent Moslem deputies).
The following day the government introduced emergency measures to tackle the economic crisis.
These included (i) increases of between 10 and 25 per cent for electricity, petrol, public transport and postal charges;(ii) increases in the rates of value added tax by 2 per cent; and (iii) surcharges of 7 per cent on taxes paid in 1989 on professional incomes and company profits.
1990 1989 1990Nov 89 ND 150 148 46.9 46.2 Pasok 123 127 38.6 40.7 Synaspismos 19 21 10.2 11.0 Ecologist Alternative 1 1 0.8 0.6 DIANA 1 0 0.7 0.5 independents and others 6* 3 2.8 1.0 *Includes four independents supported by Pasok and the Coalition and two representatives of the Turkish Moslem community in Thrace.
Konstantinos Mitsotakis Prime Minister, Merchant Marine Tzannis Tzannetakis Deputy Prime Minister, Culture Athanassios Kanellopoulos Deputy Prime Minister, Justice Miltiades Evert Minister to the Prime Minister Antonis Samaras Foreign Affairs Yannis Varvitziotis Defence Sotiris Kouvelas Interior Georgios Souflias Economy, Tourism Yannis Palaiokrassas Finance Mihalis Papakonstantinou Agriculture Aristides Kalatzakos Labour Marietta Yannakou Health, Welfare and Social Security Vassilis Kondoyannopoulous Education and Religious Affairs Yannis Vassiliadis Public Order Stavros Dimas Industry, Energy and Technology Athanassios Xarhas Commerce Nikolaos Gelesthasis Transport and Communications Stefanos Manos Environment, Town Planning and Public Works Georgios Tzitzikostas Macedonia and Thrace Georgios Misailides Aegean Mikis Theodorakis Without Portfolio
Election results
percentage
Greek Cabinet
(major portfolios)
EUROPE
TURKEY
Measures to curb Kurdish insurgency
Faced with rapidly escalating Kurdish unrest in the country's south-eastern provinces, the Army-dominated National Security Council on March 28 outlined a package of measures for the area.
Over the following two weeks President Turgut Özal called meetings of both party leaders and of the Council of Ministers, and on April 13 full details of the measures were announced.
The measures imposed new restrictions on press reporting of the Kurdish insurgency in south-east Anatolia.
All news reports would henceforth have first to be "co-ordinated" with the Interior Ministry, while publishing houses could face fines of up to 100,000,000 Turkish lira (about US$40,000) and immediate closure if found guilty of printing any material deemed to "pose a threat to the rule of law" .
The measures empowered the south-eastern regional governor to send individuals into internal exile in other regions if "he deemed them a threat to public order" .
Sentences for assisting "separatist terrorists" were to be doubled, while local officials were given the right to ban strikes and shop-closing protests.
On April 10, the Press Council declared that the proposed changes were reminiscent of the 1925 Takrir-e Sukun (law of silence) and "were in no way relevant to 1990s Turkey" , while on April 11 the Journalists' Association accused the government of wanting to "destroy the right of reporting altogether" .
Reaction from opposition leaders was more muted and the Independent of April 10 described the parties as agreeing to support the measures "in the national interest" .
The editor of the left-wing magazine Towards 2000 went into hiding on April 12 following a police raid in his absence on his office and residence, and the magazine's publishers, Hürriyet, announced they would cease publishing the magazine for fear of violating the new rules on censorship.
By April 19 The Times reported that the police had visited the offices of a number of Istanbul publishing houses and that printers had cancelled orders to print 18 periodicals deemed in the past to have shown some sympathy to the Kurdish cause.
Escalating Kurdish insurgency
Kurdish unrest in south-eastern Anatolia spread during March and April, leading newspapers to describe the uprising as an intifada similar to the Palestinian uprising in Israeli-occupied territories.
The Turkish radio station Anatolia announced on April 11 that 95 people had been reported killed since the beginning of March in the south-east of Turkey, compared with only 16 in the whole first quarter of 1989.
The total loss of life since the insurgency began in 1984 was unofficially put at between 2,100 and 2,500.
A major operation was launched by government forces on April 9-10 against guerrilla targets near the village of Dymakkya in the province of Hakkari.
In the attack 36 people were killed, of whom 21 were Kurdish guerrillas.
Some unconfirmed reports listed among the dead a Kurdish Workers' Party (KWP or PKK) leader, Dr Baran, described as responsible for planning guerrilla operations from Syrian-supported training camps in the Bekaa Valley in Lebanon.
Expulsion of West German diplomats
In what was described by The Times of April 20 as "the worst crisis in relations between the two NATO allies" , 15 Turkish diplomats were withdrawn from the Turkish embassy in Bonn, West Germany, and eight West German diplomats were expelled from Ankara.
The Turkish government declared that the security of its diplomats was threatened following the screening in March of a programme on West German television, which claimed that West German security services had uncovered up to 30 Turkish secret police, posing as diplomats, who were spying on the 1,500,000 Turks in West Germany.
EUROPE
CYPRUS
TRNC presidential elections
On April 22 Rauf Denktash obtained 67.5 per cent of the vote to be re-elected President of the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (TRNC, recognised only by Turkey), with relatively few voting for candidates of opposition parties which wanted to offer more concessions to the Greek Cypriots.
The result was therefore interpreted as a clear endorsement by the island's minority Turkish Cypriot community of his uncompromising stand for TRNC self-determination during February-March talks at the United Nations with his Greek Cypriot counterpart President Georgios Vassiliou [see p. 37331].
Denktash, President since the declaration of the TRNC in 1975 [see pp. 27033-35], was reported to have confirmed that this would be his final five-year term in office.
Elections to the TRNC parliament were due in May.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Agreement on agricultural support measures for 1990-91
The Council of (Agriculture) Ministers of the European Communities (EC) on April 27 reached agreement on a pricing package for agricultural produce in the year starting April 1, 1990.
In their efforts to reduce surplus food production in the EC, the ministers agreed to maintain for another year the virtual freeze on farm prices (when expressed in European currency units — ECU) which had been in effect since 1987 [see pp. 35534; 35915; 36493; 36599; 37209].
Nevertheless, adjustments in the exchange rates from ECUs to national "green" currencies and changes to other payment arrangements resulted in effective increases for farmers.
In particular in the United Kingdom, a devaluation of the "green pound" (helped by recent falls in the value of sterling) was expected to result in price rises of up to 11 per cent.
The ministers also agreed to shorten from 120 days to 30 days the payment period for buying in grain for EC intervention stocks.
The move was intended to boost farmers' cash flow, and thus to counterbalance a 3 per cent cut in the intervention price which was due to be invoked in July under the EC cereals stabilizer regime [see p. 35914]because of the heavy cereal crop in 1989-90.
For dairy farmers the payment period was reduced from 45 days to 30 days.
EUROPE
DISASTERS
Ferry fires
At least 159 people died in the worst ferry disaster in Scandinavian history when the 10,500-ton Danish-operated Scandinavian Star caught fire in the North Sea on the night of April 7.
The ferry, en route from Oslo in Norway to Frederikshavn in Denmark, was sailing under a Bahamian flag of convenience, and survivors contended that the death toll was aggravated by the crew's unfamiliarity with safety procedures, the large majority being Filipino and Portuguese and also new to the ship.
A maritime court of inquiry which opened on April 11 heard that fire doors malfunctioned, and, contrary to regulations, no passenger list was held on land.
The passenger death toll had not been finalized as young children did not need to be registered.
The Norwegian master, Hugo Larsen, blamed arson, and a further criminal hearing was expected.
Scandinavian seamen's unions called for an end to the use of flags of convenience in Scandinavian waters (ships' safety precautions being the responsibility of the country with which they were registered).
This disaster focused media attention on other ferry fires.
One man died on board the Reine Mathilde when it caught fire on April 9, sailing between Caen in France and Portsmouth, England, although not directly as a result of the fire; arson was not suspected.
On the same day the B & I ferry Norrona caught fire en route from Pembroke in Wales to Rosslare in Ireland; two men suspected of arson were detained and later released on bail.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Continued deterioration in relations with West — "Supergun" affair
Iraq's relations with the West and Israel continued to deteriorate during April.
Relations had already become seriously strained following the mid-March execution in Baghdad of the United Kingdom-based journalist Farzad Bazoft and had worsened towards the end of the month when the UK and the United States claimed to have foiled an Iraqi plot to import nuclear detonators [see p. 37322].
Iraq had successfully tested a modified Soviet Scud-B missile (the al-Husayen) in 1987, effectively doubling its 300-km range, thereby placing Tel Aviv, Tehran and Damascus within range.
Further modifications led Iraq to claim in 1989 the development of a second missile, the al-Abbas, with a 900-km range.
Iraq was also reported to have invested in the Argentine Condor II and, possibly, the Brazilian SS-300.
A report in the New York Times in late March 1990 quoted US intelligence sources as saying that Iraq had recently completed the construction of six launchers for its al-Husayen missiles at the H-2 air base in western Iraq near the Jordanian border.
Increased Iraqi-Jordanian military co-operation during early 1990 had also improved Iraq's potential air and ground access to Israel's eastern border.
Israel, meanwhile, had the most advanced ballistic missile force outside the five acknowledged nuclear powers.
In addition, Israel was thought to possess as many as 100 undeclared nuclear warheads as a result of its clandestine nuclear-weapons programme launched in the 1960s.
A high level of technical expertise meant that Israel almost certainly possessed warheads small enough for delivery on its Jericho II missiles (maximum range 750 km).
A report in the Jerusalem Post of April 14 outlined a number of possible consequences of the re-introduction of the "Iraqi factor into the Arab-Israeli conflict" .
Israel would be forced to consider the deployment of an upgraded "Patriot" air-defence system, and to move ahead with its "Arrow" anti-tactical ballistic missile project.
In addition, the "restoration of the Iraqi threat" had serious implications for the Palestinian peace process, because early-warning and air-defence positions along the hilltops of the West Bank and along the Golan Heights "become more critical" , and the "wider context of the Israeli-Arab conflict comes back into focus" .
Statement by Hussein on Iraqi nuclear and chemical capacity
In a speech delivered to members of the armed forces on April 2, President Saddam Hussein robustly defended Iraq against Western accusations over its alleged nuclear aspirations.
Hussein denied that Iraq had attempted to import nuclear triggers, and claimed that the capacitors seized in London were cheap, standard devices with a multitude of uses.
 "British, US and Zionist intelligence" had used the capacitors as part of their "policy of entrapment" .
Iraq did not need a nuclear device, because it already had stocks of binary chemical weapons and, he went on, any country which threatened Iraq with an atomic bomb would be "annihilated" by the chemicals.
He asserted that the West was searching for a pretext for an Israeli military assault on Iraq and that this was a mistake, "because by God we will make the fire eat up half of Israel if it tries to do anything against Iraq" .
Reaction to speech
Commentators claimed that Hussein's speech did nothing less than alter the strategic balance in the Middle East.
The Middle East International of April 13 stated that "for the first time in the history of the Arab-Israeli conflict, mutual deterrence has been introduced as a strategic concept" .
The speech was warmly endorsed throughout the Arab world.
A statement issued at the close of an extraordinary meeting of the Foreign Ministers of the Arab Co-operation Council (ACC, comprising Iraq, Egypt, Jordan and North Yemen) in Amman on April 4 said that the national security of Iraq was "a basic part of pan-Arab security" , and that the ACC countries and the Arab nation were duty-bound to support Iraq against any aggression or threat to which that country might be exposed.
Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz expressed his country's readiness to destroy its chemical weapons stocks on condition that Israel did the same and also signed the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty, to which Iraq was already a party.
An emergency session of the Arab League Council held in Tunis on April 5 "viewed with extreme concern the political statements and the unjust hostile and tendentious media campaign against Iraq" .
The Council reiterated its adherence to the 1950 Collective Security Pact, which stipulated that aggression against one Arab state was an aggression against all Arab states.
Syria, Iraq's most implacable rival in the Arab world, voiced its support for President Saddam.
In an April 4 interview the Syrian Foreign Minister, Farooq ash-Shar ", said that his country expressed solidarity with any Arab country, regardless of its" conceit and arrogance", which was the target of an Israeli threat.
Although Egypt offered its full support to Iraq, it still managed to assert its role as a regional moderator and as the main link between the Arab states, Israel and the West; thus, during a visit to Baghdad on April 7, Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak widened the debate by calling for the mass elimination of all weapons of mass destruction.
The office of the Israeli Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, issued a statement on April 3 warning that Israel had "proven in the past that it is able to defend itself and will not be blackmailed" .
(In 1981 Israel had launched a surprise air attack on Iraq's Osirak nuclear reactor site — see p. 31908.)
In what was claimed to be a complete coincidence, Israel launched Ofek 2, its second space satellite, on April 3 [for launch of Ofek 1 in September 1988 see p. 36637].
Ofek 2 was officially described as an experimental scientific satellite, but press reports suggested that it could also be used to gather military intelligence.
US President George Bush issued a statement on April 3 strongly urging Iraq to abandon the production of chemical weapons.
Two days later the USA expelled an Iraqi diplomat based at the UN in New York for his alleged role in an assassination plot aimed at US-based Iraqi opposition figures.
Iraq denied the charge, and accused the USA of intensifying its anti-Iraqi campaign.
In a reciprocal gesture on April 11, Iraq expelled a US diplomat from Baghdad.
The US NBC network reported on April 11 that Iraq was producing and stockpiling biological weapons.
Although President Hussein denied the allegations during a meeting with a US Senate delegation on April 11, he refused to give a full assurance that Iraqi scientists would not research into biological weapons.
The "supergun" affair
The issue of Iraq's military capability and long-term strategy remained to the fore during the rest of April with the emergence of British allegations that Baghdad was attempting to develop an enormous cannon, possibly with the intention of launching a satellite.
The Iraqi "supergun" affair, as it came to be known in the UK media, first came to light on April 10 when UK customs officials in Teesside detained a consignment of steel cylinders bound for Iraq.
The cylinders, it was claimed, were designed to be fitted together to form the barrel of a giant 40-metre gun.
Customs officials also removed documents from the premises of the manufacturers of the cylinder, Sheffield Engineering (SE, a subsidiary of Sheffield Forgemasters) and a West Midlands-based engineering company, Walter Summers (WS, a subsidiary of Eagle Trust).
SE claimed that the cylinders were for an Iraqi petrochemical project and that their export had been approved by the UK's Department of Trade and Industry (DTI).
However, UK Ministry of Defence officials examined the cylinders on April 12 and confirmed that they were "capable of being a gun" .
Iraq denied that the cylinders were part of a gun and maintained that they were for use in the petrochemical industry.
A report in the Independent on Sunday of April 15 alleged that a Brussels-based company, Space Research Corporation (SRC), was deeply involved in the affair.
SRC, the report alleged, had worked closely with the Iraqi government in designing a large gun and had commissioned SE and WS to produce cylinders and other components.
Until recently SRC had been owned and operated by Gerald Bull, a Canadian artillery expert who had close links with the Iraqi regime, being a friend of Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil, the Iraqi Minister of Military Industries.
Bull had worked in the past on a joint US/Canadian High Altitude Research Project (HARP), which had examined the possibility of firing missiles and rockets into space using a giant gun.
Bull had been shot dead in Brussels on March 22, 1990, and according to some reports Mossad, the Israeli secret service, had been involved in the assassination.
Eagle Trust (the parent company of WS) admitted on April 17 that it had recently shipped hydraulic equipment to Iraq which could have been used as a recoil system for a gun.
Eagle Trust claimed that WS had originally believed that the equipment was for petrochemical use, but in March 1990 the management had become suspicious and had informed the British authorities.
In a further disclosure on April 18 Astra Holdings, the British ammunition and fireworks group, confirmed that its Belgian subsidiary PRB had been contracted to produce a very large gun propellant for an Iraqi customer.
In a statement to the House of Commons on April 18 Nicholas Ridley, the Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, confirmed the government's belief that the cylinders were part of a gun, the scale of which was "outside anything previously experienced" .
Ridley also confirmed that the DTI had been contacted in 1988 by SE and WS, but that "on the information available at the time" it had been decided that export licences were not required.
Sir Hilary "Hal" Miller, a senior Conservative MP, told the House that he had acted on behalf of WS during the past few years, and had warned the DTI, the Defence Ministry and an unidentified "third agency" on a number of occasions about suspicious Iraqi orders.
Miller told reporters on April 23 that he had provided evidence of his warnings to the UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
Two days later, the Commons trade and industry select committee announced that it would conduct an inquiry into the whole affair.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Release of Western hostages
The release of five Western hostages in Lebanon during April generated intense, if premature, media speculation that a resolution of the whole hostage crisis was close at hand.
Release of French and Belgian hostages
French citizen Jacqueline Valente, her Belgian companion Fernand Houtekens and their daughter (who had been born in captivity) Sophie-Liberté Valente were released in Beirut on April 10 by representatives of the Libyan-sponsored Fatah Revolutionary Council (FRC).
The FRC had earlier announced that it would be releasing the three hostages in response to an appeal by the Libyan leader Col. Moamar al Kadhafi.
Valente and Houtekens, along with six relatives, were originally believed to have been seized by the FRC while sailing off the coast of Lebanon in November 1987.
Two of the original eight, both daughters of Valente from a previous marriage, had been released in late 1988 [see p. 37164].
However, a report in Le Monde on April 16 alleged that the group had actually been seized much earlier than originally thought, probably during 1986, and not by the FRC, but by the Libyan Navy.
This, the report claimed, would explain why Sophie-Liberté, apparently born during her mother's supposed 29-month period of captivity, actually had the appearance of a four-year-old.
The release of the hostages came shortly after signs emerged of a distinct improvement in Franco-Libyan relations.
In mid-March France delivered to Libya three Mirage fighter jets impounded in French factories since 1986.
The return of the aircraft went against a European Community embargo on arms to Libya imposed in 1986 after the United States had accused Tripoli of sponsoring international terrorism.
Although France officially claimed that the release of the jets was linked specifically to Libya's improved relations with Chad, there was intense media speculation that it represented an "arms for hostages" deal.
The speculation increased when the French Foreign Minister Roland Dumas issued a statement after the release, praising Col. Kadhafi's "noble and humanitarian gesture" .
The release would, Dumas said, "be given proper consideration in future relations between France and Libya" .
Release of two US hostages
Robert Polhill, a US lecturer, was freed in West Beirut on April 22 and was immediately driven to Damascus by Syrian security officials.
Polhill and three of his colleagues at the Beirut University College had been kidnapped by the Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine (IJLP) in Beirut in January 1987 [see p. 35024].
The Syrian and Iranian governments, both of which had contacts and influence with the kidnappers, played a significant role in Polhill's release.
In their initial statement announcing the impending release on April 18, the IJLP had cited the "urgent appeals" of the Iranian government and "permanent Syrian efforts" .
The Syrian role in Polhill's release was part of a general rapprochement between Syria and the USA, facilitated by their shared commitment to the October 1989 Taif accord on Lebanon [see p. 36986]and by Syrian apprehension over the cooling of ties with its traditional patron, the Soviet Union.
Since February 1989 the Iranian President, Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, had made it known that he would be working toward the release of all hostages in the Middle East.
Rafsanjani's desire to act on the hostage crisis was tied to domestic concerns.
The release of the Western hostages would seriously undermine Rafsanjani's "radical" opponents, principally the former Interior Minister Hojatolislam Ali Akbar Mohtashemi.
A solution to the crisis would also help Iranian efforts to obtain Western credits for economic reconstruction.
After Polhill's release the US government thanked Syria for its efforts, but insisted that there had been no deals or negotiations with the kidnappers.
Frank Reed, the US director of the Lebanese International College who had been kidnapped in Beirut in September 1986 [see p. 35023], was released into Syrian custody in West Beirut on April 30.
He was released by a previously unknown group, the Islamic Dawn Organization, but was believed to have been held by Al Jihad al-Islami (Islamic Holy War, or Islamic Jihad).
In a statement released after Reed's release, US President George Bush thanked Syria and, for the first time, Iran for their assistance.
An editorial in the May 1 edition of the Tehran Times (a newspaper close to President Rafsanjani) called on the USA and other Western countries to exert pressure on Israel to release Moslem detainees, specifically Shaikh Abdul Karim Obeid, the Shia cleric abducted from South Lebanon by Israeli commandos in July 1989 [see pp. 36832; 36858].
Remaining US hostages (date of abduction in parentheses)
Terry Anderson (March 1985); Thomas Sutherland (June 1985); Joseph Cicippio (September 1986); Faik Wareh (June 1986); Edward Tracey (October 1986); Jesse Turner (January 1987); Alann Steen (January 1987).
Recognition of Hrawi by Geaga
On April 3 Samir Geaga, leader of the Lebanese Forces (LF) militia, announced his recognition of the Syrian-backed government of President Elias Hrawi and also announced his acceptance of the October 1989 Taif accords outlining a Lebanese peace plan [see p. 36986].
Geaga's announcement came after some seven weeks of fighting in the Christian enclave between the LF and forces loyal to Gen. Michel Aoun, the former Army C.-in-C. and self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon [see pp. 37264-65; 37331-32].
On April 4 Geaga invited Hrawi's forces, headed by Gen. Emile Lahud, to take control of barracks in the LF-controlled areas of the Christian enclave.
The Middle East Economic Digest of May 4 reported that Hrawi reacted cautiously to Geaga's offer in order "to avoid being put in a situation in which his troops could be compromised" .
Meanwhile, fighting between the rival Christian units continued; on April 18 a school bus travelling through East Beirut was hit in crossfire which killed 11 people, mostly children.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Continued deadlock over formation of new government
The Israeli political system remained in a state of deadlock throughout April following the collapse of the Likud-Labour coalition in mid-March [see pp. 37303-04], when the Labour leader Shimon Peres had been invited to try and achieve a majority in the 120-member, evenly balanced Knesset (parliament).
Negotiations with Moda'i
Initially, Peres directed his efforts towards winning the support of small orthodox religious parties.
This effort had obviously failed by early April and the attention of both Labour and Likud switched to the five-member "Liberal" faction which had defected from Likud in late February [see p. 37303].
The Liberals apparently entered into secret negotiations with both parties, a surprising development given that their leader, Economic Affairs Minister Itzhak Moda'i, had in 1986 resigned from a Cabinet headed by Peres after an acrimonious personal feud [see p. 34770]; Moda'i was also a noted supporter of leading hardliner Ariel Sharon.
In his dealings with Shamir, Moda'i allegedly demanded "safe" places for the Liberals on the Likud list for the next two Knesset elections and a large monetary guarantee which Likud would forfeit if such a commitment was not kept.
Moda'i's bargaining position was greatly weakened when one of the five Liberals, Avraham Sharir, struck a separate deal with Peres to vote with Labour.
Sharir had served in the Cabinet from 1981 to 1988, and according to Israeli political commentators he nursed a grudge against Shamir for not including him in his last Cabinet.
Although Sharir did not confirm his defection until April 7, Peres informed President Chaim Herzog on April 4 that he had succeeded in gaining a majority and intended to request that the Knesset be reconvened from its Passover recess for a vote of confidence.
Demonstration in support of electoral reform
The spectacle of Labour and Likud desperately courting the smaller parties and factions aroused indignation in the media and among the public at Israel's electoral system, which, critics charged, allowed the minorities to extract enormous concessions.
On April 7 some 150,000 demonstrators marched through Tel Aviv in support of electoral reform.
Thwarting of Labour by Agudat defection — Invitation to Shamir to form new government
Peres's efforts to form a new government were thwarted a matter of hours before the April 11 Knesset confidence debate was set to open when two of the five ultra-orthodox Agudat Yisrael members withdrew their support from Labour, saying that they could not support a government sustained by Arab supporters of the Palestine Liberation Organization.
The two defectors, Rabbi Averham Verdiger and Rabbi Eliezer Mizrahi, had apparently acted on the instructions of Rabbi Menachem Schneerson, the Hasidic leader of the Lubavitch sect of orthodox Judaism; although resident in Brooklyn, New York, his profound influence on Israeli politics was widely acknowledged.
After receiving the news of the defections, which meant that Labour had only 59 assured seats, against Likud's 60, Peres managed to secure an adjournment of the Knesset without taking a vote.
President Herzog granted the Labour leader a further 15 days in which to secure majority support.
On April 19 Verdiger announced that he would after all support Labour, but on April 22 Shas, the ultra-orthodox party which had played a major role in the collapse of the coalition in March by abstaining in a vote of no-confidence, announced its absolute support for Likud.
The Labour Party finally conceded defeat on April 25 after Moda'i confirmed on television that he would definitely support Likud, despite Peres's offer to give him the deputy premiership and the finance portfolio.
On April 27, President Herzog invited the interim Prime Minister and Likud leader Itzhak Shamir to form a new government within 21 days.
Continued controversy over Jerusalem
Jewish settlement in Christian Quarter
A fierce controversy arose in late April over the settlement of Jews in the Christian Quarter of Jerusalem's Old City.
On April 11 (mid-way through Easter Passion week) 150 orthodox Jewish settlers moved into the St John's Hospice, a building situated in the Christian Quarter whose ownership was the subject of a dispute between the Greek Orthodox Church and the Ataret Cohanim yeshiva (a Jewish religious seminary and one of the main settler groups), the latter having reportedly paid up to US$4,500,000 for the lease.
The Judaization of Jerusalem had been under way since the Israelis occupied the whole city in 1967, but this was the first occasion on which Jews had moved into the Christian Quarter.
Both the Jerusalem District Court and the Israeli Attorney General ordered the eviction of the settlers, but police made no effort to remove them.
A demonstration led by the Greek Orthodox Patriarch Diodoros I on April 12 was broken up by Israeli police using tear gas; demonstrations continued on a daily basis.
Christian churches throughout Jerusalem, Israel proper and the occupied territories took the unprecedented step of closing in protest for the whole day of April 27, and the controversy encouraged an improvement in relations between the normally conservative Greek Orthodox community and Palestinian Christians; the Middle East International of April 27 reported that, soon after the Jews took over the hospice, a Palestinian flag had been raised on a nearby Greek Orthodox Church.
The Israeli government confirmed on April 22 that it had provided the equivalent of some US$1,800,000 to support the move into the hospice.
The Housing Ministry denied that the contribution was illegal, but the confirmation served to increase internal and foreign condemnation of the move.
Margaret Tutwiler, the US State Department spokesperson, said on April 23 that she found Israel's action "insensitive and provocative" and "deeply disturbing" .
The next day the contents were made public of an unusually critical letter to Shamir from the leading pro-Israel lobby in the USA (the American Israel Public Affairs Committee — AIPAC).
The hospice issue became entangled in the wider question of Jewish settlement in late April when Shamir was accused of taking advantage of the political stalemate by authorizing new settlements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip.
US Senate and House resolutions on Jerusalem — Dole tour of the Middle East
On March 22 the US Senate approved a non-binding Concurrent Resolution which acknowledged that "Jerusalem is and should remain the capital of Israel" .
The resolution was submitted in response to US President George Bush's controversial March 3 statement equating Jerusalem with the occupied territories [see p. 37304].
One of the 84 co-sponsors of the Senate resolution was Robert Dole, the highly respected and influential Republican minority leader in the Senate.
Dole led a Senate delegation on a tour of the Middle East on April 8-14, visiting Syria, Egypt, Jordan, Iraq [see p. 37390]and finally Israel.
During the last stage of his visit Dole was unusually critical of Israeli policies and told journalists that US politicians and the public were becoming increasingly frustrated with the lack of progress in the peace process.
At one point, Dole said: "How long can you support a country — 10, 20, 30, 40, 50 years?
Israel gets its money up front: other countries don't.
You make US$70 million in interest…
You're making money off our money to start with.
You've had US$40,000 million in the last 10 or 12 years.
Israelis get US$10,000 a head, while black Africans get US$1 a person."
[See p. 37199 for Dole's January 1990 call for a reduction in US aid to Israel.]
In an address to the Senate on April 19 Dole said that his visit to the Middle East had convinced him that the March 22 resolution was a mistake and that the issue of Jerusalem had to be decided by negotiation between Arabs and Israelis.
He questioned the whole process of "throwaway" non-binding Senate resolutions, and made it clear that any further resolutions on the Middle East and Jerusalem would be subject to serious examination.
Despite Dole's change of stance, the House of Representatives on April 24 overwhelmingly approved a non-binding resolution which mirrored the earlier Senate resolution.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
JORDAN
Appointment of royal commission to formulate national charter
King Hussein issued a decree on April 9 appointing a 60-member royal commission to draw up a national charter to regulate political life in Jordan.
The move was further evidence of the King's determination to press ahead with his "democratic experiment" , which he had initiated in November 1989 by holding parliamentary elections [see p. 37052].
The King appointed a former Prime Minister (in 1984-84), Ahmad Obeidat, to chair the commission.
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of April 20 other members of the commission represented "most of the country's political trends, including figures from religious fundamentalist groups and from the left" .
The inclusion of left-wingers on the commission was regarded as a significant victory for Hussein, as the left had originally opposed the charter on the grounds that it might be used to limit political activity.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
EGYPT
Approval of formation of new parties
The Political Parties Tribunal, a special court acting under the auspices of the Supreme Administrative Court, on April 14 overturned an earlier decision of the chairman of the Political Affairs Committee and approved the formation of three new political parties: the Green Party, the Democratic Unionist Party and the Young Egypt Party (Misr al-Fatah).
The decision brought to nine the number of officially recognized political parties.
The court judged that their principles, objectives and methods conformed with the sharia (Islamic law) and was satisfied that they sought to preserve national unity, social peace, the socialist democratic system and socialist gains in keeping with the principles of the July 1952 and May 1971 revolutions.
The court refused to legalize the Nasserite Party, claiming that its programme was based on a "totalitarian system which prevailed under President Nasser" antithetical to democracy and a multiparty system (parties based on religion and class struggle being illegal under the Constitution).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
MOROCCO
Debt agreement
A debt rescheduling and restructuring accord agreed on April 10 with Morocco's leading commercial creditor banks, headed by the National Bank of Paris (BNP) and the US Citibank, re-scheduled, and lowered the interest rate on, approximately US$3,200 million of medium-term debt.
Repayments on 86 per cent of this total would be rescheduled over 20 years (with a 10-year grace period) and on the remaining 14 per cent over 15 years (with 10 years' grace).
The agreement would open the way for Morocco to pay back debt to commercial banks out of official government-to-government loans, World Bank funding and IMF credits, once a three-year IMF readjustment programme had been agreed.
The agreement, the first to be concluded by commercial banks in advance of a creditor country's conclusion of an IMF-approved economic package, was also the fifth under the international debt reduction initiative launched by the United States Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady in March 1989 [see pp. 36541-42; see pp. 37243; 37313 for similar agreements with Mexico and Venezuela].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LIBYA
Rabta fire hoax
In early April the French commercial satellite firm Spot Image provided apparent photographic proof that the controversial chemical plant at Rabta, 80 km south-west of the capital, Tripoli had not been destroyed by fire on Mar. 15 as claimed by the Libyan and United States governments [see p. 37333].
The photographs, corroborated by reports by pilots leaked by the Egyptian Civil Aviation Authority, showed the main plant intact and no signs of severe damage.
Libyan opposition groups claimed that the Libyan leader Col. Moamer al Kadhafi had perpetrated the hoax in order to prevent a US air strike against the plant, which the US government suspected to be producing chemical weapons.
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Shevardnadze visit to Washington — Agreement on superpower summit — Problems in START negotiations
The United States Secretary of State, James Baker, and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze held three days of talks on April 4-6 in Washington, concentrating mainly on arms control issues (including the security status of a unified Germany — see p. 37386) but also dealing with the Lithuanian independence crisis [see pp. 37360-62]and the state of the Soviet economy.
It was announced on April 5 that the planned summit meeting between the US and Soviet leaders, President Bush and President Gorbachev, would be held on May 30-June 3 in the USA.
A detailed itinerary was not provided, but it was expected that the bulk of the meetings would be held in Washington.
It had been hoped that the centrepiece of the summit would be the initialling of a draft treaty reducing the superpowers' arsenals of strategic nuclear weapons currently being negotiated at the START talks in Geneva [see p. 37267].
This prospect appeared to recede after the Washington talks, however, as both sides reported little progress on outstanding issues, particularly on the provisions dealing with air- and sea-launched long-range missiles, with the Soviet side still seeking a treaty to cover air-launched cruise missiles carried by tactical fighters as well as by heavy bombers.
US officials reportedly expressed concerns that the Soviet side had drawn back from previously agreed elements of the START treaty, and that at the same time it appeared to be adopting a less conciliatory stance on other arms control and disarmament issues, such as the ceiling on troops in Central Europe and the outline of an "Open Skies" treaty agreed in February [ibid.].
At a meeting with seven US senators in Moscow on April 13, President Gorbachev "stressed his determination" to make enough progress on the START negotiations to allow the main provisions of a treaty to be initialled at the Washington summit, according to the leader of the delegation, Senator George Mitchell.
In a related development, the US administration proposed in April that the second round of START (due to commence after the conclusion of the START 1 talks) should concentrate on the elimination of land-based strategic nuclear missiles carrying multiple warheads (MIRVs).
The Soviet side formally rejected this in the course of the Washington talks on the grounds that it was too limited and one-sided, because it ignored both sea- and air-based MIRVs.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
G-7 Finance Ministers' meeting
Finance Ministers and central bank governors of the Group of Seven countries (Canada, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom and United States), together with Michel Camdessus, the Managing Director of the IMF, met in Paris on April 7 to review current global economic issues.
Although the meeting had been arranged to coincide with final approval of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development [see p. 37132], those talks were still incomplete, so there was little formal discussion of events in Eastern Europe.
Instead, the instability of Japanese financial markets and fluctuations in the value of the yen were the main focus of the discussions.
The Tokyo stock market had dropped by more than a fifth in 1990, with the Nikkei average falling on April 3 by 1,978.38 points to 28,002.07, a drop of 6.6 per cent, the second largest one-day fall in the exchange's history and the steepest decline since the crash of October 1987.
The yen had fallen by 11 per cent in the first quarter of 1990, and by 25 per cent in the twelve months since March 1989.
The Finance Ministers were united in expressing modest support for the yen and the implication was that central banks would be ready to intervene in the event of another speculative attack, although there was no specific reference in the final communiqué to stabilizing exchange rates.
The possibility of an increase in Japanese interest rates was raised, but seemed to be ruled out for the present by the Finance Minister, Ryutaro Hashimoto, in a statement made after his return to Tokyo.
The official communiqué referred to developments in global financial markets, "especially the decline of the yen against other currencies and its undesirable consequences for the global adjustment process" .
These consequences were seen mainly in their threat to curb progress on reducing Japan's huge trade surplus.
Japanese efforts to secure more positive and large-scale joint support for the yen were thwarted largely by West German-led opposition.
It was believed that Japan had sought joint action which would have included purchases of yen for deutschmarks by the West German Bundesbank.
However, West Germany was reluctant to spend heavily on the foreign exchanges to support the yen, because of its likely inflationary impact.
The meeting's final communiqué noted that "German economic and monetary union could contribute to improved global growth, and to a reduction of external balances in Europe" .
The West German Finance Minister, Theo Waigel, had told the meeting that the costs of unification could be carried by means of tax revenues resulting from higher than expected economic growth, and in an interview on April 8 he said that, although there would have to be some tax adjustments, the overall tax burden would remain the same.
In reviewing their general economic policies and prospects, the finance ministers noted that economic growth had slowed down to more sustainable levels in several countries; overall growth prospects remained good, with strong investment providing a major stimulus to their economies; inflation remained contained but still required vigilance, and external imbalances had been reduced, albeit unevenly.
They agreed that countries with fiscal and current-account deficits should reduce budget deficits and increase private savings.
Likewise, those countries with external surpluses were urged to contribute to external adjustment by promoting non-inflationary growth of domestic demand through appropriate macro-economic and structural policies.
INTERNATIONAL
DRUGS
London drugs summit
Government ministers from 112 countries met in London on April 9-11 to co-ordinate efforts to reduce the demand for illicit drugs and to discuss measures to curb trafficking and the illegal flow of cocaine.
Sponsored by the UN and the United Kingdom, it was the first high-level conference of its kind.
Views on tackling the demand for drugs varied from the liberal Dutch approach to the hard-line US attitude.
In the debate on the cocaine threat, the Italian Interior Minister, Antonio Gava, reported that European seizures of the drug reached 4,000 kg in the first quarter of 1990, compared to a record 6,300 kg during 1989.
The European Communities (EC) were drawing up proposals to control the export of chemicals used in cocaine production and guidelines for member states on controlling money-laundering by drug traffickers.
Colombian President Virgilio Barco Vargas called for a powerful UN agency to direct the global struggle against drug abuse.
Opening the summit, UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher announced a six-point plan to:(i) educate the young on the dangers of drug-taking;(ii) start a high-profile anti-drug publicity campaign;(iii) exert pressure on parents and society to set an example;(iv) improve the early identification of drug takers;(v) increase treatment and rehabilitation; and (vi) campaign against any legalization of drug-taking.
Over the next three years the UK would make available £26,500,000 in drug-related aid to developing countries, with £4,500,000 earmarked in 1990 for Colombia.
A task force of experts had been established to advise other countries in anti-drug strategies and the number of drug liaison officers working from UK embassies was being increased to 20.
Anti-drug teams had also been formed to co-ordinate local initiatives in seven of the UK's worst-affected urban areas.
On April 9 Czechoslovakia became an observer and Poland, Hungary and Yugoslavia became full members of the Council of Europe's Pompidou Group, set up in 1971 in response to international drug trafficking.
INTERNATIONAL
ENVIRONMENT
Conference on climate change
An international conference on global warming, held at the White House in Washington, the United States capital, on April 17-18, was attended by government delegates from 17 countries.
In his opening remarks US President George Bush called for further research before any action was taken on global warming.
Throughout the conference Bush stressed the need to couple environmental action with economic feasibility.
Environmental policies which did not take economic concerns into account were "doomed to fail" , he said, whereas "there is no better ally in the service of our environment than strong economies, economies that make possible increased efficiencies, that enable us to make environmental gains, economies that can generate new technologies and help us arrest and reverse the damage done to our environment" .
West Germany's Environment Minister Klaus Töpfer, criticizing the US position, urged that "gaps in knowledge must not be used as an excuse for worldwide inaction" .
Expressing the view of some delegates that the conference had merely been used as a forum to air US views, Brice Lalonde, the French Secretary of State for the Environment, said afterwards: "We have the feeling we were just invited to listen." 
It was widely considered that US co-operation was essential to the success of any initiative on global warming, since one-fifth of all "greenhouse gases" (carbon dioxide, chlorofluorocarbons or CFCs, nitrous oxide, methane and surface ozone) were produced in the USA.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Launch of Hubble Space Telescope
The space shuttle Discovery returned to Earth on April 29 following a five-day mission during which it successfully deployed the US$1,500 million Hubble Space Telescope jointly developed by the United States National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and the European Space Agency (ESA).
Despite problems with a solar panel and with high-gain radio antennae, the 11-tonne telescope, with a planned life-span of 15 years, was expected to revolutionize optical astronomy and to advance current understanding on the origin, evolution and structure of the universe.
INTERNATIONAL
VATICAN
Papal visit to Czechoslovakia
Pope John Paul II arrived in Prague on April 21 for his first visit to a Soviet bloc country outside his native Poland.
He was greeted by President Vaclav Havel, Marian Calfa, the Federal Prime Minister, and Alexander Dubcek, Chairman of the Federal Assembly.
He went on to celebrate mass on the Letna Plain in Prague in the presence of up to 1,500,000 people.
On April 22 the Pope celebrated mass at the shrine of Velehrad in Moravia, with up to 350,000 people present.
In a sermon he announced that he would call a synod of European bishops to consider steps to be taken in unifying Europe as a Christian continent.
The following day he celebrated mass at Bratislava, with an estimated 500,000 people attending.
In a sermon he said that the Slovaks had often "had to struggle just to survive" , and he praised the people's strength in resisting "traps" laid for their ethnic identity.
Later the same day he left the country.
Diplomatic relations between Czechoslovakia and the Vatican had been restored on April 19, having been broken off in 1950.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 945,087 sq km.
Population: 23,174,336 (1988 census).
Capital: Dar es Salaam (administrative functions are being transferred to Dodoma).
Languages: Swahili and English (official); tribal languages.
Religion: Christianity, Hinduism, Islam; traditional beliefs.
Av. life expectancy: 53 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 46,700 (perhaps 20,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$160 (mainland Tanzania only)(1988).
Currency: Tanzanian shilling (US$1.00=TSh194.4206 as at April 2, 1990).
The United Republic of Tanzania was formed in October 1964 by the union of the independent states of Tanganyika and Zanzibar.
Executive power is vested in the President who is nominated by the sole legal party, the Revolutionary Party of Tanzania (Chama cha Mapinduzi — CCM), and is elected by direct popular vote for a five-year term, renewable once only.
The current President, Ali Hassan Mwinyi, was elected in October 1985 (when legislative elections were also held) after Tanzania's first President, Julius Nyerere, stepped down at the end of his term of office.
The two Vice-Presidents, one of whom is the President of Zanzibar and the other the Prime Minister of the Union government, are appointed by the President, as is the Cabinet (in consultation with the Prime Minister).
Legislative power is vested in the National Assembly, composed of 243 members (118 directly elected from the mainland, 50 directly elected from Zanzibar, 25 ex officio, 15 nominated and 35 indirectly elected).
All candidates must be approved by the party.
The Assembly's term is five years.
Internal matters in Zanzibar are the exclusive jurisdiction of the Zanzibar executive, the Revolutionary Council of Zanzibar.
Ali Hassan Mwinyi Defence and National Service Joseph Warioba Prime Minister Rashidi Mfaume Kawawa Without Portfolio **Stephen Kibona Finance **Cleopa D. Msuya Industries and Trade Benjamin Mkapa Foreign Affairs *Nalaila Kiula Home Affairs Pius Ng'wandu Communications and Works Stephen Wassira Agriculture **Anna Abdullah Local Government, Co-operatives and Marketing **Marcel B. Komanya Lands, Natural Resources and Tourism *Jakaya M. Kikwete Energy, Minerals and Water Amrani Mayagila National Education *Charles S. Kabeho Health **Joseph Rwegasira Labour Ali Hassan Diria Information and Broadcasting Ministers of State **Paul Bomani Special Duties Kighoma Ali Malima Planning Commission Fatma Saidi Ali Civil Service Amina Salum Ali International Co-operation Anna Makinda Government Co-ordination Charles Kileo Regional Administration Mateo Qaresi Local Government, Community Development, Co-operatives and Marketing Jackson Makweta Defence and National Service **Damian Z. Lubuva Attorney-General *Mohammed Seif KhatibuSecond Vice-President's Office *New appointment, March 15, 1990. **Altered portfolio, March 15, 1990.
Cabinet
POLITICS
1989 Cabinet reshuffles
President Ali Hassan Mwinyi reshuffled the Cabinet on March 6, 1989, creating two new ministries and setting up a planning commission in the Office of the President.
The two new ministries were the Local Government, Community Development, Co-operatives and Marketing Ministry, headed by Paul Bomani, who formerly held the Local Government and Co-operatives portfolio, and the Labour, Culture and Social Services Ministry, under Christian Kisangi, formerly Minister of Labour and Manpower Development.
Only one new minister joined the Cabinet: Stephen Kibona, at Communications and Works, replacing Mustafa Nyang'anyi, who was appointed to the Planning Commission [for full list see p. 36550].
The majority of changes were at minister of state level, including the appointment as Minister of State for Planning of former National Education Minister Kighoma Malima.
Malima was also given the post of vice-chairman of the seven-member Planning Commission, set up to oversee economic affairs during the economic recovery programme.
Further changes were made on Sept. 19, prompted by the departure of Deputy Prime Minister and Defence and National Service Minister Salim Ahmed Salim to take the post of Secretary-General of the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
Mwinyi abolished the post of Deputy Prime Minister and himself took over the Defence and National Service portfolio, sharing responsibility with former President Julius Nyerere, chairman of the ruling CCM party and of the party's defence and security committee.
Stephen Wassira, hitherto a Deputy Minister, was appointed Minister of Agriculture and Livestock Development.
The information department was upgraded to a full ministry under Ali Hassan Diria.
Kisanga took over the Water Development portfolio and Pius Ng'wandu, the Minister hitherto, became Trade and Industry Minister.
Joseph Rwegasira became the new Minister of Labour, Culture and Social Services.
A further reshuffle followed on March 15, 1990, in what was seen as an attempt by Mwinyi to secure support in the Cabinet for a new investment code [see below], which had reportedly provoked dissent among some socialist ministers.
Cleopa Msuya was transferred from Finance, Planning and Economic Affairs to Industry and Trade; the Finance portfolio was taken over by Stephen Kibona.
Leaving the Cabinet (with previously held posts in parentheses) were Gertrude Mongella (Without Portfolio), Gen. Muhiddin Kimario (Home Affairs), Al-Noor Kassum (Minerals and Energy), Arcado Ntagazwa (Lands, Natural Resources and Tourism), Aaron Chiduo (Health), Damian Lubuva (Justice; Attorney-General), and Kisangi.
CCM changes
Wassira and the Zanzibar Chief Minister, Omar Ali Juma, were elected to the central committee of the CCM during a four-day meeting of the party's national executive committee in Dodoma which ended on Oct. 15, 1989.
The elections were necessitated by the death of Emilios Mamakaslos and Salim's move to the OAU.
The committee also appointed the Foreign Affairs Minister Benjamin Mkapa as party secretary for international relations, a post formerly held by Salim.
Earlier, the national executive committee had expelled two CCM members and five officials for "spreading political propaganda and causing trouble on the island of Pemba" , according to a radio report on Oct. 12.
The dismissals came against a background of mounting political tension in Zanzibar and Pemba associated with the banning of Moslem stickers bearing the words Bismillahi Rahmani Rahim (In the name of God, the Compassionate, the Merciful).
An underground movement taking the name Bismillahi had been active since the expulsion from the CCM in May 1988 of former Zanzibar Chief Minister Seif Shariff Hamad [see p. 35691].
The movement called for a referendum on the islands' continued union with the mainland.
Announcing the ban on the stickers on Oct. 5, Juma said that the government would not condone the use of Koranic verses for political ends.
Census results
Preliminary results of the 1988 census, released in March 1989 by the Planning Commission, revealed that the total population had risen to 23,174,336, from 17,512,610 10 years earlier: an average growth rate of 2.8 per cent a year, compared with 3.2 per cent during the previous decade.
The mainland population accounted for 97 per cent of the total.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.2% (1988/89)
Current-account balance -US$258 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$1,182.5 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments -US$198.6 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 10% (1988)
Total external public debt US$4,335 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 18.5% (1987)
Gross domestic product TSh311,478 m. (1988)
Gross national product TSh292,936 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 28% (1988/89)
Principal trading partners West Germany, UK, USA 
Five-year plan — 1989/90 budget — Devaluation of shilling — IMF agreement
Mwinyi launched the country's second five-year plan in Parliament on April 18, 1989, saying that it aimed to raise real growth in gross domestic product (GDP) on the mainland to 6 per cent a year by the end of the plan period in 1992/93, compared with 3.9 per cent in 1987/88.
The growth rate for Zanzibar was projected to rise to 4 per cent a year, from 1.2 per cent.
The total cost of the plan was put at US$1,300 million over the five years, of which $740,000,000 would be sought from external sources.
Transport and communications received the largest allocation, 23.8 per cent of the proposed budget, followed by agriculture with 18.5 per cent.
Exports were projected to rise by 76 per cent over the five years, from $388,000,000 in 1987/88 to $681,000,000 in 1992/93, with imports rising 22 per cent to $1,450 million over the same period.
A growth rate of 4.5 per cent was projected for 1989/90 by Finance Minister Cleopa Msuya when on June 22 he presented his budget for the year beginning July 1, 1989.
Total expenditure was expected to rise by 19 per cent to TSh141,248 million, of which 30 per cent was expected to come from foreign loans and assistance.
Recurrent expenditure was to increase by 31 per cent to TSh118,552 million, but the development budget was cut by 20 per cent to TSh22,696 million.
New taxes were expected to bring in TSh3,000 million; these included rises in education charges, land rents and duty on alcohol and cigarettes.
The minimum wage was increased by 26 per cent, less than the rate of inflation.
Msuya announced a 4.8 per cent devaluation, from $1.00=TSh138 to $1.00=TSh145.
The budget was seen as likely to have a harsh impact on the population but was generally regarded by aid donors as disappointing, containing no new measures to encourage investment or on restructuring of the produce-marketing boards.
However, an attempt to satisfy donors on the exchange rate was made with the announcement of a further 17.3 per cent devaluation of the shilling on Dec. 3, 1989, to $1.00=TSh180.
This followed the conclusion of negotiations with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in November on the release of funds [see below], and cleared the way for a consultative group meeting with aid donors, held in Paris on Dec. 18-21.
At the meeting donors pledged a total of $865,000,000 in grants and concessionary loans towards the government's $1,300 million financing requirement for 1990; the government expected to cover a further $200,000,000 through private transfers and the remainder through debt rescheduling.
The Paris Club meeting reviewed progress on Tanzania's economic recovery programme, which had ended in July 1989, and the outline of its successor, the three-year economic and social action programme, which Minister of State for Planning Kighoma Malima said would emphasize health, education, nutrition, employment and water supply.
Government subsidies would be withdrawn from loss-making parastatals, which would have to become self-financing.
On Feb. 16, 1990, the IMF announced that it was releasing the long delayed third tranche of 21,400,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.32182 as at Feb. 16, 1990) of its 1986 three-year structural adjustment facility [see pp. 35690; 36551].
Negotiations were to continue on a further facility to replace the existing one when it expired in October.
A new investment code was approved by the CCM in late March 1990 and was to be put before Parliament in April.
The code, amending many existing laws on investment, taxation and licensing as part of a liberalization of the economy, was, according to a government statement, designed to "entice private and public investors of local and foreign origin to take a more active role in promoting the development of our national economy" .
AFRICA
UGANDA
BASIC DATA
Area: 241,139 sq km(incl. inland water; not 587,000 sq km as stated on p. 36419).
Population: 16,195,000 (1988).
Capital: Kampala.
Languages: English (official); many local languages incl.
Luganda.
Religion: Christianity (60%); Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 51 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 70,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$280 (1988).
Currency: New Uganda shilling (US$1.00=Sh378.1138 as at April 2, 1990).
The Republic of Uganda was established in September 1967, after becoming an independent state within the Commonwealth in October 1962.
President Yoweri Museveni came to power in January 1986 [see pp. 34536-38]at the head of the National Resistance Movement which had waged a guerrilla war since 1981, first against the regime of President Milton Obote, and subsequently against the military government which deposed Obote in July 1985.
The President is assisted by a Prime Minister and a Cabinet composed of representatives of a number of political parties; although the parties continue to exist, political activity is banned, and elections held in February 1989 to the National Resistance Council (NRC) were conducted on a non-party basis [see p. 36455].
The NRC, consisting since the February 1989 elections of 210 elected and 68 presidentially appointed members (and of 98 appointed members hitherto), acts as a legislative body for the interim period until a new constitution has been framed.
(not including Deputy Ministers) Yoweri Museveni President; Defence Samson Kisekka Prime Minister Eriya Kategaya First Deputy Prime Minister Paul Semogerere Second Deputy Prime Minister; Minister of Foreign Affairs and Regional Co-operation Abubakar Mayanja Third Deputy Prime Minister Victoria Ssekitoleko Agriculture and Forestry George Kagonyera Animal Husbandry and Fisheries Paul Etiang Commerce Sam Njuba Constitutional Affairs James Wapakabulo Co-operatives and Marketing Amanya Mushega Education Richard Kaijuka Energy Moses Kintu Environmental Protection Crispus Kiyonga Finance Zak Kaberu Health John Ssebana Kizito Housing and Urban Development E. P. S. Adriko Industry and Technology Kintu Masoke Information and Broadcasting Ibrahim Mukiibi Internal Affairs George Kanyeihamba Justice; Attorney General Stanislas Okurut Labour Ben Okello Luwum Lands and Surveys Jaberi Bidandi Sali Local Government Henry Kajura Water and Mineral Development Tom Rubale Public Service and Cabinet Affairs Joshua Mayanja-Nkangi Planning and Economic Development Adoko Nekyon Relief and Social Rehabilitation Joseph Mulenga Regional Co-operation Ruhakana Rugunda Transport and Communications Sam Sebagerika Tourism and Wildlife Daniel Serwano Kigozi Works Gen. Moses Ali Youth, Culture and Sports David Kibirango Without Portfolio Ministers of State in President's office Anthony Butele Karamoja Ateke Ejalu Special Duties Balaki Kirya Security Joyce Mupanga Women's Development Kiiza Besigye National Political Commissar Ministers of State Maj.-Gen.
David Tinyefuza Defence John Ntimba Education Omara Atubo Foreign Affairs and Regional Co-operation Tarsis Kabwegyere Foreign Affairs and Regional Co-operation Ronald Bata Health Betty Bigombe Minister of State in Prime Minister's Office resident in north central Uganda 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Cabinet reshuffle
On April 10, 1989, President Museveni named a 48-member Cabinet in which he retained the Defence portfolio and Samson Kisekka was reappointed Prime Minister.
New appointments included the then Army Commander, Maj.-Gen.
Elly Tumwine, as Minister of State for Defence [for his replacement in November see p. 37034].
Yoweri Kyesimira was replaced as Planning and Economic Development Minister by former Education Minister Joshua Mayanja-Nkangi.
Of 15 ministers dropped from the previous Cabinet, 13 had failed to win seats in the February 1989 elections in which the NRC had been expanded from 98 members to 278 [see p. 36455].
Of the NRC members nominated by the President, Betty Bigombe was named as Minister of State in the Prime Minister's Office resident in north central Uganda, and as such in charge of the pacification campaign in the north.
Release of political prisoners
On Oct. 28, 1989, 625 rebels who had been captured in fighting in the north and north-east since 1986 and detained without trial were released.
Although their release brought the number of political prisoners freed in the previous 16 months to 4,332, another 2,000 remained in detention.
Death of 1985 coup leader
Lt.-Gen.
Bazilio Olara Okello, who led the military coup which overthrew President Milton Obote in July 1985 [see pp. 34023-24]before being forced into exile himself after Museveni's coup in January 1986 [see pp. 34536-38], died in Sudan in January 1990.
Opening of treason trial
A total of 43 soldiers and politicians, including a former Army Chief-of-Staff under Obote, Brig.
Smith Opon Acak, all of whom had been detained for more than a year, appeared in court in January 1990 charged with plotting to overthrow the government, having "levied war against the government of Uganda" between Nov. 2 and 18, 1987.
SECURITY
Operations against rebels
Government forces captured nine rebel camps in Gulu district in northern Uganda in an offensive in May 1989, killing 370 rebels proclaiming allegiance to the Holy Spirit movement (formerly led by Alice Lakwena — see p. 36419).
By mid-1989 an estimated 100,000 villagers, displaced by the continuing activities of assorted rebel bands in northern Uganda, had sought refuge in camps in Gulu, with another 50,000 in the surrounding area.
A faction of the rebel Uganda People's Democratic Army (UPDA) was still active in Kitgum district in early 1990, killing 10 people in a series of attacks in January.
In the east there were sporadic reports of ongoing rebel activity throughout 1989, concentrated around the town of Soroti.
The Army admitted responsibility for the deaths in July 1989 of 47 youths who had suffocated after being locked in a railway wagon during a roundup of suspected Uganda People's Army (UPA) rebels around Kumi, some 200 km north-east of Kampala.
In February 1990 the Army forced about 100,000 civilians into camps in eastern Kumi district during preparations for a military offensive against the UPA.
In one camp alone, in Ngora, over 320 people were reported to have died by April 1990 from illnesses caused by overcrowding and poor sanitation.
Closure of university
Makerere University was closed on Nov. 10, 1989, after 7,000 students defied a government instruction to end a 12-day strike over allowances for books and travel.
Detention of editor
Samuel Katwere, editor of The Star, the only independent English-language newspaper, was arrested on Nov. 6, 1989, and held without charge over an article published in the paper on Sept. 22, 1989, which alleged that the managing director of the government-owned Ugandan Commercial Bank was being paid huge amounts in compensation for the death of two children during the war which brought Museveni to power, and further called Museveni a liar for defending the banker against allegations raised in parliament that he was being paid more than he was worth.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 7.2% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$174,400,000 (1988-89)
Trade balance -US$373,300,000 (1988-89)
Overall balance of payments +US$11,800,000 (1988-89)
Budget deficit US$93,656,000 (1989-90 est.)
Total external public debt US$1,600 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 74% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$3,560 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$4,082 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 89% (1988-89)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: USA (27%), UK (14%), France; Imports: Kenya (39%), UK (17%), Japan (7%)
1989-90 budget
The Finance Minister Crispus Kiyonga on July 3, 1989, presented a budget for 1989/90 (the fiscal year starting on July 1, 1989) which he said was aimed at strengthening the balance of payments and at reducing inflation, but which nevertheless would provide for a 40 per cent salary increase for civil servants.
The inflation target was set at 30 per cent.
High interest rates would be maintained, to curb the money supply and to keep inflation down.
The largest allocation went on defence, at 21.3 per cent of recurrent spending.
The budget deficit was forecast at Sh93,656 million, to be financed largely by external borrowing.
Agricultural output in 1988/89 was 8.5 per cent up on 1987/88, with coffee production rising to 187,000 tonnes, from 160,000 tonnes.
Industrial output rose by 25.1 per cent.
Increases in producer prices were announced for tea (up 75 per cent to Sh35 per kilogram with immediate effect) and grade A cotton (up 63 per cent with effect from December 1989); coffee prices would not change until world prices improved.
Kiyonga said that declining terms of trade and heavy debt service payments continued to prevent rapid economic rehabilitation.
Speech by Museveni
In his 1990 New Year address Museveni said that since taking power in 1986 his administration had reversed the decline in the economy, with the growth rate increasing from 2.4 per cent in 1986 to 7.4 per cent in 1988, although Ugandans still had much hardship to bear in the form of higher prices.
These improved growth rates had been achieved despite the continuing insurgency in the north and north-east, which he said was now under control.
He also promised measures to overcome two obstacles which prevented farmers from earning increased income from their improved production: lack of crop finance, and unrepaired feeder roads blocking access to some production areas.
Devaluations
The shilling was successively devalued in March 1989 (21 per cent), in October 1989 (41 per cent ), in November 1989 (8 per cent ), and in January 1990, when it was devalued from Sh370 to Sh375 to the dollar.
Agreement on IMF facility
On April 17, 1989 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a three-year arrangement equivalent to 179,280,000 special drawing rights (SDRs; SDR1=US$1.30060 as at April 10, 1989) under an enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF).
In terms of the first annual arrangement, SDR74,700,000 was made available, of which SDR42,300,000 was disbursed on April 30.
The ESAF replaced a structural adjustment facility which had originally been agreed in mid-June 1987 [see pp. 35495; 36420].
In January 1990 the International Development Association (IDA), the World Bank's concessionary loan affiliate, granted a credit of SDR98,100,000 to intensify the economic recovery programme.
FOREIGN
Border incidents with Sudan
In November 1989 Uganda reported two air raids by Sudanese aircraft in the area around Moyo, near the common border.
Sudanese troops, allegedly accompanied by Ugandan rebels loyal to former Ugandan President Idi Amin [see p. 36391 for failed attempt by Amin to return to Uganda in January 1989], crossed into north-western Uganda on Dec. 29 and attacked an NRA detachment at Oraba, killing one Ugandan soldier before returning to Sudan.
After Museveni complained and accused Sudan of continuing to aid rebels in northern Uganda, Sudan said that the Oraba incident was "a mistake" made by a local Sudanese commander.
In a further air raid on Moyo on Feb. 3, 1990, allegedly by a Sudanese aircraft, five Ugandan civilians were killed and six injured.
On April 2 the Sudanese leader, Lt.-Gen.
Omar al-Bashir, concluded a two-day official visit to Kampala during which Uganda and Sudan signed a non-aggression treaty, in terms of which they also agreed not to allow any hostile armed activity in common border areas.
AFRICA
KENYA
BASIC DATA
Area: 582,646 sq km.
Population: 23,021,000 (1988).
Capital: Nairobi.
Languages: Kiswahili (official); English, Kikuyu and Luo widely spoken.
Religion: Traditional beliefs, Christianity (25%) and Islam (6%).
Av. life expectancy: 56 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 23,600 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$360 (1988).
Currency: Kenya shilling (US$1.00=KSh22.9307 as at April 2, 1990).
The Republic of Kenya was proclaimed in December 1964, the country having achieved independence within the Commonwealth the previous year.
The sole legal political organization is the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU).
Executive power is vested in the President, the Vice-President, and the Cabinet, which last is appointed by the President (currently Daniel T. arap Moi).
The President is elected for a five-year term by universal adult suffrage; Moi was returned for a third five-year term in February 1988 [see p. 36137]without recourse to the electorate, having been proposed as sole candidate by KANU.
Legislative power is vested in the unicameral National Assembly, comprising the Attorney General, the Speaker, 188 elected members and 12 members nominated by the President.
A general election, when all candidates had to be members of KANU, was held in March 1988 [see pp. 36136-37].
George Saitoti Vice-President; Finance Jackson Angaine Minister in the Office of the President Hussein Maalim Mohammed Minister in the Office of the President B. Nabwera Minister in the Office of the President John Kyalo Minister in the Office of the President Davidson Ngibuini Kuguru Home Affairs and Natural Heritage Paul J. Ngei Manpower Development Elijah W. Mwangale Livestock Development Mwai Kibaki Health Timothy Mibei Public Works John Cheruiyot Co-operative Development Jeremiah Nyageh Environment and Natural Resources Darius Mbela Lands and Housing John Okwanyo Water Development Zachary Onyonka Planning and National Development John Joseph Kamotho Transport and Communications Kiprono Nicholas K. Biwott Energy William ole Ntimana Local Government and Physical Planning Wilson Ndolo Ayah Foreign Affairs and International Co-operation Arthur J. Magugu Commerce George Muhoho Research and Technology Noah Katana Ngala Tourism and Wildlife Peter H. Okondo Labour Peter Oloo Aringo Education Tetu Nahason Kanyi Information and Broadcasting Maina Wanjigi Agriculture D. Otieno Industry G. Ndoto Land Reclamation and Development Musalia Mudavadi Supply and Marketing S. K. Ongeri Technical Training and Applied Technology James Njiru Culture and Social Services Mathews Onyango Midika Regional Development Arthur J. Magugu Commerce 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Dismissal of minister
On April 2, 1990, the Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Waruru Kanja, was dismissed and replaced by Tetu Nahason Kanyi, a former mayor of the town of Nyeri.
Kanja was also expelled from KANU, automatically losing his seat as an MP.
After the death of the Foreign Minister, Robert Ouko, Kanja had spoken out in parliament, condemning the "elimination" of leading politicians and implying that Ouko's death was politically motivated; two deputy ministers later called for Kanja's resignation.
Return of dissident
Andrew Kimani Ngumba, a former Assistant Minister for Lands and Settlement and mayor of Nairobi, returned from Sweden on Dec. 2, 1989, after three years of self-imposed exile [see p. 35430].
He said that he had taken advantage of an amnesty for dissidents declared by Moi on June 1, 1989.
The Organization for Democracy in Kenya, a dissident group based in Stockholm, the Swedish capital, had issued a statement on June 13 rejecting the amnesty as "a diversion from the demands for political reforms, especially for a multiparty system" .
The last three detainees held under the Public Security Act were released on June 6, 1989, an order for the release of all such detainees having been made by Moi on June 1 [see also p. 36918].
It was not known if any of the Air Force personnel detained after the 1982 coup attempt [see p. 31837], whose names were never published, were still being held.
Verdict on Julie Ward
Kenya's Chief Magistrate, Joseph Mango, ruled on Oct. 27, 1989, at the inquest of a British tourist, Julie Ward, whose body was found in the Masai Mara game reserve in September 1988, that she had been the victim of "foul play by persons unknown" , contrary to previous official claims that she had been killed by wild animals [see p. 36917].
Banning of weekly
The Nairobi weekly publication Development Agenda was banned in August 1989 after publishing only two issues, one of which had examined the politics of the Western province and the career of Livestock Development Minister Elijah W. Mwangale.
SECURITY
Screening of ethnic Somalis
In an exercise which began on Nov. 13, 1989, all ethnic Somalis over 18 were required to report to special centres with proof of citizenship or residence permits.
Those adjudged to be Kenyan citizens were issued with a special Kenyan-Somali identity card, while those who failed the screening were liable to summary detention and deportation.
The government justified the measures on security grounds, saying that it would end illegal infiltration by "aliens" who committed crimes including poaching and murder.
When a demonstration against the screening was held in Nairobi later in November, Moi called the participants "subversives" .
The Law Society, which said that the measures were discriminatory and unconstitutional, was described by Moi in an independence anniversary speech on Dec. 12 as "absurd, ridiculous and obnoxious" .
Somalia expressed concern at the impact that the measures would have on bilateral relations [see below].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.2% (1988-89)
Current-account balance -US$476 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$1,142.85 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$5,880 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$8,040 (1987)
Inflation rate 10.7% (1989)
Unemployment 13% (1989)
Principal trading partners Exports: UK, West Germany, Uganda; Imports: UK, Japan, West Germany
In 1989 tourism overtook coffee as the main earner of foreign currency.
This was due in part to the 50 per cent fall in coffee prices after the breakdown in talks at a meeting of the International Coffee Organization (ICO) in July 1989 [see p. 36836].
In addition, the number of foreign tourists rose by 20 per cent in 1988 and 1989, earning Kenya KSh641,000,000.
With coffee prices badly depressed, the tea industry seemed set to become the second principal source of foreign exchange earnings.
In November 1989 tea farmers protested about the low prices paid by the Kenya Tea Development Authority, and on Jan. 9, 1990, Moi ruled that tea farmers would be paid KSh3.00 per kg, a substantial increase on the former rate of KSh1.90.
1989-90 budget
Vice-President and Finance Minister George Saitoti presented a budget on June 15, 1989, largely intended to appeal to international donors through its aim to curb public expenditure and to reduce the deficit to 4.2 per cent of GDP in 1989-90, from 4.5 per cent in 1988-89.
Total expenditure was projected to rise by 25 per cent to KSh69,300 million.
An increase of 21 per cent was planned for recurrent spending, projected at KSh49,456 million, while development spending was projected at KSh18,442 million, up 14.4 per cent on actual spending in the previous year; the balance — KSh1,402 million — consisted of supplementary votes and under-issues from previous years.
The budget was heavily supported by aid, of which 40 per cent, totalling $65,500,000, was in the form of grants.
From Jan. 1, 1990, value added tax (VAT), with a base rate of 17 per cent, would apply to manufactured goods and business services.
Saitoti also announced that a 5 per cent presumptive tax on sales of agricultural produce would apply to farmers from July 1, 1989.
The taxation system was restructured to favour export-oriented companies and to provide incentives for investment.
Debt deals and loans
On Oct. 18, 1989, the World Bank approved two loans totalling $89,000,000, through its soft-loan affiliate, the International Development Association (IDA); $45,000,000 represented the second tranche of an industrial sector adjustment credit, of which the first tranche of $62,000,000 had been released in 1988.
The balance of $44,000,000 was for a supplementary financial sector credit.
West Germany agreed on Sept. 15, 1989, to convert $418,500,000 of official debt into grants, on condition that Kenya use the local currency equivalent for environmental improvement and conservation projects.
In January 1990 the United States agreed to write off debts worth $178,400,000, and in February France agreed to write off F1,330 million (approximately equivalent to $234 million as at Feb. 5, 1990) of official debt.
Opposition to skyscraper plan
In January 1990 a controversial project by KANU to build a 60-storey tower block in Uhuru Park, Nairobi, at a cost of $198,000,000, attracted much criticism from donors concerned at the country's mounting external debt, as well as from environmentalists.
The government said that the project would be reviewed.
FOREIGN
Clash on Somalia border
Kenya lodged a strong protest after four Kenyan policemen were killed and four injured by Somali troops at the Hare-Hare border settlement on Sept. 20, 1989.
Somalia said that its forces had been pursuing anti-government rebels.
After a visit to Nairobi by Hussein Abdurahman Matan, the Somali Defence Minister, the two countries agreed on Sept. 29 to take action against poachers and "bandits" in the border area.
Relations with Israel
During a visit by the Israeli Foreign Minister Moshe Arens, who held talks with Moi on Aug. 25, 1989, an agreement was signed on technical co-operation in the reclamation of arid land to promote food production [for resumption of relations see p. 36919].
AFRICA
IGADD
BASIC DATA
Full name: Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development.
Date of foundation: 1986.
Members: Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, Sudan, Uganda.
Headquarters: Djibouti.
Principal officials: Makonnen Kebret, executive secretary (to 1991).
Summit meetings: Biennial, most recently in Djibouti in January 1990, with the Council of Ministers meeting more frequently.
Current chairman: President Mengistu of Ethiopia, for a two-year term 1990-1992.
Activity: Some progress was recorded at the Djibouti summit on measures to improve food security and drought and famine early warning systems, but more work needed to be done before a second conference with donor countries could be convened, following that of March 1987, to obtain funding and technical support for a further series of projects.
AFRICA
SOMALIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 637,657 sq km.
Population: 5,882,000 (1988).
Capital: Mogadishu.
Languages: Somali and Arabic; English and Italian widely spoken.
Religion: Islam (majority Sunni Moslems); small Christian minority.
Av. life expectancy: 47 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 65,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$170 (1988).
Currency: Somali shilling (US$1.00=SS408.8687 as at April 2, 1990).
The Democratic Republic of Somalia (known as the Somali Republic prior to October 1969) was formed by the unification of the British Somaliland Protectorate and the UN Trust Territory of Somalia at independence in July 1960.
The present head of state, Maj.-Gen.
Mohammed Siyad Barre, seized power in a bloodless coup in October 1969, when the Constitution was suspended and the previous multiparty system abolished.
A socialist state was proclaimed one year later.
A new Constitution was approved by referendum in August 1979, under the terms of which "political leadership of party and state are indivisible" .
The presidential candidate is proposed by the central committee of the sole legal party, the Somali Revolutionary Socialist Party (SRSP) and is elected by direct universal suffrage for a seven-year term.
The People's Assembly, the unicameral legislative body, is elected for a five-year term by direct popular vote.
In line with a review of the Constitution Siyad Barre said in November 1989 that free elections would be held the following year in which "all political currents will be able to express themselves and share power" .
Having dismissed the Cabinet on Jan. 8, the President on Jan. 21, 1990, reappointed the Prime Minister to his post and gave him the responsibility for bringing together a new ministerial team [see p. 37174], which was announced on Feb. 15 and sworn in on Feb. 17 [see p. 37240].
POLITICS/SECURITY
Principal developments in Somalia from mid-1989 [see p. 36757 for events to that date]continued to be dominated by the civil war, the regime's attempts to establish some dialogue with opposition forces on its own terms, and allegations of human rights abuses [see pp. 36806; 37113-14; 37174].
Following the establishment of a committee to review the Constitution and to prepare for the introduction of a multiparty system [see p. 36842], the President's office announced on Nov. 6 that a six-member committee had been set up; the committee's members included a leading human rights lawyer, Ismail Ali Jumaale, released from prison on Oct. 25 after four months' detention.
Speaking to the Egyptian daily Al-Ahram on Nov. 12, President Mohammed Siyad Barre said that "all political currents will be able to express themselves and share power" .
The opposition (Issaq-dominated) Somali National Movement (SNM) would be able to take part in the elections, he said, if "it has a programme and does not solely seek to satisfy tribal interests" .
A report by the committee, covering the role of political parties, changes in election rules and changes in regional administration, was submitted to the President on Feb. 3, 1990.
Lt.-Gen.
Mohammed Ali Samater Prime Minister Col. Ahmed Mohammud Farah Deputy Prime Minister Abdulkadir Haji Mohammad Interior Ahmed Jaba Abdulle Foreign Affairs Brig. -Gen.
Mohammed Ghelle Yusuf Finance and Treasury Hussein Abdurahman Matan Defence Mohammed Ali Munasar Health Farah Dahir Afey Information and Tourism Abdullah Mohammed Mireh Education Sheikh Mohammed Guled Justice and Religious Affairs Mohammed Sheikh Osman Jawar Land and Air Transport Mohammed Godah Barre Planning Bashir Farah Kahiye Commerce and Industry Abdulrahman Jama Mohammed Livestock, Forestry and Ranges Mohamoud Mohammad Ulusow Agriculture Mohammed Saed Gees Marine Transport and Fisheries Abdi Warsame Isak Labour and Sports Mohammed Said Morgan Public Works and Housing Abukar Hassan Weheliyeh Posts and Telecommunications 
Council of Ministers
US report on human rights abuses
A report prepared for the United States State Department, published in September 1989, stated that the Somali armed forces had "purposely murdered" at least 5,000 civilians in fighting over the previous two years.
Rebels, the report said, had killed several hundred in the fighting and had attacked UN refugee camps, killing at least 400 people.
The report, prepared by Robert Gershony, an independent consultant responsible for a 1988 report on atrocities carried out by rebels in Mozambique, accused the Somali armed forces of a "widespread, systematic and extremely violent assault on the unarmed civilian Issaq population of northern Somalia" ; however, it also discovered evidence of widespread atrocities by the SNM rebels.
The USA had already suspended US$21,500,000 of economic aid after the killing of over 400 people in disturbances in Mogadishu in July [see p. 36806].
On Sept. 11 the US State Department said that it endorsed the conclusions of the Gershony report and had expressed its concern to the Somali government.
Further damaging reports were published in January 1990 [see p. 37174].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -3% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$29 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$394 m. (1988)
Budget deficit SS6,453 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$2,036 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product US$710 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 45% (1988 est.)
Principal trading partners (1986) Exports: Saudi Arabia, Italy; Imports: Italy, USA 
1990 budget
The Council of Ministers on Dec. 7, 1989, approved the 1990 budget, totalling SS86,012 million.
The total, including the budgets for central and local government and independent agencies, represented a 74 per cent increase on the previous year's budget, according to figures presented by Deputy Finance Minister Abdullahi Muhammad Shireh.
Shireh said that the government would give special priority to regions which could not sustain themselves, for which a special grant of SS379,000,000 had been allocated.
Economic growth in 1990 was projected to reach 5 per cent, he said, and efforts would be made to keep inflation below 60 per cent .
Also included in the budget was a 103 per cent general salary increase for workers.
A further measure to improve living standards came with the decision to reduce customs duties on imported essential goods with effect from Jan. 1, 1990.
FOREIGN
Relations with Ethiopia
The joint ministerial committee with Ethiopia, formed as a result of an agreement between the two countries in April 1988 to improve bilateral relations [see p. 36006], met for the first time on Dec. 4-7, 1989, in Mogadishu.
The Ethiopian delegation was led by Deputy Internal Affairs Minister Mersha Ketsela; Somalia was represented by Deputy Administration Minister Abdullahi Mohammed Mah.
The two sides agreed to meet again in Ethiopia, but no date was announced.
AFRICA
DJIBOUTI
BASIC DATA
Area: 23,200 sq km.
Population: 370,000 (1987).
Capital: Djibouti.
Languages: Arabic and French (official); Cushitic languages.
Religion: Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 48 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 4,230 (incl. 1,200 Gendarmerie)(1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: Djibouti franc (US$1.00=175.9656 Djibouti francs as at April 2, 1990).
The Republic of Djibouti (formerly the French Territory of the Afars and the Issas) has been ruled by President Hassan Gouled Aptidon since independence in June 1977.
Gouled, as the sole candidate, was re-elected by direct universal suffrage in June 1981 and April 1987; under the terms of the 1981 Constitution the President may serve for no more than two terms.
There is a 65-member Chamber of Deputies, most recently elected for a term of five years in April 1987 [see p. 35180], all candidates being elected from a single list put forward by the Popular Rally for Progress (Rassemblement populaire pour le progrès — RPP), since October 1981 the sole legal party.
Barkat Gourad Hamadou Prime Minister; Planning and Land Development Mohammed Moussa Chehem Agriculture and Rural Development Ismail Ali Youssouf Civil Service and Administrative Reform Moussa Bouraleh Robleh Commerce, Transport and Tourism Mohammed Djama Elabe Finance and National Economy Moumin Bahdon Farah Foreign Affairs and Co-operation Ougoure Hassan Ibrahim Health and Social Affairs Salem Abdou Industry and Industrial Development Khayreh Alaleh Hared Interior, Posts and Telecommunications Elaf Orbis Ali Justice and Islamic Affairs Ahmed Ibrahim Abdi Labour and Social Welfare Hussein Barkad Siraj National Defence Souleiman Farah Lodon National Education Bourhan Ali Warki Ports and Shipping Ahmed Aden Youssouf Public Works, Urban Affairs and Housing Omar Chirdon Abass Youth, Sports and Culture 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
Somali clashes — Border closure
Clashes in Djibouti between different groups of ethnic Somalis on Oct. 21, 1989, left 20 people injured.
The fighting was a further manifestation of the traditional enmity between Gadabursis, who generally backed the regime of President Siyad Barre in neighbouring Somalia, and Issaqs, many of whom supported the Somali National Movement (SNM) in its efforts to overthrow Barre [see p. 37400; see p. 37064 for earlier clashes].
On May 2, 1989, Djibouti had closed the border with Somalia after the SNM captured the Saylac border region.
Somali troops regained control of the area on March 26, 1990, whereupon the authorities in Djibouti, fearing a new influx of refugees from the combat zone, increased the number of troops on the border.
Djibouti officials said in late 1989 that their country was host to some 30,000 Somali refugees, most of whom had settled in the capital.
Formation of opposition front
The two main underground opposition groups, the Front démocratique de libération de Djibouti (FDLD), an Afar movement led by Mohamed Adoyta, and the Mouvement national djiboutien pour l'instauration de la démocratie (MNDID), a group of Issas founded in 1986 by former Commerce Minister Aden Robleh Awale [see p. 35180], decided at a joint meeting in Brussels in February 1990 to form a common front, the Union des mouvements démocratiques (UMD).
ECONOMY/FOREIGN
Economic indicators
Total external public debt US$250 m. (1988)
GNP growth -0.7% (1986)
Official development assistance US$92 m. (1987)
Unemployment Over 50% (1987)
Principal trading partners Exports: North and South Yemen, Somalia; Imports: France, Ethiopia, Italy 
1990 budget
The Chamber of Deputies on Dec. 23, 1989, approved the national budget for 1990 which totalled 23,987 million Djibouti francs.
It provided for higher social services expenditure, and also reflected recent unfavourable exchange rate movements.
Renewed aid agreement with France
During a visit in October 1989 French Co-operation and Development Minister Jacques Pelletier announced that his government's budgetary assistance would continue beyond the expiry in November 1989 of the current aid agreement.
AFRICA
ETHIOPIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,251,282 sq km.
Population: 46,144,000 (1988).
Capital: Addis Ababa.
Languages: Amharic (official); many local languages, English widely used in commerce and Arabic spoken in Eritrea.
Religion: Christianity (Ethiopian Orthodox Church); Islam and animism.
Av. life expectancy: 48 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 315,800 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$120 (1988).
Currency: birr (US$1.00=2.0493 birr as at April 2, 1990).
In February 1987, following a 12-year period of military rule, a new Constitution was adopted by referendum [see p. 35367].
Following a general election in June for seats in a National Shengo (which formally replaced the military administration in September of that year), the establishment of the People's Democratic Republic of Ethiopia was proclaimed.
Lt.-Col. Mengistu Haile Mariam, who came to power in February 1977 after a struggle within the military leadership [see p. 28221], was elected President by the Shengo at its inaugural session [see pp. 35367-68].
There is a 24-member Council of State which is the permanent organ of the National Shengo.
Mengistu announced on March 5, 1990, that the Workers' Party of Ethiopia, which had been created in 1984 as the sole legal party [see p. 33384], was to be transformed into a new Ethiopian Democratic Unity Party, in what was portrayed as a move towards wider political participation intended to embrace opposition groups.
Hailu Yimenu Deputy Prime Minister (acting Prime Minister) Alemu Agebe Deputy Prime Minister Wole Chekol Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Economic Affairs Ashagre Yigletu Deputy Prime Minister in charge of Social Affairs Tesfaye Dinka Foreign Affairs Col. Tesfaye Wolde Selassie Internal Affairs Kassa Gebre Construction Shimelis Adugna Labour and Social Affairs Abdul Hafis Yusuf Information Maj. Girma Yilma Culture and Sports (vacant) National Defence Tadeos Hagere Work Industry Hambisa Wakwoya Coffee and Tea Development Geremew Debele Agriculture Tekola Dejene Finance Tadese Kidane Mariam Urban Development and Housing Gizaw Tsehai Health Tekeze Shoa Autenfesu Mines, Energy and Water Resources Yoseph Muleta State Farms Getachew Habte Selassie Foreign Trade Wondayen Mehretu Justice Yayehrad Kitaw Education Mersha Wodajo Domestic Trade Asegid Wolde Amanuel Transport and Communications Feleke Gedle-Ghiorgis Minister in President's Office responsible for Foreign Relations Maj.-Gen.
Kefelegn Yibza Minister in President's Office, Chief Inspector of Military Affairs Neguse Wolde Mikael Minister in President's Office, Chief Inspector of Economic, Social and Administrative Affairs Maj.-Gen.
Seyoum Mekonen Minister in President's Office, Chief of Defence and Security sector Tsegaw Ayele Co-ordination of Zonal Affairs Dibekulu Zewde Co-ordination of Religious Affairs Hailu Wolde Amanuel Head of the Institute of Nationalities Yilma Kasaye Commissioner for Relief and Rehabilitation Dawit Getechew Commissioner for Hotels and Tourism 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Cabinet appointment
A new Minister for Foreign Trade, Getachew Habte Selassie, was appointed on Feb. 26, 1990, replacing Tadesse Gebre-Kidan.
SECURITY
Capture of Massawa by EPLF
The war in Eritrea, Tigre and elsewhere increasingly threatened the existence of the Ethiopian regime and provided the backdrop against which it launched its liberalization proposals in March 1990 [see p. 37310].
Renewed heavy fighting between government and rebel forces in late 1989 and early 1990 had culminated in the capture of the Eritrean port of Massawa by the Eritrean People's Liberation Front (EPLF) in mid-February [see p. 37239].
The EPLF offensive against Massawa, beginning on Feb. 8, had brought to an end the unofficial ceasefire observed by the front since the unsuccessful coup attempt against President Mengistu Haile Mariam in April 1989 [see p. 36646].
The EPLF claimed that the government had used this lull in the fighting to build up its military strength.
The government's ability to defend Massawa had been undermined, however, by fresh fighting around Keren and Azeza and on the Asmara-Massawa road, together with the successes scored further south in December 1989 and January 1990 by the Tigre People's Liberation Front (TPLF) and the Oromo Liberation Front.
The government stressed that the capture of Massawa would disrupt the transport of food supplies to the estimated 4,000,000 people threatened by famine in northern Ethiopia [see pp. 37113; 37173; 37239-40].
Moreover large quantities of food awaiting shipment to drought-stricken areas were reported to have been destroyed in the fighting.
Independent relief agencies, with the government's consent, on March 20 began transport of supplies from Addis Ababa through the war zone to rebel-held areas [see pp. 37173; 37368].
Aid officials from the United Kingdom, returning from visits to Eritrea and Tigre on April 3, reported that food supplies were reaching people in the region, mostly via the cross-border route from Sudan, and that there was no mass starvation, but warned that the situation could worsen when existing food aid pledges ran out after May.
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.3% (average 1983-88)
Current-account balance -US$199 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$699 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,978 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 39.2% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$5,450 m. (1988 est.)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: West Germany, Japan, USA; Imports: Italy, Soviet Union, USA
AFRICA
MADAGASCAR
BASIC DATA
Area: 587,041 sq km.
Population: 11,259,000 (1988).
Capital: Antananarivo.
Languages: Malagasy and French (both official); Hova and other dialects.
Religion: Animism (majority), Christianity (about 40%) and Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 54 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 21,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$180 (1988).
Currency: Malagasy franc (US$1.00=1299.2029 francs MG as at April 2, 1990).
The Democratic Republic of Madagascar (known until December 1975 as the Malagasy Republic) achieved full independence from France in June 1960.
The head of state is the executive President, currently Didier Ratsiraka; elected for seven years by universal adult suffrage, the President is also chairman of the Supreme Revolutionary Council, which is defined in the Constitution as "the guardian of the Malagasy Socialist Revolution" .
Two-thirds of the members of the Council are nominated by the President, who also selects the rest from a list nominated by the National People's Assembly.
The Prime Minister is appointed by the President; the government is responsible to the Assembly.
Presidential elections held on March 12, 1989, resulted in the victory of Ratsiraka, who defeated three other candidates to secure a third seven-year term; he was sworn in on April 20 [see pp. 36518; 36678].
Elections to the Assembly on May 28, 1989 [see p. 36648], once again returned the ruling Vanguard of the Malagasy Revolution (Antoky Ny Revolosiona Malagasy/Avantgarde de la révolution malgache — Arema) with an overwhelming majority of the 137 seats, despite the formation of an opposition democratic alliance within the mandatory framework of the National Front for the Defence of the Revolution (Front national pour la défence de la révolution — FNDR).
Lt.-Col. Victor Ramahatra Prime Minister Jean Robiarivuny Economy Leon Rajaobelina Finance José Michel Andrianoélison Agricultural Production Maxime Zafera Animal Production Fisheries, Forests and Water Resources Georges Ruphin Civil Service and Labour Georges Solofoson Commerce Gen. Christopher Raveloson-Mahasampo National Defence Jean Bemananjara Foreign Affairs Jean-Jacques Séraphin Health Ignace Rakoto Higher Education Vincent Radanielson Industry Jean-Claude Rahaga Information, Ideological Guidance and Co-operative Development Augustin Ampy Portos Interior Joseph Bedo Justice; Keeper of the Seals Badharoudine Population, Social Welfare Simon Pierre Posts and Telecommunications Col. Jean-Emile Tsaranasy Public Works Gisele Rabesahala Culture Antoine Rabesa Zafera Scientific Research and Development of Technology Aristide Velompanahy Primary and Secondary Education Lucien Zasy Transport 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Cabinet reshuffle — Lifting of restrictions on political parties
Eight new ministers were appointed by President Didier Ratsiraka in a Cabinet reshuffle on Aug. 17, 1989.
The appointment of technocrats to a number of economic posts was seen by observers as an indication that the government was falling into line with the requirements of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which in May had approved a three-year financing agreement for the country [see below].
The former Finance and Economy Ministry was split into two, with the portfolios entrusted to two new Cabinet members: Leon Rajaobelina (Finance) and Jean Robiarivuny (Economy).
Their predecessor, Pascal Rakotomavo, was appointed special counsellor to the policy-making Supreme Revolutionary Council.
Other appointments included that of Maxime Zafera to a restructured Ministry of Animal Production Fisheries, Forests and Water Resources, and Vincent Radanielson as Industry Minister.
Announcing the changes, Ratsiraka also said that he favoured lifting restrictions on political parties, which hitherto had been required to belong to the FNDR.
A decree permitting the free formation of political parties came into force in March 1990.
Three new parties emerged in March and April 1990:(i) the relaunched Social Democratic Party (PSD), which had held power between 1960 and 1972, and whose secretary-general was André Resampa, a former Interior Minister;(ii) the government-supporting AMFM-3FM, whose secretary-general Andrianalijaona Andriamanampy declared the party's aim to be "social equality" ; and (iii) the right-wing opposition Christian Democratic Movement led by Jean-Jacques Rakotoniaina.
Earlier, the socialist Congress Party for Malagasy Independence (Parti du congrès de l'indépendance de Madagascar — AKFM-Renewal, formed after the March 1989 presidential elections — see p. 36678) announced on Oct. 6 that it had pulled out of the ruling coalition.
The party leader, Pastor Richard Andriamanjato, said that the move was in protest at attempts by Arema to sabotage AKFM-Renewal.
He said that his party, which held three parliamentary seats, would join in opposition the centre-left Movement for Proletarian Power (Mouvement pour le pouvoir prolétarien/Monoma Ka Mivimbio — MFM/MFT or "Pouvoir aux Petits" ), which held seven seats [see pp. 36518; 36648; 36678].
SECURITY
Unsuccessful coup attempt
During the early hours of July 24, 1989, a group of armed men seized control of a radio station in Antananirivo and broadcast a statement that Ratsiraka's government had been replaced by one composed of opposition leaders.
The men, one of whom was named as Ernest Joma, were quickly arrested, however, and two hours later the then Information, Ideological Guidance and Co-operative Development Minister, Simon Pierre, broadcast a message denying that any coup had taken place and calling for calm.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.5% (1989 est.)
Current-account balance -US$150 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$100 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$3,600 m. (1988)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 56% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$1,700 m. (1988)
Principal trading partners (1988) Exports: France, USA, Japan; Imports: France, Soviet Union, Thailand
The IMF on May 15, 1989, approved a three-year enhanced structural adjustment facility (ESAF) for Madagascar, worth a total 25,600,000 special drawing rights (SDR1=US$1.27818 as at May 12, 1989).
The facility replaced the August 1987 structural adjustment facility and the 10-month standby arrangement agreed in September 1988 [see pp. 35946; 36678].
The funds would support a programme to reduce inflation, to increase investment and per capita income and to make progress towards financial stability.
Policy reforms would strengthen the private sector, while, according to the IMF, paying "due regard to the social aspects of adjustment through measures to alleviate the plight of the most vulnerable groups" .
Aid donors pledged a total of $85,000,000 for a five-year environmental action plan at a meeting in Paris on Feb. 14-15, 1990.
The plan, designed to arrest degradation of the environment, included measures to protect specific wildlife sites, as well as steps to slow soil erosion and sedimentation of reservoirs.
The plan was agreed at a meeting co-ordinated by the World Bank and attended by representatives of bilateral donors and international organizations, and was the first of its kind to receive support from the international community.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,040 sq km.
Population: 1,048,000 (1988).
Capital: Port Louis.
Languages: English (official); Creole.
Religion: Hinduism (51%), Christianity (31.3%) and Islam (16.6%)(1972).
Av. life expectancy: 67 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: No standing defence forces.
GNP per capita: US$1,810 (1988).
Currency: Mauritian rupee (US$1.00=R14.8375 as at April 2, 1990).
Mauritius became an independent state within the Commonwealth in March 1968.
Executive power is formally vested in the British monarchy, represented by a Governor-General (currently Sir Veerasamy Ringadoo) who acts on the advice of a Council of Ministers.
There is a unicameral Legislative Assembly of 70 seats, 62 of which are elected by universal adult suffrage for five years.
The Governor-General appoints the Prime Minister (currently Aneerood Jugnauth), and on the latter's advice, the other members of the Council of Ministers, who are responsible to the Assembly.
Elections were last held in August 1987 [see p. 35490], when the ruling coalition was returned for a further term of office.
As of early 1990, the coalition consisted of the Mouvement socialiste mauricien (MSM), the Mauritius Labour Party (MLP) and the Organisation du peuple rodriguais (OPR).
Aneerood Jugnauth (MSM) Prime Minister; Defence; Internal Security; Information; Reform Institutions; External Relations Sir Satcam Boolell (MLP) Deputy Prime Minister and Constitutional Assistant; Foreign Affairs; Emigration; Justice and Attorney General Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo (MSM) Finance Beergoonath Ghurburrun (MSM) Planning and Economic Development Jagdish Goburdhun (MSM) Health Mahyendrah Utchanah (MSM) Energy and Communications Dinesh Ramjuttun (MSM) Social Security; National Solidarity Clarel Malherbe (MLP) Industry Viswanath Sajadah (MLP) Co-operatives Dwarkanath Gungah (MSM) Trade and Shipping Sheilabai Bappoo (MSM) Labour; Women's Rights and Family Affairs Sir Ramesh Jeewoolall (MLP) Housing, Lands, and Environment Madun Dulloo (MSM) Agriculture, Fisheries and Natural Resources Ramdathsing Jaddoo (MSM) Works Serge Clair (OPR) Rodrigues Island Michael James Glover (MSM) Youth and Sports; Tourism Armoorgum Parsooraman (MSM) Education, Arts and Culture France Roussety (MLP) Civil Service and Employment Regis Finette (MSM) Regional Administration 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
MSM-Labour by-election victory
A by-election at La Caverne-Phoenix on June 11, 1989, was won by an MSM-MLP-backed candidate, who took the seat previously held by the opposition Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM).
As a result, the centre-left coalition led by the Prime Minister, Aneerood Jugnauth, held 47 seats in the Legislative Assembly and the opposition 23.
SECURITY
Arrest of former minister
Sir Gaetan Duval, a former Deputy Prime Minister (1983-88) and the leader of the opposition Parti mauricien social-démocrate (PMSD), was arrested on June 23, 1989, in connection with the alleged assassination in 1971 of a political activist, Azor Adelaide.
He was later released but forbidden to leave the country.
In April 1990 Duval was allowed to visit Réunion, on condition that he return by April 30, when the verdict of the judicial inquiry into his alleged involvement was to be announced.
Reports suggested that the real target in the 1971 attack was Paul Bérenger, secretary-general of the centre-left Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM), now the principal opposition party.
[For split in ruling coalition after Duval's resignation as deputy Prime Minister in August 1988 see p. 36142].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 5.5% (1980-87)
Current-account balance +US$72 m. (1987)
Total external debt US$775 m. (1987)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 6.1% (1987)
Gross domestic product US$1,480 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 8.1% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners EC, USA 
1989-90 budget
On June 23, 1989, the Finance Minister, Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo, presented a budget set at R8,900 million, with revenue estimated at R8,100 million, and an estimated deficit of 825,000,000, and with the main objective of combating inflation, which had reached 16 per cent.
Lutchmeenaraidoo predicted a reduced growth rate of 5 per cent in 1989, compared with 5.4 per cent in 1988, and a fall of 10 per cent in income from the sugar industry.
The government was unable to agree to any wage increases, despite union demands for 20 per cent rises, but as partial compensation higher subsidies would be given for rice, flour and other basic commodities, totalling R250,000,000.
Offshore banking
A package of tax and duty incentives aimed at attracting foreign institutions was launched on July 25, 1989.
Banks wishing to apply for an offshore banking licence were required to provide capital of US$1,600,000 plus an annual fee of $20,000.
The first offshore banking unit was set up on Aug. 25 by Barclays Bank of Mauritius; offshore licences were also approved for the Bank of Baroda and Banque Privée Edmond de Rothschild, and later for S. B. International (a joint Mauritian-Indian venture), the Hongkong and Shanghai Banking Corp. and Banque Nationale de Paris.
The package was seen as part of the transition from a labour-intensive to a capital-intensive economy in Mauritius.
Meanwhile the manufacturing sector, principally textiles, which was suffering from a severe shortage of labour, was expected to take advantage of the Madagascan government's decision to offer incentives to foreign investors.
Sugar production
Gross sugar production for 1989 was expected to be slightly lower than in the previous year, at 614,220 tonnes compared with 672,087 tonnes.
Sugar's share in gross domestic product (GDP) in 1989 was forecast at 8 per cent in 1989 (in 1980 it had been 12 per cent).
The drop in production was blamed on two cyclones early in the year and on unfavourable climatic conditions later.
FOREIGN
Protests at US bombing accident
Protest demonstrations outside the United States embassy in Port Louis on Nov. 6, 1989, called for the withdrawal from the Indian Ocean region of foreign military presence which the demonstrators regarded as a threat to the safety of its inhabitants.
The protests followed an incident on Oct. 30 when a bomb from a US F18 fighter aircraft was accidentally dropped on the USS Reeves, sailing off Diego Garcia in the Chagos Archipelago.
Five sailors were injured in the incident.
Mauritius claimed sovereignty over the archipelago, now serving United Kingdom and US defence purposes as the British Indian Ocean Territory (BIOT).
The US Assistant Secretary of State for African Affairs, Herman Cohen, visited Mauritius on Nov. 9-11 and reaffirmed that the USA would maintain a presence in the Indian Ocean region as long as it was considered necessary.
Visit to India by Prime Minister
Jugnauth paid a nine-day visit to India in January 1990, during which he invited Indian industrialists and investors to increase their presence in Mauritius.
AFRICA
SEYCHELLES
BASIC DATA
Area: 454 sq km.
Population: 68,000 (1988).
Capital: Victoria, on Mahé island.
Languages: Creole (official); English and French.
Religion: Christianity (92% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 1,300 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$3,800 (1988).
Currency: Seychelles rupee (US$1.00=SR5.5793 as at April 2, 1990).
The Republic of Seychelles became independent within the Commonwealth in June 1976.
The present head of state, France-Albert René, seized power in an armed coup in June 1977.
A new Constitution, proclaimed in March 1979, established a one-party state.
Executive power is vested in the President, who is elected for a five-year term by direct suffrage, and who appoints the Council of Ministers, as well as members of the judiciary and the holders of certain public offices.
There is a unicameral National Assembly of whom 23 members are elected by direct popular vote for five years and two members are appointed by the President.
All candidates in the general election of December 1987 [see p. 36530]represented the sole party, the Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF).
René was re-elected for a further five-year term on June 9-11, 1989 [see p. 36729].
France-Albert René President; Head of Government; C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces; Defence, Administration, Finance, Legal Affairs Maj. James Michel Finance Ralph Adam Health Joseph Belmont Administration and Manpower Jacques Hodoul Transport and Tourism Esme Jumeau Community Development Danielle de St Jorre Planning and External Affairs Simone Testa Education Sylvette Frichot Information, Culture and Youth William Herminie Employment and Social Affairs Jeremie Bonnelame Agriculture and Fisheries 
Council of Ministers
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.5% (1980-87)
Current-account balance -US$31 m. (1987)
Total external public debt US$159 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$256 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 3.7% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners Exports: Pakistan, France, Réunion; Imports: Bahrain, UK, South Africa 
Budget
The Minister of Finance, Maj. James Michel, presented the 1990 budget on Dec. 30, 1989.
Expenditure was to increase by 38 per cent over 1988 to a total of SR1,282 million (approximately US$210,000,000).
Higher duties were placed on luxury imports as part of a plan to curb consumer spending and to conserve foreign exchange.
Michel reported that in 1989 the cost of debt servicing had surpassed the funds available in loans and grants and would have to be paid for out of foreign exchange.
However, the economic growth rate in 1988 had reached 7 per cent.
Tourism provided 16 per cent of revenue; tourist visitors in 1988 had increased by 12 per cent.
Michel announced increases in civil service salaries and in the minimum wage level.
FOREIGN
Diplomatic relations were established with Kenya in January 1990.
AFRICA
COMOROS
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,862 sq km.
Population: 442,000 (1988).
Capital: Moroni (on Njazidja).
Languages: Arabic, French; majority of population speaks Comoran.
Religion: Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 56 yrs.
Armed forces: Nil [see also p. 37309.
GNP per capita: US$440 (1988).
Currency: Comoros franc (US$1.00=284.7540 Comoros francs as at April 23, 1990).
The Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros, an archipelago in the northern part of the Mozambique Channel between Madagascar and the east coast of Africa, comprises the main islands of Njazidja, Nzwani and Mwali (formerly Grande-Comore, Anjouan and Mohéli respectively), and a number of islets and coral reefs.
The islands achieved independence from France in July 1975.
The island of Mayotte also forms part of the archipelago, but its inhabitants voted in February 1976 to remain under French administration.
The Comoros are ruled by a President elected for a six-year term.
Ahmed Abdallah Abderrahman, who had been re-elected President for a second term in September 1984, was assassinated in November 1989 [see pp. 37033-34].
An interim President, Said Mohamed Djohar, was appointed, who subsequently won elections contested by several parties in March 1990, thus marking the end of one-party rule [see p. 37309].
There is a Federal Assembly of 42 members, elected by universal adult suffrage for a five-year term, most recently in March 1987, when all seats were declared won by candidates of the then sole legal party, the Union for Comorian Progress, although opposition candidates were permitted to stand; legislative elections are expected to be held in the course of 1990.
Governors of the islands, appointed by the President, have responsibility for routine economic and police administration.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
UNITED STATES
BASIC DATA
Area: 9,372,614 sq km.
Population: 248,231,030 (1989).
Capital: Washington DC.
Languages: English; Spanish-speaking minorities.
Religion: Christianity (majority).
Av. life expectancy: 79 yrs (women), 72 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 2,124,900 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$19,780 (1988).
Currency: US dollar.
The federal government of the United States of America embodies a separation of powers between the executive (which is headed by a President elected for four years, at present a Republican), the legislative branch (Congress, which comprises a Senate of 100 members and a House of Representatives of 435 members, both of which are at present controlled by the Democratic Party) and the judicial branch (headed by the Supreme Court).
In addition to this basic tripartite division, federal regulatory agencies enjoy a semi-independent status and exercise a mix of executive, legislative and judicial powers.
The balance and distribution of power and responsibility between the branches of government is subject to constant dispute and evolution.
There is a Cabinet but this normally has little corporate significance.
The Supreme Court enjoys an effective if indirect and delayed veto over legislation and executive actions, and its decisions where based on the Constitution may only be overridden by constitutional amendment (involving the approval of two-thirds majorities of both the House and the Senate and of three-quarters of the states).
The sovereign powers of the 50 individual states of the Union have declined continuously for at least 120 years and are severely circumscribed or non-existent in many of the major areas of public policy.
In presidential elections held on Nov. 8, 1988 [see pp. 36337-42], the Republican candidate and incumbent Vice-President, George Herbert Walker Bush, defeated his Democratic rival; he duly took office as President on Jan. 20, 1989 [see p. 36391].
In simultaneous legislative elections the Democrats retained control over Congress, winning 262 seats in the House of Representatives and controlling 55 seats in the Senate.
J. Danforth Quayle Vice-President James Baker Secretary of State Nicholas Brady Secretary of the Treasury Richard (Dick) Cheney Secretary of Defence Munuel Lujan Secretary of the Interior Clayton Yeutter Secretary of Agriculture Robert Mosbacher Secretary of Commerce Jack Kemp Secretary of Housing and Urban Development Sam Skinner Secretary of Transportation Louis Sullivan Secretary of Health and Human Services Richard Thornburgh Attorney General Elizabeth Dole Secretary of Labour James Watkins Secretary of Energy Lauro Cavazos Secretary of Education Ed Derwinsky Secretary of Veterans' Affairs 
Cabinet
SOCIAL ISSUES
Corruption
Department of Housing and Urban Development scandal
A serious case of corruption within government was first brought to light when an internal audit released on April 26, 1989, by the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) showed that former HUD officials and a number of prominent Republicans had received millions of dollars in consulting fees from developers participating in federal housing projects subsidized by the HUD.
On the same day HUD Secretary Jack Kemp suspended all 1989 funding for the housing programme.
On June 29 he announced that he was terminating a $500 million loan guarantee programme which officials had described as "riddled with abuse" , and a further programme was terminated on July 6, Kemp estimating that HUD had lost $2,000 million in waste, fraud, and mismanagement during Ronald Reagan's presidency.
Three congressional panels and the Justice Department were conducting the investigations, which opened in mid-May, and which centred on the HUD's Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Programme.
Several of those who testified laid much of the blame on Kemp's predecessor as HUD Secretary, Samuel R. Pierce.
In his appearance before the House government operations subcommittee in May Pierce denied any personal knowledge of malpractice, but subsequent testimony, particularly from his special assistant, Joseph Strauss, indicated that Pierce had been instrumental in providing assistance to friends, aides and others in housing schemes.
Pierce delayed reappearing before the subcommittee until Sept. 9.
In the course of his testimony he pleaded the Fifth Amendment, refusing eight times to answer questions in order not to incriminate himself, and became known in the press as "Silent Sam" .
In the course of the hearings it emerged that a number of other former government officials had been paid for lobbying on housing developments.
Among those involved were former Interior Secretary James Watt and Representative for Trade Negotiations Carla Hills [see below for investigation into Senator in relation to HUD scandal].
One of the most colourful figures to testify was a Maryland escrow agent Marilyn Harrell, who revealed that she had used an estimated $5,500,000 in federal funds to buy houses and cars for poor families, to pay off mortgages, and to set up construction companies.
Her defence, that in providing for the poor she was doing what the HUD was supposed to do, earned her the nickname "Robin HUD" .
She was indicted on Nov. 21 and on Dec. 6 pleaded not guilty in a Baltimore federal court to charges that she had embezzled $5,600,000 in funds from the HUD and that she had made false statements to the government.
There were many other prosecutions arising out of the investigations.
In May a federal grand jury had indicted former federal housing official James E. Baugh and contractor John B. Clyburn on charges of conspiracy and bribery.
Earlier Clyburn and David E. Rivers, former head of Washington's Department of Human Services, were charged with steering contracts worth $2,000,000 to four companies.
In June a settlement agent in Fort Worth, Texas, was indicted for embezzlement, an agent in Birmingham, Alabama, was found guilty of the theft of $168,000, and a computer operator in Denver, Colorado, was found to have transferred $313,127 in HUD funds to his own account.
In November Marvin D. Gitelson and Max Chaikin, two Washington real estate dealers, were charged with obtaining fraudulently $1,200,000 in HUD loans and with conspiring to sell drugs to real estate contacts.
Thirty-six defendants had already been convicted of fraud in relation to housing in Washington DC.
Kemp unveiled on Oct. 3 a series of reform proposals which included control of the use of consultants as well as proposals for tax relief for first-time buyers and for expanded rental assistance, and on Nov. 22 both the House and the Senate approved by voice vote legislation embodying the proposals; the legislation was signed into law on Dec. 15.
The appropriations bill for fiscal 1990 adopted on July 20 by the House and approved by the Senate on Sept. 28 had included a request to the HUD to develop rules prohibiting the use of outside consultants to acquire future contracts under the remaining funds in the programme.
On Nov. 10 President Bush outlined to the National Association of Realtors a new $4,200 million housing initiative.
The programme, spread over three years, would provide grants to make houses available to the poor, aid the homeless, extend low income housing, and create 50 enterprise zones in distressed areas.
Savings and loan scandals
A number of cases arose following the collapse of savings and loans companies ( "thrifts" — see below).
In September 1989 in Austin, Texas, Glen Mauldin, an assistant to former senator Chic Hecht (Republican, Nevada) was indicted on charges that he used his office to help secure approval of thrift deals in return for payments.
In Baltimore, Maryland, Julian M. Seidel, former president of the First Maryland Savings and Loan company, and James R. Porter, former senior vice-president of the defunct Silver Springs thrift, were sentenced to 12 and seven years' imprisonment respectively for falsely inflating the worth of their companies to attract depositors.
Their case helped to trigger off a savings and loan crisis in Maryland in 1985.
During investigations in November into the affairs of the collapsed Lincoln thrift in Irvine, California [see also below], it emerged that Charles Keating, an Arizona land developer who had bought the company in 1984, and who was being sued by the federal government for bank fraud and racketeering, had enlisted the help of five senators when the San Francisco Home Loan Bank began to investigate in 1986.
The senators, Alan Cranston (Democrat, California), John Glenn (Dem., Ohio), Donald Riegle (Dem., Michigan), Dennis DeConcini (Dem., Arizona), and John McCain (Rep., Arizona), who had received a total of over $1,300,000 in contributions to campaign funds from Keating, all denied wrongdoing.
However, the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) announced on Nov. 13 that it was investigating, and the Senate Ethics Committee on Nov. 17 appointed Robert S. Bennett as independent legal counsel to begin an informal investigation.
The Senate investigation also included the case of Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato (Rep., New York) who had been accused by a political opponent of using improper influence on behalf of political contributors and friends in federal housing programmes [see above for HUD scandal].
In December the Ethics Committee announced that the investigation had become a formal one which could lead to action against the senators if they were found guilty of infringing Senate rules.
Wedtech cases
On June 26, 1989, in a two-to-one decision, a federal appeals court in Washington DC reversed the conviction of Lyn Nofziger, a former White House aide convicted in 1988 under the 1978 Ethics in Government Act.
Nofziger, who had headed the White House Office of Political Affairs in 1981-82, had been convicted of illegal lobbying for the Wedtech Corp. within a year of leaving office, fined $30,000 and sentenced to 90 days in prison [see p. 36018].
The appeals court accepted that the law was ambiguous and that Nofziger might not have known that he was committing an illegal act.
On Dec. 11 the Supreme Court refused to review the unanimous refusal on Sept. 8 by the Court of Appeals to reconsider the earlier decision.
On Oct. 16 a federal district court in New York sentenced E. Robert Wallach, a San Francisco lawyer, to six years in prison and fined him $250,000, following his conviction on Aug. 8 of racketeering and fraud, having used his friendship with then Attorney General Edwin Meese III on behalf of Wedtech in return for a payment of $500,000.
The testimony of the former Wedtech president, Anthony Guariglia, was instrumental in securing Wallach's conviction.
Two other men, W. Franklyn Chinn, Meese's former investment adviser, and Rusty Kent London, a financial consultant, who had also been convicted, were sentenced to three and five years' imprisonment and fined $100,000 and $250,000 respectively [for earlier developments in Wedtech case see pp. 35502-03; 36679].
Cases involving city mayors
On May 7, 1989, the Los Angeles city attorney, James K. Hahn, asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to review the stock transactions of Los Angeles mayor Tom Bradley, 71, only weeks after Bradley's election for a fifth term of office [see p. 36583].
The Justice Department on May 26 opened a preliminary investigation into Bradley's affairs and into those of the then House majority whip Tony Coelho (Dem., California)[see pp. 36650; 36729].
Both men had dealt in junk bond transactions, and it appeared that Bradley had benefited from insider dealing and preferential treatment in his dealings with Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., a major Wall Street investment house [see below], and Michael Milken, a prominent financier.
In Hahn's final 1,600-page report published on Sept. 13, Bradley was cleared of criminal wrongdoing but criticized for poor judgment in private financial dealings.
In a public statement Bradley, who was liable to fines for failing to report major investments, said: "The errors I made were not deliberate.
They show only that I am not an accountant."
He was still subject to investigation by the Department of Justice.
After reaching a plea bargain with the authorities, Milken himself appeared in court on April 24, 1990, and pleaded guilty to six felonies involving securities and tax law violations.
He also agreed to pay a record $600 million in penalties: $200 million in fines and $400 million to injured investors.
During his brief court appearance the former "junk-bond king" wept as he admitted knowingly breaking the law by manipulating the financial markets between 1984 and 1986.
He was due to be sentenced on Oct. 1, and faced a maximum prison term of 28 years.
The mayor of Atlantic City, James L. Usry, 67, with three council members and nine other people were arrested on July 27 on bribery and misconduct charges including accepting $6,000 in cash from an undercover informer to license boardwalk carts in summer.
Usry, who pleaded not guilty and was released on bail, had been elected in 1984, when he had defeated Michael J. Matthews who was subsequently convicted for accepting payoffs.
Political sex scandals
A number of cases involving politicians and government workers in real or alleged sexual improprieties dominated headlines during the year.
Following reports in the Washington Times Paul Balach, a White House political liaison officer for the Labour Secretary, resigned on June 30, 1989, acknowledging that he had made use of a homosexual escort service.
According to documents published in the Washington Times, one of the biggest clients of the escort agency was Craig Spence, a trade consultant who had had close links with the Reagan administration.
Reports stated that on July 3, 1988, Spence had arranged a late night tour of the White House for six people, including two male prostitutes.
On Nov. 13, 1989, Spence was found dead in a Boston Hotel and was presumed to have committed suicide.
House ethics investigation
On Sept. 12, 1989, the House Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, the Ethics Committee, voted to begin a preliminary inquiry into whether Barney Frank (Dem., Massachusetts) had violated House rules in procuring the services of male prostitutes who he later hired as personal aides.
Frank, 49, who had requested the inquiry himself [see p. 36843], was a generally liked and respected member of the House, whose openness had originally won him much sympathy, although a detailed interview in Newsweek caused some offence.
Jim Bates (Dem., California) on Oct. 18, 1989, received a letter of reproval from the Ethics Committee for making improper advances to a female member of his staff.
The Ethics Committee on Feb. 2, 1990, released a report critical of Gus Savage (Dem., Illinois), for sexually harassing a Peace Corps worker while on a trip to Zaïre, but declined to recommend any disciplinary action, following Savage's letter of apology to the woman concerned [for previous developments in Savage and Bates cases see p. 36843].
No action was taken against Donald E. Lukens (Rep., Ohio) who had been sentenced to prison for between 30 and 180 days and fined $1,000 in June for having sexual relations with a teenage girl below the age of consent [ibid.].
Investigation of Gingrich
A law firm retained by the House Ethics Committee to investigate minority leader Newt Gingrich (Rep., Georgia) recommended on Oct. 18, 1989, that there should be no full-scale inquiry into charges against him, on grounds of insufficient evidence.
Gingrich was under investigation concerning the unusual methods used to promote the sale of a book which he had co-authored by which contributors put up funds in advance of royalties.
Gingrich had been the first to lay formal charges which had led to the resignation on June 6 of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Jim Wright [see p. 36650], and it was widely believed that his own investigation had been initiated in revenge in April by Representative Bill Alexander (Dem., Arkansas) who on Oct. 26 filed new charges against Gingrich for alleged misuse of campaign funds and of congressional stationery.
Stock market cases
Paul A. Bilzerian, 38, chairman of Singer Co. and a stock speculator, was on Sept. 27, 1989, fined $1,500,000 and sentenced to four years in prison — the longest prison sentence given for a Wall Street criminal.
Bilzerian had been convicted of securities fraud by a federal jury in New York on June 9, following evidence from Boyd Jefferies, a Los Angeles stockbroker convicted for securities fraud in the Ivan Boesky affair [see pp. 36017-18], who had been fined $250,000 and placed on probation for five years in July 1989.
Jefferies also gave evidence in the case of James Sherwin, vice-chairman of GAF Corp., who was found guilty on Dec. 13 of stock manipulation.
Stock exchange raids
It was disclosed on Jan. 19, 1989, that FBI agents posing as commodity traders for nearly two years had been accumulating evidence of widespread fraud on the floors of the Chicago Board of Trade and the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.
In April 22 traders were charged with illegal trading, and the Justice Department announced on Aug. 2 that a total of 46 traders had been indicted for futures fraud.
Federal agents on May 4 raided the four major New York commodity exchanges and escorted four traders off the floor; subpoenas were served on the exchanges themselves and on dozens of brokers and traders.
Following criticism from businesspeople and lawyers the Justice Department on Oct. 25, 1989, announced new guidelines on the use of the 1970 Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act (RICO) in the prosecution of white-collar crime.
RICO was originally intended for use against organized crime [see p. 35503], but had been used in 1988 in a number of financial malpractice cases including that of Drexel Burnham Lambert [see below].
Human rights
Death penalty
Debate over attempts to limit the number of appeals allowed to prisoners on death row in order to speed up executions affected both courts and Congress following the recommendation of a special five-judge judicial committee in September 1989 that the federal law be amended to allow states the option of permitting prisoners only one round of appeals.
Chief Justice William Rehnquist wrote in October to Jospeh Biden, chairman of the Senate Judiciary Committee, arguing against delay in accepting the proposal, but 14 judges on the Judicial conference of the USA expressed views to the contrary and criticized Rehnquist's actions.
On Oct. 18 the Senate judiciary committee reported without recommendation a bill reinstating the death penalty for more than 20 federal crimes including espionage, the attempted assassination of a President, and the murder of federal officials.
However, the committee also approved an amendment, introduced by Senator Edward Kennedy (Dem., Massachusetts) to allow federal and state prisoners to challenge the death penalty on the grounds that it was imposed in a racially discriminatory manner.
Abortion
The subject of abortion, an increasingly important political issue, continued to be a matter for court action.
On Nov. 29, 1989, the Supreme Court began to hear arguments on whether states could require that parents be notified before unmarried minor daughters could have abortions.
The cases involved the states of Minnesota (where both parents had to be informed 48 hours prior to an abortion), and Ohio (where 24 hours' notice to one parent was required).
The Michigan House of Representatives passed a bill on Dec. 8 requiring parental consent for unmarried girls under 18 to have abortions.
The bill, which still had to pass through the state Senate, was likely to be vetoed by Governor James Blanchard.
In January 1990 the US Court of Appeals in New York upheld a 1988 regulation prohibiting federally funded family planning clinics from advising on abortion.
In Harrisburg, a district court judge, Daniel Huyett III, issued a temporary injunction to block the enforcement of parts of Pennsylvania's 1989 Abortion Control Act due to come into operation on Jan. 16.
The blocked sections related to a woman notifying her husband of her intention to have an abortion.
In Wisconsin the Assembly agreed not to vote on an abortion measure, thereby killing a revised bill for the time being and allowing a stringent, but inoperable, law imposing criminal penalties for doctors performing abortions to remain in force.
The Maryland legislature agreed to hold joint hearings on abortion and began consideration of legislation introduced in January.
Dalkon Shield settlement decision
On Nov. 6, 1989, the Supreme Court refused to hear a challenge to the settlement agreed to be paid to the victims of the Dalkon Shield intrauterine birth control device.
Manufacture of the device, which was said to have caused infertility, pelvic inflammation and, in some cases, death, ceased in 1974, but the product was not withdrawn until 1986.
Lawyers of some of the women affected by the device contended that the settlement in a trust fund established by the manufacturer, A. H. Robins Co., wrongly barred future suits against the company.
They also argued that the $2,500 million provided might prove insufficient to meet all foreseeable cases.
In rejecting the argument the court cleared the way for payments to begin.
 "Right to die" cases
The Supreme Court began hearing arguments in December 1989 in the case of Cruzan v. Director of Missouri Department of Health.
The case was brought by her parents on behalf of Nancy Cruzan, the victim of a road accident in 1983 kept alive by life support systems.
A county circuit court decision in July 1988 allowing the life support systems to be withdrawn had been overturned in November 1988 by the Missouri Supreme Court in a four-to-three decision.
Cruzan's parents contended that their daughter would not wish to be kept alive in her present state and argued for the right to end her life.
In September 1989 Judge Edward H. Johnson, a superior court judge of Georgia, Atlanta, ruled that Larry James McAfee, 33, paralysed from the neck down since 1985 had the constitutional right to turn off a ventilator and to end his own life.
The judge also ruled that medical staff could administer a painkilling sedative to assist him in the process.
A similar case had been decided in Michigan in July to allow a quadriplegic, David H. Rivlin, 38, to end his life.
Decisions on drug testing
In August 1989 the US Court of Appeals in Washington DC upheld the 1986 Army plan to require random drug tests of certain workers [see p. 36091], but the Court declined to uphold testing of all categories proposed.
In January 1990 the Supreme Court rejected without any comment appeals against random drug testing of government workers in sensitive positions [ibid.].
The challenge had come from Justice Department lawyers with top secret security clearances and from civilian Army drug counsellors.
The case was the first review of random testing of federal employees and the first in which the court upheld testing which did not involve workers concerned with public safety.
In August 1989 William J. Bennett, the Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy, had called for the government "aggressively [to]implement" random testing of federal workers, but by January 1990 there had been little increase in the numbers tested due to litigation.
Freedom of speech decision
On Jan. 26, 1990, in New York, federal court Judge Leonard Sand overruled attempts by New York City to ban begging.
The case was brought by Joe Walley after the Metropolitan Transit Authority tried to prevent begging in stations and subways.
In upholding the right to beg Sand ruled that "begging is unmistakably informative and persuasive speech" .
Elizabeth Morgan case
Elizabeth Morgan, 41, a mother who refused to disclose her daughter's whereabouts to the child's father, was freed in Washington DC on Sept. 25, 1989, after 759 days in prison for contempt of court.
Her release was the result of a special bill, which was rushed through Congress, to limit confinement to one year for contempt in child custody cases.
The bill was signed by Bush on Sept. 23 and then approved by the courts to allow Morgan's release.
Morgan had claimed that her former husband had subjected their child to sexual abuse, and had withdrawn visitation rights.
The father denied the accusations, and Morgan was imprisoned when she refused to grant access or reveal the location of their child.
Drugs
Following the unveiling of proposals by Bennett on Aug. 8, 1989, Bush announced on Sept. 5 a National Drug Control Strategy [see also p. 36888].
Describing the drug problem, and particularly crack (a highly potent and addictive derivative of cocaine), as "the gravest domestic threat facing our nation" , Bush called for "unified action" in a war against drugs.
He pointed out that while the estimated number of drug users in the USA had fallen from 23,000,000 in 1985 to 14,000,000 in 1988, evidence suggested that drug users now employed more types of drugs more frequently.
His proposal called for a total of $7,900 million to be spent on increased law enforcement, more prisons, border patrols, education programmes, treatment programmes, and aid to foreign countries.
Congressional criticism of Bush's proposals concentrated on the limited additional funding provided; Democrats proposed an alternative plan, calling for total spending of $10,100 million, the additional $2,200 million to be provided by across-the-board reductions in federal programmes.
After negotiations with the administration the Senate approved on Sept. 27 anti-drugs funding of more than $3,000 million as part of the fiscal 1990 transportation appropriations bill, which was cleared by Congress on Oct. 31 and signed into law on Nov. 21.
Throughout 1989 the government experienced mixed success in its anti-drugs campaign.
The emergency plan introduced by Bennett in April to deal with the problems in Washington DC [see p. 36864]had shown only limited success by October.
The projected new prison had been cancelled, no agreement had been reached on the location of a pre-trial detention centre, and the movement of prisoners from prisons in Washington DC to free spaces had been outweighed by the overall increase in the number of inmates.
The Special Task Force had made 102 arrests in the city.
Elsewhere, there were reports of increased use of smokeable heroin in east-coast cities in August and the spread of smokeable methamphetamine ( "ice" ) use on the Pacific coast in September.
Federal officials made the world's largest seizure of cocaine in Los Angeles in September when they raided a suburban house and found 20 tonnes (44,080 lb) of cocaine.
In October the Coast Guard made the largest maritime seizure when they found 11,500 lb of cocaine on a freighter in the Gulf of Mexico.
Eight tonnes of cocaine were also seized in Harlingen, Texas, in October and 129 people were arrested in 46 states in connection with the growing of indoor marijuana.
In September Cheney announced that the increased use of US military personnel in combating drugs in Latin America would be for training and advising, but not in participation in anti-drugs operations.
It was reported in October 1989 that the Justice Department had advised the FBI that it could legally arrest fugitives in foreign countries without the consent of those countries and whether or not those arrested were US citizens.
It remained unclear whether the action related to efforts to seize Gen. Manuel Noriega, the Panamanian leader, on drugs charges.
A Justice Department ruling in November further stated that laws prohibiting the Army from making arrests did not apply outside the USA.
A Honduran drug trafficker, Juan Ramón Matta Ballesteros, 45, was on Jan. 16, 1990, in Los Angeles sentenced to life imprisonment, with no possibility of parole, having been convicted of cocaine smuggling on Sept. 6, 1989.
Matta had been accused of overseeing a ring which had distributed cocaine worth $72,000,000 in Los Angeles, and Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA) officials claimed that he controlled a drug-trafficking empire worth up to $2,000 million.
Ballesteros had been arrested in Honduras in 1988, and his extradition to the USA sparked off anti-US riots in Honduras [see pp. 36011-12].
Gun control
A number of states took steps to implement some form of gun control in 1989 following the shooting in Stockton, California, in January of five school children by a deranged gunman, Patrick Purdy, using an AK-47 semi-automatic rifle [see p. 36520].
A similar incident in Louisville, Kentucky, in September, when Joseph T. Wesbecker, 47, also used an AK-47 assault rifle to kill seven people and wound 12 before committing suicide, strengthened arguments for control.
On Nov. 1 the Virginian gun control law went into effect, requiring purchasers of handguns with barrels of less than five inches or of semi-automatic weapons to produce identification, and for the sale to be recorded to check for purchasers with a possible criminal background.
On Feb. 15, 1990, the Californian Senate replaced the previous cash-and-carry provision with a law requiring a 15-day waiting period for rifle and shotgun purchases.
The law was sent for approval to Governor George Deukmejian, a former outspoken opponent of gun control.
On Feb. 14 the National Rifle Association and other groups had filed a suit against the Californian Attorney General to overthrow the ban on assault weapons on the grounds that the law violated constitutional guarantees of privacy and the right to bear arms.
Conviction of computer hacker
On Jan. 22, 1990, Robert Tappan Morris, 24, a suspended graduate student of Cornell University, was found guilty in Syracuse, New York, of breaking into and jamming a computer network.
This was the first case of a person brought to trial under the 1986 Computer Fraud and Abuse Act.
Morris had been charged with creating a computer programme (a "virus" ) in 1988 which entered and blocked Internet, a computer network used by over 6,000 computers including those at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and military establishments.
Morris claimed to have done so to demonstrate the weaknesses in the network's security system.
He faced up to five years in prison and a fine of $250,000.
Minorities
Issues concerning American Indians
On Nov. 29, 1989, in Arizona former Navajo tribal chairman Peter MacDonald pleaded not guilty to 107 criminal counts of conspiracy, bribery, fraud, extortion, and election law violations.
The Navajo Tribal Council had on Feb. 17 voted to strip MacDonald of his administrative power in the wake of bribery accusations revealed in Senate subcommittee testimony.
Support for MacDonald had remained strong among some of the 200,000 Navajo and violence broke out during a protest march on his behalf in Window Rock on July 22; two men died and nine were wounded when police opened fire.
MacDonald's supporters seized the tribe's offices for five hours in protest.
It was announced on Sept. 12, 1989, that the Smithsonian Institute in Washington DC, had ended a long-running dispute when it agreed with various Indian groups that skeletal remains would be returned where evidence linked them to specific tribes.
Indians had long been demanding the return of sacred relics, and both Stanford University and the University of Minnesota had already agreed to release their collections to Indians.
It was reported on Jan. 31, 1990, that Congress had allocated $27,000,000 to pay 400 surviving Aleuts and their children compensation for their forced evacuation during the Second World War.
In 1942, 881 Aleuts had been forced to leave the Aleutian Islands in the north Pacific Ocean at only two hours' notice following a Japanese landing to the north.
The evacuees were located in an overcrowded and inadequate camp near Juneau, Alaska, where nearly one-fifth died from illness and disease.
Payment to Japanese Americans
On Oct. 26, 1989, the House of Representatives fulfilled a commitment made in 1988 [see p. 37081]when they voted that $20,000 should be paid to each of 62,000 Japanese-Americans who had been interned during the Second World War.
The provision was part of the appropriations bill for the Commerce, State, Justice and Judiciary Departments which was then approved by the Senate on Nov. 8 and signed into law on Nov. 21.
Beginning in 1991, the government was authorized to allocate up to $500 million a year until the total liability of approximately $1,250 million was paid in compensation for losses incurred in the forced relocation of some 120,000 Japanese-Americans in camps throughout the American west.
Issues concerning African Americans
On Jan. 24, 1990, in Miami Dade Circuit Court, Judge Joseph P. Farina sentenced William Lozano to seven years in prison for the manslaughter of two unarmed black men in January 1989.
Lozano, an Hispanic police officer, had shot dead Anthony Lloyd, and Alan Blanchard had died after sustaining head injuries when the motorcycle which he and Lloyd were both riding crashed.
The incident sparked off a riot which lasted for three days [see p. 37081], and racial tension had been high during the trial.
All police leave and holidays had been cancelled pending the trial's outcome.
Lozano was allowed to remain free on bail while appealing against his conviction.
On Feb. 7, 1990, Bush nominated Clarence Thomas, 41, a black conservative lawyer, as judge of the Court of Appeals in Washington.
Thomas, Bush's first black nominee to the federal bench, was not universally popular.
Although he had served as Reagan's chairman of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission since 1982, Thomas was a critic of the quota system for employing racial minorities and was seen as an opponent of affirmative action.
Supreme Court rulings on racial issues
On Nov. 21, 1989, the Legal Defence and Education Board of the National Association for the Advancement of Coloured People (NAACP) reported that the Supreme Court's decision in Patterson v. McLean Credit Union in 1986 [see p. 36088]had resulted in the dismissal of 96 claims of racial discrimination.
In Patterson v. McLean Credit Union the court had ruled that an 1866 Civil Rights law prohibiting discrimination in making a contract applied "only to the formation of a contract, but not to problems that may arise later" .
In a five-to-four ruling in Spallone v. USA on Jan. 10, 1990, the Supreme Court overturned contempt fines on four city council members in Yonkers, New York State.
The court ruled that a federal judge had abused his power when in August 1988 he had imposed fines on the council members, including the mayor, Henry G. Spallone, for refusing to vote for legislation needed to carry out a housing desegregation plan, itself a product of a suit brought by the NAACP against Westchester County for housing and school discrimination in 1980.
Judge Leonard B. Sand held Yonkers in contempt of a desegregation order and imposed accumulating fines on the city and on each council member who had voted against the plan.
The city was almost bankrupted before the council voted on Sept. 10 to accept the desegregation plan.
The case was reported in the Washington Post of Jan. 11 as one of the most closely watched of the judicial term because it tested the authority of federal judges, once they had found discrimination, to ensure that it was remedied.
Both the Reagan and Bush administrations had supported the judge's power to impose the fines.
Racial bombing campaign
In December 1989 four letter bombs were mailed in southern cities in what was believed to be a racially motivated campaign.
On Dec. 16 Judge Robert Vance of the 11th US Circuit Court of Appeals was killed in his home in Birmingham, Alabama, and on Dec. 18 Robert Robinson, a city council member in Savannah, Georgia, also died.
Bombs delivered to the NAACP office in Jacksonville, Florida, and to the headquarters of the 11th Court Circuit in Atlanta, Georgia, were intercepted before anyone opened it.
Originally it was thought that the bombings might be drug-related, but Vance had been involved in a case against the Ku Klux Klan in 1985 and Robinson had recently represented a black plaintiff in a school desegregation case.
A white racist group, Americans for a Competent Judicial System, claimed responsibility in a letter broadcast on Dec. 28 on a television news station in Atlanta.
The following FBI investigation focused on Robert Wayne O'Ferrell, a junk dealer in Enterprise, Alabama, who denied any involvement but was said to be helping with inquiries.
Immigration
On Feb. 2, 1990, Gene McNary, the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, announced a new policy to prevent the deportation of as many as 100,000 illegal aliens who were the children and spouses of newly legalized immigrants.
The policy represented a modification to the amnesty granted by the 1986 Immigrant Reform and Control Act to the 3,000,000 illegal immigrants who had entered the USA before Jan. 1, 1982 [see pp. 34736-37].
Families of those immigrants who came after that point in time were classed as illegal until the announcement of the new policy.
Election of former Ku Klux Klan leader to state legislature — Agreement by Klan members to take race relations course
David Duke, 38, a former imperial wizard in the Ku Klux Klan, was on Feb. 22, 1989, sworn in as a member of the Louisiana House of Representatives.
He had secured a narrow victory, 50.7 per cent of the vote against 49.3 per cent(a difference of 227 votes), in defeating the official Republican candidate in an almost 100 per cent white constituency in New Orleans.
Duke, whose campaign had been opposed personally by both Reagan and Bush, announced on Dec. 4 that he would run in the open primary for election as a state senator even though he failed to be ratified by the Republican party's state convention.
His Democratic opponent in the election in October would be Bennet Johnston who had held the seat for 18 years.
Seven members of the Ku Klux Klan agreed on July 25, 1989, to take a course in race relations and to pay $11,500 in damages in settlement of a civil suit brought by the Southern Poverty Law Centre following an attack in May 1979 by 100 Klansmen on black civil rights marchers in Decatur, Alabama.
On July 27 Robert Louis White, 46, grand dragon of the Maryland Knights of the Ku Klux Klan, pleaded guilty to charges of illegal possession of firearms, he faced up to 20 years' imprisonment.
Legal decisions in affirmative action cases
A district judge in San Francisco ruled on Oct. 4, 1989, that women employed by the state of California were not victims of sexual discrimination.
The California State Employees' Association claimed that the state deliberately set lower salaries for jobs held predominantly by women, such as nurses, teachers and clerical workers.
The Supreme Court was reported on Jan. 11, 1989, as ruling unanimously that universities might be forced to hand over confidential evaluation records on academic tenure.
The ruling was seen as a victory for the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and civil rights groups which had challenged the claims to confidentiality, made in this instance by the University of Pennsylvania, as a shield for discrimination.
Issues concerning discrimination against homosexuals
It was revealed in October 1989 that the Defence Department had rejected an internally commissioned report which suggested that homosexual men and women be allowed to undertake military service.
The report, Non-conforming Sexual Orientation and Military Suitability, was produced by the Defence Department's Personnel Security Research and Education Centre, and it concluded that there was no evidence that homosexuals were any more likely than heterosexuals to threaten the integrity of the services.
The report was rejected as "biased, flawed, and offensive" , and its author was ordered to rewrite it.
On Nov. 6, 1989, after 17 years of debate, Massachusetts became the second state to pass a civil rights law for homosexuals.
If approved by Governor Michael Dukakis, the legislation would prohibit discrimination against homosexual men and women in housing, employment, credit, insurance, and public accommodation.
The law was only accepted after the addition of amendments excluding anyone "whose sexual orientation involves minor children" and indicating that the law did not endorse homosexuality.
Wisconsin had passed a similar law in 1982.
Senate obscenity measure
In establishing funding for the National Endowment for the Arts, the Senate on Sept. 30, 1989, approved an amendment prohibiting the use of federal funds "to promote, disseminate, or produce obscene materials" .
Senator Jesse Helms (Rep., North Carolina) had introduced a series of broader amendments in July, but had settled for the agreed measure.
National education conference
Bush met state governors at a conference on education at Charlottesville, Virginia, on Sept. 27 and 28, 1989.
Although little emerged from the conference in terms of new financial proposals, it was agreed that there should be nationwide targets for literacy, scientific and mathematical knowledge, vocational training, better teacher training, a reduction of dropout rates, and drug-free schools.
The conference reflected a growing concern for deteriorating educational standards in the USA.
Religion
In January 1990 13 members of a religious sect were arrested and charged with the murder of a family of five in Kirtland, Ohio.
The 13 arrested were former members of the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints who had joined a splinter group led by Jeffrey Lundgren in 1987.
Among those in the group were the Avery family who were murdered on their farm in Ohio.
Seven of the group's members were arrested in Kansas City, Missouri, and Lundgren, 39, his wife and son, and three others were arrested in San Diego County, California.
The Rev. George A. Stallings Jr was on July 4, 1989, suspended as a Roman Catholic priest for holding a mass for his own new congregation in Washington DC.
Stallings, a black, established the African-American Catholic Congregation or Imani Temple on July 2.
Deaths
On April 12, 1989, Abbie Hoffman, 52, the radical protest leader and founder of the Youth International Party (the "Yippies" ) and one of the Chicago Seven tried after the 1968 Chicago Democratic National Convention [see pp. 24257-58], died of a drug overdose in New Hope, Pennsylvania.
On Aug. 22, 1989, Huey Newton, 47, a co-founder in the late 1960s of the militant Black Panther Party, was found shot dead in Oakland, California.
Following the breakup of the Black Panthers in the 1970s, Newton had served several prison sentences for manslaughter, firearms offences, and drug possession.
It was thought that his death was probably drug-related.
On Oct. 1, 1989, the Rt.
Rev. John T. Walker, 64, the first black Episcopal bishop of Washington, died of a cardiac arrest.
Walker, a suffragan bishop since 1971 and a diocesan bishop since 1977, had fought against racial discrimination and injustice both in the USA and South Africa.
DEFENCE
Planned withdrawal of US troops from Far East and Western Europe
Cheney announced on Feb. 23, 1990, during a tour of Japan and the Far East, that the USA intended to withdraw about 10 per cent of the 120,000 US troops currently stationed in Japan, the Philippines and South Korea, over a three-year period starting in 1990.
The move came, he said, as part of an effort to reduce the USA's defence costs as well as to ease global tensions in the light of improving relations with the Soviet Union and the Warsaw Pact countries.
Cheney's announcement nevertheless reflected a mood of caution at the Department of Defence.
A briefing paper presented to him on Dec. 18, 1989, by comparison, had argued that anything up to 80,000 Pacific-based US personnel could be withdrawn by the end of fiscal 1994, saving around $3,600 million, and that two light infantry divisions on standby postings in Alaska and Hawaii could also safely be withdrawn.
During his tour Cheney had secured the agreement of the Japanese and South Korean governments for his proposed troop cuts.
In the Philippines, however, President Corazon Aquino had refused to meet him in protest at congressional removal of $96,000 from the $481,000,000 in aid originally promised for 1990.
Earlier, the Senate had voted on Aug. 2, 1989, to reduce the strength of its presence in Western Europe, in a further attempt to save on costs and to meet the growing mood of confidence in East-West relations.
Although no final decisions had been taken by March 1990, the plans under discussion included the closure of several European bases and the possible halving of the 305,000 US troops currently stationed in Western Europe by 1994 [see below for defence budget proposals].
The US decision to withdraw troops stationed abroad marked a significant shift in national defence policy, whereby the strong local presence of US troops in many regions was to be replaced by a "rapid reaction" concept involving the increased use of airborne forces and attaching particular importance to mobile operations including the role of aircraft carriers.
It also marked a first move towards meeting demands by Congress for major reductions in the strength of the armed services by 1994, in the light of decreasing tensions between the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact.
Finalization of 1990 defence budget — Growing pressure for cuts
On Nov. 29, 1989, Bush signed a $305,000 million military authorization for fiscal 1990 (beginning Oct. 1, 1989), which had been approved by Congress on Nov. 19 after prolonged debate.
The revised budget entailed a cut of some $1,100 million from the administration's original $4,900 million request for the Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI or "Star Wars" project, involving the use of space-based defences against ballistic missiles); this cut represented a compromise with the Senate, which had acknowledged the need for reductions, but which had called instead on Sept. 27 for a cut of only $800,000,000.
Other cuts approved in the revised defence budget on Nov. 29 included a $400,000,000 reduction in the $1,800 million procurement programme for the Trident 2 ballistic missile [for whose failure in test firings see p. 36861], and a $11,000,000 cut in the $216,000,000 request for testing the missiles.
Further proposals for defence cuts had been drawn up by the armed forces in November 1989 on Cheney's orders, in an effort to save some $180,000 million in the period to 1994.
They included plans to reduce military personnel by some 250,000 overall by (i) eliminating three active-duty Army divisions and combining two reserve divisions so as to leave a total of nine divisions;(ii) removing five Air Force fighter squadrons; and (iii) scrapping 62 Navy ships by 1994.
The result, according to the Washington Post, would be a 16 per cent reduction in active Army combat divisions, a 20 per cent cut in Air Force fighter wings, and an 11 per cent cut in naval vessels.
The government's 1991 budget proposal [see p. 37178]envisaged an allocation of $295,000 million for defence, a 2.6 per cent decrease on the 1990 actual level in real terms, and envisaged the closure of 35 domestic and 13 overseas military bases as well as the reduction of forces at a further 200 bases.
The Department of Defence announced on Jan. 11, 1990, that it was to streamline its weapons procurement system in a move to save $39,000 million over a five-year period; the changes, it said, would involve some 42,000 job losses among the 600,000 staff currently engaged in some 15,000,000 transactions a year.
Strategic Defence Initiative
Despite the growing pressure for a slowing of expenditure on SDI, Cheney had requested an additional $866,000,000 (i.e. an increase of 23 per cent on the 1990 allocation) for SDI research in the 1991 budget.
On Jan. 30 the programme's director, Lt.-Gen.
George L. Monahan Jr, had said that although the prospect of East-West nuclear conflict had declined, the spread of ballistic missiles among developing countries now made the project more important than ever.
The latest version of the SDI concept, originally introduced in 1983, centred on the "brilliant pebbles" idea, which proposed that up to 100,000 small space-based rockets would be placed in orbit, where they would be able to track enemy missiles and to destroy them through direct collision.
The brilliant pebbles concept was intended to replace the original SDI proposal of 300 larger orbiting stations, housing about 10 interceptors each and using a complex system of lasers and mirrors.
For cost reasons, the original concept had already been scaled down since 1988 to include only 150 stations — the balance of the deterrent being made up by ground-based anti-missile rockets.
MX missile debate
There was deep disagreement between the administration and Congress on the future of the so-called "rail garrison" mobile multi-warhead MX intercontinental ballistic missile (ICBMS), and on its smaller counterpart, the single-warhead Midgetman [see pp. 36759-60].
Bush objected fiercely to a decision by the House of Representatives on Aug. 2, 1989, to halve the funding available for mobilizing the missiles on the rail network.
In the 1990 defence budget, however, an allocation of $1,100 million was agreed for the MX and Midgetman projects.
On Nov. 29 the Air Force announced that it had selected six new bases for the mobile MX missile in the states of Arkansas, Louisiana, Michigan, North Dakota, Texas and Washington.
Under the plan some 50 missiles would be transferred from the launch silos in Wyoming (the seventh designated MX location) to 25 new trains, which would be kept at the seven bases for deployment on the public rail system in time of crisis.
B-2 bomber
The B-2 "Stealth" bomber, which was designed to be invisible to enemy radar, and which had made its maiden flight on July 17, 1989 [see p. 36808], continued to arouse controversy during this period, due to its increasing cost (estimated in February 1990 at $530,000,000 per aircraft), and to technical problems.
The General Accounting Office, in a report published on Feb. 22, warned that faults in the avionics system threatened to drive the cost still higher.
It also criticized the manufacturers and contractors for lax planning and supervision of the project, the first aircraft having taken nearly twice as long as planned to build.
Meanwhile, it was found that increased weight in the body had drastically reduced the bomber's range.
Inquiry into Iowa explosion
A naval investigation began in August 1989 into the cause of an explosion which had occurred on board the battleship USS Iowa in April 1989, causing the death of 47 sailors [see p. 36604].
On Sept. 8 the inquiry theorized that a small detonating device placed among bags of gunpowder being loaded into the tube of one of the ship's 16-inch guns had caused a huge fireball, and that a gunner's mate, Clayton Hartwig, who was killed in the incident, had "probably" been responsible.
There was, however, considerable doubt expressed at the findings and Congress ordered an inquiry into the conduct of the investigation.
It was announced on Jan. 18, 1990, that the Iowa, together with its sister ship the New Jersey, was to be withdrawn from service after repairs had been completed [see also p. 37178].
Military corruption and espionage cases
The Justice Department's so-called "Ill Wind" investigation into abuses of power in connection with defence contracting, which had started in 1989 [see pp. 36679-80], continued, leading to a number of convictions involving senior business and government personnel.
Jack Sherman, a former civilian contracting supervisor for the Marine Corps, was imprisoned on April 21, 1989, for 18 months for accepting bribes in exchange for classified procurement information.
William Parkin, a former consultant, and Stuart Berlin, a former engineer, were imprisoned on June 2 for 26 months for bribery and corruption in connection with attempts by two employees of Teledyne Electronics, George H. Kaub and Eugene R. Sullivan, to obtain inside information on defence purchasing.
Kaub and Sullivan each received a commuted one-year prison sentence on June 7; on May 12 Michael Savaides, also of Teledyne, had received a commuted sentence of six months for his part in the affair.
Teledyne agreed to pay a fine of $4,300,000 in respect of the incident.
On June 19 charges were brought against Russell Baker Sr and Russell Baker Jr, both of Aerodyne Investment Castings, and against Carman Alexander, an engineer, for conspiring to defraud the state by using low-quality scrap metal in defence products.
A marketing executive for the Boeing Co., Richard Lee Fowler, was sentenced on Jan. 13, 1990, to two years' imprisonment for passing over 100 classified Defence Department documents, including a five-year budget projection, to Boeing between 1979 and 1985.
Boeing had agreed on Nov. 13 to pay $5,200,000 in fines and restitution.
Thomas Muldoon, a consultant, was imprisoned on Feb. 17 for 27 months for conspiracy, for acting in the bribery of a Marines procurement officer, and for violations of interstate commerce, in connection with defence purchasing.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.9% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$115,000 m. (1989-provisional)
Trade balance -US$108,600 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$152,000 m.
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 2.9%
Gross national product US$5,233,200 m. (1989-provisional)
Inflation rate 4.1% (1989)
Unemployment 5.4% (1989)
Principal trading partners (1986) Exports: Canada (24.2%), Japan (12.3%); Imports: Japan (21.8%), Canada (19.1%)
Overall economic situation
After seven years of almost continuous growth 1989 was marked by uncertainty about the underlying health of the US economy.
While inflation rates and budget and trade deficits improved or remained steady, it appeared that the growth rate of the economy was slowing and there was some fear of recession.
Such fears, however, proved to be unfounded and the economic indicators for the end of the year were not all as bad as anticipated.
In June and July 1989 statistics revealed a fall in industrial production and a rise in unemployment, and product prices and retail sales all fell in June.
However, in August consumer and government spending rose as did business investment.
By autumn indicators pointed to a higher annual growth rate and a lower increase in inflation, but the July to September growth rate of 2.5 per cent was still the lowest since 1986.
Fears that the economy was on the verge of a recession eased following the report that unemployment had held steady in August at 5.2 per cent, however, adult unemployment rose by 50,000 or 0.1 per cent , in September 1989.
For the first time in 2@1/2 years 16 out of 20 manufacturing companies surveyed reported workforce losses rather than gains.
Almost one-third of the fall in manufacturing employment was in the car industry, and in October the Ford Motor Company and General Motors (GM) both reported a fall in third-quarter profits of 45 per cent and 40 per cent respectively compared with third quarter 1988.
The Chrysler company recorded an operating loss of $178,000,000, and in November both Chrysler and GM announced the closure of some older factories.
Ford shut down some plants for a two-week period.
However, the losses in manufacturing employment were offset by a rise in service-sector employment, and non-farm jobs increased by 233,000 overall in October.
Figures released in January 1990 showed that growth had slowed sharply at the end of 1989.
Total output as measured by real gross national product (GNP) expanded at an annual rate of only 0.5 per cent in the final quarter, the smallest rise since mid-1986, but an unexpected increase of 2.5 per cent in orders for durable goods made it difficult to formulate firm economic forecasts.
While figures for the year showed an increase in real growth of 2.9 per cent, business investment was down 3 per cent , consumer spending down 0.1 per cent and the growth elements appeared only to be in home purchases and government spending.
Overall unemployment for 1989 was 5.4 per cent, and figures for January 1990 showed an increase of 275,000 in non-agricultural jobs.
Again the gains were mainly in the service sector: factory jobs fell by 112,000, 90,000 of those in car companies.
Industrial output for January showed a drop of 1.2 per cent and only 81.9 per cent of industrial capacity was in use.
Inflation and interest rates
Inflation rates oscillated throughout 1989 as seasonal and other factors affected the economy.
In July the consumer price index fell 0.1 per cent but rose again as wholesale prices jumped 0.9 per cent in September after three months of decline.
The annualized inflation rate for the first nine months of 1989 was 5.1 per cent compared with 4 per cent over the same period in 1988.
In October and November cold weather resulted in a rise in food and fuel prices, but prices fell elsewhere and the overall annualized inflation rate for 1989 was 4.1 per cent.
In January 1990, prices rose by 1.8 per cent, the largest rise in a single month on record.
Cold weather pushed up energy prices by 13.6 per cent and fuel oil prices rose by 25.3 per cent, the largest rise since the oil crisis of 1974.
These figures brought the rise in consumer prices for 12 months to 5.2 per cent.
The related issue of inflation and interest rates led to some disagreement on fiscal policy between Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, and the Bush administration.
Greenspan's main objective was to combat inflation by maintaining high interest rates, while the Bush administration and other economic advisers supported lower interest rates to encourage growth and avoid recession.
Within the Federal Reserve Board itself some of the governors were known to favour a less restrictive policy, while most of the 12 regional Federal Reserve Bank presidents were believed to support high rates.
On Aug. 13, 1989, Richard Darman, head of the administration's Office of Management and Budget (OMB), publicly warned that high interest rates could bring about a recession, but such differences of opinion were played down on Oct. 13 by the Secretary of the Treasury, Nicholas Brady.
Although the Federal Reserve reduced its discount rates during November and December from 8.75 per cent to 8.25 per cent, and major banks reduced their rates accordingly, the conflict in policy resurfaced on Jan. 19, 1990, when the Federal Reserve's vice-chairman, Manuel Johnson, said that there would be no further easing in rates.
In a speech to housebuilders in Atlanta on the same day Bush said that "the 1990s must be another decade of lower taxes and lower interest rates" .
In the course of a statement to a congressional committee on Jan. 23 Greenspan said that such comments were not putting pressure on the Federal Reserve, but were merely statements that lower interest rates were preferable to higher ones.
In his half-yearly report to Congress on Feb. 21 Greenspan reported guarded optimism about avoiding recession, but he reaffirmed that while concern for inflation persisted interest rates would remain high.
Business disappointment with this statement was expressed in the fall of the Dow Jones Industrial Average and Share Index by over 38 points.
At the end of February Greenspan remained optimistic and committed to maintaining interest rates when revised figures for real growth in GNP in the final quarter of 1989 showed growth at an annual rate of 0.9 per cent rather than the estimated 0.5 per cent.
Greenspan stated that the probability of recession had slipped below 50 per cent and he expected growth in the first quarter of 1990 to be "slow but positive" .
Raising of federal debt ceiling
On Nov. 8, 1989, Congress passed a bill to raise the federal debt ceiling to $3,120,000 million.
Without the passage of this legislation the government would have been unable to refinance the debt, to meet payments to defence contractors, or to pay federal employees.
The Treasury had been so close to running out of money prior to the passage of legislation that it had postponed an auction of $40,000 million in government securities.
The raising of the debt ceiling from $2,800,000 million reflected the rise in national debt in the 1980s.
Trade deficit
The overall trade deficit for 1989 showed a marked improvement at $108,600 million, $10,000 million less than 1988 and $44,000 million less than the peak year of 1987.
Fluctuations occurred throughout the year: the deficit in May was $10,200 million, an increase of 23.6 per cent over April due to an increase in imports of oil and industrial equipment and to the effect on exports of the rise in value of the dollar; in July and September the deficits fell to a five-year low due to a decline in the purchase of foreign machinery and consumer goods, and to an increase in aircraft exports.
A strike by machinists at Boeing Co. in October 1989 [see below]and the resultant decline in exports produced an increased deficit in November, but the end of the strike in November and the resumption of the export sale of aircraft, coupled with a fall in oil imports, produced a deficit in December of only $7,200 million, the lowest in five years.
While optimists pointed to the downward trend, pessimists noted the sixth year with a deficit in excess of $100,000 million and an overall increase in oil imports.
While exports for the year achieved a record, showing a 13 per cent increase at $364,300 million, imports had increased by 7.3 per cent to $472,900 million (also a record).
Trade quotas
On Oct. 2, 1989, a new voluntary restraint agreement limiting steel imports to the USA was signed following negotiations with 29 countries.
The previous agreement, which had limited steel imports to 18.4 per cent of the US market, and which had expired on Sept. 30, 1989, was extended for 2@1/2 years.
In December the quotas of steel imports allocated to various countries were reorganized, reducing amounts from Japan and increasing those from Brazil, Mexico and other Third-World producers.
Agreement was also reached with all main Western, including European Community (EC), steel-producing countries to phase out government subsidies for steel.
Those countries which agreed to eliminate subsidies were awarded increased shares in the US import market.
The EC also agreed to phase out limitations on their steel imports by March 31, 1992, in order to open up the EC to Third-World steel imports which flooded the US market.
Farming and agriculture
Increased exports and the effects of the drought of 1988 combined in 1989 to reduce farm surpluses and government subsidies but increased farm income.
Farm debt, put at $183,000 million in 1983, fell to about $140,000 million in 1989.
By December 1989 agricultural exports had increased by 12 per cent, having gained ground in all the USA's top 10 export markets apart from the EC, where sales dropped by 13 per cent .
The value of foreign sales rose by almost $40,000 million in 1989, compared with 1988, as exports of livestock products, horticulture, planting seeds and wood products set new records.
While sales to Canada, Mexico and the Soviet Union all rose, Japan was the largest market with purchases worth $8,200 million.
In July the Secretary of Agriculture, Clayton Yeutter, urged the EC and Japan to reduce agricultural subsidies.
At the end of October the Department of Agriculture called for the elimination of all export subsidies on US agricultural produce within five years.
However, the Department of Agriculture's proposals for the 1990 farm bill, introduced on Feb. 9, 1990, to set policy for the next five years, failed to address the issue of subsidy levels and merely proposed modifications to the current programme.
In allowing farmers to plant certain crops such as soya beans and wheat without losing existing government support, the bill was intended to encourage farmers to plant crops in response to market demand rather than government incentive.
Environmentalists criticized the bill for its lack of specific legislation to curb ground water contamination and the use of pesticide and chemical fertiliser, and for failing to promote the sale of organically grown produce.
Yeutter had opposed proposals to extend the 1988 drought relief legislation in 1989, but a bill signed by Bush on Aug. 15, 1989, provided $900,000,000 (and not the $1,000 million called for in the legislation passed by the House in June) to pay compensation to farmers who had lost more than 35 per cent of their crops due to the drought.
A total of $75,000,000 was also provided for communities whose water supplies were affected.
Kansas, North Dakota, Minnesota and Montana were the states most likely to benefit from the legislation.
Nuclear plants
Although nuclear power provided 18 per cent of US electricity, public opposition had blocked any new projects since the nuclear accident at Three Mile Island, Pennsylvania, in 1979 [see pp. 30287-90].
The debate over the use of nuclear power continued throughout 1989.
On Feb. 28, 1989, the New York state Governor, Mario Cuomo, signed an agreement with the Long Island Light Co. to close the $5,500 million nuclear reactor in Shoreham, Long Island, following pressure from environmentalist groups.
This was the first time a fully operational power plant had been decommissioned.
In June residents of Sacramento, California, voted to shut down the $342,000,000 Rancho Seco nuclear plant, and the Sacramento Municipal Utility District, which had agreed to abide by the vote, immediately began to implement its closure.
The plant, built in 1974, had a poor safety record and had been closed for a two-year period following a failure in the control system in 1985, and could no longer provide electricity at a competitive price.
Of the residents who voted 53.4 per cent were for closure and 46.6 per cent in favour of keeping it open.
This was the first time voters had decided that an operational nuclear plant be closed, and similar campaigns were expected to be launched across the USA following the successful outcome of the Californian vote.
The Department of Energy announced on Sept. 7, 1989, that one of its nuclear reactors at the Savannah River nuclear weapons complex in South Carolina, which was the only source of tritium, a radioactive isotope used in most US nuclear weapons, would restart in late 1990, to be followed at three-month intervals by the reopening of two sister reactors.
The last active reactor had been shut down in August 1988, following a still unexplained power surge which, according to a report published in March 1989, had resulted in the destruction of two heat exchangers; two other reactors had been shut down previously and the remaining two reactors at the huge, 37-year-old complex had been permanently shut down earlier for safety reasons.
In June 1989 a team of investigators from the FBI moved into the Rocky Flats nuclear plant near Denver, Colorado, in order to determine whether employees had falsified clean air documents.
In September a new management was installed, but state Governor Roy Romer was under pressure to close the plant.
Such a decision would have had considerable economic and political consequences as the plant employed 6,000 workers in a state where unemployment was already high, at 6.3 per cent.
On Sept. 9, 1989, the Department of Energy announced a $50,000,000 research subsidy for the Westinghouse Corp. to develop a new generation of "cheaper, safer and standardized reactors" .
This decision was criticized by ecology groups, including the environmental organization Greenpeace, because research was to be into developing the traditional pressurized water reactor, rather than into what were considered safer forms.
Conflict between federal and state policy on nuclear questions was evident in October 1989 when the Nevada state legislature passed a law to prohibit dumping of nuclear waste in the state, and refused to permit the excavation of Yucca Mountain, a volcanic ridge which Congress in 1987 had ordered to be used as a repository for radioactive waste.
Eastern Airlines and Boeing strikes
Airline companies were the subject of considerable media and political attention in 1989, as concern was expressed about takeovers, safety, price-fixing and financial stability.
Domestic passenger air traffic was considerably disrupted on March 4, 1989, when pilots and flight attendants working for Eastern Airlines went on strike.
On March 6, 8,500 maintenance workers also went on strike, supported by the pilots.
Eastern, the seventh-largest US airline, carrying 80,000 passengers a day, reported a loss of $335,000,000 in 1988 and wished to cut wages including those of pilots.
Negotiations had been going on for 17 months before the strike.
Secretary of Transportation Samuel Skinner refused to declare an emergency, under which a 60-day cooling-off period, would have been imposed and Bush became the first President to reject the advice of the National Mediation Board when he declined to intervene.
On March 9 Frank Lorenzo, Eastern's owner, filed for bankruptcy, a device which he had used during a strike in 1982 by workers of the Texas Air Corp.
(Eastern's parent company), which permitted the abrogation of all contracts and the hiring of new staff.
During the strike Donald Trump, a New York real estate magnate, announced that he no longer wished to purchase Eastern's shuttle services to Boston from New York and from Washington DC.
On April 1, however, Trump agreed to purchase the shuttle, but with extra aircraft, and the sale was approved by a US bankruptcy judge, Burton R. Lifland.
The pilots' strike ended in November, but the machinists' dispute continued.
In October 1989 the failure of a group of investors to purchase the United Airlines company, the second-largest carrier in the USA, caused a 190-point fall on the stock market.
A subsequent offer from a combination of managers and pilots was agreed in principle by UAL, the parent company, in early April 1990.
A strike by 55,000 machinists at the Boeing Co. began on Oct. 4, 1989, seriously affecting exports as the company, the largest net exporter in the USA, could only make 22 of 93 scheduled deliveries.
The strike was settled on Nov. 21; on Jan. 19, 1990, Boeing announced a cut of 5,000 jobs in the civilian aircraft business because of increased productivity.
Passing of minimum wage bill
On Nov. 8 the Senate approved by 89 votes to eight a minimum wage bill which would increase the minimum hourly rate of pay from $3.35 to $4.25 by 1991, but with a new, lower training wage for teenagers.
The measure, which had been drawn up by congressional leaders and administration officials and approved by the House of Representatives on Nov. 1 by 382 votes to 37, represented an alternative to the minimum wage bill passed by Congress in May and vetoed by President Bush.
The new bill, signed into law by Bush on Nov. 17, raised the minimum wage from the first time since 1981.
Savings and loans rescue
The Bush administration's efforts to rescue the savings and loans companies ( "thrifts" )[see p. 36843; see also above]faced mounting criticism in early 1990 as shortages of funds and operational problems — caused by an unwieldy bureaucracy involving 12 different agencies and vacancies in several senior regulatory posts — threatened to jeopardize the operation.
By mid-February only 47 thrifts had been closed or sold, another 300 were under the management of the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) and 200 more were expected to be taken over soon.
M. Danny Wall had resigned on Dec. 4, 1989, as head of the federal Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS), which had been created in August 1989 to assume the duties of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board, of which Wall had also been chairman.
In both capacities Wall had been in charge of monitoring the thrift industry since July 1987.
His resignation came amid sharp criticism of his handling of the troubles of the thrift industry as a whole and in particular of the collapse of the Lincoln Savings and Loan Association of Irvine, California, which was currently the subject of investigation by the House banking committee.
As of March 1990 no replacement for Wall had been found.
On Jan. 19 the administration formally requested additional funds from Congress of $40,000 million-$100,000 million in funding for the RTC, which was responsible for paying off depositors and servicing loans prior to the sale of thrifts and their assets.
The RTC had been set up in August 1989 [see p. 36843]as a new arm of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), to be supervised by William Seidman, the FDIC chairman, and with an oversight board which decided policy and funding.
Daniel Kearney, the president and chief executive of the RTC oversight board, resigned on Feb. 10, 1990, because of his lack of authority; as chief executive he answered to its other leading members, Treasury Secretary Brady, Federal Reserve Chairman Greenspan and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Kemp.
Kearney was replaced by William E. Taylor, a former director of the Federal Reserve's division of banking supervision and regulation.
On Jan. 31 Seidman suggested that the government should consider reviving some thrifts, if they appeared to be financially healthy, instead of taking them over, and said that a feasibility study was currently under way to explore the possibility.
Drexel Burnham Lambert bankruptcy
On Feb. 20, 1990, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., a brokerage firm which in the 1980s had successfully dealt in junk bonds until its collapse following insider dealing and fraud cases [see pp. 36582-83], officially filed for bankruptcy.
The move came after the company had failed to find major investors to provide an emergency loan to repay more than $100,000,000 due on short-term borrowings.
Neither the Securities and Exchange Commission nor the Federal Reserve Bank of New York were prepared to assist, and on Feb. 17 the company, which declared assets in excess of $3,600 million and liabilities in excess of $3,000 million, made 5,000 employees redundant.
There was some criticism of the company when it became known that certain Drexel employees had been paid bonuses totalling $250,000,000 only months before the bankruptcy was filed.
The Drexel's bankruptcy was the largest in Wall Street's history and had widespread repercussions.
About 40,000 brokerage accounts were transferred to Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. in the USA, while in London the Bank of England and city institutions stepped in to deal with the consequences of the collapse on the foreign exchange.
The Belgian company, Groupe Bruxelle Lambert, had to write off its 35 per cent shareholding in Drexel, with a loss of $91,000,000.
AMERICAS — CARIBBEAN
CANADA
BASIC DATA
Area: 9,970,610 sq km(incl. inland water).
Population: 26,310,836 (1989).
Capital: Ottawa.
Languages: English and French.
Religion: Christianity (about 45% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 81 yrs (women), 73 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: 89,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$16,760 (1988).
Currency: Canadian dollar (US$1.00=Can. $1.1686 as at April 2, 1990).
The Dominion of Canada is a member of the Commonwealth with the British sovereign as head of state represented by a Governor-General (currently Ramon Hnatyshyn).
The Federal Parliament comprises a Senate of 104 members appointed by the Governor-General, and a House of Commons of 295 members elected for a maximum of five years by universal adult suffrage under a simple majority system in single-member constituencies.
The Governor-General appoints the Prime Minister and, on the latter's recommendation, the members of the Cabinet.
In a general election in September 1984 [see pp. 33202-03]the Progressive Conservative Party (PCP) led by Brian Mulroney was re-elected with the largest electoral majority in Canadian history.
The PCP's majority was reduced in a general election on Nov. 21, 1988, in which six Cabinet ministers lost their parliamentary seats [see p. 36425].
Canada comprises 10 provinces and two territories.
In each of the provinces there is a Lieutenant-Governor who represents the Governor-General, and an elected legislature and executive council, led by a Premier.
Considerable decentralization of federal authority to the provincial governments is provided by the 1987 Meech Lake Accord [see p. 35451]currently awaiting formal ratification.
The two territories, in which the chief executive officer is the federally appointed Commissioner, currently enjoy differing degrees of responsible government.
POLITICS
Developing crisis over Meech Lake Accord
Difficulties arising from the Meech Lake Accord dominated Canadian politics throughout 1989 and early 1990.
The Accord, ratified by the federal House of Commons on June 22, 1988 [see p. 36426], provided for increased powers for the country's 10 provinces, reform of the federal Senate and the recognition of Quebec's position as a "distinct society" .
To become operative, however, the Accord required ratification by each provincial legislature by June 23, 1990.
By the end of 1988 only Manitoba and New Brunswick had not ratified the Accord, but during 1989 not only did these two provinces continue to withhold ratification, but several others suggested that they might withdraw their earlier support for the Accord.
One of the key main objections to the Accord was that it failed to offer sufficient protection to Quebec's English-speaking minority.
(This fear was exacerbated when, in 1988, the government of Quebec enacted legislation which banned English language commercial signs — see p. 36426 for Supreme Court ruling.)
Opposition to Meech Lake was increased when the PCP government in Newfoundland was replaced in April 1989 by a Liberal administration.
The new Premier, Clyde Wells, suggested on Oct. 30 that his province might rescind its ratification of the Accord unless the clause concerning Quebec's status was dropped or amended.
A similar position was adopted by Bill Vander Zalm, the Premier of British Columbia, who had suggested on June 22 that his province was reconsidering its initial support for the Accord.
In conjunction with this opposition from an increasing number of English-speaking provinces, the Meech Lake problem was compounded by increased pressure on the Liberal administration of Quebec following elections in September 1989 [see p. 36891].
Although Premier Robert Bourassa was returned with a reduced majority, the separatist Parti Quebecois (PQ) increased the number of its seats and secured 41 per cent of the vote, a development interpreted by most commentators as limiting the scale of concessions which Bourassa could offer in return for the ratification of Meech Lake.
The issue was further complicated by confusion over the validity of the government's June 1990 deadline.
Several politicians and lawyers suggested that "ordinary" constitutional changes required ratification by seven provinces within three years, whilst amendments to key provisions of the constitution required unanimous approval without a time limit.
In an attempt to break the deadlock over the Accord's ratification, Mulroney held a two-day Premiers' conference on Nov. 10-11.
Although on the eve of the conference Wells had announced that he was about to take steps to revoke his province's approval of the accord, during the course of the meeting he was persuaded to reconsider this position.
At separate news conferences after the meeting Wells and the Premiers of Manitoba and New Brunswick, Gary Filmon and Frank McKenna, each reiterated his belief that, without amendment, the Accord remained unacceptable.
Mulroney, however, professed himself still optimistic that the Accord would succeed and announced that he was commissioning Lowell Murray, the Government Leader in the Senate and Minister of State for Federal-Provincial Relations, as a special Meech Lake emissary.
Murray's brief was to travel throughout the country and to assess whether it was possible to construct a consensus around Meech Lake which was acceptable to all of the country's provinces.
The subsequent negotiations confirmed that the best hope for compromise lay in ratifying an unamended version of Meech Lake in conjunction with a parallel document which would address the concerns of the dissenter states.
In late March 1990 McKenna proposed such a compromise but the response of the Quebec legislature was to pass a resolution stating that no discussion of McKenna's companion document could be undertaken until Meech Lake had been ratified in its original form.
The constitutional crisis was further intensified when, on April 6, the New Foundland legislature voted to rescind its ratification of the Accord.
New Governor-General
On Oct. 6, 1989, the Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney, announced to the House of Commons that Ramon Hnatyshyn would succeed Jeanne Sauvé, who had been Governor-General since May 1984 [see p. 33023], to become Canada's 24th Governor-General with effect from January 1990.
Hnatyshyn, 55, had served as Minister of Energy, Mines and Resources and as Minister of State for Science and Technology in Joseph Clark's Cabinet in 1979-80 and as Justice Minister in Mulroney's Cabinet in 1986-88, but had lost his parliamentary seat in the November 1988 general election.
The announcement ended uncertainty following the extension of Sauvé's term beyond May 1989 to January 1990.
Brian Mulroney Prime Minister Joseph (Joe) Clark Secretary of State for External Affairs John Crosbie International Trade Donald Mazankowski Deputy Prime Minister; Agriculture; President of Privy Council Elmer MacKay Public Works Jake Epp Energy, Mines and Resources Robert De Cotret President of Treasury Board Perrin Beatty National Health and Welfare Michael Wilson Finance Harvie Andre Minister of State; Leader of Government in House of Commons Otto Jelinek National Revenue Thomas Siddon Indian Affairs and Northern Development Charles Mayer Western Economic Diversification; Minister of State for Grains and Oilseeds William McKnight Defence Benoît Bouchard Industry, Science and Technology Marcel Masse Communications Barbara McDougall Employment and Immigration Gerald Merrithew Veterans' Affairs Monique Vézina Minister of State for Employment and Immigration; Senior Citizens Frank Oberle Forestry Lowell Murray Government Leader in Senate; Minister of State for Federal-Provincial Relations Paul Dick Supply and Services Pierre Cadieux Solicitor General Tom Hockin Minister of State for Small Businesses and Tourism Monique Landry Minister of State for External Relations Bernard Valcourt Fisheries and Oceans Gerry Weiner Minister of State for Multiculturalism and Citizenship Douglas Lewis Transport Pierre Blais Consumer and Corporate Affairs Lucien Bouchard Environment John McDermid Minister of State for Privatization and Regulatory Affairs Shirley Martin Minister of State for Indian Affairs and Northern Development Mary Collins Associate Minister of National Defence; Minster responsible for Status of Women Allen Redway Minister of State for Housing William Wineguard Minister of State for Science Kim Campbell Justice and Attorney General Jean Corbeil Minister of Labour; Minister of State for Transport Gilles Loiselle Minister of State for Finance Marcel Danis Minister of State for Youth; Fitness and Amateur Sport
Cabinet
Resignation of Minister
On July 31, 1989, Bernard Valcourt pleaded guilty in Edmundston, New Brunswick, to a charge of impaired driving due to the effects of alcohol, and resigned as Minister of Consumer and Corporate Affairs and as Minister responsible for Canada Post.
He intended to remain as PCP MP for Madawaska-Victoria, New Brunswick, which he had represented since 1984.
First MP for Reform Party
The recently formed Reform Party won a federal by-election on March 13, 1989, in the rural Alberta constituency of Beaver River.
Deborah Grey won the seat with a margin of 4,252 votes over the Conservative candidate.
In the November 1988 general election she was placed fourth, the Conservative winning.
The party was formed in 1988 by Preston Manning on a platform of western disenchantment with the platforms of the three traditional parties, and favoured Senate reform and opposed the Meech Lake Accord.
Ontario scandal
A judicial inquiry into the activities of a Liberal Party fund raiser in Ontario, Patricia Starr, opened on Sept. 18, 1989.
It had been alleged that Starr had used her position as president of a charitable foundation to make illicit campaign contributions and that she was involved in bribery and dubious real-estate transactions involving Liberal political figures; the scandal also concerned a property developer, Tridel Corp., whose president, Del Zotto, was also president of the Ontario branch of the federal Liberal Party.
The allegations, first published in early June, centred upon an estimated Can.
$86,000 of charity funds which were paid to various political campaigns in breach of the Federal Income Tax Act which forbade donations of over Can.
$750 from any one source (donations from charities were illegal).
The Ontario Premier, David Peterson, was forced to call a judicial inquiry into the scandal following the resignation in June of the province's Solicitor-General, Joan Smith, over charges that she had obstructed police inquiries into the affair.
Another casualty was Gordon Ashworth, a senior aide to Peterson, who resigned over money paid to redecorate his house.
The affair led to a mid-term Cabinet reshuffle on Aug. 2 in an attempt to diffuse the political damage.
Four ministers implicated in the scandal were dismissed from the provincial Cabinet, including Housing Minister Chaviva Hosek.
SECURITY
Bus hijacking
An eight-hour bus hijacking ended outside the Canadian Parliament in Ottawa on April 7, 1989, forcing the evacuation of the Parliament building.
The bus had been en route from Montreal to New York and was driven 125 miles to Ottawa.
A lone gunman, Charles Yacoub, demanded the release of all Lebanese prisoners held in Lebanon by Syria and the withdrawal of Syrian troops from that country.
Royal Canadian Mounted Police surrounded the bus for five hours during which three shots were fired but nobody was injured.
The seige ended peacefully and Yacoub was later charged with taking hostages and with illegal possession of a firearm.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Budget deficit as % of GDP 4.8% (1988-89)
Growth rate (real GDP) 4.5% (1988)
Inflation 4% (1988)
Current-account balance -US$8,330 m. (1988)
Trade balance Can.
$4,700 m. (1989)
Unemployment 7.8% (January 1990)
Total public-sector debt as % of GDP 53.1% (1987)
GDP Can.
$549.7 m. (1987)
Accumulated federal budget deficit Can.
$321,100 m. (1988-89)
Current-account deficit as % of GDP 3.5% (1st quarter 1989)
Leaking of 1989 budget
Finance Minister Michael Wilson was forced to reveal full details of his 1989 budget a day early, on April 26, 1989, after major elements were leaked to the Global Television Network.
Wilson immediately faced calls from opposition leaders for his resignation.
The calls were ignored by Mulroney, and Wilson formally delivered his budget as planned on April 27.
Opposition leaders had rejected a request from the then Government Leader in the House, Doug Lewis, to recall the Commons for an emergency session on April 26.
The budget envisaged a federal deficit of Can.
$30,500 million in 1989-90, with the aim of reducing it to Can.
$28,000 million in 1990-91, and of halving it to Can.
$15,000 million by 1993-94.
With an accumulated debt of Can.
$321,100 million in 1988-89 (or more than half of gross domestic product — GDP), and with high interest rates increasing the cost of debt service (estimated at two-thirds of projected government expenditure in 1989-90), Wilson's priority was to raise government revenue and to lower expenditure.
Budget increases in a broad range of taxes, including personal income tax, aimed at bringing in about Can.
$10,000 million (approximately US$8,400 million) in fresh revenues in 1989-90.
Under the new Large Corporations Tax, businesses with assets valued at Can.
$10,000,000 or more — about 3,600 companies — would either be taxed at a rate of 0.175 per cent of their capital base or have to pay a 3 per cent corporate tax surcharge, whichever was higher.
There was to be a new national Goods and Services Tax (GST) of 9 per cent on most goods and services to take effect Jan. 1, 1991, replacing the existing Federal Manufacturers' Sales Tax.
The federal government formally cancelled its plan to acquire 10-12 nuclear-powered attack submarines, saving an estimated Can.
$8,000 million and marking a move away from the expansive defence White Paper of 1987.
It planned to reduce foreign aid by Can.
$400 million in 1989, with the aim of saving a total of Can.
$1,800 million over the next five years.
It also intended to sell its remaining holdings in Air Canada and to end contributions to the unemployment insurance programme.
Record current-account deficit
For the second quarter of 1989 Canada's current-account deficit rose to a record high.
Exports fell by 0.5 per cent while domestic demand, fuelled by annual tax rebates, grew by 0.8 per cent in real terms.
The current-account deficit leaped 54 per cent from the first quarter of 1989 to a record Can.
$5,700 million, equivalent to 3.5 per cent of GDP.
As well as buoyant consumer spending, which rose 1.3 per cent in the quarter, the deterioration reflected a steep fall in Canada's traditional manufacturing trade surplus.
This fell to Can.
$868,000,000, the lowest for almost 12 years, from Can.
$2,400 million in the first quarter.
The slump in manufacturing trade was partly caused by a slowdown in the US car market but also reflected a loss of competitiveness in the Canadian economy.
Canadian producers had faced higher interest rates than those of their US competitors and higher unit labour costs, which rose 15 per cent between 1985 and the first quarter of 1989, compared with only 1 per cent in the USA for the same period.
Via Rail subsidy cuts
The then Transport Minister, Benoît Bouchard, ended speculation by announcing on Oct. 4, 1989, a 50 per cent cut in Via Rail services from Jan. 15, 1990.
The cuts, although severe, were not as drastic as had been expected.
Via's subsidy was cut from Can.
$640,000,000 in 1988 to Can.
$350,000,000 in 1993, not Can.
$250,000,000 as had been announced in the April 1989 budget.
Eighteen of Via Rail's 38 routes were eliminated, with the loss of 2,700 jobs or 38 per cent of the entire Via Rail workforce.
December 1989 mini-budget
In what was in effect a mini-budget, Wilson announced on Dec. 19, 1989, a reduction in the proposed GST from 9 per cent to 7 per cent but announced further measures to make up the revenue loss.
To balance the anticipated Can.
$6,000 million shortfall Wilson unveiled plans to abandon promised income tax reductions from 26 per cent to 25 per cent for middle income earners, and to increase the income tax surcharge for upper income earners.
Corporate taxes were also increased.
Wilson justified the tough measures on the grounds that he would not be able to meet his 1990-91 deficit target of Can.
$28,000 million even with the introduction of the GST, due to the continuing high level of interest rates which had raised payments on the public debt beyond last April's projections.
Wilson felt that he could still meet the current deficit target for 1989-90 of Can.
$30,500 million.
1990 budget
The budget for the fiscal year 1990-91, presented to the House of Commons on Feb. 20, represented further efforts by the government to reduce the budget deficit.
Interest rates, running at an unexpected eight-year high, had increased the debt service burden, while slower growth had reduced tax revenues; an effort to reduce domestic interest rates in January 1990 had resulted in heavy selling of the Canadian dollar.
Consumer prices had accelerated at an annualized rate of 5.5 per cent in January 1990, and the visible trade surplus in 1989 was the lowest recorded for 10 years.
In addition, cuts in Via Rail services and reductions in other federal expenditures had not proved to be politically popular.
The deficit reduction targets outlined in April 1989 [see above]were revised upwards in the budget to account for higher interest payments.
The budget deficit target for the fiscal year 1990-91 (ending on March 31, 1991) was raised to Can.
$28,500 million (4.2 per cent of GDP — the lowest percentage since 1981-82) and for year ending 1991-92 to Can.
$26,500 million.
Tax increases were avoided but spending on a wide variety of government programmes was frozen or limited; one of the most controversial aspects of the budget was the plan to place a two-year freeze on increases in federal transfer payments to provinces for health care and secondary education programmes.
Overall expenditure would rise by 3.4 per cent compared with an increase of 7.7 per cent in 1989-90.
Reforms in the GST and slower growth in corporate taxes would result in an increase in revenue of 6.1 per cent compared with 8.1 per cent in the previous year.
Overall expenditure was set at Can.
$147,800 million with revenue amounting to Can.
$119,300 million.
It was also announced that Petro Canada, the national oil company, was to be privatized.
FOREIGN
US-Canada Free trade accord
The US-Canada free trade accord came under severe political scrutiny in the first year since its ratification [see p. 36426].
In January 1989 US pig producers asked the US government to impose countervailing duties on US$700,000,000 of Canadian pork imports, claiming that Canada offered unfair production subsidies.
Also in the food sector Pillsbury, a United Kingdom-owned US concern, complained about Canadian import controls on ice cream dating from January 1988, lodging a complaint with the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in Geneva.
The first complaints to be formally filed were by British Columbia, Canadian raspberry producers and an Ontario paving company on April 6, 1989.
The International Trade Minister, John Crosbie, announced on Jan. 1, 1989, the names of five retired justices and 25 trade lawyers selected to represent Canada in disputes with the USA under the free trade agreement.
Under the agreement five-member panels would review decisions made by either country to impose import duties on goods which they considered to be unfairly subsidized or dumped.
Two members would come from the Canadian list and two from a similar US list.
A fifth chairperson would be jointly chosen by the two countries.
The federal government on Nov. 6, 1989, announced its acceptance of a free-trade ruling against a Canadian fisheries practice concerning the processing of salmon and herring, the first such ruling under the panels procedure.
Canadian regulations requiring salmon and herring to be landed and processed in Canada as a means of conserving and managing fishing grounds were found on Oct. 16, 1989, to be a restriction on free trade.
However, the panel left intact Canada's right to set conservation and fishing quotas and suggested that the landing requirements would be legitimate if at least some of the fish was sold for export directly from fishing boats.
The ruling was not binding although the USA would be free to impose retaliatory measures if Canada did not act.
Visit by Bush — Statement on acid rain
The US President, George Bush, in his first foreign visit as President, had five hours of meetings with Mulroney on Feb. 10, 1989.
Bush promised legislation "this year" setting specific goals and timetables for the reduction of acid rain pollution, a long running source of disagreement between the two countries.
Bush promised that "the time for just pure study is over" and announced the restoration of a US$5,000 million clean coal programme cut by the administration of former US President Ronald Reagan.
He also promised "clean air" legislation and negotiations on a cross-border acid rain accord.
The clean coal project, he said, was to have a five-year timetable to replace the original 10-year timescale.
Canadians were encouraged by Bush's commitment to the environment and by his interest in Canada demonstrated so soon in his presidency and following the recent promulgation of the US-Canada free trade pact.
Visit to Soviet Union by Mulroney
In a six-day visit to the Soviet Union, ending on Nov. 25, 1989, Mulroney spent 4@1/2 hours at the Kremlin with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev.
Investment agreements, reportedly potentially worth more than US$1,000 million, were reached, and a Canadian-Soviet business council was inaugurated.
A foreign investment protection agreement signed on Nov. 20 was to protect Canadian investment in the event of expropriation or nationalization.
In 1988 Canada exported US$1,140 million worth of goods to the Soviet Union, 85 per cent of it wheat.
In return the Soviet Union exported US$156 million worth of goods to Canada.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
BASIC DATA
Area: 22,402,200 sq km.
Population: 285,659,000 (1988).
Capital: Moscow.
Languages: Russian (first language for over 50%); 112 recognized languages.
Religion: Christianity (Russian Orthodox), Judaism and Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 69 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,993,000 (end-1989).
GNP per capita: US$8,700 (1988).
Currency: rouble (US$1.00=0.6022 roubles as at April 2, 1990).
The Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), which was formally established in 1922, is a federated state consisting of 15 union republics.
At the end of May 1989 a new supreme representative body, the 2,250-member Congress of People's Deputies, held its inaugural session after being elected in three rounds of voting during the previous two months.
Two-thirds of the Congress seats were filled by direct popular vote from 750 single-member constituencies organized to include roughly equal numbers of voters and another 750 constituencies designed to give representation to the majority of the Soviet Union's recognized ethnic groups; the remaining 750 seats were reserved for members of approved social organizations (in future elections there will be no reserved seats).
The Congress, which partly superseded the former USSR Supreme Soviet, is elected for a five-year term and convenes once or twice a year to decide on major constitutional, political and socio-economic questions.
It elects from among its own members a reorganized bicameral 542-member Supreme Soviet, which meets twice a year for three- or four-month sessions and is responsible for all legislative and administrative matters [see pp. 36659-60].
The Congress on March 13, 1990, approved the creation of the post of President of the USSR, with extensive executive powers including the appointment of a new consultative Presidential Council and (subject to ratification by the Congress) of the Chairman and members of the Council of Ministers; a new consultative Council of the Federation, headed by the President, comprises the Presidents of the union republics.
Mikhail Gorbachev, the general secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Kommunisticheskaya Partiya Sovietskogo Soyuza — CPSU), was elected to the new presidency on March 15, having already served as executive President of the Soviet Union since May 1989 in his former capacity as Chairman of the USSR Supreme Soviet [see p. 37297].
The latter post was now restyled, its incumbent being effectively the Speaker of the USSR Supreme Soviet and automatically the successor of the President should the latter be unable to complete his five-year term in office.
The Congress on March 13 also abolished the CPSU's constitutionally guaranteed monopoly of political power (the communist monopoly had already been abolished in recent months in several union republics).
The CPSU nevertheless remained the only political party operating nationwide.
Each of the union republics has a constitution and state structure modelled broadly on that of the central administration.
As a result of republican elections in Lithuania on Feb. 24, 1990, pro-separatist candidates gained a majority in the republic's Supreme Soviet.
This body on March 11 unilaterally declared Lithuania independent of the Soviet Union.
This independence has not been recognized by the Soviet authorities nor by any other sovereign state [see pp. 37360-62].
Nikolai Ryzhkov Chair Yury Maslyukov First Deputy Chair; Chair of USSR State Planning Committee (Gosplan) Vladilen Nikitin First Deputy Chair; Chair of State Commission for Foodstuffs and Procurements Lev Voronin First Deputy Chair, responsible for general questions Leonid Abalkin Deputy Chair; Chair of State Commission for Economic Reform Igor Belousov Deputy Chair; Chair of Bureau for Military Industrial Complex Aleksandra Biryukova Deputy Chair; Chair of Bureau for Social Development Vitaly Doguzhiyev Deputy Chair; Chair of State Commission for Emergency Situations Vladimir Gusev Deputy Chair; Chair of Bureau for Chemical and Timber Complex Nikolai Laverov Deputy Chair; Chair of State Committee for Science and Technology Pavel Mostovoi Deputy Chair; Chair of State Committee for Material and Technical Supply Lev Ryabev Deputy Chair; Chair of Bureau for Fuel and Energy Complex Ivan Silayev Deputy Chair; Chair of Bureau for Machine Building Stepan Sitaryan Deputy Chair; Chair of State Foreign Economic Commission Principal Ministers of USSR All-Union Ministries Mikhail Shchadov Coal Industry Gen. Dmitry Yazov Defence Konstantin Katushev Foreign Economic Relations Nikolai Konarev Railways Principal Ministers of USSR Union Republican Ministries Erlen Pervyshin Communications Nicolai Gubenko Culture Valentin Pavlov Finance Eduard Shevardnadze Foreign Affairs Igor Denisov Health Vadim Bakatin Internal Affairs Veniamin Yakovlev Justice Kondrat Terekh Trade Vladimir Shcherbakov Labour and Social Affairs Vyacheslav Senchagov Prices Gennady Yagodin Public Education Gen. Vladimir Kryuchkov State Security (KGB)
Chair and Vice-Chairs of Council of Ministers
Principal Chairs of USSR Union Republican State Committees
POLITICS/SOCIAL
Media developments and glasnost
On Dec. 1, 1989, Anatoli Ananev, editor of the Writers' Union journal Oktyabr, was dismissed for publishing a satirical article about Pushkin (by the exiled writer Andrei Sinyavsky) and a novel which criticized Lenin.
Liberal writers (including the poets Yevgeny Yevtushenko and Andrei Voznesensky) attacked Russian nationalists in the Union's leadership (including Valentin Rasputin and Yuri Bondarev), accusing them of anti-Semitism, and threatened to resign.
The editor of Argumenty i Fakty, Vladislav Starkov, under strong criticism following the publication in early October 1989 of a readers' poll of the most unpopular Congress deputies [see p. 36980], continued to defend himself vigorously in the media and his staff threatened to resign if he was dismissed; in late October, however, the paper appeared to be trying to appease the party central committee by publishing both an interview with Yegor Ligachev, a leading conservative CPSU politburo member and central committee Secretary responsible for Agriculture, and also an opinion poll favourable to Gorbachev.
On Dec. 6 the Foreign Ministry announced that Soviet citizens would be allowed to subscribe (in hard currency) to foreign papers and magazines, more of which would also be available in public libraries.
Restrictions on photocopiers and satellite television equipment were also lifted.
On July 4 the dissident writer Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn was readmitted (after 20 years) to the Writers' Union, which voted to publish his book The Gulag Archipelago and to press for the return of his citizenship (of which he was stripped in 1974), an idea which the author rejected in December.
Reassessment of Soviet history
On Jan. 30, 1990, a Supreme Soviet Commission revealed that nearly 845,000 victims of Stalinism had been posthumously rehabilitated during 1988-89, but called for review procedures to be streamlined.
A CPSU central committee resolution of July 3, 1989, complained that local officials were not fully implementing January decisions to erect memorials to such victims.
More mass graves from the 1930s [see p. 36401 for such discoveries in January 1989]were discovered during 1989 near the towns of Chelyabinsk (80,000 corpses) and Donetsk and in Karelia and Byelorussia.
A leading Soviet demographer estimated that altogether 9,400,000 peasants had died during Stalin's collectivization programme in the early 1930s.
Massacre of Novocherkassk strikers (1962)— Urals nuclear disaster (1957)— Crowd crush at Moscow stadium (1982)
The glasnost ( "openness" ) policy led the Soviet authorities and the press to reveal during June and July two past disasters and a major act of police repression which, although widely rumoured, had never before been officially admitted.
It was confirmed on June 2, 1989, in the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda that on June 2, 1962, in the southern Russian town of Novocherkassk, militia officers had opened fire on a demonstration outside the local Communist Party headquarters by striking factory workers protesting against wage cuts and food price rises.
Up to 24 demonstrators had been shot dead and another 30 had been wounded, while seven others had later been executed.
At the beginning of July 1989 Soviet scientists disclosed to visiting United States congressmen and environmentalists the full details of an accident in September 1957 at the top-secret Kyshtym nuclear weapons research facility near Chelyabinsk in the Ural mountains.
On July 17 an account of the accident also appeared in the Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda.
According to the reports an explosion caused by staff negligence had destroyed a nuclear waste dump, spreading radioactive particles downwind of the Kyshtym plant for over 100 km and necessitating the evacuation of more than 10,000 people.
Both official Soviet accounts claimed that no one had been killed, although previous unofficial accounts of the accident had suggested that there were hundreds of fatalities from radiation contamination.
The newspaper Sovietsky Sport reported on July 8, 1989, that up to 340 people had been crushed to death in a stand of the Lenin Stadium in Moscow during a football match on Oct. 20, 1982.
The report blamed police incompetence for the tragedy, and said that the official obsession with keeping it secret had even extended to withholding news from relatives of the dead.
1989 October Revolution celebrations
The 1989 October Revolution parades had a reduced military element.
In several of the non-Russian republics counter-demonstrators burned Soviet flags [see p. 37047].
Gorbachev, giving the first television interview from the Lenin Mausoleum during the celebrations on Nov. 7, called for a return to the Leninist ideals of 1917.
Comparison of Gorbachev with Krushchev
On the 25th anniversary of the removal on Oct. 15, 1964, of Nikita Khrushchev as First Secretary of the CPSU and Chairman of the Council of Ministers [see pp. 20389-90], Moskovskaya Pravda drew parallels with the current situation — economic shortages, radical reforms and a "crisis of authority" .
Western observers argued that Gorbachev's stronger power base and his age (58 compared with Khrushchev's 70 in 1964) made him less vulnerable to a coup than his reformist predecessor.
Criticisms of perestroika
On Oct. 22, 1989, Ogonek published a poll, only 12 per cent of respondents to which believed that perestroika ( "restructuring" ) would lead to significant positive change; only 23 per cent said that their living standards had improved over the previous two to three years.
In July a Pravda editorial had attacked perestroika for creating a new bureaucracy without solving the old problems.
During a visit to London in June 1989 Andrei Sakharov, the Soviet Union's foremost human rights campaigner, referred to the "growing unpopularity" of the Soviet leadership and forecast a massive upheaval, which, he said, would result in a sudden shift to the right or to the left.
[For Sakharov's death in December 1989 see p. 37128.]
Human rights
The Soviet Union agreed in February 1989 to accept the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice (ICJ) in relation to five important human rights conventions.
The first visit to the Soviet Union by a delegation from the human rights organization Amnesty International in March produced "business-like and constructive discussions" with Soviet officials, lawyers and academics, especially on the contents of the proposed new Criminal Code.
After a tour in February 1989 of Soviet psychiatric hospitals a US delegation reported that, although some improvements had been made, people were still hospitalized for political reasons and recommended that the Soviet Union should not be readmitted to the World Psychiatric Association (WPA — for October 1989 Soviet readmission see p. 36980).
Reports of such abuse in the Soviet press indicated conflict between the old guard and reformers (who during the US visit had formed the Association of Independent Soviet Psychiatrists).
Independent political organizations
During 1989 demonstrations organized by the opposition group Democratic Union (DU) were broken up by police and arrests were made; several DU members were imprisoned (including Sergei Kuznetsov, a Sverdlovsk editor).
An official media campaign criticized the leaders of the DU (formed in May 1988 — see p. 36038), accusing them of personal ambition, corruption and links with anti-Soviet emigré organizations, and of seeking the overthrow of the social system.
Among new political organizations established in 1989 was the Unity organization, which campaigned for a return to pre-Gorbachev communism.
Corruption
In July 1989 an Interior Ministry official said that his directorate had exposed 400,000 economic crimes since January 1988 and had confiscated assets worth 100,000,000 roubles.
On Oct. 26, however, the Collegium of the USSR Procurator's Office was told that the "black economy" was still growing and was worth 40,000-50,000 million roubles a year.
While disgraced former officials during 1989 continued to be convicted and sentenced to long prison terms, particularly in Uzbekistan [see pp. 36898; 37129], in January 1990, however, three defendants were acquitted on the grounds of "violations of legality" by investigators.
On Sept. 28 the Supreme Soviet Presidium stripped the late Leonid Brezhnev of the Order of Victory, saying that his modest war record did not justify the 1978 award.
Problems in Komsomol
The central committee of the CPSU's youth organization, the Komsomol, on Aug. 3, 1989, accepted a report assessing that the organization was in a state of crisis.
About 6,000,000 of its members had left in four years, many to join independent political groups, and the Lithuanian branch had recently seceded.
Komsomol leaders called for a revitalized voluntary democratic organization, independent of, but sharing a political platform with, the CPSU.
New rules and a programme were to be approved at the Komsomol's 22nd congress scheduled for early 1990.
Military affairs
On Dec. 15, 1989, an 8.2 per cent reduction in Soviet military spending, to 70,975.8 million roubles in 1990, was announced.
The armed forces were cut by 265,000 personnel, to 3,993,000 during 1989, and were to be reduced by a further 184,500 during 1990.
On Jan. 1, 1990, the Soviet Union had 4,045 missile launchers with 10,000 warheads, 8,207 combat aircraft and 63,900 tanks.
Some Western analysts considered that Soviet spending estimates should be doubled to take account of artificially low prices set for hardware.
Throughout 1989 the media published complaints about low morale and poor conditions in the Soviet Army, including low pay, long hours with little time off, poor housing and healthcare, bullying (often with a racist element) and political indoctrination.
On Oct. 21 an independent military trade union called "Shield" was formed to press for reform.
Although the Defence Ministry branded it subversive, Shield attracted several middle-ranking officers who had defeated their superiors in the March Congress elections [see p. 36512].
On July 3 the Ministry published for discussion drafts of new armed forces regulations, which it said would reinforce the legal protection of the individual.
Several senior officers and other experts argued publicly for the abolition of conscription and for the creation of a smaller professional Army.
This was opposed by new Chief of Staff Gen. Mikhail Moiseyev on Feb. 12, 1989, and later by his predecessor Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev, but remained under active discussion.
As a result of student protests the Supreme Soviet Presidium agreed in April to cut military service for those in higher education from two years to one (which could be served after graduation).
On July 11, 1989, Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov announced that 175,000 students who had already been conscripted would soon be released.
Religion
In late May 1989 Konstantin Kharchev was removed without official announcement from the chairmanship of the Council for Religious Affairs (CRA, the Council of Ministers' body controlling the churches).
He was replaced by Yuri Khristoradnov, a 61-year-old former party official from Gorky with no obvious religious connections.
In an exchange of views in the weekly popular magazine Ogonek in November and December Kharchev accused officials from the CPSU and the State Security Committee (Komitet Gosudarstvennoi Bezopasnosti--KGB) and Orthodox Church leaders of punishing him for his liberal stance on Soviet religious observance, and particularly on the status of the Uniate Church [see below].
The central committee ideology department accused Kharchev of unnecessary interference in the internal affairs of churches and of financial indiscipline.
A Vatican delegation held talks in Moscow in January 1990 with Russian Orthodox leaders and representatives of the Ukrainian Uniate Church (Orthodox by ritual but loyal to Rome).
Uniate congregations had been legalized on Dec. 1, 1989, and 600 parishes had registered by January 1990.
Both sides accepted the Uniates' right to leave the Orthodox Church and affiliate to Rome, and condemned Uniate-orthodox violence; they agreed on further talks to resolve matters like the disputed ownership of church buildings.
In November 1989 Bishop Ioan of Zhitomir proclaimed himself head of a revived Ukrainian Autocephalous Church (abolished in 1929) and was summarily excommunicated by the Russian Orthodox Church; the Constantinople Patriarchate also dissociated itself from the revival.
In October the Russian Orthodox Bishops' Council said that nearly 3,000 church buildings had been reopened in the past 18 months, bringing the number of working parishes to 9,734; the number of theological students had doubled to 3,948.
The Kremlin's Uspensky (Assumption) Cathedral was used for a religious service for the first time since 1918 when the 400th anniversary of the Moscow Patriarchate was celebrated on Oct. 12.
Other religions (including Islam) reported increased reopenings of religious buildings and permission to build new ones.
Christmas and New Year services were seen on Soviet television for the first time early in 1990.
In Lithuania (where the Pope appointed two new archbishops and a bishop in March) the Constitution was amended in November 1989 to give greater religious freedom and to allow religious instruction in schools.
On April 6 the CRA repealed some of its restrictive edicts from the early 1960s, including those directed against Jehovah's Witnesses and Baptists.
Western observers commented that Gorbachev was apparently looking to religion to help provide the spiritual renewal which he saw as an essential part of perestroika.
New rules for foreign travel
On Dec. 28, 1988, the Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, told consular officials from Soviet embassies to make travel to and from the Soviet Union easier.
Foreigners (especially businesspeople) were to get visas more quickly and the 150,000 Soviet citizens living abroad would no longer need permission to travel home.
New links were also to be established with more than 20,000,000 Soviet emigrés.
From January 1990 famous exiles were no longer stripped of their Soviet citizenship: the cellist Mstislav Rostropovich, the opera diva Galina Vishnevskaya (who was married to Rostropovich) and the theatre director Yury Lyubimov were among the first to return as citizens.
The authorities also announced their intention to issue five-year passports to Soviet citizens as a matter of right (previously foreign travel passports were issued for one foreign journey only).
Observers speculated that the Soviet authorities wished to improve its international image before the proposed 1991 Moscow human rights conference, and to limit the effects of a recent "brain drain" of scientific and cultural talent.
Between January and October 1989 171,000 Soviet citizens were allowed to emigrate (only 0.4 per cent of requests were refused) and more than 1,700,000 were given permission to travel abroad or invite foreigners into the country.
The main restrictions on foreign travel now remaining appeared to be the difficulty of obtaining foreign exchange (only $200 could be bought in the Soviet Union), visas (due to long waiting lists at Western embassies in Moscow) and airline tickets (for example, the Soviet state airline Aeroflot reported a 13-month waiting list for New York flights).
In the first 11 months of 1989 a record 62,500 Jews were allowed to emigrate, including some long-term "refuseniks" .
More Jews were now emigrating to Israel because of US restrictions on their immigration [see p. 37094; for controversy over increased Soviet Jewish immigration to Israel in early 1990 see p. 37304].
The administration of US President George Bush planned to accept 50,000 Soviet refugees in fiscal 1990 (which began on Oct 1, 1989) and another 30,000 on a "parole basis" , that is, without state financial support.
The US authorities expected about 300,000 applications during that period, but could process only about 350 a day at the Moscow embassy.
(Furthermore, no new applications to enter the USA were allowed after Oct. 1 from Soviet Jews already in Austrian and Italian transit camps).
Priority to enter the USA was to be given to long-term refuseniks and those with close relatives in the USA.
During fiscal 1989 as many as 75 per cent of Armenian applicants (many homeless after the earthquake) were refused entry to the USA.
Defection of pilot to Turkey
On May 20, 1989, Capt. Alexander Zuyev flew his MiG-29 fighter from Batumi, in south-west Georgia, to Turkey.
He was later granted political asylum in the USA, but the Turks returned the aircraft to the Soviet authorities before US experts could inspect it.
SECURITY
Crime wave
More than 1,750,000 crimes were reported to the Interior Ministry during January-September 1989 (with 58 per cent committed by 14-29-year-olds)— an increase of one-third on the same period in 1988 [see p. 36855]; by the year-end the figure was 2,500,000, with one-third of cases unsolved.
Serious crime was up 42.4 per cent, with violent armed crime against individuals especially prevalent.
There were more kidnappings and hostage takings (especially by organized gangs and during prison escapes) in January-August 1989 than over the previous decade.
Ministry officials blamed the crime wave on economic shortages, inter-ethnic tensions (to which some officials attributed two bombs found on the Moscow metro on April 20), drugs, and the movement by organized crime into the co-operative movement; increasing unemployment was also blamed.
A Sept. 5 Interior Ministry briefing described the growing drug problem: there were 60,000 registered addicts, but probably five times as many users.
Administrative remedies
On May 16, 1989, the CPSU central committee's commission on legal policy called for better co-ordination between and more decisive action from the Interior and Justice Ministries and from the Procuracy.
There were demands in the press for the militia to be allowed greater use of firearms and for Interior Ministry troops to be provided with more and better equipment (notably computers, communications equipment and vehicles).
Factories which had been switched from military production because of cuts in defence spending were instructed to meet these needs, and it was decided to supplement the 36,000 Interior Ministry troops by diverting new conscripts from Army work.
Tass on Oct. 4 announced that military intelligence operations were being cut by more than 10 per cent with surplus resources reportedly being transferred to the KGB's new Directorate for the Defence of the Soviet Constitutional System.
This replaced the notorious Fifth Directorate and was to fight organized crime, as well as espionage and terrorism.
On Oct. 21 the KGB chairman Vladimir Kryuchkov proposed reduction to one-10th in the size of the Soviet Union's prohibited border zones.
He gave his first television interview on June 24 — apparently as part of the KGB's media campaign to demonstrate its commitment to working within the law — and announced that a Supreme Soviet commission would soon be established to supervise the work of all law-enforcement agencies.
In September 1989 the Soviet authorities expressed interest in joining the International Criminal Police Organization (INTERPOL).
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GNP growth 3% (1989)
Overall balance of payments -US$3,262 m. (1989)
Budget deficit US$150,033 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$54,795 m. (1989)
Debt service ratio (as % of export earnings) 49.3% (1989)
Inflation rate 7.5% (1989)
Unemployment Approx. 4,000,000 (1989)
Principal trading partners (1987) West Germany, Czechoslovakia, Poland 
Performance
During the first half of 1989 the growth rate declined and many plans were not fulfilled.
Inflation worsened as wages increased rapidly but consumer goods remained in short supply.
A further deterioration in performance in the third quarter was attributed to dislocations during the implementation of perestroika, to strikes (2,300,000 working days lost in September alone) and to ethnic disturbances.
Compared with 1988, gross national product (GNP) was up 3 per cent in 1989, national income 2 per cent, industrial output 1.7 per cent and labour productivity 3 per cent (all at "comparable prices" ).
Many plan targets were not met, however, as industrial output fell in the second half of the year.
Production of foodstuffs rose by 3.2 per cent and of consumer goods by 7.7 per cent, helped by a good grain harvest (211,100,000 tonnes) and by 21 per cent and 11 per cent increases in the output of alcoholic drinks and sugar, respectively; output of fish products fell by 4 per cent .
Imports of consumer goods were up 19 per cent.
Despite these figures, grave shortages persisted.
Although official prices rose only 2 per cent, unsatisfied consumer demand (estimated at a value of 165,000 million roubles) drove up inflation to an annualized rate of 7.5 per cent .
In January 1990 the State Committee for Statistics announced that it was developing a more realistic type of retail price index, based on what consumers actually paid rather than on list prices.
Although average 1989 wage increases, at 9.5 per cent, ran well ahead of output, they slowed down in the fourth quarter, possibly helping to reduce the budget deficit to about 75 per cent of its planned level.
By September contracts had been signed for the import of scarce food and consumer goods worth 43,000 million roubles, mostly on a barter or joint-enterprise basis (that is, not using hard currency); some of the imports were to meet the demands of striking miners [see p. 36826].
In September several senior officials were dismissed or reprimanded for poor work in the consumer goods sector.
In August the Moscow authorities restricted the sale to non-residents of scarce goods, following similar decisions in other cities.
From Sept. 15 foreigners were forbidden to export scarce consumer goods, unless purchased for hard currency.
Economists blamed the shortages on prices which gave little incentive to production.
In October the Supreme Soviet agreed to impose a progressive tax on enterprises which increased their total wage bills by more than 3 per cent a year.
Inflation, shortages and fear of a currency devaluation led to massive purchases of gold, silver and jewellery late in 1989.
On Jan. 10, 1990, the price of these items was raised 50 per cent.
Housing construction and freight transport declined by 3 per cent and 2 per cent respectively in 1989 compared with 1988.
More than 7,000,000 working days were lost to strikes.
Progress both in environmental conservation and technology were officially deemed inadequate, even though 12,000 million roubles were spent on the former.
Foreign trade turnover was up 4.7 per cent overall; that with socialist countries fell slightly but exports to and imports from the industrialized West rose 7.6 per cent and 23.6 per cent respectively, to 26,000 million and 26,800 million roubles.
1990 plan
Consumer goods output was planned to rise 20 per cent and housing construction 17 per cent in 1990.
It was hoped to achieve this through rapid modernization of production processes, more conversion of military plants to civilian production, and improved agricultural performance.
The budget deficit was to be cut to 60,000 million roubles by reducing central state expenditure on investment (notably in heavy industry), the military and administration.
In August 1989 the official news agency Tass revealed that 46 per cent of the defence sector's 1990 production would be civilian products, rising to 60 per cent in 1995.
The value of its output of consumer goods reached 160,000,000 roubles in 1989 and was planned to rise 30 per cent in 1990.
Unemployment
On Oct. 31, 1989, Pravda said that 3,000,000 of the workforce had been made unemployed since 1985 and that the total would reach 15-16,000,000 by 2005.
The 1,500,000 job vacancies were mostly in undesirable jobs or areas.
Unemployment rates were particularly high (16-28 per cent) in the Central Asian and Transcaucasian republics.
An August radio report suggested that more than 40,000,000 Soviet citizens were receiving less than the official subsistence wage of 75 roubles a month.
Economic reform
The Amended Law on State Enterprises passed in early August 1989 allowed companies to secede from the ministry which managed them and the ministry in question was forbidden to take all of one company's output.
In November Gorbachev admitted that "we have temporarily lost control of some levers of economic management" .
The old system had been removed, but the new ones were not yet working at full power.
A strategy for the transition period had to be worked out; a sudden switch to a market system would produce "riots in the streets" and the government's downfall, he said.
Meanwhile more than 40 per cent of respondents to an opinion poll said that they would prefer a return to more centralized economic management and only 25 per cent wanted a market-oriented system.
On Nov. 13 Gorbachev's leading economic adviser, Deputy Prime Minister Leonid Abalkin, presented his transition plan.
He wanted the Soviet Union to adopt a mixed economy with some state enterprises being transferred to other forms of socialist ownership (although not into private hands, as a leading radical economist, Abel Aganbegyan, suggested).
Unprofitable state enterprises would be closed and the money supply stabilized.
Price reform would be gradual: first luxury goods would be decontrolled, with necessities following by about 1995.
A foreign currency market would be established and foreign investment encouraged.
Agriculture
In June 1989 Gorbachev accused "top economic leaders" of reluctance to help the private and family-based farms whose development had been recommended by the March 1989 central committee plenum.
(Earlier in June experts had complained to Izvestiya, the organ of the presidium of the Supreme Soviet, that there were still no proper mechanisms for giving these farms land or credit, and that they were discriminated against in equipment supplies.)
Ligachev argued that collective and state farms were still the backbone of the system and that most peasants did not want to leave them to set up on their own.
Improving processing facilities, not new organizational forms, was the way to end food shortages, he claimed.
Interviewed on Dec. 28, central committee secretary Yegor Stroyev advocated changes to official policy on grain production in order to end the need for imports (36,000,000 tonnes in 1989): farmers wanted better prices, varying according to quality rather than region.
The experiment of giving hard-currency incentives [see p. 36855]had not worked properly because it had been introduced too late in the year and people did not know how to operate it.
(Grain imports, halted during the experiment, were resumed in November.)
It was not necessary to break up large collective and state farms (as was already happening in parts of Georgia and the Ukraine) to give peasants more incentive; they could form associations or joint-stock companies or leaseholders.
Grain should also be used more efficiently, through better processing and improved fodder mixes (it was estimated that the Soviet Union lost 29,000,000 tonnes of grain, 1,000,000 tonnes of meat and one-third of all fruit and vegetables per year during collection, processing and storage).
Oil and gas
From September 1989 shortages of petrol and diesel fuel were reported, notably in the Caucasus and northern Siberia.
Officials blamed the perestroika reforms as resulting in dislocation and in newly-autonomous plants producing heavy oil rather than petrol and diesel.
There were also transport and pipeline problems and overall output of petroleum products was down on 1988.
Preliminary reports from the inquiry into the Ufa rail accident [see p. 36745]suggested that the pipeline was damaged when its construction was rushed.
Repairs were expected to cost 100,000,000 roubles and to take six months.
Supplies of liquefied gas fell 20 per cent in June and exports were to be cut by 60 per cent in the third quarter.
A massive explosion occurred during testing at Tobolsk on the same pipeline in October.
Transport
The Railways Ministry fell short of its 1989 plan for freight by 27,500,000 tonnes [for rail freight problems in October-November see p. 37046].
The main problem, said Ryzhkov in December, was an acute shortage of rolling stock: freight tariffs had barely changed in 40 years and had to be raised to finance a modernization plan for 1991-2000.
The Baikal-Amur Mainline railway (BAM — see pp. 33476-77) finally entered into commission in November 1989, although it was not yet working at full capacity and much of the infrastructure around it was still being built.
Foreign links
The Soviet Union's foreign debt (previously a state secret) was revealed to be the equivalent of 33,600 million roubles in January 1989, 28,100 million of which was in convertible currencies.
In July it was disclosed that the Soviet Union was owed the equivalent of 87,500 million (25 per cent in convertible currencies), but much of this was believed to be for arms sales to poorer countries who were unable to repay it.
In October Italy and West Germany granted the Soviet Union trade credits worth $775 million and $1,600 million respectively.
During a visit to the United Kingdom by the then State Foreign Economic Commission Chairman Vladimir Kamentsev in February 1989, a delayed protocol on credits to the Soviet Union (believed to total £1,000 million — approximately equivalent to $1,750 million) from a consortium of seven British banks was signed.
In October 1989 the rouble for personal transactions was devalued 10 times, primarily to discourage visitors from changing money on the black market (where one US dollar could buy 15 roubles or more).
The old rate would still apply to essential imports, but it was planned to set in due course another new rate (somewhere between the two) for non-essential imports and possibly some types of export.
A multiple exchange rate system was to be retained until full international convertibility of the rouble.
Foreign exchange auctions began in November.
Thirty-one enterprises sold to 210 others at an average 15.2 roubles per hard currency rouble (worth about US$1.50); at the second auction in January 1990 the rate was 17.5 roubles.
Since April 1989 all firms "competitive on foreign markets" could apply to register for independent foreign trading rights, although a ceiling of 6,000 companies actually registered was set for 1989.
Of the 1,274 joint ventures with foreign companies registered by the end of 1989, only 184 were actually operating.
Many were small and few were engaged in manufacturing.
Two of the largest 1989 joint-venture deals were with the Italian Fiat company ($1,410 million to build 300,000 cars a year in the Soviet Union) and with the US-owned Combustion Engineering ($2,000 million to build a petrochemical plant in West Siberia).
The first MacDonalds fast-food restaurant and an Estée Lauder perfumery in Moscow (both selling for ordinary roubles) both attracted huge queues.
In August it was decided to establish tariff-free economic zones in Vyborg (specializing in science and industry), Nakhodka (raw materials and fish products) and Novgorod (tourism and video equipment).
Environment
A draft State Ecological Programme, published on June 28, 1989, called for 400,000 million roubles to be spent, for an end to discharges of effluent into lakes and rivers by 2000 and for a halving of atmospheric pollutants by 2005.
Observers doubted that such targets would be achieved; of 158 clean-up projects ordered in January 1989 only 10 had begun by October.
Losses resulting from the 1986 Chernobyl nuclear accident [see pp. 34751-52; 34779-81; 35401-02; 35844; 36460-62; 36471; 37324]amounted to more than 10,000 million roubles, Ryzhkov told the politburo in November, while the Byelorussian authorities had appealed for an additional 10,000 million roubles for their clean-up and resettlement work.
Armenia's nuclear power station was closed in February 1989 because of earthquake fears, while construction of nuclear plants in Krasnodar and the Crimea had been terminated for the same reason, after popular protests and construction of several reactors of the Chernobyl type had also been halted.
Nevertheless, Tass reported in June that 20 per cent of electric power would be nuclear-generated by 1995 and over 30 per cent by 2000 (compared with 11 per cent in 1989).
An underground nuclear test in January 1989 near Semipalatinsk (Kazakhstan) sparked off local protests which were given formal support by the Kazakhstan Supreme Soviet in November.
There was also fierce local opposition in June to plans to build the world's largest nuclear waste facility near Krasnoyarsk.
In September the international environmental organization Greenpeace established its own Moscow bureau, while a number of new environmental groups appeared in the Soviet Union.
Census
The seventh all-union census was conducted in most areas between Jan. 12 and 19, 1989.
Full results were not due until the autumn of 1990, but first figures showed an average population growth of 9.3 per cent over 10 years, with the Central Asian republics growing fastest (22-34 per cent) and the Russian Republic (with 51.4 per cent of the total population) at only 7 per cent .
The rural population had declined from 38 per cent in 1979 to 34 per cent.
FOREIGN
Soviet foreign policy
On Nov. 23, 1989, the deputy director of Moscow's Institute for Europe told an audience in London that the Soviet Union no longer aspired to global superpower status and was now just a "major European power" , and in Izvestiya on Jan. 19, 1990, Shevardnadze advocated the gradual establishment of "a European confederation…of equal nations, whose borders are recognized as unshakeable constraints" .
The USA had a role to play in this process, he said, which might involve setting up a Committee of Foreign Ministers within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
The question of German unity was a matter for all the states in Europe and the USA.
In March 1989 Shevardnadze had told Izvestiya that several bad foreign policy decisions (including that in 1979 to intervene in Afghanistan) had been the result of leaders not consulting a wider circle of views within the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the Supreme Soviet.
The Ministry had recently established a Centre for the Study of Public Opinion; policy-makers should listen to popular opinion, but not "play up to" it, said Shevardnadze.
The requirements of negotiating procedures and national security meant that full glasnost was not possible in foreign policy, but wider discussion was essential.
Soviet-US relations
During October 1989 the Bush administration appeared to take a more positive stance on perestroika, playing down the views of Deputy National Security Adviser Robert Gates, the leading proponent of the view that the USA should not react strongly to perestroika, because the reformist Soviet administration under Gorbachev might not survive for long.
In October US Secretary of State James Baker offered economic advice and technical assistance to help perestroika, and in the same month Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan visited Moscow to advise Soviet officials.
In August and September the USA and the Soviet Union removed many of the travel restrictions hitherto imposed on each other 's diplomats.
In October Gen. Dmitri Yazov made the first visit to the USA by a Soviet Defence Minister, at the invitation of US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney.
He also met Bush, congressmen and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and visited military installations.
A month earlier a US Defence Department report had rated the likelihood of US-Soviet conflict as low as at any time in the post-war era.
A secret Moscow meeting of Soviet and US counter-terrorism experts in June was followed by another in California in September.
Discussions concerned joint action and exchange of information.
Relations with UK
On Dec. 19, 1989, Shevardnadze had talks in London with the UK Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher, and with the UK Foreign and Commonwealth Secretary, Douglas Hurd.
Then, and in a New Year message to the Soviet people, Thatcher praised Gorbachev for his role in the democratization of Eastern Europe.
Yazov headed a Soviet military delegation to London on July 25, 1989, when he had talks with Thatcher and the outgoing UK Defence Secretary George Younger.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,648,000 sq km.
Population: 48,555,000 (1988).
Capital: Tehran.
Languages: Farsi (Persian — 50%); Turkic, Kurdish, Arabic and other languages.
Religion: Islam (mainly Shia); small minorities of Christians, Jews and Zoroastrians.
Av. life expectancy: 63 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 604,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: Iranian rial (US$1.00=70.6000 rials as at April 2, 1990).
The Islamic Republic of Iran was proclaimed in 1979 after the overthrow of the monarchy.
Overall authority is exercised by the wali faqih, the country's spiritual leader.
The President and the 270 members of the Majlis (Islamic Consultative Assembly) are elected by universal adult suffrage every four years.
The Majlis must approve the appointment of all members of the Council of Ministers.
A 12-member Council of Guardians ensures that all legislation conforms with the Islamic Constitution and has the power to veto candidates to high elected office on the same grounds.
Following elections to the Majlis in April and May 1988, Prime Minister Hossein Moussavi was re-elected by the Majlis for a further four-year term [see pp. 36053-54; for abolition of post of Prime Minister in July 1989 see p. 36833].
Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, Iran's wali faqih since 1979, died on June 3, 1989 [see pp. 36724-25].
An Assembly of Experts, first elected in 1982 to decide on the leadership issue, convened in emergency session the next day and elected Ayatollah Seyed Ali Khamenei as Khomeini's successor.
On July 28, the Speaker of the Majlis, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, was elected President, succeeding Khamenei, and assumed office on Aug. 17; also on July 28 voters in a referendum approved a number of constitutional amendments which effectively increased presidential authority.
The Majlis approved a new Cabinet on Aug. 29 [see pp. 36832-33; 36859-60].
POLITICS
The period between May 1989 and February 1990 was dominated by the death in early June 1989 of the spiritual leader, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini [see pp. 36724-25], and the struggle between "radical" and "pragmatist" factions within the Islamic regime and in the Majlis (Parliament) to establish their leadership in the post-Khomeini era.
The pragmatic faction, favouring closer links with both the West and with Eastern Europe and China, gained the upper hand as the leading personality within that wing, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, the then Majlis Speaker, was nominated for and subsequently won the presidential elections in July 1989 [see pp. 36832-33].
The radical faction, however, was somewhat strengthened by the enhanced position of Khomeini's son, Ahmad Khomeini, who had already established himself within the Iranian political scene [see p. 36630], and who after his father's death was able to claim that his views and pronouncements carried the authority of the late leader.
However, the fact that he was a very junior cleric with little political experience limited his ability to mount a serious challenge to the existing leadership of Rafsanjani and the other leading "pragmatist" , former President Seyed Ali Khamenei.
Khamenei's position within the clerical hierarchy was strengthened when he was designated "Ayatollah" , a promotion from his previous ranking of Hojatolislam, and appointed as spiritual leader in succession to Khomeini.
Politically, however, he was forced to "share" power with Rafsanjani, whose powers as President were greatly strengthened by the new Constitution, approved in July 1989 [see p. 36833].
The political influence of the other major radical figure, Hojatolislam Ali Akbar Mohtashemi, was drastically reduced when Rafsanjani removed him from the post of Interior Minister in his Cabinet reshuffle of August 1989, following his election as President [see pp. 36859-60].
However, Mohtashemi's election to the Majlis in the December 1989 by-elections [see pp. 37137-38]represented an attempt on his part to make a political comeback.
Ali Akbar Vellayati Foreign Affairs Gholamreza Aghazadeh Oil Abdollah Nouri Interior; Chairman of State Security Council Mohsen Nourbakhsh Economic Affairs and Finance Isa Kalantari Agriculture and Rural Affairs Abdol-Hossein Vahaji Commerce Namdar Zanganeh Energy Mohammed Saeedi Kya Roads and Transport Gholamreza Foruzesh Jihad ( "crusade" ) for Reconstruction Mohammad Hadi Nezhad-Hosseinian Heavy Industries Mohammad Reza Nematzadeh Industry Sarajuddin Kazeruni Housing and Urban Development Hossein Kamali Labour and Social Affairs Mohammed Gharazi Posts, Telephones and Telegraphs Iraj Fazel Health, Treatment and Medical Education Mohammad Ali Najafi Education and Training Mostafa Moin Higher Education and Culture Hojatolislam Ismail Shostari Justice Akbar Torkan Defence and Armed Forces Logistics Hojatolislam Ali Fallahiyan Intelligence and Security Seyyed Mohammad Khatami Culture and Islamic Guidance Mohammad Hossein Mahloji Mines and Metals 
Council of Ministers
Political parties bill — Change in official name of Majlis — Merger of ministries
On May 29, 1989, the Majlis approved a bill seeking to amend the 1981 law on the registration of political parties.
The 1981 law had led to the establishment of a committee to examine the qualifications, with regards to adherence to the basic tenets of the Islamic Revolution, of political parties seeking legal recognition.
The new bill empowered the Intelligence and Security Ministry to be represented on this committee, whose deliberations, which had been suspended during the Iran-Iraq war, had begun again in December 1988.
The Majlis had on May 23 unanimously approved a change in its formal title from the National Consultative Assembly to the Islamic Consultative Assembly.
On the same day the first reading took place of a bill to merge the Ministries of Defence and Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps into a single Ministry of Defence and Armed Forces Logistics [for merger of Ministries in August Cabinet reshuffle see p. 36859].
Attack on Montazeri
The Tehran daily newspaper Ettela'at of May 16, 1989, published extracts from a document prepared by Ahmad Khomeini attacking the past political stands of Ayatollah Hossein Ali Montazeri, who had resigned in March 1989 as Khomeini's designated successor [see p. 36539].
The document also alleged that Montazeri had been involved in a gang whose members had been executed in Iran in 1987 after smuggling explosives to Saudi Arabia during the pilgrimage to Mecca the previous year [see pp. 35541-42; 35677].
According to Ahmad Khomeini, Montazeri had "rejected the Imam's paternal advice and warnings against the murderous band of Mehdi and Hadi Hashemi, as well as against his deviation from Islam and the Revolution" .
The evidence presented by Ahmad Khomeini in his 110-page document, The Book of Sufferings, was based on a series of unpublished letters between Ayatollah Khomeini and Montazeri over recent years.
Consolidation of Rafsanjani's position
Expressing his backing for Rafsanjani's presidential candidacy on May 7, 1989, Khamenei declared that Rafsanjani's candidacy revived the hope that "our nation will have a much brighter future ahead of it" .
During the first meeting of the Cabinet on Aug. 30, Rafsanjani made it clear that he would not "engage in the fantasies of an independent and self-sufficient society" , but declared that Iranians "need not, even a bit, deviate from the path of the Imam and the ideals of the Revolution for the construction of the country" [see reconstruction efforts and five-year plan below].
Rafsanjani announced on Sept. 2 that he was resigning from his post of acting Armed Forces Commander-in-Chief as he was now too busy with his presidential functions.
The resignation was accepted by Khamenei as the Armed Forces Commander-in-Chief.
SECURITY
Execution of "CIA agents" — Arrest of "Iraqi spies" 
Following the staging on television of "confessions" by four Iranians who had allegedly acted as "CIA [United States Central Intelligence Agency]agents" , the four were hanged on Nov. 4, 1989.
The four men had "confessed" to gathering information for the carrying out of "terrorist and interventionist acts" against Iran.
The hangings were conducted on the anniversary of the 1979 storming by Iranian students of the US embassy in Tehran [see p. 30150], and were accompanied by an anti-US demonstration in the capital which was addressed by Mohtashemi.
It was announced on May 11 that a "spy ring" linked to the left-wing opposition group, Mujaheddin e-Khalq, had been discovered and that "the ringleader Mas'ud Dalvand and 10 other spies [had]been arrested" .
The 11 had allegedly been "involved in spying for the Ba'athist, Iraqi and other foreign intelligence agencies" .
Human rights situation — Action against drug traffickers
A report by the international human rights organization Amnesty International, published in October 1989, said that torture and executions were widespread in Iran and that at least 1,200 people had been executed by the authorities in 1988.
This was followed by a UN Human Rights Commission report in November, saying that "ill-treatment and torture, both physical and psychological" were continuing in Iran's prisons [for January 1990 visit by UN human rights delegation to Iran see p. 37200].
On Nov. 16, 1989, an official government statement said that the execution and torture of "terrorists" was permitted under Islamic law.
It was announced on Dec. 5 that 900 drug dealers and traffickers had been hanged during 1989, that a further 900 faced the death penalty and that a total of 14,000 traffickers had been arrested since March 1989.
On July 20 a report by the Islamic Republic News Agency (IRNA) quoted government estimates that over 1,000,000 Iranians were drug addicts.
It was reported that 200,000 of these had registered officially as addicts by the July 23 deadline set by the government at the start of its new anti-drugs campaign begun in early January 1989.
Of these, 55,000 were to be punished either by receiving prison sentences or by being sent to labour camps.
Reported deaths in Tehran food riot
It was widely reported that at least five people had died during food riots in Tehran on Nov. 2, 1989.
The rioters, protesting against vegetable shortages, had been killed in clashes with the Revolutionary Guards, who arrested 150 people.
Kurdish guerrilla claims — Assassination of Kurdish figure in Cyprus
Intense Kurdish guerrilla activity in Kurdistan appeared to take place in late September and October 1989, during which time the Kurdish Democratic Party of Iran (KDPI) claimed that its fighters had killed 172 Iranian troops and Revolutionary Guards in and around the city of Mahabad approximately 550 km west of Tehran.
In a statement on Sept. 28 the guerrillas claimed to have held the city for a brief period.
A member of the central committee of the Iran Communist Party and of its Kurdish guerrilla section Komaleh, Bahman Javadi, was shot dead on Aug. 26, 1989, by a group of gunmen on the streets of Larnaca in Cyprus.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -1.3% (1988)
Current-account balance +US$1,600 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$1,000 m. (1987/88 est.)
Budget deficit US$29,000 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 72.5% (1988)
Gross domestic product US$36,580 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$40,000 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 23% (official); 50% (unofficial)(current)
Unemployment 14% (official); 25% (unofficial est.)(current)
Principal trading partners West Germany, Japan, Belgium, UK 
Five-year development plan
Iran's first post-revolutionary five-year development plan was approved by the Majlis on Jan. 9, 1990, after a debate which had begun on Dec. 10, 1989.
However, the Council of Guardians re-submitted it to the Majlis on Jan. 24, calling for revisions to be made to it.
It was believed that the inclusion in the plan of provisions for the use of foreign loans and for a more liberal market policy was the source of the Council of Guardians' complaint [see also p. 37333].
The inclusion of these provisions in the plan were referred to by Rafsanjani in a speech on Oct. 8, when he reported that "we decided to make some amendments in the plan (which had been completed in an earlier draft form by the previous government of Prime Minister Hossein Moussavi) under the new atmosphere" .
During his first international press conference on Oct. 23 [see p. 36988]Rafsanjani said that there would be "serious guarantees for (foreign) investment" during the reconstruction programme.
He declared the new administration's "first step" to be to "re-activate our industry" and to "give people a freer hand for greater participation in economic activities" .
The plan envisaged a rate of growth in gross domestic product (GDP) of 8 per cent a year and an increase in per capita income of 4.8 per cent a year.
There was to be a reduction in the state budget deficit from the 1988 level of 2,146,000 million rials to 92,500 million rials in 1993.
Total spending for the five-year plan was set at US$341,550 million.
Investment was planned to rise by 10.3 per cent a year during the five years, with an increasing role for private investment which would account for 60 per cent of the total by 1993.
Foreign exchange earnings were planned to total $90,000 million, with $83,000 million of this to be accounted for by earnings from oil and gas exports.
It was later estimated that, because of the rising price of oil and increasing production quotas set by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), this figure was an underestimate.
It was expected that the unemployment rate by the end of the plan period would be reduced from its current 14 per cent official estimate, with a projected 394,000 jobs to be created each year.
Inflation was projected to fall to 8.9 per cent from its current official level of 23 per cent.
In a television statement on Oct. 8 Rafsanjani said that the plan included the sale of state-owned factories to the private sector.
He was referring to a development of a policy document first published in early May 1989, calling for the state sector "to issue public tenders for the sale of all profitable or non-profitable production, service and trade units, with the exception of important and strategic units" .
Currency reforms
The improving economic climate and government measures to increase importers' access to foreign exchange placed a downward pressure on the rial's black market value from $1.00=1,410 rials at the beginning of June to $1.00=1,250 rials in December 1989.
This rate compared unfavourably with the free market rate on Dec. 9 of $1.00=800 rials.
An important measure to encourage this trend was taken in October, when Iran's central bank (Bank Markazi Jomhouri Islam Iran) doubled the foreign exchange quota available to all private-sector enterprises dealing with the public sector and set a new special exchange rate of $1.00=1,000 rials (a fall from $1.00=1,250 rials).
FOREIGN
Relations with USA
Iran-US relations remained at a low ebb during 1989 and early 1990 despite the new regime in Iran and US efforts under the new administration of President George Bush to come to terms with the Iranian government.
Continuing anti-US feeling in Iran and the associated strength of the radical Islamic political forces resulted from the US refusal to make a more comprehensive effort to compensate Iran for the shooting down of an Iranian airbus in the Gulf by the USS Vincennes warship in July 1988 [see pp. 36169-70], and from the fact that it continued to hold, according to official Iranian estimates, some $12,000 million in assets frozen since the 1979 Iranian revolution [for agreement in November 1989 to release assets see p. 37053].
On May 17, 1989, Iran formally applied for the aircraft compensation case to be referred to the International Court of Justice (ICJ) at The Hague.
The application called for a ruling to order US payment of compensation "in accordance with the injuries suffered by the Islamic Republic and the bereaved families" .
The US administration announced on Aug. 15 its intention to fight the case.
In the meantime, reliable and authoritative sources placed further blame on the Vincennes for the shooting down of the airbus.
An unpublished but widely quoted UN International Civil Aviation Organization report of May 1989 referred to the involvement of the Vincennes in a series of provocative incidents in the Gulf before and after the Iranian incident.
Commander David Carlson of the US frigate John H. Sides, which was in the Gulf at the same time as the Vincennes, wrote in the September issue of the US Naval Institute journal Proceedings that the airbus was shot down "for no good reason" and referred to "pathetic post-incident attempts to place the blame [for the incident]on the victims" .
A letter by 200 US members of Congress on Sept. 5 calling for the Bush administration to abandon hopes for a moderate leadership in Iran and instead to recognize the country's resistance groups, was condemned by the Majlis Speaker, Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, who said that the US administration would "take the wish of overthrowing the Islamic Republic to their graves" .
Reports in early September indicated that the Bush administration had been conducting an ongoing but indirect correspondence with the Iranian regime.
The Majlis on Oct. 31 approved a draft bill authorizing the Iranian President to take measures for the arrest and punishment anywhere in the world of US citizens found guilty by the Iranian judiciary of anti-Iran terrorist activity.
The bill, which was ratified by the Council of Guardians two days later, followed approval of US legislation allowing US forces to arrest "terrorists" anywhere in the world [see p. 37407].
Relations with UK
The Rushdie affair [see pp. 36450-51]continued to present obstacles to the restoration of diplomatic relations with the United Kingdom, despite statements by both sides indicating their willingness to restore relations.
The Deputy Foreign Minister responsible for Euro-American affairs, Mahmud Va'ezi, offered on Aug. 22, 1989, to restore relations if the UK government convinced Iran that its intentions were "genuine" and that it would "respect Islamic principles and values" .
A UK Foreign Ministry spokesperson responded on the same day by saying that it was for Iran to make the first gesture and that the UK would "not accept Iranian intervention in [its]internal affairs" .
This was seen to be a reference to Iran's standing position calling for the death of Salman Rushdie for the anti-Islamic "blasphemies" contained in his novel, The Satanic Verses.
During his visit to China in May 1989 [see p. 36671], Khamenei said that "the decision against Rushdie remain[ed] valid" and declared that "this [was]a bullet for which there was a target; it has been shot; sooner or later it will reach its target" .
The UK Foreign and Commonwealth Office responded by "deploring" the remark and calling on the international community "to reject, in the firmest possible way, Iran's outrageous behaviour" .
The UK government expelled a number of Iranians in relation to their alleged involvement in anti-Rushdie activities in the UK.
Three Iranians were expelled in June, two more in December and a further nine at the beginning of February 1990 [see p. 37266].
Speaking on Nov. 20, 1989, the UK Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs, Douglas Hurd, expressed his desire to "have a better relationship with Iran" and said that "a decision by the Iranians to use effectively their influence [with Lebanese hostage-holders]would be a great help" .
Following his September release from a British prison after serving seven years of a 10-year sentence for a failed car bomb attempt in London in 1980, Kourosh Fouladi, an Iranian citizen, claimed that he had been "subjected to various forms of brutal physical and psychological torture" by the UK police and security forces.
Suggestions by leading Iranian political figures, including the head of the judiciary, Hojatolislam Mohammad Yazdi, that Roger Cooper, a British businessman in an Iranian prison on alleged spying charges, be released, received a negative response from the Iranian press and from the Majlis.
The daily newspaper Kayhan said that pardons should not be extended to "a seasoned spy like Cooper" .
Relations with other West European countries
Iran's relations with other West European countries began to improve a few months after the initial call by Ayatollah Khomeini for Rushdie's death, although Rafsanjani's statement in May 1989 advocating the killing of five Westerners for every Palestinian killed in the occupied territories [see pp. 36669-70]drew a strong rebuke from the Council of Ministers of the European Communities (EC).
The EC statement of May 8 said that the call "violated the most elementary principles and obligations governing relations between sovereign states" .
A decision by the governments of France and West Germany to return their ambassadors to Iran in early June was welcomed by the Iranian press, with Kayhan saying that Iran would "give a positive response to this positive political move" .
A breakthrough in Franco-Iranian relations was represented by a visit on Sept. 17-18 to Iran by the secretary-general of the French Foreign Ministry, François Scheer, who held talks with Va'ezi.
According to Tehran radio, Va'ezi emphasized "the political resolve of the two governments to normalize and expand relations" .
He also wished the French government "to make every effort to settle the financial difficulties between the two countries as soon as possible" .
This was a reference to the Iranian demand for the return of a $1,000 million loan made by Iran to France in 1974 [see p. 26755].
Although France had already repaid $630 million, Iran was claiming an extra $1,000 million in interest payments.
A joint Italian-Iranian memorandum of understanding signed on Jan. 22, 1990, included an agreement by Italy to suspend limitations imposed on financial and capital guarantees for projects and transactions with Iran.
West Germany announced on Jan. 27, 1990, that it envisaged the granting of special credits for short-term and "semi-long-term" transactions and that West German companies were prepared to finance Iranian capital projects.
Relations with Eastern Europe
An indication of Iran's increasing alignment with East European countries was the large-scale trade agreement reached with the Soviet Union during Rafsanjani's visit to that country in June 1989 [see p. 36725].
A bilateral tourist exchange agreement was signed by the two countries on Jan. 5, 1990, allowing tourist visas to be issued within 15 days of application.
A Tehran-Baku (Azerbaijan) air link was inaugurated on Jan. 18.
[For 1989 pro-Islamic and pro-Iranian demonstrations in Azerbaijan and in Uzbekistan see pp. 36489; 36745.]
A May 1, 1989, statement by the Iranian First Deputy Foreign Minister, Ali Mohammad Besharati, confirmed that "extensive talks" had been held between Iran and the Soviet Union on arms purchases from the latter and that "all related issues [had]been finalized" .
He also said that Iran was soon to acquire fighter-bomber aircraft from countries other than the USA and the Soviet Union.
These countries were believed to be Romania and Yugoslavia.
A visit to Iran by the then Romanian leader, Nicolae Ceausescu, on Dec. 18-20, 1989, resulted in the signature of a 10-year economic protocol for the export of Iranian oil to Romania in exchange for hard currency and for military hardware and machinery.
It was followed by strong criticism of the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, in the Majlis, and in the reported dismissal of the Iranian ambassador to Romania, Mohammad Jamshid Gowhari.
During a visit to Iran in late May 1989, the then Foreign Trade Minister of Bulgaria, Kristo Kristov, signed a $200,000,000 economic contract with Iran.
Relations with China
Iran signed a 10-year agreement with China on Jan. 21, 1990, for scientific and technological co-operation in military industries.
A $600,000,000 trade agreement was signed by the two countries the previous month during a visit to Tehran by China's Minister of Foreign Economic Relations and Trade, Zheng Tuobin.
Relations with Pakistan
At the end of a six-day visit to Iran by the Pakistani Minister of State for Defence, Col. (retd) Ghulam Sarwar Cheema, a defence co-operation agreement was signed.
A joint statement said that a ministerial commission for co-operation in military training and defence industries was to be set up.
An official Iranian statement said that the defence agreement had "vast dimensions and [would]help to stabilize peace in the region" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
BASIC DATA
Area: 438,317 sq km.
Population: 17,657,000 (1988).
Capital: Baghdad.
Languages: Arabic (official); Kurdish (about 15%) and Turkoman (small minority).
Religion: Islam (95% — more than 50% of whom belong to the Shia sect).
Av. life expectancy: 64 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 1,000,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: Iraqi dinar (US$1.00=0.3137 Iraqi dinars as at April 2, 1990).
The Republic of Iraq was declared in 1958 following the overthrow of the monarchy.
Power is concentrated in the hands of the Revolutionary Command Council (RCC), which elects the President (currently Saddam Hussein) by a two-thirds majority from among its own members.
The President, who is also Prime Minister, appoints the Council of Ministers.
Legislative authority is shared between the RCC and the 250-member National Assembly, which is elected every four years by universal adult suffrage under a system of proportional representation.
Following the general election in April 1989 the Arab Baath Socialist Party holds the majority of the Assembly seats, the remainder being distributed among members of the state-sponsored National Progressive Patriotic Front (NPPF)[see p. 36601].
A leading political role is also played by the Baath Party's most senior body, the 17-member Regional Command.
Although Shia Moslems form a majority of the population, Sunni Moslems are in power.
Taha Yasin Ramadhan First Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Aziz Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Sa'adoun Hammadi Deputy Prime Minister Gen. Abdel-Jabbar Khalil Shanshal Defence Abdul Wahab Mahmoud al-Sabbagh Agriculture and Irrigation Abdullah Fadil Abbas Waqfs (Religious Endowments) and Religious Affairs Latif Naseef al-Jasim Information and Culture Abdul Qadir Izz ad-Din Education Abdel-Salem Mohammed Saeed Health Mundhir Ibrahim Higher Education and Scientific Research Taher Mohammed Hassoun al-Marzouk Housing and Construction Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil Industry and Minerals; Military Industries Samir Muhammad Abdul Wahhab Interior Akram Abdel-Qader Ali Justice Umeed Madhat Mubarak Labour and Social Affairs Ali Hasan al-Majid Local Government Issam Abdel Rahim al Chalabi Oil Samal Majid Faraj Planning Mohammad Mehdi Saleh Trade; Finance (acting) Mohammad Hamza al Zubaidi Transport and Communications Abdel-Fattah Mohammad Amin Youth Affairs Arshad Ahmed az-Zibari Minister of State Hashim Subhi Minister of State at the President's Office Ahmed Hussein as-Samarra'i Director of the Presidential Office 
Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Debate on new Constitution
The autumn 1989 session of the National Assembly discussed the proposals for a new Constitution to replace the provisional Constitution of 1968 [see p. 23232], and President Saddam Hussein announced on Jan. 31, 1990, that the draft of a new Constitution had been completed by the Council of Ministers.
The proposals were to be put to a referendum after first being considered by the National Assembly.
A statement in early September 1989 by the National Assembly Speaker, Saadi Medhi Saleh, had referred to the regime's commitment to a multiparty system, although decisions regarding the political forces which would be permitted to take part in it would be left to the "near future" .
Government changes
Baghdad radio reported on May 15, 1989, that Hashim Hissan had been relieved of his post as Minister of State due to illness and to "the inability to carry out his duties" .
He was later replaced by Arshad Ahmed az-Zibari.
Abdel-Salem Mohammed Saeed, who had been acting Health Minister since August 1988 [see p. 36566], was appointed to the full post of Health Minister on July 13, 1989.
Abdul Wahab Mahmoud al-Sabbagh was appointed Minister of Agriculture and Irrigation on March 25, 1990.
The post had been vacant since the dismissal of Abdullah Badr Danouk in October 1989 [see p. 36987].
SECURITY
Kurdish political activities — US and French aid to Kurds
It was announced by the pro-government Kurdish Democratic Party of Iraq (KDP) on June 30, 1989, that Mohammad Saeed al-Atrushi was to replace Hashim Hissan [see also above]as secretary-general of the party.
The 10th congress of the anti-government guerrilla grouping, the Democratic Party of Kurdistan (DPK), was held in the village of Orumiyeh (on the border with Iran) on Dec. 2-13, 1989, after a 10-year delay.
In his inaugural speech to the congress on Dec. 2 the DPK leader, Masoud Barzani, said that "with the holding of the 10th congress our belief in victory through an armed struggle becomes stronger" .
In an interview on Nov. 18 with The Independent newspaper, the leader of the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan (PUK — the other main anti-government Kurdish guerrilla grouping), Jalal Talabani, declared that the PUK was to adopt a new strategy of taking "our urban guerrilla war to Arab cities" .
He expressed his confidence, however, that "responsible Kurdish forces [would]never go into terrorism" or carry out attacks outside Iraqi territory.
He said that guerrilla attacks would henceforth be directed at military targets, state companies and economic installations among others.
The first 180 of 300 Iraqi Kurdish refugees living in Turkey who were to be accepted by France arrived in the latter country on Aug. 1, 1989.
The French government described its policy as a "goodwill gesture" .
The United States administration on April 4, 1989, announced that it was to extend US$5,000,000 in aid to Iraqi refugees in Turkish camps.
It was believed that by October 1989 the Iraqi government had achieved virtually complete success in their policy of deporting large numbers of Kurds from north-eastern to southern (Arab) Iraq.
An estimated 100,000 Kurds had been deported since April 1989, following the reactivating of the internal deportation programme [see p. 36748].
Human rights allegations — Amnesty announcement
A statement issued on Jan. 25, 1990, by the (London-based) Organization of Human Rights in Iraq claimed that the Iraqi armed forces had attacked 30 towns and villages in the (Shia-dominated) provinces of Basra, Nasiria and Amara on Jan. 10-23, killing and injuring up to 10,000 people.
The statement said that the attacks, involving artillery, helicopter gunships, and special forces gunmen, was intended "to create what is called a safe border zone similar to that created in the north [Kurdish areas]and in the same bloody fashion" .
The allegations were followed on Feb. 11 by the report of a new Washington-based human rights group, Middle East Watch, declaring that the Iraqi government was "one of the most brutal and repressive regimes in power today" .
The report referred to documented cases of "forced relocation and deportation, arbitrary arrests and detention, torture, disappearances and summary political executions" .
A year earlier, on Feb. 28, 1989, the international human rights organization Amnesty International had made allegations concerning the imprisonment and torture of children in Iraqi prisons.
Amnesty claimed that many children had died of torture, carried out to extract confessions from opposition detainees, and that many had "disappeared" .
The Iraqi government announced on March 1, 1989, that a general amnesty from legal proceedings would be granted to "all Iraqis who reside abroad and are involved in any political crime with the exception of the traitors Jalal al-Talabani and the agents of the Iranian regime [a reference to the DPK]" .
The amnesty applied to those returning to Iraq by April 30, 1989.
Missile programme
In a statement to the Egyptian Al-Akhbar newspaper on May 7, 1989, the Military Industries Minister, Brig. -Gen.
Hussein Kamil, said that Iraq and France were negotiating a contract for the reconstruction of a nuclear reactor destroyed by Israeli fighter aircraft in 1981 [see pp. 31908-09].
The French Foreign Ministry promptly denied the claim, which followed the seizure on May 5 by the US Commerce Department of a shipment of vacuum pumps destined for Iraq because of the cargo's "possible nuclear applications" .
The United Kingdom Cabinet decided on July 28, 1989, to order the British company British Aerospace to withdraw from negotiations with Iraq on the sale of 50 Hawk jet trainers to the country in a $500,000,000 package.
It was believed that the French state-controlled defence contractor, Avions Marcel Dassault-Breguet Aviation, was reconsidering the sale of its Alpha jet trainers to Iraq in the light of the decision on British Aerospace.
Kamil announced on Dec. 7 that a 25-metre, 48-tonne three-stage rocket (named the al-Abid) had been launched into space on Dec. 5 from the al-Anbar space research base near Baghdad.
He said that Iraq had achieved "a complicated scientific leap" when it successfully tested the launching.
He also announced that Iraq had successfully completed "the most complicated and important stages in the development and production of two different surface-to-surface missile systems, each of which has a range of 2,000 km" .
At least one of these missiles was believed to be a modification of the Soviet SCUD-B missile.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.6% (1987)
Current-account balance -US$3,100 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$1,600 m. (1987)
Budget deficit ID7,200 m. (1989)
Total external public debt US$80,000 m. (unofficial est., of which $35,000 m. non-Arab)(1989)
Gross domestic product ID17,898 m. (1988)
Gross national product ID14,704 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 28% (diplomatic est.)(1989)
The National Assembly approved the government's budget for 1990 after its presentation on Dec. 28, 1989, by Deputy Prime Minister Sa'adoun Hammadi.
He said that the budget, totalling ID24,400 million, aimed to:(i) fight inflation;(ii) accelerate development;(iii) secure the supply of essential consumer goods;(iv) maintain the combat capability of the armed forces; and (v) reduce foreign debt.
The budget was to include a ID6,600 million deficit projection for 1990, compared with an actual deficit of ID7,200 million in 1989 (US$1.00=ID0.31 was the official fixed exchange rate as at January 1990).
Hammadi said that the budget would reduce by US$2,495 million foreign debts including new loans expected in 1990.
Increase in bank interest rates — Increased oil export capacity
The Central Bank of Iraq announced on Sept. 10, 1989, that it had imposed a 1 per cent increase in interest rates on savings deposits and bank loans, the first such increase for over eight years.
The rate on bank loans was thereby raised to 11 per cent.
A major new Iraqi offshore terminal opened on Sept. 18, 1989, at Al-Muajiz, about 50 km south of the Saudi port of Yanbu, marking the completion of the second phase of the Iraqi pipeline through Saudi Arabia (IPSA 2), and doubling Iraq's export capacity compared with 1986.
The Oil Minister, Issam Abdel Rahim al Chalabi, had earlier predicted that Iraq's oil production capacity would increase from its existing 4,000,000 barrels per day (bpd) to some 6,000,000 bpd by the end of 1990.
FOREIGN
Relations with Italy
The chairman and the director-general of Italy's largest commercial bank (75 per cent owned by the Italian Treasury), the Banca Nazionale del Lavoro (BNL), resigned on Sept. 7, 1989, following a scandal involving the transfer to Iraq of $2,870 million of unauthorized loan commitments; the loans, to United States and European companies exporting industrial and agricultural products to Iraq, were arranged by BNL's Atlanta (USA) branch [see also p. 37096].
A statement on Dec. 14 by the Italian Treasury Minister, Guido Carli, estimated that $116,000,000 of the funds were potentially arms-related.
On Jan. 20, 1990, the Iraqi government signed an accord with BNL in Geneva legitimizing the release of all but $750,000,000 of the total loan commitment, but relating it to Iraq's commitment to employ two-thirds of the credit to buy Italian exports.
At the end of a visit to Rome, the Italian capital, on Jan. 25-26, 1990, the First Deputy Prime Minister, Taha Yasin Ramadhan, signed a trade protocol with the Italian Foreign Trade Minister, Renato Ruggiero, which included the lifting by Italy of an embargo on the delivery of 11 warships to Iraq.
Although Iraq had paid some $1,300 million (or roughly one-half) of the money for the ships, their delivery had been blocked by the imposition in 1986 of an Italian embargo on lethal weaponry to Iran and Iraq.
On Jan. 26 Iraq agreed to unblock payments owed to Italian companies working in Iraq, and Ruggiero said that contracts worth $500,000,000 between the countries were "virtually already signed" .
French debt agreement
France agreed on Sept. 14, 1989, to a debt rescheduling agreement with Iraq worth F8,850 million (or one-quarter of Iraq's debt to France — US$1.00=F6.5907 as at Sept. 18, 1989).
F7,000 million of this was to be repaid over six years (with a three-year grace period), while the remainder was to be paid back by the end of 1989.
During a visit to Baghdad on Dec. 11-12 the French Foreign Affairs Minister, Roland Dumas, said that France was ready to discuss new payments facilities with Iraq provided that Iraq settled some arrears in the repayment of F1,850 million as agreed in September.
Compensation for Stark attack
The International Herald Tribune of May 29, 1989, quoted US officials as saying that Iraq had agreed to pay $27,300,000 in compensation to the families of the 37 US crew members who had been killed in May 1987 during Iraq's missile attack on the USS Stark in the Gulf [see p. 35597].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAN-IRAQ
State of ceasefire and peace talks since March 1989
The continuing deadlock in the Iran-Iraq peace efforts, which were largely conducted through UN mediation, was due to the intransigent positions taken by the two sides.
While Iraq demanded the unconditional release of all prisoners-of-war (PoWs) and their return to their countries of origin on "humanitarian and legal" grounds, Iran insisted that the issue of prisoner exchange could not be separated from territorial questions and called for the simultaneous withdrawal of Iranian and Iraqi troops from each other 's territory with prisoner exchange.
It was estimated by the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) that Iraq was holding up to 40,000 Iranian PoWs (more than half of them unregistered as such) and that Iran held up to 70,000 Iraqi PoWs (of whom some 50,000 were registered).
Iraq was also still in occupation of some 1,000 sq km of Iranian territory.
The Iraqi government was adamant, however, that Iraq would not withdraw from this territory unless Iraq's "historic and legal right" to full sovereignty over the Shatt al-Arab waterway was recognized by Iran [for legal status of waterway see September 1980 outbreak of Iran-Iraq war p. 31005].
Ceasefire talks and proposals
Although UN-mediated negotiations were resumed in April 1989 in Geneva [see p. 36602], the lack of progress led the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, to express on Aug. 20 (the first anniversary of the ceasefire) his "deep regret" that "the withdrawal of forces to internationally recognized boundaries [had]yet to take place" .
He declared that peace would only be lasting if it was based on the principle of "no victor, no vanquished" .
Speaking at a press conference in the UN headquarters in New York on Sept. 30, 1989, the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, said that Iran had accepted a four-point UN proposal including simultaneous troop withdrawal and prisoner exchange, but that Iraq had rejected the idea.
The two countries' Foreign Ministers had been presented with the proposals by Pérez de Cuéllar at the ninth Non-aligned Movement (NAM) summit earlier in the month [see p. 36907].
The UN Secretary-General's special envoy in the Iran-Iraq peace talks, Jan Eliasson, shuttled between Tehran and Baghdad, the capitals of Iran and Iraq, between Nov. 1 and 16 to speed up the process.
On Nov. 16 Vellayati restated his proposal of Sept. 30 in more specific form in order "to help break the present artificial impasse which benefits no-one" .
The Iranian President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, had on Sept. 17 threatened that Iran would "make (Iraq) retreat by force" if necessary from Iranian territory, and on Oct. 22 further signs of exasperation with the pace of the peace process were voiced by Vellayati, who warned in a newspaper interview that "if the current trend continues, it is not clear whether we will make any tangible progress in the future" .
Pérez de Cuéllar on March 7, 1990, presented Iran and Iraq with a new eight-point peace agenda in a fresh attempt to bring the Gulf war to an official end.
The proposal made some changes to the first paragraph of Security Council Resolution 598, dealing with a ceasefire and the withdrawal of troops, in line with Iraqi demands.
Rafsanjani expressed qualified approval of the plan on March 9, but Iraq made no official comment.
Unilateral release of Iraqi PoWs
Following the April 1989 PoW releases [see p. 36602], Iran unilaterally freed a further 49 sick, wounded and disabled Iraqi prisoners on May 23 to mark the end of the holy month of Ramadan.
On Oct. 3, however, the head of the Iranian committee in charge of Iraqi PoWs, Ali Nazaran, announced that "the unilateral release of prisoners by Iran had been stopped" because Iran's example had not been followed by Iraq.
Ceasefire clashes and alleged violations — Extension of UNIIMOG mandate
The UN Iran-Iraq Military Observer Group (UNIIMOG), with responsibility for maintaining the truce, reported on March 8, 1989, that five Iranian soldiers had been shot in the back and killed in an ambush on Feb. 17, although it did not confirm an Iranian claim that the ambush had been carried out by Iraqi forces.
The ambush had taken place in the southern front area, where an exchange of fire between the two sides to the conflict took place on March 13, with each country accusing the other of opening fire.
Iran claimed that there had been "14 major cases" of Iraqi ceasefire violations between Feb. 20 and March 10.
Iraq accused Iran on Oct. 9, 1989, of "violating the diplomatic sanctity" of the Iraqi embassy residence in Tehran (which had been closed since December 1987, diplomatic relations having formally been severed in October — see p. 35601).
Iran had allegedly "occupied" the residence's grounds and "engaged in construction work" .
An Iraqi seaman was apparently killed in the northern part of the Gulf on Oct. 25 in an exchange of gunfire between an Iraqi tug-boat and two Iranian gunboats.
Iran denied that an incident involving Iranian naval forces took place, but on Oct. 28 Iraq claimed that the Iranian boats had opened fire and killed the Iraqi.
In a report to the UN Security Council in February 1990, Pérez de Cuéllar described the ceasefire as "delicate" and pointed out that troops of the two sides were only 10 metres apart in some places.
The UN Security Council unanimously approved on Sept. 29, 1989, a six-month extension of the UNIIMOG mandate to March 31, 1990, and a further six-month extension of this mandate to Sept. 30, 1990, was approved on March 29.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
Arab Co-Operation Council
The Arab Co-operation Council (ACC) was founded by the heads of state of Egypt, Iraq, Jordan and North Yemen in Baghdad on Feb. 16, 1989, with the aim of achieving gradual economic integration through "plans and practical measures" [see p. 36474].
Membership was declared to be open to all Arab states.
Chairmanship passed after one year from President Saddam Hussein of Iraq to King Hussein of Jordan.
The Supreme Council, consisting of heads of state of member governments, has met four times to date; it is the highest policy-making body and appoints the Secretary-General (currently Helmi Mahmud Namar).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
NORTH YEMEN
BASIC DATA
Area: 200,000 sq km.
Population: 8,740,000 (mid-1988 est.).
Capital: Sana'a.
Language: Arabic.
Religion: Islam (Sunni and Shia).
Av. life expectancy: 48 yrs (1989).
Armed forces: 36,600 (1988).
GNP per capita: US$650 (1988 est.).
Currency: Yemeni rial (US$1.00=YR11.83 as at April 9, 1990).
The Yemen Arab Republic was declared in North Yemen in 1962 following the overthrow of the monarchy.
Executive power is vested in the President, who appoints a Council of Ministers headed by a Prime Minister.
North Yemen's first general election took place on July 5, 1988, for 128 seats in a new 159-member Majlis al Shura (Consultative Council) which replaced the non-elected Constituent People's Assembly.
President ALi Abdullah Saleh was re-elected by the Council for a third five-year term on July 17.
There is also a General People's Congress, consisting of 700 elected and 300 appointed members, which meets every two years and is elected every four years.
There are no organized political parties.
Since 1979, and with increasing impetus since 1989, negotiations with South Yemen have been taking place towards a merger of the two countries.
Abdel Aziz Abdel Ghani Prime Minister Abdel Karim al-Iryani Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Muhammad Said al-Attar Deputy Prime Minister; Development; Head of Central Planning Organization Lt.-Col. Mujahid Abu Shawrib Deputy Prime Minister for Internal Affairs Hassan Muhammad Makki Deputy Prime Minister
Principal members of Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY
The issue of Yemeni reunification dominated the internal politics of North Yemen.
In a series of meetings in early 1990 the government of President Ali Abdullah Saleh pressed for more rapid progress even than that envisaged by the Aden declaration of Nov. 30, 1989, which provided for a formal declaration of a unified Yemen Republic on Nov. 30, 1990.
[See p. 37138 for this Aden meeting and publication on Dec. 1 of a draft joint constitution, requiring ratification by both parliaments within six months, and then endorsement by referendum after a further six months; see p. 37266 for progress on unity in February 1990.]
Within North Yemen there was opposition to unification among some militant Moslem Brotherhood groups, on the grounds that the Islamic basis of legislation in the Moslem north could be undermined by the "pagan-dominated" Marxist southern Yemen Socialist Party (YSP).
The "Islamist" leader Shaikh Abd al-Hamid Zaydani in mid-April 1990 challenged the YSP leadership to a televised debate, and was in turn challenged to publish his own proposals for unified state before such a debate took place.
Meanwhile, press reports suggested that an explosion on March 10 at the principal mosque in Sana'a was the work of the Moslem Brotherhood, three of whose activists were said to have been executed summarily.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 4.8% (1987)
Trade balance -US$850 m. (1988 est.)
Overall balance of payments -US$650 m. (1988 est.)
Budget deficit YR 5,164 m. (1990 projected)
Total external public debt US$2,948 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$5,680 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 21.7% (1987)
Unemployment 13% (1986)
Principal trading partners Exports: USA, South Yemen, Japan; Imports: Italy, Saudi Arabia, USA
The budget for 1990 was presented on March 1, 1990, and approved by Saleh on March 22, providing for revenue of 19,685 million rials and expenditure of 24,850 million.
Revenue was increased from 16,000 million rials in 1989, but the projected deficit was nevertheless up by 10 per cent.
A devaluation of the rial by 23 per cent in February 1990 was initially reported as the introduction of a preferential rate in an effort to increase the remittances of foreign currency by North Yemenis working abroad; however, by March 1990 this new rate of approximately US$1.00=12 rials was being cited as the official rate.
Meanwhile, Abdel Ghani on Feb. 27 confirmed that more foreign workers were expected to come to North Yemen to carry out jobs including refuse collection and disposal, in which Somali, Sudanese and Filipino workers were already employed.
Unfounded optimism over anticipated revenue from oil exports had led to major increases in imports in 1989 [see p. 37016 for unsuccessful commencement of oil exports in 1988].
During 1989 North and South Yemen (the latter having significantly richer oil reserves) formed a joint company to exploit the Shabwa oilfields straddling the border between the two Yemens.
In the neutral zone between the two countries there were estimated reserves of 5,000 million barrels, a strong economic incentive for reunification.
A contract for the joint exploitation of these resources was signed on March 14, 1990, with Kuwaiti and Soviet interests and major oil companies, notably Exxon and Mobil.
Other joint economic projects covered electricity and telecommunications: on Jan. 15, 1990, OPEC agreed to finance a common Yemeni electricity grid, and on Feb. 1 a Yemen General Electricity Corporation was set up, attracting immediate bids from eight British companies, while later in February the French company Alcatel announced a project to introduce a common digital telecommunications system for the two Yemens.
FOREIGN
A series of foreign contacts reflected increased diplomatic and economic interest in the prospect of a reunited Yemen.
Relations with Italy improved after a visit by Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti on Dec. 28, 1989, when the North Yemenis promised to release Italian technicians detained nine months previously.
In January 1990 President Saleh visited the United States.
Following his visit to Saudi Arabia in February [see p. 37266], Saleh received visits in March from the Jordanian and Egyptian Prime Ministers, and on April 14 the North Yemeni Prime Minister, Abdel Aziz Abdel Ghani, visited Syria for talks with President Assad.
On March 4 the Foreign Minister, Abdel Karim al-Iryani, met his Chinese opposite number, Qian Qichen.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SOUTH YEMEN
BASIC DATA
Area: 336,869 sq km.
Population: 2,339,000 (1988).
Capital: Aden.
Language: Arabic.
Religion: Islam.
Av. life expectancy: 51 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 27,500 (perhaps 18,000 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$430 (1988).
Currency: Yemeni dinar (US$1.00=0.3393 dinars as at April 2, 1990).
The People's Democratic Republic of Yemen became independent in 1967 as the People's Republic of Southern Yemen, comprising Aden, which had been under British rule since 1839, and the former Protectorate of South Arabia, which had been developed by a series of treaties between the United Kingdom and local leaders.
The Yemen Socialist Party (YSP), the country's sole legal political organization, wields overall authority.
Legislative power is vested in an elected Supreme People's Council (SPC), composed of 71 YSP members and 40 independents.
It elects a 15-member presidium, which in turn elects a Chairman who serves as State President for a five-year term.
As a result of the civil war of January 1986, President Ali Nasser Mohammad was overthrown by a rival faction within the YSP and was replaced by Haider Abu Bakr al Attas, who was formally elected President by the SPC presidium in November 1986.
Yasin Said Numan Chairman (Prime Minister) Salih Munassar as-Siyayli Deputy Chairman; Internal Affairs Saleh Abu Bakr bin Hussain Deputy Chairman; Energy and Minerals Abdel Aziz ad-Dali Foreign Affairs Said Salih Salim National Security Salih Ubayd Ahmed Defence Said Ahmed Bakr al-Dinawi Finance
Principal Members of Council of Ministers
POLITICS/SECURITY 
Moves towards unification
As in North Yemen, the political situation in South Yemen was dominated by the process of Yemeni reunification, which had gathered pace dramatically in late 1989 [see p. 37138; see also p. 37266 for update to February 1990].
For the one-party regime of the YSP in South Yemen this entailed acceptance of a multiparty system and also of a state in which the Moslem identity of the much more populous North would necessarily predominate.
In the continuing series of unity meetings, South Yemeni leaders reiterated their full commitment to the goal of formal reunification by Nov. 30, 1990.
However, they were believed not only to be resisting pressures to bring this date forward, but also to be insisting on a more protracted period, perhaps of four years, for the subsequent completion of the unification of ministries and other institutions.
What was often described as South Yemen's perestroika continued meanwhile with the release of political prisoners, changes in press laws and in education, and the holding of multi-candidate local council elections.
Attas confirmed on March 12, 1990, that all detainees from the 1986 coup attempt had been released under the amnesty of Dec. 26, 1989, while on April 12 the YSP presidium agreed to amnesty those sentenced in absentia to prison terms of between five and 15 years.
On March 21 it was announced that members of the armed forces who had left for political reasons after June 1978 were to be reinstated.
A new press and publications law was drafted to protect journalists and encourage new publications in both Yemens; on Jan. 8 both Yemeni news agencies issued a joint bulletin on this subject.
Changes in education laws, however, brought protests on March 22, 1990, from Islamic students who opposed the still-compulsory Marxist instruction and objected to co-education.
On March 24 a soldier was shot and seriously wounded at an otherwise peaceful demonstration by Islamic students in Makulla, east of Aden, and two days later counter-demonstrations were organized in the town, attended by several thousand people.
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of March 16, however, the SPC authorized the government to revise the educational curriculum to include Islamic studies, as well as to establish an Islamic institute, publish a religious affairs magazine and expand religious coverage on radio and television.
[See North Yemen article for concern among some northern Islamic militants over impact of unity with "pagan-dominated" South Yemen.]
Local elections
On Nov. 27, 1989, polling took place in elections to local People's Councils; there were 909 candidates in 141 constituencies.
The YSP in late January approved what was described as the completion of the final stage of the local elections, but on April 13 it was reported that thousands had demonstrated in Aden to protest over the defeat of the capital's mayor, Naji Othman, in what was described as a delayed election there which had enabled the YSP leadership to secure the return of its own preferred candidate.
YSP central committee meeting
The YSP central committee at its 19th meeting, on Feb. 15, 1990, discussed the implications of Yemeni unity in terms of the separation of party from state functions under a multi-party system, reportedly accepting the need for far-reaching restructuring of the party.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -9% (1986)
Current-account balance -US$436 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$516 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,087 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$988 m. (1988)
Average annual inflation rate 5% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: France, Japan, Saudi Arabia; Imports: Soviet Union, UK, Kuwait 
Economic situation
The YSP central committee meeting of Feb. 15 [see above]approved increases in salaries, proposed measures to implement workplace industrial democracy, and reaffirmed the continuation of price subsidies.
The measures already taken in preceding weeks towards economic liberalization had led to unrest and strikes, which spread in February from journalists to mill and construction workers and doctors, and to oil workers.
Besides the developments in the oil industry undertaken jointly with North Yemen [see p. 37427], new investment laws had been debated by the SPC in early November 1989 which would allow foreigners to own local ventures and remit profits abroad, and which granted tax concessions and exemption from tariffs for up to six years.
Free enterprise was encouraged in private-sector hotel projects and the creation of new farms and small-scale industries not subject to state price controls.
On Feb 28, 1990, the SPC approved a draft law for the last year of the five-year plan, and agreed new terms under which property might be more freely hired and transferred.
Budget legislation
In early March 1990, Attas introduced budget legislation for 1990, predicting income of 540 million dinars and expenditure of 483 million, and thus envisaging a budget surplus of 57 million dinars or some US$166 million.
The Middle East Economic Digest of March 16 described this prediction of a budget surplus as surprising to many observers, but noted that, in the absence of figures for years more recent than 1984, it could not be determined whether it implied higher income or a sharp reduction in public expenditure.
In the context of moves towards unification, the Aden news agency said on March 3 that a single budget for 1991 would be drawn up by the North and South Yemeni finance ministers.
FOREIGN
Attas visited Jordan on Sept. 10, 1989, and made progress in talks with Oman in early February 1990 on resolving the issue of border demarcation which had affected relations hitherto.
In mid-November 1989 the Foreign Minister of Saudi Arabia, Prince Saud al Faisal, visited Aden.
Aden radio reported on April 30, 1990, the decision that diplomatic relations between South Yemen and the United States were to be restored.
Other signs of South Yemen's rapprochement with the West and pro-Western Arab states had been the visits (i) on Dec. 4, 1989, by the United Kingdom Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, William Waldegrave, the first UK minister to visit since independence; and (ii) on Dec. 29-30 by the Italian Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti.
The Economist of March 3, 1990, commented that "the revolution in Eastern Europe has robbed the only avowedly Marxist Arab state of its support and its ideological lodestone" , that "Czech and East German advisers are leaving in droves" and that "the Russians have been disengaging" and had reportedly closed their military bases.
Long-standing relations between South Yemen and socialist countries continued to be marked by visits, however, such as those of the North Korean Vice-President Yi Jong Ok on Feb. 25, 1990, and the Ethiopian Foreign Minister Tesfaye Dinka on March 4.
The Iraqi Chief of General Staff, Gen. Khadraji, visited both Yemens in early March 1990 for discussions on military co-operation.
On April 18 Ali Salim al-Bid, the YSP secretary-general, visited Iraq, conveying to President Saddam Hussein his country's support in the face of what he described as Western and Zionist aggression [see p. 37389]and receiving in turn Saddam's expressions of strong support for Yemeni unity.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
BASIC DATA
Area: 17,818 sq km.
Population: 1,919,000 (1988).
Capital: Kuwait City.
Languages: Arabic (official); English (commercial).
Religion: Islam (95% at 1975 census, 70% of whom are Sunni); Christianity and Hinduism.
Av. life expectancy: 73 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 20,300 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$13,680 (1988).
Currency: Kuwaiti dinar (US$1.00=KD0.2930 as at April 2, 1990).
The State of Kuwait, which became independent in 1961 when it ceased to be a British protectorate, is governed by the Amir (currently Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah), who is chosen by and from among the royal family, and who appoints the Council of Ministers.
In July 1986 the Amir dissolved the country's legislature, the National Assembly, after it had repeatedly criticized the government, and announced that henceforth he would rule by decree.
The Prime Minister, Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as-Salim as-Sabah, was at the same time authorized to form a new government [see pp. 34767-68].
Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah Prime Minister Shaikh Sabah al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs Jassim Mohammed al Kharafi Finance and Economy Anwar Abdullah al Nuri Education Ali Abdullah al Shamlan Higher Education Khaled Ahmed Saad al Jasir Waqfs (Religious Endowments) and Islamic Affairs Shaikh Salim as Sabah as Salim as Sabah Interior Dari Abdullah al Uthman Justice, Legal and Administrative Affairs Abdel-Rahman Ibrahim al Houti Public Works Abdel-Razzaq Yusuf al Abdel Razzaq Public Health Abdel-Rahman Abdullah al Awadi Planning Shaikh Ali al Khalifa al Adhibi as Sabah Oil Abdullah Abdel Moshin as Sharhan Communications Hamud Abdullah al Raqabah Electricity and Water Shaikh Nasser Mohammed al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah Social Affairs and Labour Shaikh Jabir Mubarak al Ahmad as Sabah Information Shaikh Nawaf al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah Defence Faisal Abdel Razzaq al Khaled Trade and Industry *Excluding ministers of state.
Cabinet*
POLITICS
Pro-democracy movement
Former members of the now dissolved National Assembly [see above]organized a petition in early 1989 as part of a campaign for the Assembly's restoration [see p. 36951 for rumours of such a petition].
Over 25,000 signatures were collected, but the Amir refused to accept the petition.
On Dec. 4, 1989, the campaign launched a series of regular public meetings to be held every Monday evening at the homes of former National Assembly members.
A week later, on Dec. 11, the police prevented members of the public from gathering outside the meeting, which was attended by 22 former Assembly members.
The rallies continued, and on Dec. 30 the Interior Ministry issued a warning to all Kuwaitis not to hold such unauthorized meetings.
The meeting on Jan. 8, 1990, was attended by 10,000-15,000 people and was broken up by the police, one person being arrested.
The Amir addressed the country on Jan. 20 appealing for an end to the pro-democracy agitation and calling for national issues to be resolved through political dialogue and consultation.
Leaders of the former Assembly members welcomed the appeal for dialogue, requested a formal meeting with the Amir and suspended the Monday evening rallies.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Feb. 2 reported that the ruling family was believed to want two concessions on the Constitution in return for setting a date for National Assembly elections.
These were believed to be an increase in the Amir's constitutional powers, to allow him to veto National Assembly decisions, and a reduction in immunity for Assembly members.
The Prime Minister, Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah, met former Assembly members on Feb. 7, 1990.
The meeting was described as "positive" by the former Assembly Speaker, Ahmed Abdul-Aziz al-Saadoun.
Shaikh Saad again met former Assembly members in early March, and on March 4 the newspaper Al-Watan published an interview with him in which he announced that he favoured the restoration of an elected parliament.
SECURITY
The State Security Court on June 24, 1989, sentenced 22 people to prison terms of between five and 15 years for plotting to overthrow the government, while 11 people were acquitted; all had been charged in March 1989 [see p. 36951].
Shia Moslems, who comprised a substantial minority of the Kuwaiti population, staged demonstrations in Kuwait City in September 1989 denouncing the execution of 16 Kuwaiti Shias in Saudi Arabia for their part in a July bomb attack in Mecca [see pp. 36906; 36835].
The government arrested two senior Shia clerics and issued a decree dismissing the board of directors of the Shia Social Culture Society, seized the board's records and froze its assets.
A group of Shia Moslems was arrested in Kuwait on Feb. 14, 1990, on suspicion of involvement in the Mecca bomb attacks.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.5% (1988)
Current-account balance +US$4,414 m. (1987)
Budget deficit US$1,910 m. (1987-88)
Trade balance +US$3,545 m. (1987)
Oil export revenues US$4,557 m. (1987)
Merchandise exports US$8,315 m. (1987)
Merchandise imports US$4,769 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$18,900 m. (1987)
Inflation rate -0.6% (1987)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: Japan (19.8%), Italy (10.5%), Netherlands (9.3%); Imports: Japan (20%), USA (11.6%), West Germany (9.4%)
1989/90 budget
The budget for the 1989/90 financial year which began on July 1, 1989, included a planned 4.4 per cent increase in expenditure to KD3,549,100,000, made possible by an expected 8.6 per cent rise in revenues to KD2,230,500,000.
The budget deficit, set at KD1,318,600,000, was 2 per cent down on the previous year.
According to the Middle East Economic Digest of July 21 the actual deficit was unlikely to be as high as this as the Ministry of Finance consistently overestimated its budget deficits.
The increased spending was largely allocated to government salaries, to land purchases, seen by the government as a means of stimulating the local economy, and to an expected increase in defence spending.
Spending on construction projects was reduced.
The Central Bank of Kuwait's statistical bulletin for October-December 1989 showed that government revenues had increased dramatically during 1989.
Government income, excluding investment income, increased by 61 per cent to $10,300 million, with expenditure rising by 11 per cent to $9,440 million; a surplus of $855,000,000 was recorded, the largest surplus since the early 1980s.
The increase in revenues reflected high average oil production and rising prices [see also p. 37229].
Ordering home of KIO chief
The head of the Kuwait Investment Office (KIO — a government agency based in London), Fouad Jaffar, returned to Kuwait in early March after being ordered to do so by the Kuwaiti government.
The Ministry of Finance gave no indication about the future role of the KIO, which invested Kuwait's oil wealth in stock markets around the world.
The move reflected government unease over some of the KIO's investments, including a controversial stake in British Petroleum (BP — see p. 36951).
FOREIGN
The first Iranian ambassador to be assigned to Kuwait in five years (Kuwait having supported Iraq in the Gulf war), Hussein Sadeqi, took up his post on Sept. 29, 1989.
The Amir paid his first visit to Egypt on Aug. 28-30 and held talks with President Hosni Mubarak on the Lebanon and on relations between their two countries.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,240,000 sq km.
Population: 14,016,000 (1988).
Capital: Riyadh (royal), Jeddah (administrative).
Language: Arabic (official).
Religion: Islam (about 85% Sunni and 15% Shia).
Av. life expectancy: 64 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 65,700 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$6,170 (1988).
Currency: Saudi riyal (US$1.00=SR3.7367 as at April 2, 1990).
The Kingdom of Saudi Arabia was established in 1932.
The King (since 1982 King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz), whose official title is "Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques" (i.e. Mecca and Medina), heads the Council of Ministers as Prime Minister, and holds supreme legislative and executive power.
There is no legislative assembly, although the formation of an advisory assembly has been under consideration since 1980.
There are no political parties and no elections.
King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz "Custodian of the Two Holy Mosques" ; Prime Minister Prince Abdullah ibn Abdul Aziz Crown Prince; First Deputy Prime Minister; Commander of National Guard Prince Sultan ibn Abdul Aziz Second Deputy Prime Minister; Defence; Civil Aviation Prince Miteb ibn Abdul Aziz Public Works and Housing Prince Nayef ibn Abdul Aziz Interior Prince Saud al Faisal Foreign Affairs Muhammad al-Ali al-Fayiz Labour and Social Affairs Shaikh Hussein Ibrahim al-Mansouri Communications Muhammad Ali Abdul Khail Finance and National Economy Ali ibm Hasan al-Shaer Information Abdul Aziz al-Zamil Industry and Electricity Sulaiman Abdul Aziz al-Sulaim Commerce Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Jubair Justice Abdul Aziz al Abdullah al Khuwaiter Education and Higher Education Shaikh Hisham Nazer Petroleum and Mineral Resources; Planning (acting) Shaikh Abdul Wahhab Ahmad Abdul Wasi Haj (Pilgrimage) Affairs and Waqfs (Religious Endowments) Shaikh Ibrahim ibn Abdulla al-Angari Municipal and Rural Affairs Abdul Rahman ibn Abdul Aziz ibn Hasan al-Shaikh Agriculture and Water Faisal ibn Abdul Aziz al-Hujaylan Health Alawi Darwish Kayyal Posts and Telecommunications Fayez Badr Without Portfolio 
Cabinet
POLITICS
Cabinet appointments
On Oct. 13, 1989, Shaikh Ibrahim ibn Abdullah al-Angari was appointed special adviser to King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz.
He was replaced as Municipal and Rural Affairs Minister by Khaled ibn Mohammed al-Angari.
The official Saudi Press Agency reported on Oct. 14 that Muhammad ibn Ibrahim ibn Jubair, who had been acting Justice Minister since the resignation in May 1989 of Ibrahim Shaikh, had been confirmed in that post.
SECURITY
Attacks on Saudi diplomats
A diplomat working at the military attaché's office in Ankara, the Turkish capital, was seriously injured on Oct. 16, 1989, when a bomb exploded in his car.
On Feb. 1, 1990, a Saudi diplomat and two other embassy staff were shot and killed in Bangkok, the capital of Thailand.
Saudi Arabia responded on Feb. 3 by banning the recruitment of Thai workers.
Saudi diplomats had been assassinated in Ankara and Bangkok in October 1988 and January 1989 respectively [see pp. 36259; 36952].
Executions
An Interior Ministry official was reported on Jan. 13, 1990, as saying that cases of drug-trafficking had halved since Saudi Arabia's decision to behead offenders.
During 1989 a total of 99 people had been beheaded, many of them for drug trafficking offences.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth -5.3% annual (1980-87)
Current-account balance -US$9,570 m. (1987)
Trade balance +US$5,340 m. (1987)
Services deficit US$14,911 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$71,470 m. (1987)
Inflation rate -2.8% annual (1980-87)
Principal trading partners Japan, USA, UK 
Fifth development plan — 1990 budget
The first details of the fifth five-year development plan (1990-95) were revealed in a Planning Ministry statement on Dec. 31, 1989, in which heavy emphasis continued to be placed on defence spending in spite of the recession of recent years and a chronic deficit which resulted in modest spending increases overall.
Total government spending was put at an estimated SR753,000 million, of which SR498,000 million would be civil expenditure.
The statement listed a series of general commitments following on from or developing the aims of the previous five-year plan [see p. 32823].
These included economic diversification, development of non-oil revenues and the promotion of export and import-substitution industries.
The statement also stressed the private sector's role in attaining objectives and the need to consolidate its economic role by stimulating investment.
A budget statement issued on Dec. 31, 1989, by the Finance and National Economy Ministry indicated slight nominal increases in expenditure and revenue for 1990, and a projected deficit — SR25,000 million — unchanged from the previous year.
Planned expenditure was put at SR143,000 million (an increase of 1.4 per cent on 1989) and total estimated revenue at SR25,000 million (an increase of 1.7 per cent).
The deficit would be covered by borrowing, through the issue for the third consecutive year of treasury bonds.
Defence spending, at 36 per cent of the total, was slightly up on 1988, when a separate defence allocation was last published.
In his speech to the Cabinet meeting which approved the development plan and the budget, King Fahd explained why so much was spent on defence: "[Although we]prefer friendship to hostility, want stability and security and prefer peace…we must have full preparedness in land, air and naval forces." 
[See below for weapons purchase agreements.]
Oil and mineral discoveries — New share dealing system
On Jan. 7, 1989, Saudi Aramco announced the discovery of a new high quality oil and gas field at al-Ragheeb, 123 km south-east of Riyadh; this was the third in recent months, and it raised expectations that the three wells were part of a single huge field, which, if proven, would increase Saudi Arabia's existing reserves by 10 per cent.
On Nov. 14, 1989, the government had announced the discovery of bauxite ore which would supply Saudi Arabia's aluminium smelters and those of other countries in the region.
On Feb. 1, 1990, Saudi Arabia announced plans for the first electronic share dealing system in the Gulf, to be launched in April, which bankers said would revolutionize the market and attract many new investors.
FOREIGN
Postponement of King's visit to USA
The second postponement of a visit to the United States by King Fahd, first scheduled for July 1989, was reported on Sept. 15, 1989.
An official statement said that the postponement had been agreed "in the light of the current situation in Lebanon and the urgent need to revive the efforts of the Arab League's tripartite committee" [for October 1989 Lebanon peace accord agreed in Taif, Saudi Arabia, see p. 36986].
Weapons purchase agreements with USA and Brazil
In late July 1989 Saudi Arabia and the United States opened secret talks to extend the life of a floating military base in the Gulf established at the height of the Iran-Iraq war.
The US administration on Oct. 11, 1989, formally notified Congress of its intention to sell to Saudi Arabia 315 M1-A1 battlefield tanks at a cost variously reported as between US$700 million and $3,000 million, and the Financial Times of Oct. 3 reported that Saudi Arabia, which was seeking to purchase a total of some 600 tanks to replace its current ageing fleet, was "close to signing a deal" with a Brazilian defence contractor, Engesa, for the acquisition of 300 light weight Osorio tanks.
Payments difficulties over Al-Yamamah deal with UK
The Financial Times of Nov. 27, 1989, reported that the United Kingdom was seeking to arrange a £2,000 million bank loan to finance Saudi Arabia's continued purchase of British arms under the massive Al-Yamamah arms deal first agreed in 1985 and expanded in 1988 [see pp. 34012; 36312; 36952], chiefly involving the purchase of Tornado fighter-bombers built by British Aerospace (BAe) and currently estimated to be worth some £20,000 million.
The deal was being financed by Saudi oil shipments, and the cash shortfall had resulted from weak oil prices.
However, it was reported on Dec. 12-14 that Saudi Arabia had made an exceptional cash payment of nearly £2,000 million to make up the difference.
Under the Al-Yamamah economic offset programme agreed in November 1988 [see p. 36952], BAe and Dowty Defence and Air Systems signed on Dec. 13, 1989, an agreement to establish a missile engineering plant in Saudi Arabia to repair and overhaul equipment.
Establishment of formal trade relations with China
During a visit to Beijing, the Chinese capital, Abdullah al-Kuwaizi, the Deputy Minister of Finance and National Economy, announced on April 19, 1989, the establishment for the first time of formal trade relations with China.
Saudi Arabia remained the only Arab state without diplomatic relations with China, but China had been a weapons supplier to Saudi Arabia since 1985; in addition the move was expected to open new links between Saudi Arabia and the Moslem minority in China.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
OMAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 300,000 sq km(est.).
Population: 1,402,000 (1988).
Capital: Muscat.
Languages: Arabic (official), English (commercial).
Religion: Ibadi Moslems (majority), Sunni Moslems (about 25%).
Av. life expectancy: 56 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 25,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$5,070 (1988).
Currency: rial Omani (US$1.00=RO0.3835 as at April 2, 1990).
The Sultanate of Oman became independent in 1951, having previously had a special relationship with the United Kingdom.
The Sultan (since 1970 Sultan Qaboos bin Said) rules by decree, and is advised by the Cabinet, which he appoints, and by a nominated 55-member Consultative Assembly.
There are no political parties and no elections.
Sultan Qaboos bin Said Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Defence; Finance Sayyid Fahr bin Taimour al-Said Deputy Prime Minister for Security and Defence Sayyid Fahad bin Mahmoud al-Said Deputy Prime Minister for Legal Affairs Qais Abdel-Moneim al-Zawawi Deputy Prime Minister for Financial and Economic Affairs Sayyid Thuwaini bin Shihab Special Representative of the Sultan and governor of Muscat Said Ahmed al-Shanfari Petroleum and Minerals Col. Salim bin Abdullah al-Ghazali Commerce and Industry 
Principal members of Cabinet
POLITICS
Cabinet changes
A number of Cabinet changes were announced by royal decree on Jan. 2, 1990.
The Social Affairs and Labour Ministry was split into a new Labour Ministry under former Minister of State for Defence, Brig.
Said al Mutasim bin Hamad al-Busaidi, and a Social Affairs Ministry under Shaikh Mustahil bin Ahmad al-Maashani.
Khalfan bin Nasir al-Wahabi, formerly Minister of Electricity and Water, was confirmed as Minister of Environment and Water Resources, while Mohammad bin Ali al-Qatabi was appointed Minister of Electricity and Water.
His former position as Minister of Regional and Municipal Affairs was taken by Shaikh Amir bin Shumin al-Hufni, a newcomer to the Cabinet, who was also appointed Chairman of the Musanadam Development Committee.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 12.7% (1980-87)
Current-account balance -US$966 m. (1987)
Trade balance -US$1,028.6 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$655 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$2,879 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$8,150 m. (1987)
Average annual rate of inflation -6.5% (1980-87)
Principal trading partners Exports: Japan, South Korea, Thailand; Imports: Japan, UAE, UK 
Opening of stock exchange — New tax on companies
Oman's first stock exchange started trading on May 20, 1989, with an initial listing of 48 local businesses.
The only other functioning stock exchange in the Gulf at that time was in Kuwait [see p. 37432 for opening of stock exchange in Bahrain in June 1989; see p. 37430 for introduction of electronic system in Saudi Arabia].
A decree issued on Sept. 16 stated that the profits of all wholly Omani-owned companies were to be taxed for the first time from the end of 1989.
Previously only joint ventures with foreign companies had been taxed.
1990 budget
The 1990 budget presented on Jan. 1, 1990, announced an increase of 8 per cent in government expenditure to US$4,600 million, coupled with a predicted 18.5 per cent growth in revenues to $3,771 million and a lower projected budget deficit of $826.3 million.
The rise in spending, according to the Deputy Prime Minister for Financial and Economic Affairs, Qais Abdel-Moneim al-Zawawi, was designed to activate the economy and to encourage trade.
A total of $1,384 million was allocated to defence, $1,644 million to civil expenditure and $526 million to the oil sector.
FOREIGN
A military co-operation agreement was signed with France on June 2, 1989, during a visit by Sultan Qaboos bin Said.
It was reported that the agreement covered missile systems, light armoured vehicles and sea surveillance aircraft.
The opening of a Palestinian embassy in Muscat was announced during a private visit in January 1990 by the chairman of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO), Yassir Arafat.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
BASIC DATA
Area: 77,700 sq km.
Population: 1,500,000 (1988).
Capital: Abu Dhabi.
Languages: Arabic (official); English (commercial).
Religion: Islam (mainly Sunni moslems).
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 43,000 (perhaps 30% expatriates)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$15,720 (1988).
Currency: UAE dirham (US$1.00=Dh3.6589 as at April 2, 1990).
The United Arab Emirates (UAE), which achieved independence in 1971, is composed of the emirates of Abu Dhabi, Dubai, Sharjah, Ras al-Khaimah (acceded 1972), Fujairah, Umm al-Qaiwain and Ajman.
Overall authority is vested in the Supreme Council of the seven emirate rulers (each of whom is an absolute monarch in his own state).
Decisions of the Council require the approval of at least five of the rulers, including those of Abu Dhabi and Dubai.
The President, currently Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan (the ruler of Abu Dhabi), and the Vice-President, currently Shaikh Rashid bin Said al-Maktoum (also Prime Minister and ruler of Dubai), are elected by the Supreme Council from among its members, and the Prime Minister and Council of Ministers are appointed by the President.
An appointed Federal National Council considers legislative proposals submitted by the Council of Ministers.
Shaikh Maktoum bin Rashid al-Maktoum Deputy Prime Minister (vacant) Deputy Prime Minister Shaikh Hamdan bin Rashid al-Maktoum Finance and Industry Shaikh Mubarak bin Mohammed al-Nahayan Interior Shaikh Mohammed bin Rashid al-Maktoum Defence Sayf al-Jarwan Economy and Trade Sayed Manah Said al-Oteiba Petroleum and Mineral Resources 
Principal members of Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Removal of deputy ruler of Sharjah
The ruler of Sharjah, Shaikh bin Sultan Mohammed al-Qassimi, on Feb. 4, 1990, removed from his brother, Shaikh Abdel-Aziz bin Mohammed al-Qassimi, the title of Crown Prince and dismissed him from the deputy chairmanship of the Sharjah Executive Council.
Shaikh Abdel-Aziz had staged an unsuccessful coup against Shaikh Sultan on June 16, 1987 [see pp. 35292; 36313].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Trade surplus US$4,200 m. (1988 est.)
Budget deficit US$3,133 m. (1988 est.)
Rejection of 1989 budget
The 1989 draft budget of US$4,410 million, set against projected revenues of $3,510 million, was returned to the Finance and Industry Ministry in August 1989 for further cuts to reduce the proposed deficit of $900,000,000.
The 1988 federal budget had envisaged a deficit of $500 million, due primarily to a 22 per cent drop in oil revenues.
FOREIGN
Relations with Egypt
The UAE President, Shaikh Zaid bin Sultan al-Nahayan, visited Egypt on May 14, 1989.
He praised the level of sophistication reached by the Egyptian arms industry, stating that pan-Arab security was a "defensive necessity" and was dependent on the full mobilization of the potential capability of the Arab nation.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
BAHRAIN
BASIC DATA
Area: 691,200 sq km.
Population: 458,000 (1987).
Capital: Manama.
Languages: Arabic (official); English widely spoken.
Religion: Islam (Shia, almost 60%; Sunni, over 40%).
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,350 (1989).
GNP per capita: Not known.
Currency: Bahrain dinar (US$1.00=BD0.3756 as at April 2, 1990).
The State of Bahrain became fully independent in 1971, having previously been a British protected state.
It is an absolute monarchy, whose head of state, the Amir (currently Shaikh Isa bin Sulman al-Khalifa), governs through an appointed Cabinet.
The 1973 Constitution provides for a National Assembly made up of the Cabinet and 30 members elected by popular vote.
However, the last National Assembly was dissolved in 1975.
Shaikh Khalifa bin Sulman al-Khalifa Prime Minister Habib Ahmend Kassem Commerce and Agriculture Shaikh Khalifa bin Ahmed al-Khalifa Defence Yusuf Ahmad ash-Shirawi Development and Industry; Minister of State for Cabinet Affairs (acting) Ali Mohammed Fakhru Education Ibrahim Abdel-Karim Mohammed Finance and National Economy Shaikh Mohammed bin Mubarak al-Khalifa Foreign Affairs Jalil Salim al-Arrayed Health Shaikh Khaled bin Khalifa al-Khalifa Housing Tariq Abdel-Rahman al-Moayed Information Shaikh Mohammed bin Mohammed al-Khalifa Interior Shaikh Abdullah bin Khaled al-Khalifa Justice and Islamic Affairs 
Principal members of Cabinet
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$266 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$13 m. (1988)
Total external public debt US$1,316 m. (1986)
Gross domestic product US$3,678 m. (1986)
Principal trading partner Saudi Arabia 
New stock exchange
Bahrain opened its first stock exchange on June 17, 1989.
Shares in 29 Bahraini companies with a total nominal capital of US$1,600 million were to be traded on the exchange and only citizens of Bahrain and other Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) countries were allowed to take part.
The move reflected a growing interest in share trading among the Gulf Arab states as their economies recovered from recession in the mid-1980's brought on by lower oil prices.
(Oman had opened a stock exchange in May 1989 — see p. 37431.)
The Ministry of Labour on Feb. 4, 1990 said that 15 per cent of any new recruits for private companies had to be Bahrainis.
The directive was part of a plan aimed at reducing the estimated unemployment rate of between 8 and 10 per cent by doubling the percentage of Bahrainis working in the private sector to 50 per cent by mid-1994.
FOREIGN
The Prime Minister, Shaikh Khalifa bin Sulman al-Khalifa, and the Vice-Chairman of the Baath Revolutionary Command Council of Iraq, Izzat Ibrahim, on Dec. 12, 1989, signed an agreement on non-interference in each others' domestic affairs and on the non-use of force by either side.
Bahrain had supported Iraq during the Gulf war, and both were Sunni-dominated.
The military ruler of Sudan, Lt.-Gen.
Omar Hassan Ahmad al-Bashir, visited Bahrain on Dec. 12, when he announced that Sudan planned to open an embassy in Manama.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
Gulf Co-Operation Council
The Co-Operation Council for the Arab States of the Gulf (GCC), was founded May 25, 1981, with the aim of establishing co-ordination, integration and co-operation in economic, social and cultural affairs between member countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates).
It holds regular ministerial meetings to co-ordinate different aspects of policy amongst the Gulf States, including most controversially in the defence and security fields.
The highest body is the Supreme Council, comprising heads of state of member governments, which meets annually, most recently in Muscat, the capital of Oman, in December 1989 [see p. 37138].
The GCC secretariat, based in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, is headed by a Secretary-General, currently Abdullah Yacoub Bishara (Kuwait).
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
QATAR
BASIC DATA
Area: 11,437 sq km.
Population: 350,000 (1988).
Capital: Doha.
Languages: Arabic (official), English (commercial).
Religion: Islam (native Qataris — less than one-third of the population — principally adhere to the orthodox Wahhabi sect of Sunni Moslems).
Av. life expectancy: 70 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 7,000 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$11,610 (1988).
Currency: Qatar riyal (US$1.00=QR3.6275 as at April 2, 1990).
The State of Qatar became independent in 1971, having previously been under United Kingdom protection.
It is an absolute monarchy; the Amir (currently Shaikh Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani) appoints a Cabinet, in which he occupies the office of Prime Minister.
There is also a 30-member Advisory Council.
Qatar has no legislature or political parties.
Shaikh Khalifa bin Hamad al-Thani Amir; Prime Minister Shaikh Hamad bin Khalifa al-Thani Heir Apparent; Defence; C.-in-C. of the Armed Forces Shaikh Abdul Aziz bin Khalifa al-Thani Finance and Petroleum Shaikh Hamad bin Jasim bin Hamadi al-Thani Economy and Commerce Shaikh Abdullah bin Khalifah al-Thani Interior Shaikh Hamad bin Suhaym al-Thani Information and Culture Shaikh Ahmad bin Sayf al-Thani Justice 
Principal members of Council of Ministers
POLITICS
New QMA governor
Abdulla Khalid al-Attiya, general manager of the Qatar National Bank, was appointed governor of the Qatar Monetary Agency (QMA — central bank) on Jan. 14, 1990, replacing Majid Muhammad al-Majid al-Saad, who had been in office since the QMA was founded in 1973.
The QMA governorship was upgraded to full ministerial rank.
Shaikh Abdullah bin Said bin Abdul-Aziz al-Thani became deputy governor at under-secretary level.
Bankers welcomed the appointments, seeing them as positive moves which would revitalize the QMA's management of the economy.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Current-account balance -US$300 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$600 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$3,598 m. (1987-88)
Total external public debt US$700 m. (1988)
Gross national product US$4,129 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 3.6% (1987 est.)
Principal trading partners Japan (imports from Japan worth $172.5 m. in 1987, exports to Japan $1,130 m., of which 90% was oil)
Financial difficulties caused by the fall in the oil price in the late 1980s and by the increasing budget deficit forced the government to turn for the first time to the international financial markets.
A total of US$400,000,000 was raised on Dec. 11, 1989, for the Qatar General Petroleum Corporation to pay for development of the North Field — the world's largest known gas reserve.
A further $200,000,000 was secured for unspecified purposes by the government.
FOREIGN
The Minister of Municipal Affairs and Agriculture, Shaikh Hamad bin Jasim bin Jabr al-Thani, visited Iran on Jan. 6-9, 1990, and held talks with the President, Hojatolislam Hashemi Ali Akbar Rafsanjani, who stressed Iran's willingness to co-operate extensively with its neighbours.
The visit marked the improvement in relations between the two countries following the 1988 ceasefire in the Iran-Iraq war [see p. 36171].
INTERNATIONAL
UNITED NATIONS
BASIC DATA
Year of foundation: 1945.
Objective: To uphold world peace and security and to develop economic, social, cultural and humanitarian cooperation on an international basis.
Membership: 160 countries.
Secretary-General: Javier Pérez de Cuéllar (Peru).
Proceedings of 44th regular session of UN General Assembly
The first part of the 44th regular session of the UN General Assembly took place at the UN headquarters in New York from Sept. 19 to Dec. 29, 1989, chaired by Maj.-Gen.
Joseph Nanven Garba of Nigeria who was elected, by acclamation, president of the Assembly on Sept. 19, under Resolution 44/302.
Opening the Assembly, Garba said that an "emerging atmosphere of trust" was replacing an earlier "climate of fear and mutual suspicion" in international relations and that there was now the real prospect of a concerted approach in favour of regional and global peace.
The UN had survived "dog days" and now enjoyed renewed credibility and popularity.
In an address on Oct. 24, Garba added that the world community should take advantage of the closing of the ideological gulf between East and West to reduce the North-South divide in terms of development.
A new spirit of interdependence was needed to complement that of detente, he said.
During the opening general debate of the Assembly, delegates from 155 countries presented statements.
In his first address to the UN since taking office, United States President George Bush on Sept. 25 made proposals for cuts in chemical weapons, saying that the United States would begin elimination of 60 per cent or 98 per cent of its chemical weapons respectively, provided the Soviet Union cut its own stockpile to an equal level or eliminated it completely; and that the USA would destroy all its chemical weapons within 10 years if the countries capable of producing such weapons signed a total ban treaty.
Bush also told the Assembly that the USA had just tabled new proposals on reducing conventional forces in Europe and recalled the USA's "Open Skies" proposals [see pp. 37112; 37267].
Reminding the Assembly that the Soviet Union had stopped production of chemical weapons, Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze on Sept. 26 proposed that the Soviet Union and the United States bilaterally reduce or destroy their chemical weapons; and that they renounce use of such weapons, under any circumstances, as the first step towards their global elimination.
The introduction of rigorous verification procedures was also needed, he said.
Shevardnadze also proposed a halt in nuclear testing and cuts in tactical nuclear weapons.
Endorsing the concept of "open skies" and "open lands" , he indicated the Soviet Union's willingness to participate in "the establishment of a United Nations register of sales and transfers of weapons" .
One of many speakers on the subject of drugs, President Virgilio Barco Vargas of Colombia said that drug trafficking fuelled terrorism and was one of the greatest threats to democracy in Latin America, adding that "every weapon in the war against narcotics pales into insignificance compared to the need to reduce demand" .
Speaking on Sept. 29, he called for a special session of the Assembly on this issue, and welcomed the United Kingdom's proposal to convene (in April 1990) an international conference on drug demand reduction.
On the environment, the United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, speaking on Nov. 8, called for the implementation of a co-ordinated programme of global action.
She rejected the need for new institutions, insisting instead that existing bodies, such as the UN World Meteorological Organization and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP) should be strengthened.
Announcing the establishment of new climate monitoring centre, Thatcher offered support for the establishment of a convention on climatic change by the time of the UN's 1992 world conference on the environment and development (a proposal supported in Resolutions 44/229 and 44/207); and proposed that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change preparing a report for that conference be extended.
She asserted that multinational companies should not be blamed for damage to the environment, and further stated that nuclear power was the most environmentally safe form of energy.
Following completion on Oct. 12 of the opening debate, the Assembly went on to adopt 240 resolutions and 80 decisions on a wide range of issues, including:(i) the enhancement of the UN's role in the promotion of international peace and security;(ii) international co-operation over environmental problems;(iii) the problem of drugs;(iv) a number of regional conflicts, including Kampuchea (Cambodia);(v) children's rights; and (vi) various disarmament issues.
Joint US-Soviet resolution on peace and security co-operation
Adopted without a vote on Nov. 15, Resolution 44/21 was the first General Assembly resolution of a political nature to be co-sponsored by the United States and the Soviet Union.
The resolution noted "the potential of the United Nations to be even more effective in achieving international co-operation" , and reaffirmed support "for the validity and relevance of the [UN]Charter and urged all states to abide by it" .
Urging respect for "the principles of sovereign equality, political independence and territorial integrity of states and non-intervention in internal affairs" , the resolution also called on members to"refrain from the threat or use of force,…settle disputes peacefully,[and]adhere to the principles of equal rights and self-determination of peoples, respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms…
".
It encouraged members to use every instance of the UN framework to pursue peace, security and international co-operation.
UN environment conference and other environmental resolutions
A number of resolutions on the environment were adopted without a vote on Dec. 22.
Following on from Resolution 43/196 [see p.36779]and earlier resolutions, the Assembly decided, in Resolution 44/228, to convene a two-week UN conference on environment and development in June 1992.
The resolution accepted the Brazilian government's offer to host the conference, which would have the "highest possible level of participation" .
According to the resolution the conference would have, among others, the following aims: to examine the state of the environment and changes which had occurred since the 1972 UN Conference on the Human Environment and since other meetings and agreements such as the 1987 Montreal protocol on the ozone layer [see pp. 35678; 36412]; to "examine strategies for national and international action…to promote a supportive international economic environment that would result in sustained and environmentally sound development in all countries, with a view to combating poverty and improving the quality of life" ; and to promote the "further development of international environmental law" .
A particular timescale would be set for the implementation of the appropriate strategies.
Also adopted was Resolution 44/229 on international environmental co-operation.
Expressing concern at the "increasing degradation" of the environment "which could not only endanger economic and social development, but the very basis of life itself" , the resolution asserted that the UN system was the "appropriate forum for concerted political action" on this issue.
In this respect it called on governments to increase contributions to UNEP by at least 35 per cent on the Jan. 1, 1989 level, in order for UNEP to reach an annual target of $US100 million in contributions by 1992.
The resolution noted that most environmental pollution originated in the developed countries, which thus had the main responsibility for fighting it.
Stressing that the current pattern of production and consumption was unsustainable and would have to change, "particularly in the industrialized countries" , the resolution also emphasized that a significant transfer of technology and finance to the developing world was required.
In this regard, it reaffirmed "the urgent need" for governments, as well as multilateral and private financial institutions, to take into account the relationship between foreign debt and the developing countries' ability to address environmental issues.
But environmental concern, while an important consideration in the formulation of policy, should not lead to a "new form of conditionality in aid or development financing" or become a "pretext for unjustified barriers to trade" .
Resolution 44/224 stressed the need for both countries and UN bodies to strengthen international co-operation in the monitoring and anticipation of environmental emergencies and disasters.
On climate change [see also p. 37291], Resolution 44/207 recalled an earlier resolution (43/53 — see p. 36778) and noted the number of conferences that had been held on this issue in 1989.
Urging governments, intergovernmental organizations and industry to make every effort to "limit and prevent" activities adversely affecting the climate, the resolution supported a request for UNEP and the World Meteorological Organization to begin work on a "framework convention on climate" .
Concern was also expressed at the limited participation of developing countries in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.
Pursuant to Resolution 43/212 [see p. 36778]and earlier resolutions, the Assembly adopted Resolution 44/226 on the "traffic in and disposal, control and transboundary movements of toxic and dangerous products and waste" .
Recognizing the need for the development of international law on liability and compensation arising from the transport or disposal of hazardous wastes, the resolution requested UNEP to set up a working group of experts on this issue.
Adopted without a vote on Dec. 22, Resolution 44/236 proclaimed the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction, beginning on Jan. 1, 1990.
Following Resolution 43/83 on the Antarctic at the previous session [see p. 36779], part B of Resolution 44/124 expressed its regret that the Antarctic Treaty consultative parties had not invited the UN Secretary-General to meetings held in Paris in May and October 1989 [see pp. 36989-90], in spite of numerous resolutions to that effect.
Expressing the conviction that the global eco-system would be best protected by turning Antarctica into a world park or nature reserve, it urged all states to cooperate with the UN and to support a ban on mining and prospecting.
It was adopted by 101 votes to none with eight abstentions.
All the 11 Antarctic Treaty signatories, who were UN members decided not to participate in the vote.
UN global action against drugs
Responding to the appeal of President Barco of Colombia, on Nov. 1 the Assembly adopted, without a vote, Resolution 44/16, which decided to hold a special session of the Assembly on international co-operation against drugs.
On Nov. 14 Resolution 44/410 fixed the date of the session, to be held at the UN headquarters in New York, for Feb. 20-23 1990.
[For this meeting see p. 37268.]
On Dec. 15, the assembly adopted, without a vote, three other resolutions on the drugs issue.
Recalling Resolution 43/120 (adopted at the 43rd session — see p. 36780) which had led to the December 1988 adoption of the UN Convention against Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs in Vienna, the Assembly approved Resolution 44/140.
This urged states to sign and ratify the convention and to make domestic legislation and administrative procedures compatible with it.
Resolution 44/141 resolved that action against drugs should be given the highest priority by the international community, and that the UN should be the "main focus" for this collective responsibility.
It expressed concern, however, that UN bodies had been unable to carry out measures mandated for the 1988-89 biennium due to lack of funds.
It commended the efforts of the Colombian government to deal with drug trafficking.
Requesting the UN Secretary-General to draw up by March 1990 an action plan by UN bodies against drugs with specific goals and timetables, the resolution invited states to consider asking him to appoint a number of experts from both the developed and developing world, in order to enhance the efficiency of the UN in this area.
It also outlined a number of proposals that states might take into account in the drawing up of a global action plan at the February 1990 special session, including, among others: increased public information and education; the possibility of a UN decade against drugs; the establishment of a UN capability to provide training and equipment for national anti-drug forces; relevant measures to prevent the laundering of drug monies and the establishment of a UN facility to gather information on this; and development and technical assistance programmes aimed at strengthening local economies and legal systems against drugs.
Resolution 44/142 expressed alarm that drug trafficking and related criminal activities were now a threat to the political stability and security of states, as well as to their social and economic fabric, and asked the Secretary-General to prepare a comprehensive study of the problem.
Noting the crop substitution programmes being implemented by a number of governments, it also recognized the need for greater international support for development programmes which would be an economically viable alternative to drugs.
States were urged to take measures to reduce the demand for drugs, and to increase financial contributions so that the UN Fund for Drug Abuse Control could expand its work.
Also adopted (without a vote, on Dec. 4) was Resolution 44/39.
This decided to consider, at the next (45th) session of the Assembly, the establishment of an international criminal court with jurisdiction over international drug-trafficking cases.
It requested the International Law Commission to prepare a report on which discussions would be based.
Kampuchea (Cambodia)
Middle East
On Dec. 6 the Assembly adopted Resolution 44/42 on the question of Palestine.
Adopted by 151 votes to 3 (including Israel and the United States) with 1 abstention, it declared that a resolution of this issue was crucial to a settlement of the Arab-Israeli conflict and thus to international peace.
Among the conditions for the achievement of a comprehensive solution were: Israel's withdrawal from "Palestinian territory occupied since 1967, including Jerusalem, and from the other occupied Arab territories" ; the dismantling of Israeli settlements in the occupied territories; and the guaranteeing of the security of all states in the region, including those named in Resolution 181…within secure and recognized boundaries".
The call for a UN-sponsored International Peace Conference on the Middle East "with the participation of all parties to the conflict, including the Palestine Liberation Organization, and the five permanent members of the Security Council" was renewed.
Sponsors of a draft resolution changing the status of "Palestine" from observer status to that of state were persuaded by the President of the Assembly to withdraw it [for Resolution 43/177 changing the designation "Palestine Liberation Organization" to "Palestine" see p. 36779].
The President, responding to the USA's threat to withhold its contribution to the UN budget because of the draft, reminded the Assembly that contributions were not a "loan or a charity" but an obligation.
With the opposition of Israel, Resolutions 44/2 of Oct. 6 and 44/48 (several parts) of Dec. 8 expressed concern at the means used by Israel to suppress the Palestinian intifada and at Israeli practices affecting human rights in the occupies territories.
The United States voted against 44/2 and against several parts of 44/48.
Afghanistan and international peace and security
Recalling Resolution 43/20 of its previous session [see p. 36780], on Nov. 1 the Assembly adopted (without a vote) Resolution 44/15.
This welcomed Soviet completion, in compliance with the 1988 Geneva agreements, of the withdrawal of its troops from Afghanistan in February 1989 [see pp. 36448-50]and called on all parties to respect the latter scrupulously.
Pointing to the "territorial integrity, political independence and non-aligned and Islamic character of Afghanistan" as essential to a political solution, the resolution reaffirmed the right of the Afghan people to determine their own form of government and economic, political and social system "free from outside intervention, subversion,[and]coercion" .
It emphasized the need for "an early start of the intra-Afghan dialogue for the establishment of a broad-based government to ensure the broadest support and immediate participation of all sectors of the Afghan people" .
South Africa
Adopted without a vote on Nov. 22, part B of Resolution 44/27 expressed the conviction that the system of apartheid could not be reformed and had to be eliminated, leading to the establishment of a united, non-racial and democratic South Africa.
Supporting "the efforts of the South African people" to reach a peaceful settlement through genuine negotiations, it demanded, among other points: the lifting of the state of emergency, the immediate release of political prisoners, and the lifting of bans on organizations opposing apartheid.
It also called on UN members states to use "concerted and effective measures" to implement the resolution.
Other parts of Resolution 44/27, calling for various sanctions against the regime in South Africa, were adopted, but with recorded votes.
The United States and the United Kingdom voted against in each case.
At the initiative of the non-aligned countries, the Assembly held a special session from Dec. 12-14 on apartheid and its destructive effects on Southern Africa.
Central America and Panama
Adopted without a vote, Resolution 44/10 of Oct. 23 commended support for the 1987 five-country Central American Esquipulás peace accords and expressed the hope that the August 1989 agreement signed in Tela, Honduras, for the demobilization of the Nicaraguan contras, would be implemented.
It appealed for all outside countries with interests in the region to refrain from actions that would impede such a process.
Supporting the establishment of a UN mission to observe the electoral process in Nicaragua (on which a report would be later submitted), the resolution also recognized the efforts made by the UN Secretary-General to create verification machinery to monitor compliance with the regional peace process as a whole.
Resolution 44/44 of Dec. 7, adopted without a vote, allocated $US40,800,000 to the UN Observer Group in Central America (established for a six-month period by the UN Security Council on Nov. 7).
Resolution 44/240 of Dec. 29 expressed "profound concern" at the possible consequences for peace and security in Central America of the USA's armed intervention in Panama and deplored the action as a "flagrant violation of international law" [see pp. 37112-13].
Calling for the immediate withdrawal of the "invasion forces" , the resolution demanded respect for the Torrijos-Carter Panama Canal treaties and the sovereignty and territorial integrity of Panama.
It was adopted by 75 votes to 20 and 40 abstentions.
Latin American countries voted in favour (except Costa Rica, which abstained), and the United States was joined by most Western nations and the new Panamanian government in voting against.
Opposed by the United States and Israel, Resolution 44/217 of Dec. 22 deplored the continued US trade embargo against Nicaragua.
Western Sahara
Pursuant to Resolution 43/33 [see p. 36780], Resolution 44/88 of Dec. 11 was adopted without a vote.
It welcomed the progress made by the UN and the Organization of African Unity for the holding of a referendum in the Western Sahara, and noted "with appreciation" that a technical commission had been created to work on this task.
It also welcomed the Marrakech talks between King Hassan II of Morocco and the Polisario Front liberation movement [see p. 37015].
Falkland (Malvinas) Islands
Resolution 44/406 of Nov. 1 deferred consideration of the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands issue until the 45th session.
Resolutions on terrorism and use of mercenaries
Resolution 44/29 of Dec. 4, adopted without a vote, recognized that the "effectiveness of the struggle against terrorism could be enhanced by the establishment of a generally agreed definition of international terrorism" so as to differentiate it from the struggle of peoples for national liberation.
It requested the Secretary-General to convene a UN-sponsored international conference on this issue.
Adopted by 125 votes to 10 (the United States and other Western nations) with 21 abstentions, Resolution 44/81 of Dec. 8 condemned the use of mercenaries to destabilize governments in Southern Africa, Central America and other developing states, or to fight against "national liberation movements…struggling for…self-determination" , judging such a practice a threat to world peace and security and at odds with international law.
Convention on the Rights of the Child
Disarmament resolutions
On Dec. 15 the Assembly adopted several resolutions on disarmament issues.
Parts I and U of Resolution 44/116, adopted without a vote, welcomed the opening, within the framework of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe, of negotiations in Vienna on confidence- and security-building measures and on the reduction of conventional forces in Europe.
Part K, adopted by 134 votes to none with 18 abstentions (the 16 members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization — NATO — Japan and Israel) urged the United States and the Soviet Union to conclude a treaty for a 50 per cent reduction in strategic nuclear weapons.
NATO countries abstained on part P, which favoured the promotion of defensive security policies.
NATO countries opposed part C of Resolution 44/117, adopted by 134 votes to 17 with four abstentions, renewing a call for negotiations on an international convention prohibiting the use or threat to use nuclear weapons.
Part D, in favour a nuclear arms freeze, was adopted by 136 votes to 13 (NATO countries, bar Denmark which voted in favour and Spain which abstained) with 5 abstentions.
Part B of Resolution 44/119 calling for the non-use of nuclear weapons was adopted by 129 votes to 17 (including all NATO countries) with 7 abstentions.
Resolution 44/105 for the cessation of all nuclear tests, adopted by 136 votes, was opposed by the United States, France and the United Kingdom.
Resolution 44/107, adopted by 145 votes (including 13 NATO countries) to 2 (France and the United States) with 6 abstentions (including the United Kingdom) urged "substantive work" on a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty.
Adopted by 127 votes, Resolution 44/106, aimed at converting the 1963 Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water into a comprehensive ban was opposed by the United States and the United Kingdom with 22 abstentions (including the remaining NATO countries).
Resolution 44/112, adopted by 153 votes to 1 (the United States) with no abstentions, called on states to prevent an arms race in outer space.
Resolution 44/115 on chemical weapons was adopted without a vote.
Welcoming the "broad participation" at the January Paris conference, as well as the September Canberra conference on government-industry co-operation against chemical weapons, part A called on states to conclude and implement a new convention banning chemical weapons.
They were also urged to adhere to 1925 Geneva Protocol banning use of chemical weapons and to a 1972 convention on destroying and banning the development of biological weapons.
Part B requested prompt investigation by the Secretary-General of the reported use of such weapons.
Debt crisis
Resolution 44/205 of Dec. 22 (adopted by 139 votes to one — the United States — with no abstentions) recognized that "a number of recent initiatives" (presumably a reference to the Brady Plan, among others) providing for debt reduction and debt relief measures represented a "conceptual advance" in the handling of the developing world foreign debt issue.
It stressed the need for their broadest possible implementation.
In order to be effective, the resolution emphasized, such initiatives would require adequate financial support for growth-oriented adjustment programmes, including debt service reduction and the provision of new funds, thus making payment compatible with sustained economic reactivation, growth and the satisfaction of social needs.
A more open international trading system was needed to provide access to exports from the developing world.
In addition the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund should be adequately funded.
UN budget approval
Adopted without a vote, part A of Resolution 44/202 of Dec. 21 approved budget appropriations of US$1,974 million for the 1990-91 biennium.
Part B approved just over US$987,317,000 for 1990 (half the biennium total less a US$16,432,600 revision made in the 1988-89 appropriations by Resolution 44/193).
RNP8> Adopted without a vote, Part A of Resolution 44/195 on the UN's financial crisis urged all members states to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time, and requested those members in arrears to make every effort to pay outstanding contributions.
Part B noted "with concern" the UN's short term deficit of US$315 million.
On Oct. 24 the Secretary-General said that the proposed 1990-91 budget represented a negative growth rate on 1988-89 and would mean 12 per cent staff cuts, adding that 1989 peace-keeping activities had almost equalled the regular budget.
In his report to the Assembly, the Secretary-General said that by December only 72 countries had paid their contributions (fewer than the previous year) and that resources would be exhausted by the last quarter of 1990.
According to Le Monde of Jan. 4, 1990, the USA's total arrears amounted to US$733 million.
UN appointments
Under Resolution 44/306 of Oct. 18, the Assembly elected in a secret ballot Cuba, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen (South Yemen), Côte d'Ivoire, Romania and Zaïre as non-permanent members of the UN Security Council for a two-year term beginning on Jan. 1, 1990.
Under Resolution 44/308 of Nov. 1, the Assembly elected the following 18 states to the UN Economic and Social Council (following the expiration of the term in office of one-third of the Council's membership) for a three-year term beginning on Jan. 1, 1990 (* — re-elected): Algeria, Bahrain, Bulgaria*, Burkina, Canada*, China*, Ecuador, Finland, German Democratic Republic, Iran*, Jamaica, Mexico, Pakistan, Rwanda*, Soviet Union*, Sweden, United Kingdom*, Zaïre*.
The outgoing states were: Belize, Bolivia, Denmark, Norway, Oman, Poland, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Uruguay.
Under Resolution 44/309 of Nov. 1, the Assembly elected the following 29 states to the 58-member Governing Council of the UN Environment Programme for a four-year term beginning on Jan. 1, 1990 (* — re-elected): Argentina*, Austria, Barbados*, Brazil*, Burundi*, China*, France*, Gabon*, Gambia, German Democratic Republic (East Germany), Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) *, Indonesia*, Japan*, Kuwait, Lesotho*, Mauritius*, New Zealand, Norway, Peru, Philippines, Spain, Thailand, Tunisia, Soviet Union*, United States*, Venezuela*, Yugoslavia*, Zaïre*, Zimbabwe.
* The outgoing states were: Australia, Dominican Republic, Greece, Iran, Iraq, Mauritania, Republic of Korea (South Korea), Senegal, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine.
Under Resolution 44/312 of Nov. 20, the Assembly elected former Norwegian Foreign Minister Thorvald Stoltenberg as the UN High Commissioner for Refugees for a four-year period from Jan. 1, 1990.
Stoltenberg had been proposed by the Secretary-General after his predecessor, Jean-Pierre Hocké, had resigned amid controversy over expenses [see p. 36989].
INTERNATIONAL
INTERNATIONAL PARTY ORGANIZATIONS
Basic data
Year of foundation: 1951 (1864).
Status: International grouping of democratic socialist, social democratic and labour parties.
Membership: 52 full member and 25 consultative parties from 69 countries.
President: Willy Brandt (West Germany).
General Secretary: Luis Ayala (Chile).
18th SI congress — SI council meeting
At its 18th congress, held in Stockholm, Sweden, on June 20-22, 1989, the Socialist International (SI) adopted a new declaration of principles.
Formally replacing the Frankfurt Declaration of 1951, the declaration defined democratic socialism as "an international movement for freedom, social justice and solidarity" .
Its goal was "to achieve a peaceful world where these basic values can be enhanced and where each individual can live a meaningful life with the full development of his or her personality and talents and with the guarantee of human and civil rights in a democratic framework of society" .
The declaration also laid down guidelines on peace and disarmament issues, development, the environmental challenge, the realization of full political and economic democracy, culture and society, and the role of women and men in society.
The final resolution adopted by the congress stressed that the 1980s had shown that neither the free market nor central planning had been able to alleviate unemployment and poverty.
 "Policies of co-operation for common prosperity offer the real alternative in the 1990s" , and developments in the second half of the decade had created opportunities for peace, disarmament and development, it declared.
On specific political issues, the resolution expressed the SI's support for self-determination, democracy and economic and ecological recovery in Central and Eastern Europe (including the Baltic), and called for the full participation of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) in the Middle East peace process and an international peace conference.
(The Israeli Labour Party, a long-standing member of the SI, boycotted the proceedings after representatives of the PLO had been allowed to attend the congress as observers.)
The congress re-elected Willy Brandt as president, and elected Luis Ayala of Chile as general secretary in succession to Pentii Väänänen of Finland.
It also suspended the Democratic Revolutionary Party (PRD) of Panama from membership for accepting the annulment of the general election in that country the previous month [see p. 36645].
There was reported controversy at a meeting of the SI council on Nov. 23-24 in Geneva, Switzerland, over proposals, principally from the West German and Austrian socialist parties, that the SI establish formal links with ruling "ex-communist parties" in Eastern Europe, especially with the Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP — which had changed its name from the Hungarian Socialist Workers' Party (HSWP) in October — see p. 36960).
Basic data
Year of foundation: 1983.
Status: International grouping of conservative and right-wing parties.
Membership: 26 parties from 25 countries.
Chairman: Kaare Willoch (Norway).
Executive Secretary: Scott Hamilton.
IDU conference
The fourth biennial conference of the International Democrat Union (IDU), held in Tokyo, Japan, on Sept. 22-23, 1989, welcomed "the abandonment of socialism" in Eastern Europe and condemned the Chinese authorities for their repression of the pro-democracy movement in June [see pp. 36720-22].
The final statement adopted by the conference declared that the "disintegration and decay of socialism as an idea and an economic and political system" was self-evident.
It welcomed the reform process begun in Eastern Europe, and pledged support for all those who wanted to free their countries from the "structures, rigidities and follies of socialism" .
Specifically, it urged Western business to provide financial incentives to bring about the introduction of the market economy in the region.
The IDU elected Andrew Peacock, leader of the opposition Liberal Party of Australia, as its new president in succession to Aloïs Mock of Austria.
Basic data
Year of foundation: 1947.
Status: International grouping of liberal parties.
Membership: 32 parties from 23 countries.
President: Giovanni Malagodi (Italy).
Executive Vice-President: Urs Schöttli (Switzerland).
41st and 42nd LI congresses
The 41st annual congress of Liberal International (LI), held in Pisa, Italy, on Sept. 15-17, 1988, dealt primarily with a draft programmatic report on the future tasks of liberalism prepared by the German-born sociologist and politician, Sir Ralf Dahrendorf.
In its final resolution the congress endorsed the main tenets of this report, which stressed the continued importance of liberal principles in the wake of the evident failure of state intervention and centralized bureaucracies as means of ensuring prosperous societies.
The 42nd annual congress, held in Paris, France, on Oct. 12-14, 1989, dealt in particular with the current relevance of the French Revolution of 1789.
The congress adopted resolutions pledging aid for fledgling liberal parties in Eastern Europe and stressed the importance of the refugee problem, the need for an international conference on the Middle East, and self-determination for Western Sahara.
The congress also agreed a revision of the LI's leadership structure.
The presidency of the organization would henceforth be rotated within a three-member presidium, to which were elected Giovanni Malagodi, LI president since 1977, Otto Lambsdorff, chair of the West German Free Democratic Party (FDP), and Adolfo Suárez, leader of Spain's Democratic and Social Centre (CDS).
Suárez was elected president for the period 1990-91.
Congress of European environmentalists
European environmentalist parties held their fifth international congress on April 7-9, 1989, in Paris.
Attended by around 1,500 representatives of parties and movements from 20 countries in both Western and Eastern Europe, the informal debates (no formal resolutions were adopted) focused particularly on the issue of European integration.
The narrow economic emphasis of the integration policies pursued by the European Communities (EC)— epitomized by the planned introduction of the single market in 1992 — were widely condemned, since they would exact excessive social and ecological costs and lead to greater regional differences.
Most delegates instead called for stronger efforts towards integration in such areas as energy policy, environmental policy and protection of human rights, and for a concept of Europe which included neutral and reformist Eastern European countries.
Other key themes running through the debates included opposition to the military blocs in Europe and support for wide-ranging disarmament measures, and condemnation of protectionism and support for self-sufficiency.
Conference of communist and workers' parties
A conference of central committee secretaries of communist and workers' parties aligned at that time to the Soviet bloc was held in Varna, Bulgaria, on Sept. 26-28, 1989.
The final document released by the conference on Sept. 29 reported that an "exchange of views" had taken place on "the prospect for the pan-European process, the building of an indivisible Europe, a stable peace and co-operation, and an" all-European home".
Geza Kotai, representing the central committee of the HSWP, dissociated his party from the final statement.
In an interview on Sept. 29, Kotai rejected (i) the document's call for "the consolidation of what is called socialist property" ; and (ii) references to "the gaining ground of revanchism, neo-fascism and neo-Nazism in" certain countries'", which Kotai said implicitly but wrongly included West Germany.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Soviet space programme
Resumption of Soviet-crewed space flights
The launch on Sept. 6, 1989, of Soyuz TM-8, crewed by Aleksandr Viktorenko and Aleksandr Serebrov, and its subsequent docking with the Mir space station on Sept. 8 ended three months of speculation (fuelled by increased political and public criticism of the cost of space exploration at a time of acute domestic economic crisis) that the Soviet-crewed space programme had been indefinitely suspended due to financial stringencies [see p. 36636].
The head of the Soviet space marketing agency Glavkosmos [see pp. 36636-37], Aleksandr Dunayev, confirmed on May 16 that the shuttle craft Buran [ibid.]would not fly for the remainder of the year and that its next mission would be determined by the financial return from potential payloads.
After initial orientation and docking difficulties the new uncrewed technical "re-equipment" module Kavant-2, launched on Nov. 26, 1989, was added to the existing Mir structure on Dec. 6.
A further specialized module, scheduled for docking in March 1990, was intended to complete what was designed to be a multipurpose orbital complex for enhanced research in the fields of astrophysics, space biology, medicine and technology and the investigation of the Earth's natural resources.
Soviet space marketing and bilateral space agreements
The growing pressure to reduce state expenditure on space projects (estimated to have been about US$2,200 million in 1988) continued to stimulate Soviet space agencies and scientists in their search for alternative sources of financing.
The return of the Photon satellite on May 11, 1989, marked the completion of the first (uncrewed) commercial experiment on board a Soviet spacecraft (the production of crystals and semi-conductors under micro-gravitation), and scientific equipment was returned to the French Centre for Space Research.
On June 29 Glavkosmos and the United Kingdom company Antequera (financially backed by the Moscow Narodny Bank and represented by the UK advertising agency Saatchi & Saatchi) launched the $26,000,000 "Juno" project to put the first Briton in space aboard a Soyuz spacecraft in 1991.
Glavkosmos hoped that the predicted commercial success of Juno (the first to be supported entirely by commercial funding) from the sale of broadcasting rights, corporate sponsorship of the scientific experiments to be performed on board the Mir space station and the fees from "space advertising" , would encourage more Western companies, especially in the United States, to fund future crewed missions.
It was reported by the Soviet news agency Tass on Sept. 1 that a recent agreement would allow the US company Space Commerce Corporation to lease Soviet "Start" launching systems to place its own satellites into orbit.
Tass confirmed on Sept. 18, 1989, that two Japanese journalists had been selected, in line with a $12,000,000 agreement made in March 1989 with the Tokyo TBS television network, as candidates to give the first space broadcast from Mir at an unspecified date in 1991, despite earlier protests from Soviet journalists that the decision was unpatriotic.
Tass also announced on Oct. 6 that two Austrian civilians had been chosen (for an undisclosed sum) as candidates for an Austrian-Soviet Soyuz-Mir space mission in 1992.
An agreement, in principle, for a joint French-Soviet mission in 1992 was signed on July 3 during a visit to Paris by the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev [see p. 36821].
Negotiations to reduce the fee for the prospective French cosmonaut (estimated at $10,000,000 for one week in orbit) were continuing during a meeting between the two country's space agencies in November.
On Dec. 1 the Soviet astronomical satellite Granat, with which the Danish and Bulgarians were scientifically involved, was launched.
It also carried the French Sigma telescope for the study of gamma ray emissions from stars and galaxies.
US space programme
NASA appointments
A former astronaut, Rear-Adml.
Richard H. Truly, 50, was appointed on April 12, 1989, as acting administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA); James C. Fletcher, a previous administrator who had come out of retirement to guide NASA after the 1986 Challenger disaster [see pp. 34266-68], had left the post on April 8.
NASA on May 18 named William Lenoir, a former astronaut, to head the space station programme.
US space launches
On June 14, 1989, the largest and most expensive US space booster, the Titan-4, was launched from Cape Canaveral, Florida, successfully deploying what was thought to be a secret military satellite capable of providing early warning of nuclear attack.
A further secret payload, for the US Air Force, was launched on Sept. 5 by the last of the ageing Titan 34-D series of rockets.
The plutonium-powered scientific space probe Galileo, whose launch had been delayed by 11 days due to a combination of technical faults and attempts by anti-nuclear activists to gain a court injunction to ground it, was launched on Oct. 17, 1989, aboard the space shuttle Atlantis.
It was released in space on Oct. 19 to begin a six-year 2,500-million-mile voyage to study the planet Jupiter, on a gravitationally assisted trajectory planned to swing it once past the planet Venus and twice around the Earth.
On Dec. 4 NASA announced that the Solar Maximum Mission satellite (informally known as Solar Max) had fallen safely into the Indian Ocean on Dec. 2 after re-entering the atmosphere.
Launched in February 1980, Solar Max had made continuous and detailed observations of the Sun.
First commercial US space launch
On Aug. 27, 1989, the $150,000,000 UK television satellite Marco Polo 1 became the first satellite to be commercially launched from Cape Canaveral, by the US McDonell Douglas aircraft company which built the Delta 187 rocket carrying the satellite.
The US Air Force was reportedly paid more than $1,000,000 for the use of the facilities and tracking stations.
European space developments
In a keynote speech given on April 19, 1989, to mark the 25th anniversary of the European Space Agency (ESA), the West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl, emphasizing the peaceful mandate of the ESA, offered the prospect of sending European satellites into space to monitor compliance with international arms control agreements.
He also stressed the ESA's role in solving environmental problems.
(It was reported in late April that the West German government had agreed to establish its own space agency, the Agency for Space Travel Affairs, with initial funding of $18,800,000, to develop a reusable air-launched space shuttle.)
On July 12, 1989, after a week's delay, ESA's Ariane-3 rocket launched Olympus 1, Europe's most advanced communications satellite, built by British Aerospace, from Kourou in French Guiana.
It was reported on Oct. 29 that Ariane 44-L had successfully launched into orbit the Intelsat VI communications satellite for the 110-member International Telecommunications Satellite Organization (INTELSAT).
After winning orders on April 19 to launch three further INTELSAT communications satellites between 1992 and 1994 (with an option to launch four new generation Intelsat VII satellites), Arianespace (the ESA launch company) commanded more than half of the international commercial launch market, with 71 outstanding contracts and a backlog of 35 satellites (worth an estimated total of $2,350 million) still to launch.
On Sept. 12 ESA officials announced that its new Pegasus rocket, designed to be air-launched and to carry small satellites into orbit, would undergo its first flight test in the USA the following week.
ERRATUM: Western Sahara
The SADR first took its seat at the Organization of African Unity summit of 1984, not 1989 as inadvertently given on pp. 37014, 37220.