

ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Major US policy shift on Cambodia
Announcement by Baker of US foreign policy "revision" on Cambodia
James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, announced on July 18 a dramatic "revision" of US foreign policy towards Cambodia and Vietnam.
His announcement constituted the first fundamental change of US policy on Indo-China since the US retreat from the region in 1975.
The USA would no longer support the seating of the rebel National Government of Cambodia (NGC, formerly known as the Coalition Government of Democratic Kampuchea — CGDK) at the United Nations, unless the dominant Khmers Rouges faction was removed from the coalition.
However, the USA would continue to offer every support to the two non-communist coalition factions, namely the Sihanoukists, led by Prince Norodom Sihanouk, and the Kampuchean People's National Liberation Front (KPNLF), headed by Son Sann.
The USA would enter into a direct dialogue with Vietnam over the issue of Cambodia.
 "We want to talk to Vietnam," Baker said, "because we think they have influence over the Cambodian government and could use this to help us construct conditions permitting free elections." 
Baker also signalled that the USA might be prepared to give humanitarian assistance to the State of Cambodia (SOC) government in Phnom Penh.
Baker issued his surprise announcement in Paris after two hours of talks with his Soviet counterpart Eduard Shevardnadze, both of them being in France to attend talks on German unity.
The announcement came after representatives of the five permanent members of the UN Security Council (China, France, Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the USA) had held their fifth round of talks on Cambodia in Paris on July 16-17 [see p. 37532 for fourth round of talks in New York in May].
The five reportedly reached a "preliminary consensus" on a plan to involve the UN in the governing of Cambodia ahead of a general election.
However, a major stumbling block remained in the form of a dispute between the Cambodian parties over the exact composition of a Supreme National Council (SNC) of prominent Cambodians.
The dispute became more intense in early July after Prince Sihanouk announced his approval of a Khmer Rouge plan for equal quadripartite power-sharing on the SNC, thereby effectively reneging on an agreement signed with the SOC Premier Hun Sen in Tokyo in early June [see pp. 37532-33].
Congressional pressure for policy change on Cambodia
The Bush administration's revision of its Indo-China policy was designed to forestall a possible congressional rebellion over the issue.
Concern in Congress over US support for the Cambodian resistance had grown during May and June as CIA reports of the increasing strength of the Khmer Rouge forces indicated that a military victory could no longer be ruled out.
Many Congressmen, appalled at the prospect of US overt and covert aid being used to help the Khmers Rouges regain power in Cambodia, called for major policy changes to be quickly implemented.
The current US policy toward Cambodia had its roots in the late 1970s when President Carter had set aside concerns over the appalling human rights record while in power of the Khmers Rouges in order to maintain friendly relations with China, the principal patron of the Khmers Rouges.
The deterioration in Sino-US relations after the 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre and the improvement in US-Soviet relations during 1990 therefore added further arguments for a US policy change on Cambodia.
In late June the House of Representatives approved a US$7,000,000 package of overt, non-lethal aid to the Sihanoukists and the KPNLF.
However, also in late June, the Senate intelligence committee voted to reduce drastically the covert aid programme to these two non-communist groups.
Two other key Senate committees (appropriations and foreign operations) subsequently aligned themselves with the intelligence committee, thereby creating a powerful lobby to push for a change in policy.
The revision was eventually approved on July 13 after President George Bush met with Baker and his National Security Adviser Gen. Brent Scowcroft.
A letter of July 26 signed by 66 (out of 100) senators urged Bush to take additional steps to prevent the Khmers Rouges from seizing power, including the initiation of a US development programme for Cambodia and the opening of direct contacts with the Phnom Penh regime.
Response to US policy change
The first response to Baker's announcement came from Shevardnadze who welcomed the change, which, he said, brought US and Soviet approaches to Cambodia "much closer" .
The Chinese Foreign Ministry, which had been informed of the change only two hours before Baker's announcement, issued a guarded rebuke of the move on July 19.
The Cambodian seat at the UN, it was stated, should not be left vacant before a political solution was reached.
China would continue to support the resistance until Vietnam withdrew all its forces from Cambodia.
In a statement issued on July 19 the SOC Foreign Ministry announced that it "welcomed" the "constructive" US move.
The Vietnamese Foreign Minister, Nguyen Co Thach, also welcomed the decision on July 19, and announced that Vietnam was "ready to negotiate with all countries affected by the Cambodian problem" .
In a telegram from the North Korean capital Pyongyang on July 19 Prince Sihanouk called the US decision "unjust and unfair" and announced that the resistance would "never accept a Pax Vietnamica or a so-called peace imposed by foreign powers" .
Khieu Samphan, the NGC Vice-President and a Khmer Rouge leader, issued a statement on July 23 which made no mention of the US policy change.
Instead the statement contained an attack on Vietnam's "brutal and barbarous aggression against Cambodia" .
The six member countries of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) had been informed of the US decision 12 hours before Baker's announcement.
An ASEAN statement issued on July 23 (the day before the start of the annual Foreign Ministers' meeting in Indonesia — see p. 37613) stated that the representation of Cambodia at the UN was "a delicate political question" and that attempts to change the seating in the absence of an acceptable Supreme National Council would set back the search for a comprehensive political solution.
At a meeting with the ASEAN Foreign Ministers in Indonesia on July 27 Baker attempted to allay their fears, informing them that the US goals in Cambodia remained the same and that "our approach towards achieving them differs only very slightly" .
Visit to Cambodia by US MIA team
A US military team arrived in Phnom Penh on July 24 to search for the bodies of US servicemen missing in action (MIA) in Cambodia after the Vietnam war.
It was the first US MIA team to visit Cambodia [see p. 37289 for developments relating to MIA issues in Vietnam, which US teams visited frequently].
The team left Cambodia on July 26 having secured the remains of six servicemen.
Evidence of power struggle in Phnom Penh
A series of reports in June and July indicated that an internal power struggle was under way in Phnom Penh.
Commentators suggested that the struggle was between a "hardline" faction led by Chea Sim, President of the National Assembly and second ranking member of the ruling Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party politburo, and a "liberal" faction loosely associated with Hun Sen.
Phnom Penh home service radio reported on June 21 that a "clandestine reactionary organization embodying all kinds of inactive and idle people and hooligans" had recently been smashed at its inception.
The announcement was issued after reports in the foreign press and on rebel radio stations had given details of arrests and dismissals in Phnom Penh.
Ung Phan, Minister of Communications, Transport and Posts, had been dismissed and arrested along with five Army and Foreign Ministry officials.
He was apparently replaced by Ros Chhun, a party central committee member who was close to Chea Sim.
Khieu Kanrith, editor of the weekly Kampuchea newspaper and a strong supporter of Hun Sen's economic liberalization programme, was dismissed and replaced by another supporter of Chea Sim, Keo Prasat.
Men Sa Man, a politburo member and the highest ranking woman politician in Cambodia, was removed from her position as president of the party's central committee for organization and replaced by Sar Kheng, another Chea Sim supporter and a member of the party secretariat.
Military situation
Most Western press reports on the military situation in Cambodia in July claimed that the Khmer Rouge forces were making major advances in many areas, particularly the north and west of the country.
For example, a report in the International Herald Tribune of July 17 claimed that the rebels had recently made the most significant gains in the whole of the 11-year civil war and that government forces were being forced to fall back and defend large urban centres.
A dissenting voice came from a Financial Times reporter who had recently visited the northern town of Kompong Thom, briefly captured by the Khmers Rouges in mid-June [see p. 37533].
The report, published on July 23, alleged that recent stories of Khmer Rouge successes had emanated mainly from Bangkok and were "exaggerated" .
This, it was claimed, stemmed from a "misconception" about the freedom of operation afforded to the Khmers Rouges by the Phnom Penh government forces.
The Independent of July 5 claimed that the Khmers Rouges were fighting within 80 km of Phnom Penh and that large numbers of refugees were flooding into the capital.
The report, quoting Sihanoukist sources, stated that the rebel forces were pursuing a "4-5-6 strategy" , aimed at cutting off Routes 4, 5 and 6 linking Phnom Penh with the north and north-west.
In another report, the Independent of July 14 described a Khmer Rouge attack on a train travelling from the southern port of Kompong Som to Phnom Penh on July 1.
The report claimed that at least 26 people had been killed in the attack, mostly government employees who had been singled out and shot.
Another train was reportedly attacked on July 15 in the central province of Kompong Chhang, resulting in the death of 30 people.
INTERNATIONAL
NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION
London summit
A meeting of heads of state and government of the 16 NATO member countries in London on July 5-6 concluded with a declaration which effectively formalized the end of the Cold War by redefining the organization's military strategy and political goals.
The declaration included a decision that recourse to nuclear weapons should be considered only as a last resort; the meeting also looked forward to the prospect of a reduction in the armed forces of a united Germany, and issued an invitation to the Warsaw Pact to sign a joint declaration with NATO on non-aggression.
Summit declaration
Noting that "Europe has entered a new, promising era" , the declaration stated that "as a consequence this Alliance must and will adapt" and must "reach out to the countries of the East which were our adversaries in the Cold War and extend to them the hand of friendship" .
However, NATO would remain a defensive alliance and must continue to provide for the common defence, while enhancing its political component.
"We have no aggressive intentions and we commit ourselves to the peaceful resolution of all disputes.
We will never in any circumstances be the first to use force."
A united Germany, a member of NATO and of the European Communities (EC), would be "an indispensable factor of stability" , and the move towards political union within the EC would also contribute to solidarity and peace.
NATO proposed to the Warsaw Treaty states a joint declaration"in which we solemnly state that we are no longer adversaries and reaffirm our intention to refrain from the threat or use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state or from acting in any other manner inconsistent with the purposes and principles of the UN Charter and with the CSCE [Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe]Final Act.
We invite all other CSCE member states to join us in this commitment to non-aggression."
The summit invited President Mikhail Gorbachev of the Soviet Union and representatives of the other East European countries to come to Brussels and address the North Atlantic Council, and to establish regular diplomatic liaison with NATO.
It expressed readiness to intensify military contacts with the Soviet and other East European administrations and welcomed the invitation to NATO Secretary-General Manfred Wörner to visit Moscow.
Recalling the Vienna meeting of European military leaders earlier in the year, NATO proposed another such meeting in the autumn to establish "an entirely different quality of openness" in Europe, including an "Open Skies" agreement [see p. 37267].
Noting the need for profound change in the way of thinking about defence, the declaration placed the highest priority on the completion in 1990 of the first treaty to reduce and limit conventional armed forces in Europe (CFE) and the completion of a package on conventional and short-range ballistic measures (CSBM).
Once a CFE treaty was signed talks should begin to build on additional measures including ones to limit manpower in Europe; a commitment would be given at the time of signature of the CFE treaty concerning the manpower levels of a unified Germany.
NATO's objective would be to conclude the follow-on CFE and CSBM negotiations as soon as possible, looking ahead to the CSCE follow-up meeting in Helsinki in 1992.
Through new conventional arms control negotiations within the CSCE framework, further far-reaching measures would be sought in the 1990s to limit the offensive capability of conventional forces in Europe.
As Soviet troops left Eastern Europe and a CFE treaty was implemented, fundamental changes to NATO's structure and strategy would include: smaller and restructured active forces, highly mobile and versatile and relying increasingly on multinational corps of national units; scaled-back readiness of active units, with less training requirements and exercises; and more reliance on the ability to build up larger forces if and when needed.
While NATO must maintain for the foreseeable future a mix of nuclear and conventional forces in Europe, the declaration reaffirmed that no weapons would ever be used except in self-defence and that the lowest and most stable level of nuclear forces to prevent war was sought.
Further, as a result of the changes in Europe, the size and tasks of nuclear deterrent forces would be modified and adapted, and the role for substrategic nuclear systems of the shortest range would be significantly reduced.
Once negotiations began on short-range forces (after the signature of a CFE treaty), NATO would propose, in return for reciprocal action by the Soviet Union, the elimination of all its nuclear artillery shells from Europe.
Finally, with the total withdrawal of Soviet stationed forces and the implementation of a CFE agreement, NATO could reduce its reliance on nuclear weapons, which would nevertheless continue to fulfil an essential role in the overall strategy of preventing war "by ensuring that there are no circumstances in which nuclear retaliation in response to military action might be discounted" .
[This was inserted at the insistence of United Kingdom Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.]
However, in the transformed Europe NATO would be able to adopt a new strategy "making nuclear forces truly weapons of the last resort" .
It would also prepare a new military strategy moving away from "forward defence" towards a reduced forward presence and modifying "flexible response" to reflect a reduced dependence on nuclear weapons.
The declaration supported a CSCE summit in Paris later in 1990 to decide how the CSCE could provide "a forum for wider political dialogue in Europe" via a programme for regular consultations among leaders, a secretariat to co-ordinate meetings, a parliamentary body — the Assembly of Europe, and a centre for the prevention of conflict which would resolve disputes among members.
Foreign Ministers' meeting
At an earlier meeting, in Turnberry (Scotland) on June 7-8, the North Atlantic Council (of NATO Foreign Ministers) had announced outline proposals for improving co-operation with the Warsaw Pact and set the agenda for the forthcoming summit.
In a special preface to their communiqué the Foreign Ministers extended to the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe "the hand of friendship and co-operation" and expressed determination to "seize the historic opportunities resulting from the profound changes in Europe to help build a new peaceful order…based on freedom, justice and democracy" .
Thatcher stated in an opening address to the meeting that the continued forward stationing of nuclear weapons in member countries which would be in the front line of a conventional war (i.e. on German territory) remained fundamental to NATO strategy.
Thatcher also stressed during a visit to Moscow on June 7-10 that some troops and nuclear weapons must remain in Europe, and she could not envisage the materialization of Gorbachev's plan for NATO and the Warsaw Pact to operate in parallel with linked institutions.
The final communiqué of the Turnberry meeting noted that the ministers had instructed negotiators at the CFE talks to pursue "new approaches" , particularly on the numbers of aircraft and armour and on verification, in order to speed up progress towards a CFE agreement in 1990.
It committed the forthcoming summit to draw up a mandate for negotiations on short-range nuclear forces.
It affirmed their desire to institutionalize and strengthen the CSCE, whose role would, however, remain complementary to that of NATO.
It committed NATO to maintaining "an appropriate mix of survivable and effective conventional and nuclear forces at the lowest levels consistent with our security needs" , and asserted that European stability required a unified Germany to be a full member of the Alliance, but that "we seek no unilateral advantage from German unity" .
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Mass protest over increasing Natal violence
Workers on July 2 responded to a call by the African National Congress (ANC) and the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) for a nationwide one-day strike at the start of a week of protest action highlighting the continuing carnage in Natal.
The action sought to emphasize that the conflict, in which more than 3,000 people had died in faction fighting since January 1987, was a national, and not simply a local problem.
Some 3,000,000 workers nationwide were said by the organizers to have responded to the call.
The protests were also an attempt to pressurize the government into bringing an end to the violence by reducing the powers of Chief Gatsha Buthelezi, leader the conservative, Natal-based Inkatha movement which competed with the ANC for the loyalty of black South africans.
The organizers of the protest demanded among other things the lifting of the state of emergency in Natal, the dismantling of the nominally self-governing KwaZulu homeland administration (of which Buthelezi was Chief Minister) and disbandment of KwaZulu's police force.
Buthelezi criticized the action as "confrontationist" , while the police claimed that intimidatory tactics were used to implement the strike.
At least 26 people were killed on July 18 in one of the worst incidents in the long-running conflict, when a bus ran over a cliff after coming under fire near Durban.
About 24 people died on July 22-23 in violence in the industrial area 30 miles south of Johannesburg known as the Vaal Triangle.
The township of Sebokeng was the centre of the violence, which followed a rally sponsored by Inkatha.
The incident suggested that the movement was seeking to extend its campaign for political dominance beyond the province of Natal.
A COSATU representative accused the police of siding with some armed Inkatha supporters.
Inkatha conference — Resignation of general secretary
Inkatha at its general conference on July 15 resolved, among other things, to transform itself "from a liberation movement into a political party" open to all races.
A general meeting was called for December 1990 when a new constitution was to be adopted.
The meeting blamed the ANC for the violence in Natal, calling on it to abandon the so-called "armed struggle" ; furthermore, it urged the ANC deputy president, Nelson Mandela "to accept [Buthelezi's]repeated invitation to sit down with him and to talk peace" .
The ANC was strongly opposed to such a meeting on the grounds that it would give undeserved legitimacy to Buthelezi by treating him as a leader of equivalent standing.
The conference was attended by the ruling National Party (NP) provincial chairman, in what was seen as a bid by the NP to secure Inkatha as an ally in negotiations on South Africa's political future.
On June 1 Oscar Dhlomo, Inkatha's general secretary and close associate of Buthelezi, had resigned, giving rise to speculation that he was in dispute with Buthelezi over how to handle the situation in Natal.
Mandela's foreign tour
Nelson Mandela embarked on June 4 on a six-week, 13-nation tour through Europe, North America and Africa, the crowded schedule giving rise to fears for his health as he approached his 72nd birthday in mid-July.
The principal objectives of the tour were (i) to raise the ANC's profile abroad, thus encouraging the flow of funds and moral support, the former being essential to the establishment of the ANC as a fully functioning political organization; and (ii) to persuade Western countries to maintain sanctions against South Africa — despite the partial lifting in South Africa of the state of emergency [see p. 37522]— until "profound and irreversible change" had taken place.
The tour was considered to have been a successful public relations exercise.
Mandela, accompanied by an entourage of 24 including his wife Winnie Mandela, arrived in France on June 6 for a 36-hour visit; thence he travelled to Switzerland and West Germany.
On June 13 he received a standing ovation from the European Parliament in Strasbourg; on the following day the Parliament voted by 177 votes to 47 with five abstentions in favour of a resolution to maintain sanctions [see p. 37521 for June EC Foreign Ministers' summit meeting in Dublin; for February United Kingdom decision to lift some sanctions see p. 37234].
Leaving Italy, where he met government officials and had an audience with Pope John Paul II, Mandela travelled to Canada, where he received assurances of support from Prime Minister Brian Mulroney.
Mandela arrived in the United States on June 20 for a 10-day visit amid controversy engendered by an earlier news agency report on the role of the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) in his arrest in August 1962.
The report appeared to confirm rumours which had long circulated to the effect that the CIA had passed on information (supplied by an informant within the ANC) which enabled the South African authorities to arrest Mandela, who as an underground activist had evaded arrest for 17 months.
Amid intense media excitement and stringent security Mandela was given a tumultuous ticker-tape welcome in New York where he received the freedom of the city.
After speaking at the UN General Assembly on June 22, he met President George Bush in Washington on June 25.
Bush said that he would be willing to lift US sanctions once the Pretoria government had fulfilled conditions including the total lifting of the state of emergency.
Earlier, Mandela had been forthright in his criticism of US support for the Angolan rebel movement UNITA [see p. 37523].
In the course of his visit Mandela addressed Congress and travelled to other US cities which had taken a strong anti-apartheid stance, including Atlanta, Georgia, where he visited the tomb of the Rev. Martin Luther King.
Mandela had what was by all accounts a successful meeting with the UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on July 4, describing her afterwards as an "enemy of apartheid" .
Earlier, during his visit to Dublin, he said in a controversial reply to journalists that the UK government should negotiate with the Irish Republican Army (IRA) on a peaceful settlement of the Northern Ireland issue.
After visiting Uganda, Ethiopia, Kenya (where he was outspoken about Western governments' attempts to pressurize African countries into hastening the pace of political reform) and Mozambique, Mandela returned to South Africa on July 18.
Relaunching of SACP — Alleged "Red plot" 
The South African Communist Party (SACP — which had been unbanned in February) was formally relaunched as a legal organization at a rally on July 29 [see below], amid controversy over allegations that it had conspired with the ANC's military wing Umkhonto we Sizwe to use violence to overthrow the government if the current negotiations were to break down.
Details of the plot, seen by some as an attempt to derail the negotiations, threatened to jeopardize the second round of talks between the ANC and the government scheduled for Aug. 6.
Police claimed to have evidence that the SACP secretary-general, Joe Slovo, a member of the ANC delegation, had been involved.
However, Slovo was able to disprove the allegations.
Nonetheless, while denying the existence of the plot, SACP and ANC representatives acknowledged that strategic underground activity continued in the absence of a political solution.
The arrest on July 25 of Mac Maharaj, a member of the SACP politburo and of the ANC's policy-making national executive committee (NEC)(and named among the party's interim leadership — see below) and one of 40 ANC and party cadres detained in connection with the alleged plot in the preceding weeks, was a further threat to the forthcoming talks.
However, after emergency meetings between President F. W. de Klerk and Mandela on July 26 and Aug. 1, the issue appeared to have been resolved, and the two delegations, the ANC's including Slovo, met as scheduled on Aug. 6 [see p. 37642].
At the July 29 rally, attended by some 45,000, the SACP named a 22-member interim leadership.
Those named included, as well as Slovo, the Umkhonto chief of staff Chris Hani, the SACP chairman Dan Tloome, Ronnie Kasrills, formerly ANC's chief of intelligence, COSATU's assistant general secretary Sydney Mufamadi, its vice-president Chris Dhlamini, and the general secretary of the National Union of Metalworkers Moses Mayekiso [see p. 36912].
The composition of the leadership confirmed the close co-operation between the SACP and the ANC, many of whose policy-makers were also SACP members [see p. 37176 for apparent rejection by Slovo of the party's former "hardline" reputation].
Right-wing violence
There was an upsurge in violence during June and July, with an increasing number of incidents being claimed by or attributed to white extremists.
Police statistics recorded 34 acts of terrorism in June — the highest in one month since 1976.
In the most widely reported incidents of this nature (i) a group calling itself "White Wolves" on July 4 claimed responsibility for a bomb attack outside the offices of Vrye Weekblad, a radical Afrikaans newspaper;(ii) a bomb attack during the rush-hour on July 6 injured 27 people at a Johannesburg bus station much used by commuters from the townships; and (iii) NP offices in Bloemfontein were extensively damaged on July 22 by a bomb, the latest in a series of attacks on NP offices.
Resignation of Boesak
After admitting to an extramarital affair with the niece of a former Cabinet minister the Rev. Allan Boesak, President of the World Alliance of Reformed Churches, on July 25 resigned as minister of his local church, outside Cape Town, and as Moderator of the Dutch Reformed Mission Church.
In 1982 he had helped to found the anti-apartheid United Democratic Front (UDF)[see also p. 33895], and he was expected to remain active in politics.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Rebel successes — Advance into Monrovia
President Samuel Doe appeared close to being ousted by Charles Taylor's rebel army, the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), when the NPFL took control of large sections of the capital, Monrovia, in mid-July.
However, as Doe's Cabinet and military chiefs deserted him and fled abroad, Doe tenaciously clung on to power, besieged in the executive mansion with his Israeli-trained presidential guard.
The 200-strong rebel army which had in December 1989 infiltrated from neighbouring Côte d'Ivoire was now thought to number some 5,000 men and boys, a small proportion of whom had reportedly received training in Libya and Burkina.
Meanwhile the regular Army had been reduced, largely by desertion, to 1,000 men (from about 6,000).
The NPFL's advance had enabled it to secure control of the port of Buchanan, 100 km south-east of Monrovia, after fierce fighting on May 23.
This became a forward base for the NPFL, and reports told of ships being diverted to Buchanan and their cargoes used to replenish the rebel supplies.
In early June the world's largest rubber plantation, situated 56 km south-east of Monrovia and managed by the United States company Firestone, fell into rebel hands; access to the international airport at Robertsfield was through the plantation and all flights were halted on June 6-7.
On June 8, however, the government claimed to have regained control of the airport complex.
By mid-June the rebels had advanced to within 50 km of Monrovia; thousands of civilians fled by road, and many also sought refuge in US installations, including the embassy.
After seizing control of a water and electricity complex on the northern outskirts of the city on June 28, the NPFL on July 2, in a two-pronged attack, succeeded in cutting the principal road links to Monrovia.
A splinter group of the NPFL, led by Prince Yormie Johnson, had emerged by this time as a separate and important force.
Johnson had left the NPLF in February after Taylor accused him of summarily executing his own men.
His forces were now pledged to prevent Taylor seizing power.
Johnson's group succeeded on July 23 in taking government troops by surprise and gaining access to the centre of Monrovia, but was later repulsed.
Until the rebels reached Monrovia the fighting had involved few direct clashes between the government troops and the rebels and had largely consisted of tribally motivated reprisal attacks against civilians.
Atrocities were reported on both sides; random killings appeared to increase in mid- to late July as basic supplies in the capital ran low, and discipline broke down in the ranks of Army and rebel forces alike.
The most widely reported atrocity occurred on July 29, when more than 500 civilians (mostly of the Gio and Mano tribes — the enemies of Doe's minority Khran tribe) were massacred in a church compound in Monrovia; all accounts attributed the action to government troops.
In an interview with the BBC, however, Doe claimed that rebels wearing Army uniforms were responsible.
The incident was the subject of international condemnation.
On July 3 Doe had reportedly agreed to resign at the request of a deputation of his remaining allies, including Vice-President Harry Moniba and Samuel Hill, the Speaker of the House of Representatives (parliament), on condition that his own safety and that of the Khran people was assured.
Nonetheless, on the following day Doe had refused a US offer of assistance to leave the country.
On June 30 the USA had called for the installation of a transitional government, thus indicating that it would no longer help Doe to remain in power.
Six US warships were stationed off the Liberian coast in early June with a contingent of 2,000 marines, officially to safeguard US citizens and installations, and if necessary to assist the evacuation of remaining US diplomatic staff and civilians.
A number of US citizens were airlifted to Abidjan (Côte d'Ivoire) in mid-June when a first round of peace talks proved unsuccessful [see below].
US strategic installations and facilities in Liberia included (i) an Omega communications system allowing the tracking of shipping and submarine movements in the Atlantic;(ii) a powerful Voice of America radio transmitter situated near Monrovia;(iii) a communications and information-gathering centre at the embassy for contact with US embassies throughout Africa; and (iv) refuelling facilities at Robertsfield airport for the US Air Force.
Doe was left further isolated by the desertion on July 4 of his chief of armed forces and presidential guard, Lt.-Gen.
Charles Julu, the latest in a series of rapid changes in senior military personnel; Julu himself had taken over only days before from Lt.-Gen.
Harry Dubar, who resigned and fled abroad in late June.
Proposed regional peacekeeping force
In the absence of UN or Organization of African Unity (OAU) solutions to the conflict, the regional Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) emerged as the principal initiator in the peace process.
Delegations from the NPFL and the government on June 12-16 had held inconclusive discussions on a ceasefire at the US embassy in Freetown (Sierra Leone) under the mediation of the Liberian Council of Churches.
The NPFL refused to take part in further talks on June 25, announcing instead its intention to attack Monrovia.
Nonetheless the delegations met in Freetown on July 10, the NPFL being represented by spokesman Tom Woewiyu.
After further meetings it was reported on July 20 that the Liberian government had accepted an ECOWAS peace proposal, providing for (i) a ceasefire;(ii) the deployment of a regional peacekeeping force; and (iii) the immediate formation of a government of national unity.
However this was rejected outright by the NPFL, which declared the peace talks to be "over" .
Taylor had consistently made it known that he would not agree to a ceasefire until Doe had resigned and left the country.
A statement issued by the Minister of Information, Emmanuel Bowier, on July 21 on behalf of the government ministers present at the talks, advised Doe to resign "in order to save Liberia from further destruction of lives and properties, and also to ensure his personal safety" .
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Execution of coup plotters
Forty-two soldiers were executed by firing squad on July 27, having been found guilty by a special military tribunal of staging a coup attempt against the governing Armed Forces Ruling Council (AFRC) in April [see p. 37367], when 19 people were killed (according to unofficial estimates, however, about 200 people died).
Maj. Gideon Orkar [not Okar as given on p. 37367], described as the ringleader, was among those executed.
The executions followed the AFRC's rejection of an appeal, and calls for clemency from various quarters within Nigeria and abroad.
Altogether over 800 people had stood trial, of whom nine, including three civilians, received prison sentences.
A retrial was ordered in 31 cases, while 13 were still sought by the police.
AFRICA
CONGO
PCT agreement on political reforms
A communiqué issued on July 4 at the end of a five-day meeting of the central committee of the ruling Parti congolais du travail (PCT) announced agreement on wide-ranging political reforms, specifically (i) broadening membership of the party;(ii) abandoning Marxism-Leninism as the ideology of the state;(iii) separating the functions of party and state;(iv) ending the one-party system; and (v) strengthening existing mechanisms allowing for freedom of expression, of the press, and of association.
Reforming legislation was to be drawn up at an extraordinary PCT congress in 1991.
Meanwhile the PCT's status as sole legal party remained unchanged.
The central committee secretariat was reorganized and reduced, excluding four heads of department who included two "close associates" of President Denis Sassou-Nguesso.
Arrest of reformists
Clément Mierassa, a member of the central committee until 1985 [see p. 34406], and former journalist Céléstin Nkoua were arrested in mid-July for allegedly plotting to overthrow the government.
The arrests came soon after they had sent an open letter to Sassou Nguesso calling for multiparty democracy.
AFRICA
UGANDA
Peace accord with UDPM
A peace agreement was signed in Addis Ababa (Ethiopia) on July 12 between the Ugandan government, represented by Ateke Ejalu, Minister of State for Special Duties, and the Uganda People's Democratic Movement (UDPM), first formed in 1986 [see p. 35493]and chaired by Eric Otema Alimadi (Prime Minister until 1985 under the Milton Obote regime).
The agreement provided for the 5,000-strong rebel army (the UDPA) to be absorbed into the National Resistance Army (the regular army).
Prospects for the implementation of the accord appeared slim, however, when it emerged that the UDPA commander, Col. Owinyi, had rejected it; guerrilla activities in Soroti district (north-east of Kampala) later in the month provoked a major government offensive in the area.
Joseph Oronya, described as one of the most senior rebel leaders in eastern Uganda, and commander of another rebel faction, the Uganda People's Army, was killed by regular troops at a rally near Soroti town in late July.
AFRICA
ZAMBIA
Amnesty for political prisoners — Postponement of referendum
In an address to the nation on July 25, during which he spoke of the need for a "fresh start" after the upheavals of June [see p. 37523], President Kenneth Kaunda pardoned Lt. Mwamba Luchembe and his colleagues who were behind the June 30 announcement of an Army takeover, and announced the release of all other political prisoners.
These included prisoners serving life sentences for their part in a coup attempt in 1980, namely Edward Shamwana, Goodwin Yoram Mumba, Albert Chilambe Chimbalile and Deogratia Symba [see p. 32179], as well as Lt.-Gen.
Christon Tembo and three other Army officers currently on trial for treason in connection with a 1988 coup plot [see p. 37557].
Postponement of referendum
In the same July 25 address Kaunda announced that the referendum on whether to terminate one-party rule was to be postponed from October 1990 to August 1991 to allow the electoral roll to be updated.
Pro-democracy campaigners had claimed that many eligible voters did not bother to register in 1987 prior to the 1988 one-party elections.
Nonetheless the move was criticized by Arthur Wina, the chairman of a newly formed campaign group, the National Interim Committee for Multiparty Democracy, who argued that the poll should take place in the course of 1990.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Lifting of state of emergency
In an unexpected announcement on July 18, the Minister of Home Affairs, Moven Mahachi, said that the state of emergency, first imposed under the Ian Smith regime in 1965 [see p. 21092], would be allowed to lapse when it expired at midnight on July 25.
The government had renewed the state of emergency every six months since independence in 1980, most recently in January 1990 [p. 37175].
On July 26 President Robert Mugabe announced a general amnesty to mark the country's 10th anniversary of independence (celebrated on April 18).
The announcement ended a protracted controversy by allowing the release of some 200 former supporters of Joshua Nkomo's ZAPU party (now absorbed into Mugabe's ruling ZANU-PF following the December 1987 reconciliation agreement — see pp. 35626; 36415), many of whom had fought for ZAPU as guerrillas in Matabeleland during the 1980s.
Also on July 18 Finance Minister Bernard Chidzero made known in his budget speech that the government, up till now guided by socialist principles, was in future to allow market forces to direct "the pace and course of economic activities" .
Chidzero admitted that Zimbabweans were financially worse off in 1989 than they had been in 1982.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
First direct talks with MNR
After the abortive attempt to meet in Malawi in June [see p. 37561], the first direct talks between the Frelimo government and the MNR rebels aimed at ending the 15-year civil war finally took place in Rome on July 8-10.
This encounter was reportedly successful, and a second round was expected to take place in early August.
The delegation leaders were Transport Minister and politburo member Lt.-Gen.
Armando Emílio Guebuza, for the government, and MNR secretary for foreign affairs Raul Manuel Domingos.
Observing the talks, described as the beginning of the peace process, were the Roman Catholic Archbishop of Beira, Mgr Jaime Goncalves, as well as representatives of the Italian government and of the Catholic charitable organization which provided the venue.
A joint communiqué issued after the meetings was couched in general terms and did not refer to the cessation of hostilities.
Nonetheless it noted that "the two teams expressed their interest and willingness in making every effort to implement a constructive search for lasting peace…[and]to become deeply committed to the search for a working platform to end the war and to create political conditions permitting the normalization of the lives of all Mozambican people" .
The talks were arranged at Frelimo's request by the Italian government and the Vatican, apparently without the knowledge of Presidents Daniel arap Moi of Kenya and Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe, who had attempted to mediate in the conflict.
Mozambican officials had reportedly become dissatisfied with Moi as a mediator because of close ties between the MNR leader Afonso Dhlakama and senior officials in the Kenyan government.
Politburo approval of multiparty system
President Joaquim Chissano announced on July 31 that the Frelimo politburo was unanimously in favour of introducing a multiparty system in time for the next elections, scheduled for 1991.
The proposal was to be put to the People Assembly for approval in the latter part of the year.
The decision followed analysis of the national debate on the draft constitution [see p. 37560], which showed that a sizeable minority were in favour of such a system.
Chissano acknowledged that the MNR would be able to register as a political party if it laid down arms.
The decision removed one of the rebels' principal grievances and was expected to strengthen Frelimo's position at the negotiating table.
AFRICA
KENYA
Government attempts to suppress pro-democracy campaign
In what was seen as a serious challenge to President Daniel arap Moi's government, four days of rioting in which more than 20 people were killed followed a rally held on July 7 by advocates of political reform.
The rally, which the government had declared illegal, was nonetheless attended by some 6,000 at a stadium in Nairobi.
After the police broke up the meeting the demonstration turned to violence and looting; more than 1,000 people were arrested as rioting spread to other towns.
Detention of dissident politicians
Moi was opposed to a pluralist political system, on the grounds that it would lead to a resurgence of intertribal conflict.
The government's response to mounting criticism was to crack down on the principal advocates of reform.
Former Cabinet ministers Kenneth Matiba [for whose resignation from the Cabinet and expulsion from KANU in December 1988 see p. 36917]and Charles Rubia, prominent figures in the campaign for the formation of a legal opposition to the ruling Kenya African National Union (KANU), were arrested on July 4.
Both had in May called publicly for a return to a multiparty system.
Subsequently, Matiba's wife and daughter were attacked on June 14 at their home in what was widely seen as an attempt to intimidate
By late July about 20 dissidents were known to be in detention, several (including Matiba and Rubia) under security legislation which allowed for detention without charge for up to 14 days or longer.
A number of other well-known government critics fled abroad or went into hiding.
 "Alternative cabinet" named by government
Membership of what was described as an alternative cabinet, claimed to have been preparing to take power forcibly if the unrest of early July caused the government to fall, was revealed in Parliament on July 18 by an assistant minister.
Among the 21 people named were Jaramogi Oginga Odinga Kenya's first Vice-President (his son Raila Odinga was among six dissident intellectuals who were detained on July 5); another former Vice-President Josephat Karanja, who had been forced to resign in May 1989 [see p. 36648]; the writer Ngugi wa Thiongo; an Anglican bishop, the Rev. Henry Okullu, who three days previously had called upon the government to resign; and a lawyer, Gibson Kamau Kuria, who had earlier compared Moi with the late Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceausescu.
On July 8, fearing detention, Kuria took refuge in the United States embassy and subsequently left the country.
It was strongly implied that Matiba (not named in the list) was to have become President and Rubia Prime Minister; a sitting MP, Laban Kitele, was also named, but immediately denied the allegation.
The government continued to face criticism from the Christian establishment.
On June 21 a pastoral letter signed by all the country's Catholic prelates warned against extrajudicial action by the authorities and remarked that "the superiority of the party over the authority of parliament seems to be an accomplished fact" .
The Minister of Agriculture, Maina Wanjigi, was dismissed in early June (and replaced by Elijah Mwangale) after criticizing the action of the authorities in demolishing a squatter camp in a poor area of Nairobi in late May.
The government charged three executives of the Nairobi daily Standard with publishing false reports claiming that people had died attempting to resist the demolition team; the charges were dropped in mid-July.
NORTH AFRICA
CHAD
General election
On July 8 an estimated 56.6 per cent of the 3,00,000 people eligible to vote participated in Chad's first general election since 1962, held under a new Constitution approved in december 1989 [see p. 37114].
President Hissène Habré had decided that his ruling National Union for Independence and Revolution (UNIR) party would not run a formal campaign, and the 436 candidates for the 123 elective seats in the new National Assembly (which replaced the National Consultative Council — CNC — whose 30 members had been appointed) ran as individuals.
The campaign had begun on June 17; the successful candidates, elected in 65 constituencies including five in the capital Ndjamena, would serve a five-year term.
Several UNIR central committee members were defeated, including UNIR secretary-general Outman Issa and former ministers Kolbassia Vounna and Ahmed Senoussi Wadak.
Three candidates who had been members of the CNC, Nadjita Ngororo, Doungous Kimto and Bobekreo Tchimne, were also defeated.
A former ambassador and veteran politician Ali Tahirou was among those elected, as was Abdoul Boukar, who had been a minister in the government of President Goukouni Oueddi overthrown by Habré in 1982 [see pp. 31677-80].
Habré stated that five seats in the National Assembly would be allocated to women who had achieved the highest number of votes as runners-up, to join the two women who had succeeded in being elected.
AFRICA
HORN OF AFRICA
Meeting of IGADD heads of state
On July 9 the leaders of Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Sudan and Uganda and a representative of the Somali government met in the Ethiopian capital Addis Ababa, in the context of the Inter-Governmental Authority on Drought and Development (IGADD).
A joint declaration pledged the countries to respect each other 's national unity and territorial integrity and to co-operate with peace and reconciliation efforts in order to effect a peaceful resolution of internal conflicts.
The non-intervention proposal was initiated by Ethiopia's President Mengistu Haile Mariam whose forces had suffered serious reverses in recent months at the hands of Eritrean and Tigrean rebels [see pp. 37239-40].
AFRICA
ORGANIZATION OF AFRICAN UNITY
OAU summit
The Organization of African Unity (OAU) held its 26th Assembly of heads of state and government in the Ethiopian capital, Addis Ababa, on July 9-11, 1990.
The summit was opened by Ethiopian President Mengistu Haile Mariam, who welcomed Namibia as the organization's 51st member.
Mengistu referred to the presence at an OAU summit for the first time of African National Congress deputy president Nelson Mandela, whom he described as "a shining symbol of the struggle for liberation" .
He also called for sanctions against South Africa to be maintained.
The subject of growing demands for greater democracy on the continent preoccupied African leaders attending the summit.
In their final declaration they undertook "to democratize further our societies and consolidate democratic institutions in our countries" .
However, the summit rejected Western pressure for East European-style reforms, stressing each state's right to decide its own democratic system "in all sovereignty" and on the basis of its own "social and cultural values" .
Concern was expressed that Western donors might link aid to political reform.
In his report to the summit, the OAU Secretary-General Salim Ahmed Salim said that "Africa must gauge the significance of the fundamental changes taking place in the world and adapt accordingly" .
He called on African leaders to respect universal democratic values, but to resist democratic models imposed from outside: "Like revolutions, which cannot be exported, democracy must be home grown." 
Ugandan President Yoweri Museveni, elected to succeed President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt as the organization's Chairman for the coming year, said after the summit that Africa should be allowed to develop its own response to pressure for political change.
"The form of democracy Africa shall adopt, it must decide itself.
I reject the shallow lectures we are getting from some quarters."
The summit was marked by a new mood of realism among the leaders present.
In his report, Salim said that Africa's socio-economic decline and increasing debt burden were the result of inadequate policies, as well as of the "unfair, hostile international economic system" .
President Ibrahim Babangida of Nigeria said that Africa had failed to meet its challenges: "Ever since the majority of our countries became independent in the 1960s we have conducted our lives as if the world owes us a living." 
The leaders promised to co-operate in ending the civil wars and the conflicts between states which were hindering the continent's development, in particular the border conflict between Mauritania and Senegal, the subject of an OAU commission report presented during the summit, and the civil war in Liberia [see pp. 37601-02].
The 1991 OAU summit was to be held in Abuja, Nigeria, starting on June 3.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Resignation of Supreme Court Justice — Nomination of replacement
George Bush made the first Supreme Court appointment of his presidency on July 23 when he nominated David H. Souter, a federal Appeals Court judge, to fill the vacancy created by the resignation of Justice William J. Brennan.
Bush's choice was of particular importance because of the Court's current delicate political balance.
President Ronald Reagan's appointment of three conservative justices had created a five-four conservative majority which had resulted in the erosion of a number of liberal precedents, most notably the constitutional right of women to obtain abortions which had been established in the 1973 landmark decision Roe v. Wade [for which see also below].
On some issues, however, the Court's liberal minority was still able to prevail as a result of managing to win a fifth vote, usually from either Justice Byron R. White or Justice Sandra Day O'Connor.
Thus the retirement of Brennan, the Court's leading liberal, offered Bush the opportunity of making an appointment which would ensure the creation of an absolute and dependable conservative majority.
Brennan, 84, who had recently suffered a small stroke, announced his resignation on July 20, stating that the "strenuous demands of court work" were "incompatible with my advancing age and medical condition" .
Born into a poor Irish immigrant family, Brennan specialized in labour law before his appointment to the Supreme Court by President Eisenhower in 1956.
Thereafter he quickly became its most renowned liberal member, leading some opponents to accuse him of judicial activism.
An author of over 1,200 published opinions, Brennan was known as a strong opponent of the death penalty, a proponent of minority and women's rights, and a believer in a broad interpretation of the Constitution.
Although most of his final years were spent attempting to defend liberal precedents, those victories which the liberal minority did still achieve were due largely to his authority, intellect and tactical skill.
In the most recent session, which ended on June 30, 1990, Brennan secured majorities for a reaffirmation of congressional power to enact affirmative action programmes; for a ruling that the First Amendment prohibited most political patronage in hiring or promotion; and for a reiteration of the 1989 ruling that anti-flag-burning legislation was unconstitutional.
Brennan's retirement reduced the Court's liberal caucus to three: Thurgood Marshall, 82, and Harry Blackmun, 81 (the two oldest members), and John Paul Stevens, 70.
David Souter, born in 1939, was educated at Harvard and Oxford universities before practising law in New Hampshire.
He was appointed to the state's Superior Court in 1978, to its Supreme Court in 1983, and to the federal Court of Appeals for the First Circuit in 1990.
Reputed to be a conservative and an advocate of a narrow interpretation of the Constitution, Souter's recent appointment as an Appeals Court judge, together with a sparse record of published opinion, meant that his views on contentious contemporary issues remained largely unknown at the time of his nomination.
This factor was thought to have been a key reason for Souter's nomination, as Bush was eager to avoid repeating the divisive — and ultimately unsuccessful — struggle for Senate endorsement which had marked Reagan's 1987 attempt to appoint the conservative Robert Bork [see p. 35701].
In announcing his decision, Bush brushed aside questions on Souter's attitude to abortion and civil rights, stating that he had been selected because of his "keen intellect and highest ability" .
Souter also refused to reveal his views, stating that he would refrain from commenting on any judicial issues prior to his confirmation hearings which were expected to take place in September 1990.
Souter's relative anonymity also meant that his nomination received a muted reaction from most pressure groups — particularly those in favour of and opposed to abortion — most of whose spokespeople suggested that they would await a fuller disclosure of the judge's views before commenting upon the suitability of his appointment.
Appeal by Oliver North
A federal Appeals Court of the District of Columbia Circuit ruled by two votes to one on July 20 to overturn one of the convictions against Oliver North; the court also ordered a fresh examination of the evidence in relation to the remaining two guilty verdicts against North.
The three convictions had resulted from North's 1989 trial on 12 felony charges arising from his role in the Iran-contra scandal, a clandestine operation by members of the Reagan administration to sell arms to Iran and to use the proceeds to provide illegal aid to the right-wing Nicaraguan contra rebels.
The court reversed North's conviction for altering and destroying National Security Council documents on the grounds that the trial judge, District Judge Gerhard Gesell, had issued erroneous instructions to the jury.
The panel also ruled that in relation to the convictions for accepting an illegal gratuity and for aiding and abetting the obstruction of Congress, the evidence should be re-examined "witness by witness, line by line and item by item" , in order to determine whether any of it had been "tainted" by North's televised testimony to congressional investigating committees in 1987 for which he had been granted limited immunity.
The two Appeals Court judges who constituted the majority opinion, David Sentelle and Laurence Silberman, were both appointees of President Reagan, who had been consistent in his support of North.
Chief Judge Patricia Wald, an appointee of President Jimmy Carter, dissenting, issued a statement after the appeal verdict stating that she was "satisfied that North received a fair trial" .
Independent Counsel Lawrence E. Walsh, the chief prosecutor in the Iran-contra cases, stated that he was studying the appeal ruling in order "to determine the prosecution's next step" .
The ruling threatened to undermine other Iran-contra convictions, including that of John Poindexter, North's former superior at the National Security Council, who was convicted of five felonies in April 1990 and who, like North, had testified to Congress under a grant of limited immunity.
Abortion
Vetoing of Louisiana anti-abortion bill
The divisive national debate over abortion centred upon Louisiana during July as two attempts by the state legislature to enact the most draconian anti-abortion law in the country were vetoed by Democrat Governor Charles E. (Buddy) Roemer.
The Louisiana Human Life Bill, passed by the state legislature on June 27, provided punishments of 10 years' "hard labour" and fines of up to $100,000 for doctors who performed abortions for any reason other than to save the life of the woman.
The bill did not make an exception in cases of pregnancy caused by incest or rape despite a warning by Roemer — himself an opponent of abortion — that he would veto any legislation which was deficient in these respects.
Roemer vetoed the bill on July 6.
The Louisiana House of Representatives immediately voted to override his veto, by 73 votes to 31.
On the following day the Senate also voted, by 23 to 16, to override the veto, but fell three votes short of the required two-thirds majority.
On July 8 the legislature incorporated the substance of the vetoed bill in the form of an amendment to a bill designed to discourage flag-desecration.
(The Supreme Court had held flag-desecration to be a form of free speech protected by the First Amendment, but this bill provided for only a $25 fine in cases of assault upon flag-burners.)
The amendment differed from the original Human Life bill by allowing abortion in cases of incest, and after rape, but only if the rape was reported within seven days.
Roemer vetoed the bill on July 27.
Whilst he regarded the concession on incest as acceptable, he considered the rape provision too restrictive.
Supreme Court's attitude to abortion
The Louisiana bill was drafted by state and national anti-abortion groups in an effort to force the Supreme Court to address the 1973 Roe v. Wade ruling which had established the constitutional right of women to obtain abortions.
Although the newly established conservative majority on the Supreme Court had undermined the 1973 decision, most notably in the case of Webster v. Reproductive Health Services in July 1989, the precedent had not been struck down in its entirety.
In the year since the Webster ruling invited states to pass new restricts against abortion, more than 300 bills had been formulated in some 40 states.
Opposition by those in favour of the availability of abortion, however, meant that few such measures had progressed to the statute books.
At the end of the Supreme Court's current session on June 30, therefore, it remained unclear how far the Court was willing to undo Roe v. Wade.
Despite the Court's five-four conservative-liberal balance, the nominally conservative O'Connor (the Court's only female justice) was considered ambiguous in her attitude on Roe v. Wade.
On June 25 the Court ruled by five to four (with O'Connor voting with the liberals) to strike down part of a Minnesota law which required pregnant minors to notify both parents prior to obtaining an abortion.
The constitutionality of two-parent notification was upheld, however, provided that a provision was included allowing minors to seek a judicial review to waive the requirement.
The Court also upheld an Ohio parental notification requirement.
Most commentators considered that the effect of the decisions would be to encourage other states to reinstate existing laws on parental notification and consent which had fallen into disuse because of previous court rulings.
The Supreme Court was due to consider more comprehensive anti-abortion laws in Guam and Pennsylvania later in the year.
Following the retirement from the Court of Brennan, the leading liberal, in early July [see above], the anti-abortionist movement remained optimistic that Roe v. Wade would eventually be overturned.
Veto of Family and Medical Leave Bill
The House of Representatives on July 25 failed to overturn the presidential veto of the Family and Medical Leave Bill, legislation which would have required businesses with 50 or more employees to allow workers to take 12 weeks of annual unpaid leave in order to care for newly born infants or seriously ill family members.
Although the House voted in favour of the bill by 232 to 195, it fell 53 votes short of the two-thirds majority needed to override a presidential veto.
The legislation, which would have applied to some 50 per cent of US employees, had been passed by the House on May 10 and by the Senate on June 14.
It was vetoed by President George Bush on June 29 on the grounds that such issues should be resolved through collective bargaining and voluntary agreements rather than through mandatory federal legislation.
The result of the House vote meant that of the 13 vetoes applied by Bush since his inauguration in January 1989, all had been maintained.
Congressional ethics cases
Denunciation of Senator Durenberger
In the first of several ethics cases due to be heard in 1990, the Senate voted unanimously on July 25 to denounce a Republican senator, David Durenberger of Minnesota, for "clearly and unequivocally unethical conduct" in violating congressional rules governing outside income.
In following the July 18 recommendation of the Select Committee on Ethics, the Senate also ordered Durenberger to pay more than $120,000 in restitution for improper expense claims and the receipt of gifts and honoraria (in the form of speaking fees) in excess of the prescribed limit.
The Senate's decision meant that Durenberger became only the ninth member to be so censured, and the first since 1979.
To be "denounced" , "censured" , or "condemned" (each of which carried equal weight) was the strongest form of discipline against a member short of outright expulsion.
Whereas expulsion — a fate to have befallen 15 senators since the foundation of the US republic — required a two-thirds majority, however, denunciation needed only a simple majority.
Durenberger, who was not due to face re-election until 1994, acknowledged that he had made "serious mistakes" and characterized the verdict against him as a "fair conclusion" .
Admonished senators
Timothy Pickering (Federalist, Massachusetts), 1811: censured for reading confidential documents in open Senate.
Benjamin Tappan (Dem., Ohio), 1844: censured for leaking to the press a presidential message to the Senate.
Benjamin Tillman and John McLaurin (both Dem., South Carolina), 1902: censured for fist-fighting in the chamber.
Hiram Bingham (Rep., Connecticut), 1929: censured over his choice of a staff member.
Joseph McCarthy (Rep., Wisconsin), 1954: condemned for his abuse of and non-cooperation with the subcommittee on privileges and elections during a 1952 investigation into his conduct.
Thomas Dodd (Dem., Connecticut), 1967: censured for conversion of campaign funds to personal benefit.
Herman Talmadge (Dem., Georgia), 1979: denounced for improper financial conduct including the falsification of expense claims and the improper reporting of campaign receipts.
Reprimand of Representative Frank
On the day after the Senate's adjudication, the House of Representatives voted by 408 to 18 to reprimand Barney Frank, a Democratic representative for Massachusetts, for bringing discredit upon Congress through his relationship with a male prostitute.
The decision to reprimand Frank (a less severe disciplinary measure than either censure or expulsion) was in accordance with the July 19 recommendation of the House's Standard of Official Conduct Committee and concluded a 10-month investigation into the affair.
Frank, who was serving his fifth term in the House and was one of the country's most liberal federal legislators, had acknowledged his homosexuality in 1987.
In 1989 it was revealed that he had engaged in a homosexual relationship with Steven Gobie, whom he also hired as a personal aide and driver in 1985.
Frank claimed that he had not known that Gobie was running a prostitution service from Frank's apartment on Capitol Hill and that he had dismissed him upon learning of it.
The four-hour debate included some bitter personal attacks upon Frank, particularly by the California Republican William Dannemeyer who demanded his colleague's expulsion.
The reprimand was adopted only after expulsion and censure motions were defeated.
Overturning of Garcia conviction
A federal Appeals Court of the Second Circuit on July 29 overturned the convictions against Robert Garcia, a former member of the House of Representatives, and his wife Jane Lee Garcia.
The two had been convicted in October 1989 of extortion and conspiracy (although acquitted of bribery and the acceptance of illegal gratuities) from the Wedtech Corporation, a now-defunct defence contractor.
Garcia resigned his seat in January 1990, shortly before the two were sentenced to three years' imprisonment.
In a unanimous ruling the court deemed that the couple's acceptance of $170,000 from Wedtech, in return for assisting the corporation to win federal contracts, did not amount to extortion.
However, the court upheld the conviction against Mario Biaggi, a former member of the House who was sentenced to eight years' imprisonment on charges arising from the Wedtech affair.
Ending of McMartin retrial
The longest and costliest criminal case in US history ended on July 27 when the prosecution dropped child molestation charges against Raymond Buckey after the jury had declared itself unable to arrive at a majority verdict.
The charges arose from a 1983 investigation of alleged sexual abuse by Buckey, his mother Peggy McMartin Buckey, and several members of staff at the family-owned McMartin kindergarten in Los Angeles.
The original 33-month trial ended in January 1990 when the jury returned verdicts of not guilty on 52 counts of sexual molestation, but was unable to reach a conclusion on a further 13 counts.
Buckey was retried on eight charges, although the proceedings lasted less than 12 weeks and involved 40 rather than the 124 original witnesses.
As with the original trial, a central aspect of the case involved the extent to which the assault allegations of the children involved had been induced by social workers involved in the case.
Speaking after the withdrawal of the final charges Buckey, who had spent five years in prison before being released on bail in 1987, said that he planned to move out of the state and "get some fresh air" .
AMERICAS
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
Attempted coup by Moslem militants
Members of the Jamaat al Muslimeen, a militant black Moslem sect, staged an unsuccessful coup attempt on July 27 against the government of Prime Minister Arthur Robinson.
In the five days of violence which resulted official estimates suggested that at least 30 people died (including one MP) and several hundred were injured.
In a series of co-ordinated attacks the rebels occupied Red House — the country's legislative building — capturing Robinson and several members of his Cabinet, seized the state-run television station and destroyed the police headquarters.
The leader of the rebels, Imam Yasin Abu Bakr, demanded Robinson's resignation, the establishment of a coalition interim government (including himself), the holding of national elections within 90 days and an amnesty for all who had participated in the coup.
The country's armed forces remained loyal to the elected government, however, and a five-day stalemate developed.
The coup attempt followed a prolonged period of economic recession within Trinidad and Tobago, which saw gross national product (GNP) fall by more than 30 per cent between 1982 and 1990 and unemployment rise to over 22 per cent.
Public disaffection from Robinson's government, elected in 1986, was increased by austerity measures which included reductions in public-sector pay, jobs and services.
Before the coup attempt, commentators had already been expressing the fear that economic decline could exacerbate the conflict inherent within the country's heterogeneous racial structure.
Some 40 per cent of the population were of black African descent, 40 per cent were descended from labourers brought from the Indian subcontinent, and the remainder were of mixed race.
About 6 per cent of Trinidad's 1,300,000 population were followers of Islam, most of them being of east Indian descent.
However, the membership of Jamaat al Muslimeen, estimated at around 300, was composed of black Islamic converts.
Relations between this group and the government had been strained for some years because of the sect's links with Libya and its occupation of a disputed eight-acre site west of the capital, where it had built a commune.
In the days which followed the coup attempt, as police and Army units concentrated upon laying seige to the two occupied buildings, there was widespread violence and looting within Port of Spain.
The 12-hour curfew imposed after the coup attempt was extended to 18 hours on July 30, but the chaos continued as rampaging gangs clashed with vigilantes and police amid burnt out shops and warehouses.
Police and troops made an attempt to recapture Red House on July 29, but were ordered back by the Prime Minister who, along with several other hostages, had been wired with explosive charges.
Although there were reports that Robinson had agreed to the rebel demands, the security forces appeared determined to resist any such deal.
On the following day there was fierce fighting at the television station and the building was partially destroyed by fire.
On July 31 the rebels released Robinson after Abu Bakr accused the security forces of wanting him to die in order to justify a military solution to the stalemate.
Robinson, aged 63, in deteriorating health and suffering from glaucoma, had been shot in the legs on July 27; he was also reported to have been beaten.
Although the Prime Minister admitted having signed a document agreeing to the rebel demands, the security forces made it clear that they would not accept the validity of this contract.
In the face of this intransigence the rebels surrendered on Aug. 1.
A total of 25 hostages were released from the television station and a further 17, including seven Cabinet Ministers, from Red House.
Some of the 120 rebels claimed that they had been granted an amnesty, but an official spokesman stated that all had surrendered unconditionally and could face charges of treason, a capital offence.
AMERICAS
NICARAGUA
General strike
An agreement signed by the government of President Violeta Chamorro and by the National Workers' Front (FNT) on July 12 ended a 15-day general strike by an estimated 100,000 workers in public, private and agricultural sectors which had paralysed the country and brought it to the brink of civil war.
In return for an orderly resumption of work the government agreed (i) a general wage increase of 43 per cent for July to offset the inflationary effects of its current economic austerity programme, with a further review in August;(ii) job security for and non-victimization of strikers;(iii) compensation for public-sector workers made redundant between April 26 and July 21, but not their reappointment;(iv) the suspension of a programme to privatize land nationalized since 1979 by the former Sandinista (FSLN) government; and (v) the retention of subsidies on public transport.
Both sides claimed a victory and agreed to maintain communications on matters of economic concern.
They also agreed to participate with the business sector in a "national dialogue" to reactivate productivity and encourage national reconstruction.
However, the FNT announced on July 30 that it would not participate in this national dialogue because the government was reneging on the July 12 agreement by continuing to dismiss workers, especially in the textile sector.
The strike was in support of FNT demands, which enjoyed widespread popular support and that of the FSLN (Sandinista) opposition to which the FNT was affiliated, for a minimum monthly wage equivalent to US$200 and for an end to plans to privatize state enterprises.
The FNT had also accused the government of breaking promises given during a similar strike in May [see p. 37450]not to dismiss large numbers of state employees.
The government's response was to depict the strike as "strictly political" and to order the arrest of six strike leaders who were held briefly in custody on July 4.
The strike was declared illegal on July 7.
Despite attempts at mediation by the FSLN leader and former President Daniel Ortega Saavedra, and by the Venezuelan President Carlos Andrés Pérez, six people were reportedly killed and over 100 injured as gangs of armed supporters of the former FSLN government clashed with armed right-wing vigilantes (among whom were former members of the contras) during days of fighting in the capital, Managua.
Barricades blocked the main streets and were erected in many neighbourhoods.
The action of the Sandinista-controlled Army (EPS), in obeying a government order and clearing the barricades away on July 10, and the constitutional loyalty also of the police force (which was similarly linked with the FSLN), was generally considered to have been crucial to the government's survival.
A right-wing challenge to the government, led by Vice-President Virgilio Godoy, was reportedly supported by most of the parties within Chamorro's 14-party ruling National Opposition Union (UNO).
Godoy on July 10 called for the establishment of a "National Salvation Commission" to organize armed resistance to the Sandinistas.
Despite an immediate reprimand from Chamorro, Godoy's statements during the strike reportedly encouraged the formation of right-wing armed groups.
Godoy described the July 12 agreement between the government and unions as a concession to "terrorism" .
On July 19 an estimated 60,000 people attended a Sandinista rally in Managua to celebrate the 11th anniversary of the overthrow of the Somoza dictatorship.
The previous evening Chamorro had urged the population to "rescue" the anniversary as a national event, claiming that the Sandinistas had betrayed the 1979 revolution by replacing one dictatorship with another.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Cabinet reshuffle
Cabinet changes were announced on July 27, with the appointment of the following new Ministers.
Gen. Héctor Jurado Toro — Defence; Roberto Smith — Transport and Communications; Jonathan Coles — Agriculture; Armando Durán — Secretary-General of the Presidency; Vladimir Gessen — Tourism; Vladimir Moreno Guacaran — Justice; Herbert Torres — Venezuela Fund for Investment; Régulo Villegas — Drug Control.
Jesús Ramón Carmona Borjas, hitherto Secretary-General of the Presidency, became Minister for Congressional Relations.
AMERICAS
URUGUAY
IMF credit
The Economy and Finance Minister, Enrique Braga reported on July 2 that the International Monetary Fund (IMF) had agreed a new standby credit of US$150,000,000, to be disbursed over 18 months, in support of the Uruguayan government's economic programme.
Government targets already agreed with the IMF included reducing the fiscal deficit from 6.1 per cent in 1989 to 2.5 per cent in 1990; reducing inflation from 89.3 per cent to 37.7 per cent in 1990 and to 30 per cent in 1991; and achieving growth of 2 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) during 1990.
In addition cost-cutting measures included a proposed 15 per cent reduction in government spending.
On July 17 the country's commercial creditor banks reportedly agreed terms necessary for Uruguay to undertake a buy-back of US$1,000 million of its debt, thereby reducing its medium-term bank debt by an estimated 60 per cent.
However, a government offer to purchase the debt at 47 cents on the US dollar, which was below its current secondary market trading price, was felt to be an obstacle to many banks agreeing to sell.
AMERICAS
PERU
Inauguration of President
Alberto Keinya Fujimori was invested as Peru's new President on July 28 in the presence of the Presidents of Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Venezuela.
Fujimori stated in his inaugural address to the Congress that his government had inherited a "disaster" , with the country in the grip of hyper-inflation and an escalating guerrilla war.
He promised "a moral renewal in political leadership" and pledged himself to root out state corruption, to combat drug trafficking and to investigate human rights abuses.
Lacking a majority in either chamber, he asked senators and deputies for 180 days of extraordinary legislative powers to launch an economic anti-inflationary plan (details of which were expected to be announced in August), with the intention of restoring Peru's relationships with international lending agencies.
New Cabinet
The new Cabinet, sworn in on the same day, contained no members from Fujimori's politically inexperienced Change 90 (Cambio 90) movement.
In an attempt to create a government of national unity it included specialists, politically non-aligned individuals, right- and left-wing politicians (albeit without the backing of their parties), and members of the armed forces.
The new Prime Minister and Finance Minister, Juan Carlos Hurtado Miller, a former Agriculture Minister, resigned from the conservative Popular Action party (AP) in order to take up his new government role.
Juan Carlos Hurtado Miller Prime Minister; Finance Luis Marchand Stens Foreign Affairs Gen. Adolfo Alvarado Fournier Interior Gen. Jorge Torres Aciego Defence Gloria Helfer (IU*) Public Education Carlos Vidal Layseca Public Health Carlos Amat y León (IS**) Agriculture Guillermo del Solar Rojas Housing Fernando Sánchez Albavera (IS**) Energy and Mines Eduardo Toledo Gonzales Transport and Communications Adml. (retd) Raúl Sánchez Sotomayor Fisheries Guido Pennano Industry Carlos Torres y Torres Lara Labour Augusto Antoniolli Vásquez Justice *United Left.
**Socialist Left.
New Peruvian Council of Ministers
Dismissal of senior military leaders
On July 28, in an controversial and unprecedented move, Fujimori dismissed Adml.
Alfonso Panizo Sariquey, the head of the Joint Chiefs of Staff and Navy Commander, and Gen. German Vucetich, the Air Force Chief of Staff.
In a news conference he denied that the decision reflected disquiet in the armed forces and stated that "the President does not have to give any explanations whatsoever" .
The dismissal of Panizo was thought to be linked to expressions of anti-Japanese racism (Fujimori himself being of Japanese descent) and to rumours of a coup plot within the Navy.
Panizo, who demanded an inquiry into the decision, was posted to the Inter-American Defence Board based in Washington, and was replaced by Adml.
Luis Montes Lecaros; Gen. Arnaldo Velarde Ramirez replaced Vucetich.
The fact that Gen. Jorge Zegarra was confirmed in his post as Army Chief of Staff, together with the appointment of Alvarado, an Army general, as Interior Minister, led to speculation that Fujimori intended to bolster his political position through an alliance with the Army.
On July 30, 12 lieutenant-generals were retired and eight of the nine leading national police commanders were dismissed.
Gen. Adolfo Cuba y Escobedo was named as the new Director of the National Police.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Sale of state airline
In response to a government appeal the Supreme Court on July 14 allowed the privatization of the state airline Aerolíneas Argentinas to go ahead, overruling a decision taken the previous day in a lower court.
The purchaser was a consortium composed of the Spanish state-owned carrier, Iberia, and Cielos del Sur, the operators of the principal domestic Argentine airline Austral Líneas Aéreas.
The lower court had accepted a submission from eight dissident congressional deputies of the ruling Justicialist (Peronist) Party, that the proposed sale would give Austral a virtual monopoly over the domestic market, and granted a 60-day suspension to allow investigations into allegations that the tender violated Argentine company law.
The Supreme Court had been increased in size from five to nine judges by President Carlos Saúl Menem in April, and there were accusations that it was biased in favour of the government.
On July 16 it was officially announced that the consortium had offered US$260,000,000 in cash (of which half was to be paid immediately and the remainder over 10 months) in addition to US$2,000 million in a debt-for-equity exchange, comprising US$1,600 million in Argentine debt principal and $400,000,000 in outstanding interest on that debt.
Iberia also pledged a $683,000,000 investment programme.
Four other airlines, Alitalia (Italy), American Airlines (United States), KLM (Netherlands), and Varig (the main Brazilian carrier) had withdrawn from the tender.
Common market with Brazil
During a visit to Buenos Aires on July 6-7 the Brazilian President Fernando Collor de Mello signed a formal statement of intent to establish an Argentina-Brazil common market by 1995.
This represented the culmination of a process of economic integration initiated by both countries in July 1986 [see pp. 34669; 36614].
A joint commission was also to be established to discuss with the United States government the proposal in June by President George Bush that the Americas be made a free-trade zone [see p. 37526].
In addition 25 other trade-related agreements were ratified which included the mutual reduction of tariffs and export duties on 350 manufactured goods; the freeing of restrictions on nearly all primary agricultural produce and the equalizing of tariffs of 170 food items; and a bilateral annual trade of 10,000 vehicles.
In mid-July, in response to Uruguayan concerns that it had not been invited to participate in the talks, the Foreign Minister Domingo Cavallo stressed that Uruguay was welcome to participate in future discussions and was not excluded from the common market [for previous Brazil, Uruguay, Argentina trilateral trade accords see pp. 35309; 36273].
He envisaged that Chile, Paraguay and Bolivia would also eventually join.
New UK ambassador
Humphrey Maud presented his diplomatic credentials to Menem on July 18, becoming the first United Kingdom ambassador to Argentina since diplomatic relations were broken off at the time of the Falkland (Malvinas) Islands war of 1982.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Resumption of dialogue
After a five-month hiatus in contacts between the two Korean states, July saw a plethora of proposals and counter-proposals from both countries.
Although the two countries agreed to an unprecedented meeting of their Premiers in September, the negotiations quickly assumed a familiar pattern with each side seeming to make offers which it knew that the other would reject.
Agreement on proposed meeting of Premiers
The stimulus for the reopening of dialogue (broken off by North Korea in early 1990 in protest over the annual joint South Korean-United States "Team Spirit" military exercise) came from the North in late June, following improving relations between South Korea and the Soviet Union [see p. 37533].
A breakthrough was achieved on July 3, with the agreement in principle that the Premiers of the two countries should meet in Seoul in the near future.
There had by this stage been seven rounds of preliminary talks designed to arrange such a meeting.
The eighth round, on July 26, produced agreement on a specific date — Sept. 4-7, with a further session in Pyongyang on Oct. 16-19.
Speculation on whether the historic meeting would actually go ahead, however, was intensified when, on the same day, a planned visit to the South by a North Korean delegation — the first since 1985 — was cancelled because of a failure to agree upon minor procedural details.
The delegation had been due to meet South Korean dissidents to discuss their possible attendance at a North Korean pro-unification rally due to be held at Panmunjom on Aug. 15.
Earlier, North Korea had on July 17 cancelled an 11th round of talks to arrange a joint meeting of legislators (scheduled for July 19), on the grounds that the violent clashes within the South Korean National Assembly [see this page]had made the meeting impossible.
Proposals on opening of border
In another unexpected Northern initiative, it was announced on July 5 that the northern side of the border at the Panmunjom armistice village (situated in the Demilitarized Zone between the two countries) would be opened from Aug. 15 in an attempt to encourage contacts between the two countries.
Initially the South responded cautiously to the Northern invitation to reciprocate: South Koreans who undertook unofficial visits to the North were subject to long terms of imprisonment under the country's National Security Law.
Nevertheless, President Roh Tae Woo of South Korea welcomed the recent progress in relations between the two states, and on July 6 suggested that he expected to see Korean reunification achieved within five years.
During a televised national address on July 20, Roh announced that his government would open the border at Panmunjom for five days from Aug. 13 and allow unrestricted crossings, although a government spokesman later suggested that the country's leading dissidents would not be permitted to travel to the North.
The response of the North was to suggest that Roh's gesture would be considered sincere only if it was accompanied by the removal of certain border defences and the abolition of the National Security Law.
Further proposals and counter-proposals failed to produce any agreement on the border-opening issue.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH KOREA
Mass resignation of opposition legislators
Relations between President Roh Tae Woo's ruling Democratic Liberal Party (DLP) and the remaining opposition forces worsened significantly during July, leading to fighting within the National Assembly and to the mass resignation of opposition legislators.
The country's political atmosphere had become embittered as a result of the creation of the DLP, in January 1990, through a merger of the then minority governing party and two of the three main opposition groups, which gave the new formation control of more than two-thirds of the seats in the 299-member National Assembly.
The largest opposition force, the Party for Peace and Democracy (PPD), led by veteran dissident Kim Dae Jung, opposed the merger and demanded a general election to allow the electorate to express its opinion of Roh's controversial political manoeuvre.
The dramatic July developments were triggered by the government's attempts to use its new legislative majority to circumvent normal procedure and enact a series of controversial measures prior to the conclusion of the current legislative session in late July.
The bills, which included measures to restructure the country's military leadership and reorganize the broadcasting media, had been delayed by opposition filibustering which had led to outbreaks of fighting in the Assembly as a result of which two members were hospitalized.
Eventually some 26 bills, including those relating to the military and broadcasting industry, were approved in a matter of minutes on July 14 amid scenes of protest and chaos.
The opposition refused to accept the legality of the move and threatened to resign en masse in protest over the DLP's disregard for legislative procedure.
There followed talks between Kim and Lee Ki Taek, the leader of the eight-member Democratic Party (which was already engaged in merger negotiations with the PPD — see p. 37375 for its emergence following formation of DLP) concerning a co-ordinated mass resignation.
On July 20 Kim and Lee also met with Kim Kwan Suk, the leader of the Conference for Promotion of Opposition Unity, thereby fuelling speculation regarding an imminent political realignment in the form of a new unified party of opposition.
The strength of anti-DLP feeling was manifest at a 200,000-strong opposition rally in Seoul on July 21.
The entire 80-member opposition (the PPD, the Democratic Party and two independents) resigned from the National Assembly on July 23, and demanded that Roh call an immediate general election.
In a move calculated to bring a return to the opposition's extra-parliamentary politics of the past, Kim also called for mass anti-government rallies throughout the country.
By the end of the month, however, it remained unclear whether the resignations had become effective.
Technically, unless accepted by the Speaker, a resignation from the Assembly became operative only if approved by the Assembly as a whole, which was due to remain in recess until September.
Prime Minister's apology
In a separate development earlier in the month Prime Minster Kang Young Hoon apologized to the National Assembly on July 3 for the government's misuse of 55,200 million won (equivalent at the time to nearly US$64,000,000) from the 1987 budget to assist the ruling party's campaign in the 1987 presidential elections.
Kang also apologized for the "insincerity" of his initial response to the opposition allegation.
He submitted his resignation to Roh on July 5, but the President refused to accept it.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Multiparty elections
National and local elections
Mongolia's first multiparty elections were held on July 29.
The elections had been called in mid-May as part of a package of political reforms which included the introduction of a multiparty system and the creation of a standing legislature [see p. 37454].
Previous elections, when the electorate voted for a list of candidates nominated by the ruling communist Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP), had taken place in 1986 [see p. 34678].
Elections were held to (i) the 430-seat People's Great Hural, hitherto the legislative body but now in effect an "upper house" with reduced powers;(ii) all 53 seats in the Little Hural, the newly created standing legislature (not one-quarter of the seats as first laid down — see p. 37454); and (iii) municipal and provisional People's Hurals.
Seats in the Little Hural, which would control the budget and the day-to-day running of the country, were to be allocated on the basis of party lists nationwide.
The July 29 elections were preceded by a number of primary elections held on July 22, reducing to 800 (from over 2,400) the number of candidates for the People's Great Hural.
Of those going forward as candidates, 628 were from the MPRP, 16 from the pro-MPRP Mongolian Revolutionary Youth League, 68 from the Mongolian Democratic Party (MDP)(the main opposition grouping), 18 from the Social Democratic Party (SDP), 15 from the National Progress party (NPP), and 55 were independents.
The Mongolian Party of Free Labour (MPFL) and the Mongolian Party of Greens (MPG) failed to get any candidates through to the second round of voting.
Election results
Complete results of the July 29 elections were not available as of mid-August, but according to the Far Eastern Economic Review of Aug. 16 the MPRP had received at least 60 per cent of the votes and had won over 340 of the 430 seats in the People's Great Hural.
The MDP had won 24 per cent of votes, but only a small number of seats; the NPP and SDP had polled about 5 per cent each and the MPFL and the MPG about 1 per cent each.
The report stated that another 40 results were outstanding and that repeat elections were to be held in 20 constituencies where candidates had failed to receive the minimum number of votes.
The government claimed a 91.9 per cent voter turnout, and the elections were monitored by foreign observers from more than 20 countries including the Soviet Union, Thailand, the United Kingdom and the United States.
The observers reported that the elections were generally fair, although some improvements were suggested.
MPRP coalition offer
Gombojavyn Ochirbat, the MPRP chair, announced on July 31 that the party would be willing to enter into discussions with the opposition over the possibility of forming a coalition government.
In the election Ochirbat had only narrowly defeated the NPP leader, Dagvasurengiyn Ganbold, in a contest for an Ulan Bator seat.
The MDP leader, Erdenijn Bat-Uul, gave a press conference on Aug. 6 at which he expressed satisfaction with the election results and said that he did not exclude the possibility of the MDP's participation in a coalition government.
MPRP plenum — New party
The MPRP held its third plenum on June 29 when the former head of state and MPRP general secretary Yumjaagiyn Tsedenbal, who had lived in Moscow since being removed from power in 1984 [see p. 33159], was roundly criticized.
Delegates were told that Tsedenbal and his entourage were largely responsible for Mongolia's "backwardness" .
The plenum expelled seven former MPRP politburo members from the party, accusing them of "crude violation of party discipline" .
The Mongolian Religious Democratic Party, chaired by Tserengiyn Bayarsuren, was founded in late June [for list of parties registered as of May 1990 see p. 37454].
Application to join the IMF
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) announced in a press release of July 12 that the Mongolian government had filed an application to join the IMF which would be considered "in accordance with prescribed procedures" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Crisis within Janata Dal
A serious crisis erupted within the Janata Dal party (the main component of the ruling National Front coalition) in mid-July, and came close to destroying India's coalition government after less than a year in power.
Reappointment of Chauthala as Haryana Chief Minister — Resignations in protest from central Cabinet
The Janata Dal crisis had its roots in a dispute in the northern state of Haryana, the power base of the Deputy Prime Minister and Agriculture Minister, Devi Lal.
In May Devi Lal's son, Om Prakash Chauthala, had been forced to resign as the Janata Dal Chief Minister of Haryana (a post he had effectively inherited from his father in December 1989) after months of controversy over a state-level by-election [see p. 37452].
On July 12, however, it was announced that Chauthala had been re-appointed as Haryana Chief Minister, replacing Banarasi Das Gupta.
Gupta's resignation and Chauthala's reappointment followed a meeting between Devi Lal and the Prime Minister, V. P. Singh, on July 7.
As a result of the meeting Devi Lal apparently believed he had the Prime Minister's approval to reinstate his son, although Singh subsequently denied that he had given his approval to such a move.
V. P. Singh made no immediate comment on Chauthala's reappointment, prompting speculation that he had in fact struck a "deal" with Devi Lal.
Singh's silence prompted Indian newspapers, which had tended to be very supportive of the Prime Minister, to publish some highly critical articles.
On July 13 three Janata Dal ministers resigned in protest over Chauthala's reappointment.
The three were Arun Nehru (Commerce; Tourism), Arif Mohammed Khan (Energy; Civil Aviation) and Satpal Malik (Minister of State for Parliamentary Affairs and Tourism).
By the end of July 14 a further nine Ministers had resigned: External Affairs Minister I. K. Gujral and Ministers of State Hari Kishore Singh (External Affairs), Rampujan Patel (Food and Civil Supplies), Arangil Sridharan (Commerce), Chimanbhai Mehta (Human Resources Development), Bhagey Govardhan (Planning and Programme Implementation), Bhajman Behra (Petroleum and Chemicals) and Deputy Ministers Anil Shastri (Finance) and Ajay Singh (Railways).
At the same time the Bharatiya Janata Party and the Left Front parties, all of which supported the National Front coalition from the "outside" , made it known that they strongly disapproved of Chauthala's reappointment.
Singh's resignation offer — Chauthala's resignation
V. P. Singh offered to resign as Prime Minister on July 14.
In a letter sent to the Janata Dal president, S. R. Bommai, and the National Front chair, N. T. Rama Rao, Singh claimed that he had lost the trust of the people as a result of "the developments during the last two days." 
He called on Bommai and Rao to arrange quickly the election of a new Prime Minister.
After a series of meetings on July 15 both the National Front and the Janata Dal rejected Singh's resignation offer and it was announced that he would reluctantly stay in office.
Meanwhile, on July 15, Devi Lal went on the attack, accusing Arun Nehru and Arif Mohammad Khan, hitherto two of his strongest critics in the Cabinet, of corruption.
The Janata Dal's political affairs committee met on July 16, at the end of which Bommai announced that Chauthala had unconditionally resigned as Chief Minister of Haryana.
He was replaced the following day by Hukam Singh.
Meanwhile, all the ministers who had resigned on July 13-14 returned to their posts after being invited to do so by V. P. Singh.
Continued unrest in Kashmir and Punjab
Imposition of President's rule in Jammu and Kashmir
President's rule in Jammu and Kashmir came into force on July 19.
The decision to impose direct rule followed the expiry of Governor's rule at midnight on July 18.
Governor's rule had initially been imposed for a maximum six-month period (as provided for under the state Constitution) on Jan. 19 [see pp. 37183-84].
All-India Radio had reported on July 5 that the Governor of Jammu and Kashmir, Girish Chandra Saxena, had declared the entire Kashmir Valley and the 20-km border belt in Punch and Rajaori districts a "disturbed area" , thereby giving the security forces increased powers to act against "extremists" .
Meeting of Indian and Pakistani foreign secretaries
Muchkund Dubey and Tanver Ahmad Khan, foreign secretaries of India and Pakistan respectively, held talks in Islamabad, Pakistan, on July 18-19.
The talks concentrated on the unrest in Kashmir and the resultant Indo-Pakistani border tension, and were concerned mainly with confidence-building measures.
Both foreign secretaries described the meeting as "useful" , and it was agreed to hold a second round of talks in New Delhi on Aug. 9-10.
Assassinations in Punjab
Shiv Singh Bela, a senior Akali Dal leader and a member of the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee (the Sikh Temple Management Committee), was assassinated on July 7.
Three days later Balwant Singh, a leader of the Akali Dal (Badal) and a former state Finance Minister, was shot dead near Chandigarh, the state capital.
The Guardian of Aug. 1 reported that 2,420 Punjab-related killings had been reported in the Indian press during the first seven months of 1990.
This figure compared with 1,159 deaths reported in Jammu and Kashmir.
Visit by Prime Minister to Soviet Union
V. P. Singh visited the Soviet Union on July 23-26, his first major foreign visit since he took office in late 1989.
During his visit Singh met with Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev and Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov.
The official Soviet news agency Tass reported on July 24 that Gorbachev had expressed"complete understanding and support for the [Indian]Prime Minister in connection with the exacerbation of the situation in…
Kashmir".
The two sides agreed to begin drafting a large-scale economic treaty to be signed during Gorbachev's next visit to India [see p. 37352 for 1988 visit by Gorbachev to India].
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Continued fighting in North-Eastern Province
Fighting between the Sri Lankan security forces and guerrillas of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE, the main Tamil separatist group) continued throughout July in the North-Eastern Province.
The latest confrontation between the two sides had started on June 11 when LTTE guerrillas launched a series of attacks on police stations throughout eastern Sri Lanka [see pp. 37529-30].
On July 3 the security forces successfully carried out a daring mission to remove wounded soldiers from the Fort in Jaffna town, under siege since mid-June.
Following the raid the plight of those 250 soldiers remaining in the Fort worsened, especially after the LTTE cut off the Fort's water supply.
Attempts by the Sri Lankan Air Force to air-drop supplies into the Fort usually failed.
Meanwhile, the LTTE claimed that the Air Force carried out heavy bombing and napalm attacks throughout the Jaffna peninsula during July, killing or wounding large numbers of civilians.
On July 12 the government claimed to have overrun a LTTE base camp at Kanjikudichi Aru in the east of the province.
However, the following day, the LTTE struck in the north capturing the Army base at Kokkavil and killing 45 soldiers.
Five days later the Army killed as many as 90 LTTE guerrillas in a battle around the strategically important northern town of Mankulam, some 15 km from Kokkavil.
On July 23 the Army stepped up its offensive in the north, concentrating on the area just south of the Jaffna peninsula; it gained control of Paranthan town on July 24 and, the next day, pushed south and relieved the besieged Army camp at Kilnochchi.
Discovery of mass grave near Tirrukkovil — Alleged LTTE attack on Sinhalese villagers
On July 22 the security forces discovered a series of mass graves near the village of Tirrukkovil in the east.
The graves contained the bodies of up to 200 policemen, many of whom had been blindfolded and shot in the back of the head, who were presumed to have been amongst the 600 captured by the LTTE on June 11 [see above; pp. 37529-30].
Ranjan Wijeratne, the Plantations Minister and Minister of State for Defence, claimed on July 26 that the LTTE had recently carried out a series of attacks on Sinhalese villages.
Wijeratne said that 35 people had been killed in attacks on July 24-25 on villages near Medawachchiya in the north and Polonnaruwa and Trincomalee in the east.
Meeting between Premadasa and Tamil groups — Resignation of Tamil MPs
President Ranasinghe Premadasa offered to reopen a dialogue with the LTTE on July 8, but only with the involvement of the international community and "in a manner acceptable to us" .
Premadasa met with the leaders of anti-LTTE Tamil groups in Colombo on July 13 and 26.
The Tamils called on Premadasa to ensure that food and medical supplies were getting through to Tamil citizens in the North-East Province.
Meanwhile 11 Tamil members of parliament resigned on July 23, in protest at the Army offensive in the North-Eastern province.
All members of the Eelavar Democratic Front (previously known as the Eelam Revolutionary Organization of Students), the 11 MPs constituted the largest Tamil bloc in Parliament and the second-largest opposition grouping.
ASIA — PACIFIC
HONG KONG
UK minister's visit to China — British Nationality Act
Visit by Francis Maude to China — Talks with Li Peng
In his last assignment as Minister of State at the United Kingdom Foreign and Commonwealth Office, Francis Maude visited China on July 25-27, primarily for talks on Hong Kong.
(Maude had officially been promoted to a senior Treasury post prior to his visit.)
Maude was the first minister from a European Community (EC) country to visit China since the Tiananmen Square massacre in June 1989.
The visit was technically in breach of a ban on high-level visits imposed by the EC after the massacre, but the UK claimed exemption on the grounds that it was vital to maintain a dialogue with China over Hong Kong.
During his visit Maude held talks with Li Peng, the Chinese Premier, and Wu Xueqian, a Vice-Premier.
Li told Maude that China had given "high acclaim" to recent "friendly gestures" by the UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher.
Maude claimed that "tough talking about human rights and Hong Kong" took place during his meetings with Chinese officials.
However, it was reported that the UK delegation had raised the possibility of a relaxation of economic sanctions imposed against China after the Tiananmen Square massacre.
After his talks with Li, Maude said that he had been "encouraged" by the Chinese administration's muted attitude to issues of contention between the UK and China, including the British Nationality (Hong Kong) Bill which provided for full British citizenship to be given to some 225,000 Hong Kong citizens.
British Nationality Act — Chinese criticism
The British Nationality (Hong Kong) Act, approved at its second reading in April by the UK parliament [see p. 37376], received the royal assent on July 26, whilst Maude was in Beijing.
On July 25, thousands of Hong Kong citizens had applied for British Dependent Territories Citizenship (BDTC).
Those Hong Kong citizens receiving BDTC before the British Nationality Bill received the royal assent were entitled to apply for a full British right of abode passport.
On July 28 (the day after Maude left Beijing) the Chinese government, abandoning its guarded attitude, launched a fierce attack on the British Nationality Act.
The Chinese Foreign Ministry claimed that the Act was "unacceptable" and would cause "confusion" amongst the people of Hong Kong.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Election results — NLD-SLORC stand-off
Final election results
The final results of the general election held in Myanma on May 27 [see pp. 37457-58]were released on July 1.
The results confirmed that the opposition National League for Democracy (NLD) had won a massive victory, winning 392 of the 485 People's Assembly seats contested.
The National Unity Party (NUP), formed in 1988 by members of the former ruling Burma Socialist Programme Party, won only 10 seats.
The NUP had been supported by the ruling military junta in Myanma, the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC).
Four seats were won by two parties closely aligned with the NLD, the United Nationalities League for Democracy (UNLD) won 65 seats and the remaining seats were won by smaller parties or independent candidates.
The NLD and the UNLD held talks during July aimed at achieving a measure of unity in their opposition to military rule.
Delay in transfer of power — SLORC and NLD statements
Despite the NLD success in the May elections, SLORC statements during June and July, far from indicating that they were contemplating a transfer of power to a civilian government, suggested that the military rulers had little intention of relinquishing power.
At a press conference on July 13 Maj.-Gen.
Khin Nyunt, first secretary of the SLORC and head of the powerful Directorate of Defence Services Intelligence, stated that a swift transfer of power would only lead to weak government.
He also made it clear that the SLORC had no intention of releasing Daw Aung San Suu Kyi, the charismatic NLD secretary general, from house arrest, and other NLD leaders, such as the chair, Gen. (retd.)
Tin U, remained in prison [see pp. 36816-17; 37123; 37188; 37284].
The SLORC issued a statement on July 27 which laid down the powers and responsibilities of the newly elected People's Assembly, but gave no indication as to when it would be allowed to convene.
According to the statement the sole task of the new People's Assembly would be to draft a new constitution to be placed before the people for approval.
The new constitution would, however, have to conform to a series of guidelines to be set down by the SLORC.
A new government would only be formed once the constitution was in place.
In the weeks following the general election the NLD adopted extremely cautious tactics in their dealings with the military.
Under the leadership of the acting chair Kyi Maung, the NLD contacted the SLORC for the first time on June 21, requesting national reconciliation talks.
The military failed to respond to the offer.
A planned NLD rally to mark Martyrs' Day on July 19 (commemorating the 1947 assassination of Suu Kyi's father, Aung San — the country's independence hero) was abandoned at the last moment.
However, by late July there were increasing signs of public frustration at the political impasse, with student demonstrations being reported in the capital Yangon (Rangoon) and also in Mandalay and Prome.
NLD deputies convened in Yangon on July 28-29, when a tough statement was issued attacking the "shameful" delay in the transfer of power, denouncing the military's July 27 statement on the role of the People's Assembly and calling for the release of Suu Kyi and other political prisoners.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MALAYSIA
Sabah state elections — Anti-federation plot in Sabah
PBS victory in Sabah elections
In elections to the Sabah State Assembly held on July 16-17, the ruling United Sabah Party (Parti Bersatu Sabah — PBS), led by the Chief Minister of Sabah, Datuk Joseph Pairin Kitingan, won 36 out of 48 contested seats.
In the previous State Assembly elections, held in May 1986, the PBS had won 34 seats [see p. 34743].
The remaining 12 seats were all won by the opposition United Sabah National Organization (USNO).
Both the PBS and USNO were members of the ruling federal National Front coalition.
The PBS, which came to power soon after its formation in 1985, gained most of its support from the mainly Christian Kadazan ethnic group and from the Chinese; however, the party also made some inroads into what had previously been USNO-controlled Moslem constituencies.
None of the other five competing parties, including Berjaya, which had governed the state until 1985, won any seats.
Kitingan, who described the election results as "heartening" , was sworn in for another term as Chief Minister on July 18.
Arrest of anti-federation plotters in Sabah
On July 9 the federal government released details of a "secret plot" to take Sabah out of the Malaysian Federation by a group called the Sabah People's Liberation Organization.
However, the following day Chief Minister Kitingan, who had close links with one of the alleged plotters, denied that any such plot existed.
The federal government claimed that the plotters aimed to seize the state by force, with the help of foreign mercenaries.
Four people arrested in connection with the plot had been placed in detention under Malaysia's stringent Internal Security Act (ISA).
The four were Damit Undikai, a former police sergeant, arrested on May 18; Banabas Tapin, secretary of the Kadazan-Dusun Tribesman Cultural Association and a close associate of Kitingan, arrested on May 25; Albinus Yudah, a police constable, arrested on May 25; and Abdul Rahman Ahmad, Assistant Superintendent of Police in Sabah, arrested on June 7.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDONESIA
Agreement to restore diplomatic relations with China
Ali Alatas, the Indonesian Foreign Minister, visited China on July 1-4, the first senior Indonesian official to do so since early 1965, and on July 3 he and Qian Qichen, his Chinese counterpart, signed a communiqué providing for the resumption of diplomatic relations between the two countries from Aug. 8.
The resumption of relations, suspended by Indonesia in 1967 [see below for background], was planned to coincide with a visit to Indonesia by the Chinese Premier, Li Peng.
During their talks Qian and Alatas reached agreements on the remaining stumbling blocks to normalization.
Indonesia agreed to repay some US$84,000,000 to China in cash and commodities, to settle debts incurred by the Sukarno regime in the early 1960s.
As regards the legal position of some 350,000 Chinese living in Indonesia, it was eventually agreed that China would offer them citizenship, and that those who declined this offer would be granted permanent residency rights by the Indonesian government.
One of the main Indonesian preconditions for normalization had been a Chinese guarantee of non-interference in Indonesia's internal affairs.
Although no official statement to this effect was released, the Chinese Communist Party general secretary Jiang Zemin told Alatas on July 3 that no country should interfere in the internal affairs of another country.
On the same day Li Peng, told an Indonesian journalist that it would be "impossible" for China to have relations with the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI) because, he claimed, China had "no idea" whether the PKI still existed.
Background to Sino-Indonesian relations
Indonesia established diplomatic relations with communist China in 1950.
During the early 1960s relations flourished as the late President Sukarno embarked on a policy of extreme nationalism and of confrontation with Western and colonial powers.
Relations soured after the abortive coup attempt of September 1965 which heralded Sukarno's eventual downfall and the rise of the current President, Suharto.
According to Suharto and his right-wing military supporters their rival, the Indonesian Communist Party (PKI), with heavy Chinese backing, had been the driving force behind the failed coup.
The military used the event as an excuse to take action against the PKI, and as many as 500,000 people named as communists and left-wing sympathizers were killed by the end of 1965.
Suharto's "New Order" regime eventually suspended diplomatic relations with China in October 1967 [see p. 22482].
Relations between the two countries improved in 1985 when the Chinese Foreign Minister visited Indonesia for the commemorative Afro-Asian Conference in Bandung; later that year a memorandum of understanding on the resumption of direct trade links was signed [see p. 34235].
A breakthrough occurred at the funeral of the Japanese Emperor Hirohito in February 1989 when Suharto held talks with Qian, and the two countries' respective UN missions as a consequence began normalization talks [see pp. 36462; 36935; 37124; 37578].
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Earthquake
At least 1,653 people died, over 3,000 were seriously injured and some 110,000 were made homeless by a powerful earthquake, measuring 7.7 on the Richter scale, which struck the northern Philippines on July 16.
The epicentre of the earthquake was in Cabanatuan City, 95 km north of Manila, although the nearby mountain city of Baguio, a popular tourist resort with 110,000 inhabitants, was also severely damaged with several hundred people trapped beneath the rubble of collapsed hotels and factories.
Initial rescue efforts were hampered by a lack of heavy equipment and by landslides triggered by the initial earthquake.
Rescue teams were quickly reinforced by United States military units operating from bases in the Philippines, the future of which was under discussion between the two countries at the time of the disaster [see p. 37458].
In the ensuing days, as the country suffered a series of aftershocks measuring up to 6.3 on the Richter scale, medical teams and supplies began arriving from around the world.
On July 22 the search for survivors in Baguio city was abandoned by foreign rescue teams, but local volunteers continued the search and, as late as July 30, a man was rescued from beneath the ruins of a hotel.
With at least 1,000 people reported missing, the final death toll of the disaster was expected to rise further.
Acquittal of Imelda Marcos
Imelda Marcos, the widow of deposed Filipino President Ferdinand Marcos, was acquitted by a US federal court of racketeering, fraud and obstruction of justice charges arising from the purchase of real estate, jewellery and works of art.
After five days of deliberation the New York jury delivered its not guilty verdict on July 2, the defendant's 61st birthday.
The charges, which carried a maximum sentence of 50 years' imprisonment and a fine of $1,000,000, alleged that Imelda Marcos had secretly invested in Manhattan real estate and valuables using money stolen from the Philippines.
During the course of the trial, which began on March 20 and involved 95 witnesses, she frequently wept and, on several occasions, collapsed suffering from high blood pressure and gastric ailments.
Although the prosecution claimed that she had stolen over $222,000,000 from the Filipino treasury, its case rested largely upon circumstantial evidence.
The defence, which called no witnesses, presented her as a grieving widow who was "a world-class shopper" but who knew little of the origin of her late's husband's wealth.
(Although both of the Marcoses had been indicted in October 1988, Ferdinand was judged too ill to stand trial and died in Hawaii in September 1989.)
In his summing up the judge stressed that the jury should determine only if Imelda Marcos had engaged in criminal activities whilst in the USA.
Corazon Aquino, who had replaced Ferdinand Marcos as president of the Philippines in 1986, expressed her regret that the "courageous efforts made by the American prosecution" had failed, and suggested that Imelda Marcos would be charged under the criminal law of the Philippines at some point in the future.
Aquino also stated that Marcos remained banned from the country on "national interest and security grounds" , despite her frequently stated desire to return so that she could bury her husband's body in his native soil.
The co-defendant in the Marcos trial, Adnan Khashoggi, the wealthy Saudi Arabian businessman and arms dealer [see also p. 35183], was acquitted of assisting her and her husband to conceal their ownership of US real estate.
It was alleged that Khashoggi, who had been extradited from Switzerland in April 1989, had purchased four Manhattan properties secretly owned by the Marcoses and had backdated the sale documents to evade a New York court order which had frozen the assets of the former dictator and his wife.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASEAN
Meeting of ASEAN Foreign Ministers
Foreign Ministers of the six member countries of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN, comprising Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) held their 23rd annual meeting in Jakarta, Indonesia, on July 24-25.
Both the July 24-25 meeting and the post-ministerial conference between ASEAN and its "dialogue partners" (Australia, Canada, the European Communities (EC), Japan, New Zealand and the United States) held on July 27-29 were dominated by the question of Cambodia and in particular the recent US decision to withdraw its support from the Cambodian rebel government at the UN and to enter into talks with Vietnam [see p. 37598].
The US decision was criticized by ASEAN in a final communiqué which stated that "attempts to change the [UN]representation of Cambodia at this time…would set back the search for a comprehensive political solution to the problem" .
The USA and also Vietnam came under attack for their continued opposition to the forcible repatriation of Indo-Chinese boat people.
ASIA — PACIFIC
ASIA-PACIFIC ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION
Second Ministerial meeting
The second ministerial meeting of the 12-member Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) group was held in Singapore on July 30-31.
The APEC group was composed of the six ASEAN countries — Brunei, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand — and Australia, Canada, Japan, South Korea, New Zealand and the United States.
In a final statement issued at the close of the talks the group agreed to conduct an "urgent review" of the member countries' negotiating positions towards finding greater flexibility and facilitating a breakthrough at the deadlocked "Uruguay Round" of global trade talks launched in 1986 under the auspices of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)[see pp. 37227-28 for most recent developments in Uruguay Round negotiations].
Ministers also agreed to open negotiations to find an acceptable formula to bring the "three Chinas" (China, Hong Kong and Taiwan) into the group.
In addition officials reported that Chile, Ecuador, Mexico, Mongolia, Papua New Guinea, Peru, the Soviet Union and Vietnam had each expressed interest in joining the group.
ASIA — PACIFIC
FIJI
Adoption of new Constitution
The President of Fiji, Ratu Sir Penaia Ganilau, formally promulgated a new Constitution on July 25, which was designed to ensure that political power remained in the hands of the country's ethnic Melanesian population.
The document, which replaced the 1970 Constitution, also upheld traditional Melanesian land ownership structures and guaranteed immunity from prosecution for Maj.-Gen.
Sitiveni Rabuka, the Army officer who had led two military coups in 1987.
The initial coup had been triggered by the 1987 election victory of Labour Party and the (predominantly Indian) National Federation Party.
Attempts by Ratu Sir Penaia when Governor General to ensure a return to civilian rule were dashed when Rabuka staged a second coup later in the year with the specific aim of revising the Constitution in order to guarantee power for the ethnic Melanesians.
At the time of the coups the Melanesian and Indian communities each constituted a minority of the total population but were approximately equal in size.
A new draft constitution was drawn up in 1988 and approved by the Great Council of Chiefs, the traditional Melanesian hierarchical structure, in June 1990.
In an attempt to preserve their authority, the Chiefs amended the Constitution — which was already heavily biased in favour of the rural rather than the urban population — so that only five of the 37 Melanesian lower chamber seats were allocated to the urban areas, where approximately one-third of the Melanesian population lived.
In addition to stipulating that the office of Prime Minister had to be held by a Melanesian, the Constitution now also guaranteed 37 of the 70 seats in the House of Representatives (the lower chamber of the bicameral legislature) to the indigenous population, 27 seats to the Indian community, five seats for other races and one for the inhabitants of Rotuma island [see p. 35252 for previous weighted basis].
In the non-elected upper house of 34 members, 24 seats were reserved for Melanesians, nine for Indians and other races, and one for the inhabitants of Rotuma.
In promulgating the new Constitution Ganilau expressed the hope that elections would be held in 1991, although it remained unclear whether the opposition Labour Party would participate.
The Indian government denounced the Constitution as "racist and undemocratic," and the governments of both Australia and New Zealand expressed reservations concerning its provisions.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Communist Party congress
The 28th congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU), anticipated as a watershed in party history and in the political transformation of the country, was held between July 2 and 13.
Much of the early proceedings seemed to confirm the recent resurgence of the conservative wing, as witnessed at the June founding congress of the Russian Federation Communist Party [see pp. 37538-39].
However, President Mikhail Gorbachev, as CPSU general secretary, once again demonstrated his skill as a political tactician to sway the voting on key issues in his favour.
The congress confirmed the decline in party authority when it set in place a leadership divorced as never before from the mechanisms of state and government.
However, an anticipated schism in party ranks failed to materialize.
Delegate selection — Suggested postponement of congress
Attending the congress were 4,683 delegates.
The central committee had decided in March that these should be nominated by primary party cells.
By leaving the conduct of delegate elections to the discretion of municipal and district committees, the central committee had allowed the conservatives, still dominant in many areas at this local level, to manipulate the elections to their advantage.
Consequently, around 40 per cent of the delegates were conservative party bureaucrats; by contrast, only 104 (slightly over 2 per cent) were members of the radical reformist Democratic Platform faction [see pp. 37384-85], which claimed the backing of up to 40 per cent of the 19,300,000 CPSU members.
The conservative resurgence had not been anticipated when the congress had twice been brought forward from early 1991.
A main aim of that rescheduling had been to allow Gorbachev at the earliest opportunity to push through reforms and install a more sympathetic central committee.
In the week before the start of the congress it emerged that party ideology secretary Vadim Medvedev was canvassing support among the party leaderships in several republics and in Moscow and Leningrad for postponing the congress until the autumn.
However, on June 27 Medvedev announced that the consensus had been for the congress to proceed as scheduled.
Opening of congress — Gorbachev's address
The first agenda item on July 2 was the central committee's political report.
This had been substantially rewritten since publication of the first draft in February [see pp. 37234-35], some of the revisions reflecting conservative criticism of the party leadership, but as delivered by Gorbachev it still came across as a spirited defence of his perestroika reform policies.
Gorbachev's address was greeted with barely five seconds of perfunctory applause, contrasting sharply with the thunderous standing ovations accorded to party leaders at previous congresses.
Entitled To Advance Further Along the Road to Perestroika, Gorbachev's address began with the assertion that there had been a "revolutionary stride" in all spheres of life since he first announced perestroika in April 1985.
He spoke of a "worthy future" in store if perestroika was continued, but warned that if its opponents gained the upper hand there lay ahead "dismal times" .
Principal points of the report were as follows.
The current situation.
Listing the successes of perestroika in transforming Soviet society, Gorbachev declared that the "Stalinist model of socialism" was being replaced by a civil society.
Genuine democracy was being established.
Production relations which "caused the alienation of the working people from property and from the results of their work" were being dismantled, and conditions were being created for "free competition of socialist producers" .
The "overcentralized" Soviet state was in the process of being converted into a genuine union based on the "self-determination and voluntary association of peoples" .
The "atmosphere of ideological domineering" had been replaced by freedom of thought and glasnost, and leaders had at last begun to tell people the truth.
New political thinking had "rid us of a confrontational approach in foreign policy" , making the Soviet Union "a country open to the world and to co-operation, generating not fear, but respect and solidarity" .
It was "simply rubbish" to blame perestroika for all the country's present troubles.
However, in enriching people's lives and revolutionizing their thinking, perestroika had heightened social and economic expectations, and had unleashed sometimes conflicting political tendencies and social forces.
Problems were arising because perestroika was still in its "transitional period" .
It had failed to cure many of society's ills, and in matters such as the economy, public order and inter-ethnic relations had indeed made things worse.
In defence of his policies Gorbachev once again talked of the "grim legacy" inherited from past leaderships, but he also admitted that there were "negative processes" which the current party leadership could have foreseen and prevented.
Rounding on conservative opponents, Gorbachev commented: "When we embarked on perestroika we of course realized that it would inevitably affect the interests of those who held the actual power and who administered society's wealth in the name of the people.
This applies to some extent to the present posture of some of the leading cadres who prefer the old and are in substance quite incapable of integrating in the reform processes, and who, moreover, refuse to accept them either politically or psychologically."
He accused these conservatives of hindering renovation of society under the pretext of populism or of safeguarding ideological purity.
Gorbachev was equally forceful in attacking radical reformers, warning that some were "pushing us towards a bourgeois system and linking the solution of current problems with the country's switch on to capitalist tracks" .
The policy of perestroika: experience and prospects.
Gorbachev sought to explain why, despite a host of achievements in improving economic performance, the situation for the consumer had become critical.
He laid much of the blame on the growth of incomes outstripping that of consumer goods production, and attributed this primarily to mistakes in granting autonomy to state enterprises and in regulating the co-operative sector.
The government had failed to approach economic reform comprehensively, and, lacking sufficient support from the CPSU politburo, had bowed to pressure from "various industries and the old managerial structures which sought to keep their position and maintain the command methods of administration" .
Explaining plans for a market economy, Gorbachev declared that diverse forms of ownership and management ranging from state-owned enterprises to co-operatives or family farms "all serve to strengthen the democratic pillars of society, since the working people become genuine masters of the means of production and the results of their work, and have a personal stake in efficient performance and high ultimate results" .
He continued: "This means that by moving towards a market we are not swerving from the road to socialism, but are advancing towards a fuller realisation of society's potential." 
He went on to note the need to improve integration of the Soviet economy into world markets, requiring early full convertibility of the rouble, a comprehensive switch to world prices and hard-currency trade settlements, and expanded ties with capitalist countries.
Concerning agrarian reform, Gorbachev took issue with the position espoused by party agriculture secretary and leading conservative Yegor Ligachev (albeit not mentioning him by name).
He declared that "probably no other branch needs economic freedom and a true market economy as keenly" , and he criticized speculation that the future of collective and state farms was in doubt.
There would be no "blanket de-collectivization" , and profitable collective and state farms would be allowed to continue in the context of equal opportunities being given to all forms of farm ownership.
Gorbachev explained the new Soviet thinking on international relations with particular reference to the end of the Cold War and the recent changes in Eastern Europe.
He rejected the conservative assessment (put most forcefully by military district commander Col.-Gen.
Albert Makashov at the Russian Federation CP congress) that political change in Eastern Europe constituted the "collapse of socialism" and that the Soviet Union was guilty of "leaving the field without fighting" .
Gorbachev declared that what had collapsed was not socialism but Stalinism, stressing that "it is impossible to ensure one's own security at the expense of anybody else's…and to pretend to know better how other peoples and nations should manage their affairs" .
The party and reform.
Gorbachev set out to correlate the CPSU's policy of "humane and democratic socialism" with Marxism.
Commenting that the social theories of Marx, Engels and Lenin were rooted in 19th and early 20th century realities, Gorbachev complained that "we tried for decades to find answers to all contingencies of life in quotations from classics, forgetting that they [Marx, Engels and Lenin]had themselves insisted on taking into account the historical circumstances behind any theory and mocked those who had sought to convert Marxism into a kind of scripture" .
He asserted that with the concept of reform still in a state of flux it "must be enriched with new ideas and conclusions" .
On the future of the party, Gorbachev declared that the CPSU "has neither the political nor the moral right to absolve itself from the responsibility for the destiny of the reform programme, to shirk its role and to retire to the wayside of the social process" .
He proceeded to elaborate his vision of a party "freed from its ideological blinkers and dogmatism" , and seeking "dialogue, discussion, co-operation and partnership with all of the nation's progressive social and political forces" .
He spoke of freedom of debate and "recognition of the right of the minority to a stand of their own" , but he explicitly ruled out factionalism, declaring that all decisions adopted by the majority must be binding on all.
On the highly contentious issue of whether the CPSU should be a "vanguard" or a "parliamentary" party, Gorbachev reaffirmed that "the vanguard role cannot be imposed on the community" , and that the party would operate as a "parliamentary" party in the sense that it would work to retain the mandate of the ruling party within the bounds of the democratic process.
Party cells in enterprises, the Army, the police and KGB (State Security Committee) should remain, since "the right of association is among the inalienable political freedoms" , but he stressed that the CPSU did not claim exclusivity in this respect and that other legally constituted parties would be able to form similar cells.
A main task of party renovation would be to restore confidence in the party as the defender of working class interests.
 "Decades of the domination of the administrative command system have alienated the working class from property and authority" , but recently a "rebirth of the working class movement in the Soviet Union" had taken place, albeit principally through unofficial structures such as strike committees.
 "The touchstone for the party's ability to defend the interests of the working people will be its success in ensuring that their living standards do not fall…in the course of transition to the market economy." 
Nevertheless, in seeking to build by means of perestroika a political system within which various interests could be harmonized, the CPSU was also a "political organization of the entire people" .
Gorbachev described as the most topical issue facing the congress the role of the communist parties in the union republics.
Rejecting a federalized party, he asserted that the CPSU should remain unified in order to be true to Lenin's concept of an internationalist party acting as a force to cement the multinational Soviet state.
At the same time, the CPSU should allow the republican parties the greatest possible degree of independence in order to take account of national, historical, local and other distinctions, and allow them to decide their cadre, financial and other matters.
Democratic centralism should not be confused with the "bureaucratic centralism" which had existed in the past; Gorbachev noted the strength of support in the party for abolishing democratic centralism, and the opposing view that without it the party would become a "shapeless association" , but he made no recommendation on behalf of the central committee.
Reports by politburo members
A combative mood at the congress had been set at the very opening of proceedings when the first speaker in the debate on the agenda, Vladimir Bludov from Magadan in the Far East, had called for the entire politburo to resign.
Subsequently, the congress had approved an amendment to the proposed agenda requiring individual politburo members to report to the congress on their performance in office.
The first of these reports was given on July 2 by Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov, who was heard in what the Independent of the following day described as an atmosphere of "chilly disdain" .
Speaking next, Medvedev's report on his work as secretary for ideology was greeted with open hostility, and there were jeers and whistling as he left the podium.
By contrast Aleksandr Yakovlev, regarded as the most liberal politburo member, won an unexpectedly warm reception for an impassioned address in which he dwelt on the value of perestroika in doing away with the Stalinist legacy and restoring morale and morality and the dignity of both the party and the individual: he observed that "not only emptying shelves but also emptying souls brought about perestroika and demanded revolutionary changes" .
Ligachev spoke on July 3.
He firmly rejected the charge of conservatism, which he said derived from his "uncompromising stand on genuine socialism" .
He declared that he could see no alternative to perestroika, but he won loud and prolonged applause when he observed that "all manner of rash radicalism, improvisations and dithering have not given us much in five years" .
Ligachev was highly critical of the reintroduction of private ownership, declaring scornfully that this was hardly "the last word in socialist theory" .
Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze in his report on July 3 gave a strong defence of perestroika in foreign policy which took up many of the themes featured in Gorbachev's address.
He stressed the financial cost of past policies, noting that aside from the human toll the war in Afghanistan had cost 60,000 million roubles; "Cold War" ideological confrontation with the West had cost 700,000 million roubles in the past two decades alone (aside from the cost of maintaining military parity with the West); and confrontation with China and the military buildup along the Sino-Soviet frontier had cost 200,000 million roubles.
He declared that "by squandering a quarter of our budget on military expenditure we have ruined the country" .
Shevardnadze also made the startling claim that the Soviet leadership had foreseen the revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe in 1989.
Towards the close of the second day's proceedings Gorbachev was forced to take over chairing the session to avoid delegates tabling a vote of no confidence in chairman Yefrem Sokolov, the Byelorussian Communist Party (CP) first secretary, whom they accused of railroading proceedings.
Furthermore, when it became clear from the tone of the debate that Georgy Razumovsky, Gorbachev's favoured candidate to head the key statutes commission (responsible for finalizing the draft party rules), would be defeated, Gorbachev instead put himself forward for the post and was approved by a three-to-one majority.
Start of congress debate — Gorbachev's intervention to prevent votes of no confidence in politburo
The congress debate began in earnest on July 4 with repeated attacks by a procession of republican and regional officials on the leadership and economic reform plans, and calls for retention of the party's "vanguard role" .
The chief target for criticism among the politburo members was Medvedev.
He was accused notably by Kazakh CP first secretary Nursultan Nazarbayev of "demoralizing party forces" , while Ukrainian CP first secretary Stanislav Gurenko (elected in June — see p. 37540) blamed both Medvedev and Yakovlev for a collapse of party ideological work.
The conservative majority in the congress hall gave a rough reception to reformists called to the rostrum, such as Deputy Premier Leonid Abalkin.
The principal author of the market reform programme, Abalkin was booed and slow hand-clapped during an impassioned speech in which he declared that the party hitherto had failed socialist ideals in every respect, and would be swept aside if it stood in the way of a market economy.
On July 7 the congress heard replies by politburo members to questions from delegates.
The delegates voted by a two-to-one majority to give an assessment of the individual political activity of each politburo member.
However, in what the Guardian of July 9 called "a scintillating display of his personality and skill at manipulation" , Gorbachev castigated and cajoled the congress into reversing this decision; on this and several subsequent occasions it was proved that the combative talk by the majority conservatives was strikingly at odds with their docility when it came to challenging outright the will of the party leader.
 "What are we supposed to do?" 
Gorbachev demanded, "Vote on each politburo member on a five-point scale — so-and-so getting two and another minus three?" 
He continued: "If you want to bury the party and cause it to split, then follow this route." 
As chairman of the session, Gorbachev returned to this issue later in the proceedings, and secured a similar two-to-one majority in favour of his proposal to assess the work of the members of the politburo as a whole, rather than individually.
Approval of new leadership structure
After protracted behind-the-scenes debate in the statutes commission, the congress was presented on July 9 with proposals to restructure the upper echelons of the party leadership, albeit less radically than had originally been proposed in the first draft of the new party rules published in March.
The commission proposals were approved by a three-to-one majority.
They left in place the post of general secretary instead of introducing the office of party chairman, but created the new post of deputy general secretary.
Both posts were to be filled by election by the full congress.
The politburo was also retained, rather than being replaced by a party presidium, although in keeping with the proposals for the latter body the politburo was now to include the leaders of the parties in the 15 republics.
The secretariat, which had effectively ceased to exist as a cohesive body upon its reorganization in September 1988 [see pp. 36355-56], was to be revived and expanded.
Commentators noted that the leadership restructuring was likely in practice to curtail still further the role of both the politburo and central committee in influencing state policy (already the politburo had effectively been supplanted by Gorbachev's new Presidential Council — see pp. 37298-99).
In particular the central committee had been deprived of its ultimate power to dismiss the general secretary or the full politburo (since the majority of politburo members sat ex-officio), while the composition of the politburo was likely to reduce drastically the frequency of its meetings.
On another key organization matter, Gorbachev managed to secure rejection of a proposal that the mandates of the congress delegates should be extended for five years (thus giving them control of extraordinary congresses or conferences called in the period before the next scheduled congress).
Gorbachev's re-election as general secretary
Gorbachev was re-elected general secretary on July 10 by secret ballot.
There were eight nominations for the post, but six withdrew before the voting, leaving a contest between Gorbachev and Temuraz Avaliani, municipal party first secretary in the Kuzbass mining town of Kiselevsk.
Gorbachev polled 3,411 votes in favour and 1,116 against, compared with 501 for Avaliani and 4,026 against.
Observers were agreed that Gorbachev's re-election had never seriously been in doubt: the Independent of July 11 commented that "reformers and the party old guard alike realise that no alternative exists if the party is to avoid terminal disintegration" .
In a combative pre-election speech Gorbachev delivered a blistering attack on conservative thinking and "those who came to this congress hoping to take the party back to the old condition of commands and orders" .
Most significantly, unlike on previous occasions Gorbachev made no effort to balance his criticism of conservatives with attacks on the radical wing.
Indeed he appeared to hold out the offer of an alliance with the radicals, insisting that there should be no split "among the democratic, progressive forces which are dedicated to carrying out transformations in society" .
Prior to Gorbachev's re-election, the congress had adopted a resolution approving his report of July 2.
Election of deputy general secretary
The election of Gorbachev's deputy in the party leadership was awaited as probably the single most important indication of how the party and Gorbachev's leadership would develop after the congress.
Observers suggested that election of a Gorbachev ally would enable him to surrender completely the day-to-day running of the party in order to concentrate on the presidency.
Election of a conservative, on the other hand, might necessitate Gorbachev's expending time and energy on the party in a constant battle for control.
The election on July 11 was won by Volodymyr (Vladimir) Ivashko, who was Gorbachev's nominee.
He defeated both Ligachev and a Leningrad party official Anatoly Dudyrev.
Ivashko, 58, the Ukrainian President for little over a month [see pp. 37539-40; for his resignation on July 18 see below], was described by Western commentators variously as a "cautious centrist" and a "pragmatic neo-conservative" , although all were agreed on his staunch support for Gorbachev since being named Ukrainian CP leader in September 1989 [see p. 36884].
He had been a member of the politburo since December 1989 [see p. 37128].
Election of new central committee, politburo and secretariat
It had been agreed on July 12 that the central committee would comprise 398 members.
A list of 398 nominees had been drawn up (311 put forward on separate lists by the 15 republican CP delegations according to quotas, 85 on a list drawn up by Gorbachev in consultation with the delegation heads, and Gorbachev and Ivashko ex officio).
However, late on July 12 a further 14 names were added.
Delegates voted on the nominations in a secret ballot on the morning of July 13, as a result of which it was announced that every candidate had won an absolute majority of votes.
When it was revealed that the 14 candidates polling the least votes and thus threatened with exclusion from the central committee included such notables as Abalkin, Shevardnadze, Ryzhkov, Defence Minister Dmitry Yazov and CPSU international department head Valentin Falin, Gorbachev intervened with a proposal that they too should be deemed elected by virtue of having won a legitimate majority, this being accepted by the congress.
Among the most conspicuous absentees from the lists of nominees were Ligachev, Medvedev and Yakovlev.
Also on July 13 the congress elected Gorbachev to head a commission to draft a new party programme for approval at a special conference or congress by mid-1992.
In the meantime the party would be guided by a "programme statement" entitled Towards a humane, democratic socialism.
Following the close of the congress the new central committee met in plenary session on July 13-14 to elect by secret ballot the new politburo and secretariat.
For the first time no government ministers were included, and only Gorbachev and Ivashko remained from the old politburo.
According to commentators the composition of the new party leadership made it more generally sympathetic to Gorbachev's policies than ever before, despite containing the prominent conservatives Boris Gidaspov (the Leningrad party first secretary) and Trade Union Central Council chair Gennady Yaneyev, and several leading conservatives among the republican party leaders.
Leadership of the CPSU
General secretary.
*Mikhail Gorbachev.
Deputy general secretary.
Volodymyr (Vladimir) Ivashko.
Full politburo members.
*Mikhail Gorbachev, *Volodymyr Ivashko, Aleksandr Dzasokhov, Yury Prokofyev, Galina Semenova, Yegor Stroyev, Ivan Frolov, Oleg Shenin, Gennady Yanayev, Vladimir Movsisyan (Armenian CP 1st sec.),
Ayaz Mutalibov (Azerbaijan CP 1st sec.),
Yefrem Sokolov (Byelorussian CP 1st sec.),
Enn-Arno Sillari (Estonian CP 1st sec.),
Givi Gumbaridze (Georgian CP 1st sec.),
Nursultan Nazarbayev (Kazakh CP 1st sec.),
Absamat Masaliyev (Kirghiz CP 1st sec.),
Alfred Rubiks (Latvian CP 1st sec.),
Mikolas Burokevicius (Lithuanian CP — CPSU platform 1st sec.),
Pyotr Luchinsky (Moldavian CP 1st sec.),
Ivan Polozkov (Russian Federation CP 1st sec.),
Kakhar Makhkamov (Tadjik CP 1st sec.),
Saparmurad Niyazov (Turkmen CP 1st sec.),
Stanislav Gurenko (Ukrainian CP 1st sec.),
Islam Karimov (Uzbek CP 1st sec.).
Central committee secretaries (with portfolios in parentheses).
*Oleg Bakhlanov (defence complex), Boris Gidaspov, *Andrei Girenko (inter-ethnic problems), Aleksandr Dzasokhov (ideology), Valentin Kuptsov (relations with public and political organizations), *Yury Manayenkov (organizational construction of the Russian Federation CP), Galina Semenova (women's issues), *Yegor Stroyev (agriculture), Valentin Falin (international ties), Oleg Shenin (personnel), Gennady Yanayev (international ties).
Members of the secretariat.
Viktor Aniskin, Valentin Gaivoronsky, Ivan Melnikov, Aleksandr Teplenichev, Gulchakhra Turganova.
Chair of central control commission.
*Boris Pugo
*Re-elected.
Resignation of Yeltsin — Lack of support for Democratic Platform walkout
Boris Yeltsin, the CPSU's most prominent radical, stunned the congress on July 12 with the announcement that he was resigning his party membership.
In a brief speech, he explained that as President of the Russian Federation he should be above party politics; he then strode dramatically from the congress hall.
On the following day the radical mayors of Moscow and Leningrad, respectively Gavriil Popov and Anatoly Sobchak, similarly announced to the congress that they were leaving the party.
The fundamental split in party ranks threatened by the Democratic Platform failed to emerge, however.
Shortly after Yeltsin's resignation Vyacheslav Shostakovsky read an announcement on behalf of a group of prominent Democratic Platform members to the effect that they planned to leave the CPSU in order to found their own party; apparently this action had been triggered by the retention in the new party rules, approval on July 12, of democratic centralism and a ban on factions.
However, it quickly emerged that this declaration was backed by fewer than a quarter of the Platform delegates at the congress.
Alluding to this lack of support for a walkout, Gorbachev in his closing speech to the congress on July 13 insisted: "Those who hoped this congress would be the funeral of the Communist Party have been proved wrong.
The CPSU lives and will continue to live."
Nevertheless, in the days immediately after the congress there was evidence that an exodus of members from the party was gathering pace.
In June it had been announced that since the start of the year 130,000 people had left the CPSU (as many as in the whole of 1989), and on July 26 Prokofyev (the Moscow city party first secretary) announced that around 10,000 people had left the CPSU in the capital in July alone.
On July 17 it was reported that the Democratic Platform co-ordinating council had decided to recommend that its supporters should begin leaving the party after all.
Two days earlier, Democratic Platform had been one of the groups responsible for organizing a demonstration by around 50,000 people in Moscow's Manezh Square in protest at the CPSU.
Medvedev's appointment to Presidential Council
Gorbachev on July 17 named Medvedev as a member of the Presidential Council.
Yakovlev was already a member.
Miners' one-day strike
Tens of thousands of coalminers went ahead with political strikes and rallies on July 11.
They demanded fulfilment of promises of improved living and working conditions, which the government had made in settlement of strikes in July 1989 [see pp. 36826-27], the resignation of the USSR Council of Ministers because of its handling of the economy, and the depoliticization of the Army, police, judiciary and education system.
The miners openly defied October 1989 legislation outlawing political strikes and temporarily banning stoppages in key economic sectors [see p. 36978].
At the CPSU congress currently in session Gorbachev tried to play down the significance of the strikes, claiming that the "general strike" urged by independent miner's leaders had not materialized.
However, Ryzhkov on July 12 told the congress that production had been halted for 24 hours at 230 of the country's 655 coalmines, with shorter stoppages occurring at many others.
June independent miners' congress
Delegates representing miners in most Soviet coalfields held a week-long congress in mid-June in the Ukrainian city of Donetsk, at which it was decided in principle to set up an independent miners' union.
By a nearly three-to-one majority the congress on June 15 passed a resolution declaring that the CPSU could no longer be considered the champion of workers' rights, and was losing its authority.
It called for a "mass exit" of members from the party, for CPSU cells in state enterprises to be abolished, and for the CPSU to surrender its assets to the state.
Sovereignty declarations in Ukraine and Byelorussia
The Ukraine on July 16 and neighbouring Byelorussia on July 27 (both separate members of the UN) joined the growing list of Soviet republics to declare sovereignty.
Deputies to the Supreme Soviet in the Ukraine adopted overwhelmingly a declaration proclaiming "supremacy, independence and indivisibility of the republic's power on its territory, and independence and equality in external relations" .
The declaration made no mention of the Ukraine's right to secede from the Soviet Union, however, most speakers in the debate having rejected full independence as a goal.
Nevertheless, in several important respects, the declaration went further than sovereignty declarations adopted in June in the Russian Federation, Uzbekistan and Moldavia [see pp. 37539-40].
Most notably, it insisted on the Ukraine's right to have "its own armed forces, internal security troops and state security bodies" , and to veto the deployment of Ukrainian citizens outside the republic for military service (a subsequent resolution, adopted on July 30, condemned the deployment of Ukrainian conscripts in peacekeeping duties in Transcaucasia and Central Asia, and called for all Ukrainian conscripts serving in other republics to be repatriated by Dec. 1).
The declaration also proclaimed the intention of making the Ukraine a "permanently neutral state" , free of nuclear weapons.
Regarding economic sovereignty, it called for the creation of an independent financial system and demanded the Ukraine's share of Soviet currency and gold reserves.
It also proclaimed the right to "demand compensation for damages caused to the republic's ecology by union bodies" .
The declaration was passed by 355 votes to four with one abstention.
The Washington Post of July 17 described this overwhelming endorsement as "an indication of how far the official Communist majority has had to move in order to keep pace with the pressure from Rukh [the main nationalist opposition group]" .
Nevertheless, several elements in the sovereignty declaration represented a compromise between the Communists and nationalists, notably the provision for dual Ukrainian and USSR citizenship.
The declaration by the Supreme Soviet in Byelorussia closely resembled the Ukrainian declaration, but alluded to secession by ascribing to the republic the right to "voluntary unions with other states, and free withdrawal from such unions" .
New Ukrainian President
As a result of his election as CPSU deputy general secretary [see above], the Ukrainian Supreme Soviet on July 18 accepted the resignation of Volodymyr Ivashko as its Chairman (de facto Ukrainian President), after only six weeks in office [ibid.].
The Supreme Soviet on July 23 elected as his replacement Leonid Kravchuk, the second secretary of the Ukrainian Communist Party, from a field of five candidates.
Threatened crackdown against armed nationalist groups
Gorbachev on July 25 issued a decree ordering all illegal "armed formations" to disband and surrender their weapons within 15 days, or face a crackdown by Interior Ministry or even regular Army units.
Clearly intended to curb the activities of nationalist guerrilla groups operating in the Transcaucasian and Central Asian republics (particularly Armenia), the decree appeared designed for use equally to prevent militia units being formed in the Baltic republics as an alternative to the Soviet police and armed forces.
Armenian defiance of decree
On July 28 the new Armenian Supreme Soviet (constituted on July 20 following elections begun in May) openly defied Gorbachev by voting to suspend application of his decree on Armenian territory.
Armenian nationalist leaders warned that any attempt by troops to disarm the militias operating there might produce a bloodbath.
In recent months there had been numerous incidents, in Armenia and the disputed Nagorny Karabakh enclave within Armenia, in which Armenian militants ambushed troops and raided police stations to capture weapons [for worst such incident, in Yerevan in May, see p. 37462].
The local authorities had been accused by security officials and the Soviet press of laxity or even connivance.
Continuing violence in Kirghizia
As clashes between Kirghiz and Uzbeks in southern Kirghizia's Osh oblast (region) continued, reports emerged indicating the full horror of the intercommunal violence which had flared early in June [see pp. 37540-41].
There were suggestions that the death toll was up to five times higher than officially stated.
Pogrom in Uzgen
It became clear that the most serious incidents had occurred in Uzgen, where the Uzbek population had been subjected to a pogrom by gangs of Kirghiz who invaded the town on June 5.
Uzbeks had been murdered, raped and mutilated, and three-quarters of the town had been burned down.
All Kirghiz residents fled after the pogrom.
The simultaneous outbreak of attacks on Uzbek communities in Osh oblast on June 5, by Kirghiz gangs which were well provided with weapons and transport, suggested to observers an orchestrated campaign, possibly with the collusion of officials.
Renewed clashes in July — Death toll
Widespread violence flared again for several days from July 14, with unauthorized rallies, inter-ethnic clashes, pogroms and attacks on official buildings reported in Osh city and several other localities.
On July 10 the newspaper Komsomolskaya Pravda had quoted a senior police official as saying that up to 800 people were missing, presumed dead, from the June violence throughout Osh oblast.
Meanwhile, survivors of the Uzgen pogrom claimed that at least 1,000 people had been killed in that town alone.
However, after the July flare-up the official total death toll, as announced on July 19, stood at 212, with some 400 people missing.
Bomb attacks
At least 17 people were killed and 15 injured when a home-made bomb exploded on a bus 20 km from the Azerbaijani city of Gendzhe (formerly Kirovabad) on Aug. 10.
The bus was travelling from Tbilisi in Georgia to Agdam, a town just outside the disputed Nagorny Karabakh region.
The manager of the airport at Stepanakert, Nagorny Karabakh's capital, was killed in a bomb attack on her home on July 15.
Five people were killed by an explosion on a train north of Rostov-na-Donu, in the Russian Federation, late on July 19.
According to a report the next day on Soviet television a powerful home-made bomb had been placed in a carriage of the train, which was travelling from Georgia to Moscow.
Police identified the bomber as an Azerbaijani man who had shouted a warning to other passengers just before the blast, but by Aug. 8 investigators had concluded that he was not a terrorist but a dishonest businessman trying to escape his creditors by faking his own death.
He was in fact one of the five fatalities.
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Exodus of refugees — Government changes
Between July 9 and 13 nearly 5,000 Albanians — mostly young men aged between 20 and 30 — who had sought refuge in foreign embassies in Tirana were given passports by the Albanian government and allowed to leave the country.
This brought to an end a two-week crisis which had presented the first serious threat to communist rule in Albania since its establishment during the Second World War.
Unprecedented anti-government street demonstrations in Tirana on July 1 were brutally broken up by the security forces, and the next day four Albanians fled to the West German embassy, to be joined by 3,200 others in the course of the following week.
Defying the security cordon around the diplomatic area of Tirana, some 800 Albanians swarmed into the Italian mission and more than 500 into the French embassy; smaller groups entered the Greek, Turkish, Hungarian and Czechoslovak missions.
The special representative of the United Nations Secretary-General, Steffan di Mistura, flew to Albania on July 8 to assist in negotiations between the embassies and governments involved and the Albanian authorities.
The first breakthrough came on July 9 with the departure by air to Prague of 51 refugees from the Czechoslovak embassy.
This was followed on July 13 by the night-time departure of the remaining asylum-seekers from the other embassies.
In an operation co-ordinated by the UN, four ferry boats were sent to the Albanian port of Durres and took the refugees to Brindisi in Italy, where special trains were waiting to take the majority to West Germany.
A fifth vessel, chartered by the French government, sailed direct from Durres to Marseille with the refugees from the French embassy.
After the Albanian exodus, the West German, French and Italian embassies were closed, ostensibly to clean and repair the buildings and grounds, but also to prevent a new influx of would-be emigrants.
Speaking at the 11th APL central committee plenum on July 7 [see also below], President Ramiz Alia had said that those sheltering in foreign embassies were "not patriots or honest citizens" and continued: "The aims and activities of destructive, anti-democratic and anti-Albanian forces are clearly visible.
They wish to create a general atmosphere of distrust of the measures we have taken and will take for the further democratisation of the country."
Government and party changes — Steps towards liberalization
Alia announced a ministerial reshuffle on July 9 in which some leading hardliners were among those dismissed from the government.
Simon Stefani was replaced as Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers and Minister of Internal Affairs by Hekuran Isai, a former Albanian Party of Labour (APL) central committee secretary in charge of economic affairs.
Stefani retained his politburo membership and was appointed Chairman of the State Control Commission, in place of Manush Myftiu who also lost his post as Deputy Chairman of the Council of Ministers.
The Chief of the General Staff of the People's Army, Kico Mustaqi, was appointed Minister of People's Defence in place of Prokop Murra.
Other changes included the replacement of Vito Kapo, Jovan Bardhi and Osman Murati (the Ministers of Light Industry, of Foodstuff Industry and of Domestic Trade respectively) by Bashkim Sykaj, Ylli Bufi and Pajtim Ajazi.
The Minister of Public Services, Xhemal Tafaj, was also transferred to other duties.
Party changes were announced at the July 7 APC central committee plenum, with Myftiu, Murra and Rita Marko being replaced as politburo members by Mustaqi, Vangjel Cerrava and Xhelil Gjoni.
Observers believed that Alia was taking the opportunity of the embassy sit-ins to strengthen the hand of the reformers in the party and government.
It was noted that in his speech he stressed that Albania's perestroika was irreversible and that economic reform would take priority, albeit at a gradual pace.
At the same time as announcing wage increases for the low-paid, he also declared that work was in progress on a new electoral law for the People's Assembly.
According to a decree of July 12 signed by Adil Carcani, Chairman of the Council of Ministers, some free enterprise was to be permitted in the services and handicrafts sector.
Artisans and small traders were to be allowed to perform individual services from their homes, from shops or by street vending, provided they had a trading licence and a medical card.
They could work privately, alone or with a partner, and could employ members of their own family, but not "wage earners" .
A mass rally of 100,000 people in Tirana attended by Carcani and leading members of the government on July 13 endorsed Alia's speech at the central committee plenum and the policy of "democratizing the entire country's life" .
A meeting of the Presidium of the People's Assembly on July 31 approved a decree allowing meetings and demonstrations by citizens in public places and proposed the creation of a special commission to consider changes to the Constitution as well as a new electoral law.
It also approved a decree protecting foreign investment in Albania against expropriation and permitting the repatriation of profits.
In future, enterprises using foreign capital would be allowed foreign currency accounts in the State Bank or a foreign bank.
Restoration of relations with Soviet Union
It was officially announced on July 30 that Albania and the Soviet Union had agreed to normalize their relations and to reopen their respective embassies.
The agreement followed talks between the two sides in Sofia, Bulgaria, on June 29-30 and in Tirana on July 28-30.
The Soviet Union had broken diplomatic relations with Albania in 1961 in the wake of the Sino-Soviet dispute; China and Albania remained friendly until 1978.
The move was seen as part of the continuing attempts to end Albania's international isolation.
The regime had recently expressed readiness to develop relations with the United States and to join the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Resignation of President
Petur Mladenov resigned on July 6 as Bulgaria's President after only three months in office.
He had been forced out by the controversy surrounding a video recording, made public by the opposition, which showed Mladenov (at the time President of the State Council and thus head of State) suggesting that tanks be used to crush an anti-government demonstration on Dec. 14, 1989 [see p. 37110].
After nearly a month of political stalemate and gathering crisis opposition leader Zhelyu Zhelev was elected to replace him on Aug. 1.
Circumstances of Mladenov's resignation
When the Union of Democratic Forces (UDF) first screened the videotape of the Dec. 14 demonstration on state television in June [see p. 37544], Mladenov denounced it as a "slanderous montage" , but experts ruled it authentic on July 4, whereupon Mladenov in a nationwide broadcast declared that his remark had been taken out of context, and that he should be judged by deeds not words.
Meanwhile, a campaign of student-led protests, including a call for a general strike on July 7 unless Mladenov resigned, had been gathering support.
By July 6 Mladenov's own Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP — the renamed Bulgarian Communist Party) had taken up the call for his resignation with an editorial in the party newspaper Duma.
Also capitulating to the student protesters, television director-general Pavel Pisarev resigned on July 5.
Convening of parliament — Zhelev's election
The newly elected National Assembly met in a ceremonial opening session on July 10 at Veliko Turnovo, the northern town where modern Bulgaria's first parliament had convened in 1879.
It then reconvened in Sofia (the capital) on July 17, formally accepted Mladenov's resignation, and elected as speaker (and acting President) Nikolai Todorov of the BSP.
The BSP initially nominated for the presidency Chavdar Kyuranov, the UDF nominated Petur Dertliev (veteran Bulgarian Social Democratic Party leader), and the Bulgarian Agrarian People's Union nominated its leader Viktor Vulkov.
In four rounds of voting on July 24 and 26 none received the necessary backing of two-thirds of the 400 deputies.
On July 30 the BSP withdrew Kyuranov's candidature, and in voting on that day BSP support brought Vulkov to within three votes of the required majority, but he then also withdrew.
On the following day Dertliev withdrew in favour of Zhelev, who, standing unopposed on Aug. 1, polled 284 of the 389 votes cast.
BSP Prime Minister-designate Andrei Lukanov told the Assembly that his party did not want a monopoly of power, and would support and co-operate with Zhelev in the interests of national consent.
Dertliev's withdrawal in Zhelev's favour indicated that the BSP and UDF had come to an agreement (reportedly Dertliev had been unacceptable to the BSP as President), as did the Assembly's election by acclamation on Aug. 1 of the BSP's Atanas Semerdzhiev as Vice-President.
Opposition and nationalist protests
Mladenov's resignation and Zhelev's election were dramatic evidence of how the BSP, in the wake of its June general election victory, had lost the political initiative to the opposition.
Following Mladenov's resignation several hundred intellectuals had opted to press the opposition advantage by continuing a sit-in protest against the BSP begun on July 4 (they dubbed their encampment outside government offices in Sofia the "city of truth" ).
The deadlock in electing a president heightened the political tension in the country.
The trade unions threatened a general strike unless the National Assembly freed its agenda to move on to pressing economic questions, and anti-BSP demonstrations in Sofia drew thousands of supporters.
On July 23 Lukanov's caretaker government adopted a decree on maintaining public order aimed at containing the "city of truth" protests (now being copied in many towns) but also at strikes and rallies (principally in the southern town of Kurdzhali) by nationalists opposed to the presence in the National Assembly of ethnic Turkish deputies [ibid.].
Semerdzhiev's resignation as Interior Minister
Semerdzhiev resigned on July 27 as Interior Minister during a noisy Assembly debate on plans for ousted Communist leader Todor Zhivkov to testify before parliament.
Semerdzhiev claimed that the UDF had organized the gathering outside the National Assembly of demonstrators protesting against a parliamentary commission's recommendation that Zhivkov's testimony should not be broadcast live; the protesters assumed that this would allow for statements incriminating BSP leaders to be edited out.
(On July 30 Zhivkov issued a statement declining to address the Assembly.)
Cremation of Georgi Dimitrov
The embalmed corpse of Georgi Dimitrov, Bulgaria's Communist leader from 1946 until his death in 1949, was removed on July 18 from the mausoleum in central Sofia where it had been on public display, and was cremated in a private ceremony.
Over 200,000 people took part in a memorial march for Dimitrov through Sofia on July 23.
EUROPE
CZECHOSLOVAKIA
Re-election of Havel — Government policy statement and price rises
The Federal Assembly on July 5 re-elected Vaclav Havel as President of Czechoslovakia for a further period of two years.
Havel, who had been elected in December 1989 to serve in an interim capacity [see p. 37107], was the sole candidate; a number of other individuals had been disqualified, not having been nominated by parliamentary deputies, while Stefan Kvietik, nominated by the Slovak National Party, had withdrawn.
In a secret ballot, Havel received the required three-fifths majority in both chambers, with 114 votes to 25 against in the Chamber of the People, and in the Chamber of the Nations 63 votes to nine against in the Czech section and 57 votes to 16 against in the Slovak section.
Government policy statement
Marian Calfa, the Federal Premier, on July 3 presented to the Federal Assembly the policy statement of the new government appointed on June 27 [see p. 37543].
New constitutions would be drafted for the federation and for the Czech and Slovak republics, separating local self-administration from state administration, and ending excessive centralism.
Control of most branches of the economy, except for fuel, energy, metallurgy and communications, would be devolved to the republics.
Czechoslovakia would continue to form a single market, but in the approach to European bodies the government would try to ensure that the Czechs and Slovaks were able to act as "independent and equal subjects" .
The social security system would undergo "fundamental reform" .
In pursuing economic reform, ecological considerations would be a basic criterion; the government would create a competitive environment, liberalize prices and foreign trade, privatize a large part of the state sector and develop the private economy, while seeking to limit inflation, unemployment and foreign debt.
Czechoslovakia would seek to rejoin the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank (both of which it had left in 1954) before 1991.
The transformation of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) into an organization operating on market principles would be pursued [for March 1990 COMECON meeting see p. 37334].
The government expected the Soviet Union to remain Czechoslovakia's most important trading partner.
The government would work for the "creation of a common European standard of human rights and united legal, economic and security space" , including institutionalizing the Helsinki process.
Czechoslovakia viewed the Warsaw Pact as a temporary body, whose role was co-operation between states in disarmament talks, and intended to retain its Pact membership, provided that a political and military reorganization was carried through.
The Federal Assembly on July 11 approved the government policy statement by 111 votes (out of 120 deputies present) in the Chamber of the People and 110 out 121 in the Chamber of Nations.
The vote simultaneously represented a vote of confidence in the new government.
Price rises
On July 9 food prices rose by an average of 25 per cent following the withdrawal of state subsidies.
Using funds previously devoted to subsidies, 27,000 million crowns (US$1.00=15.8571 crowns at the official rate) per year would instead be allocated as a monthly allowance of 140 crowns per person, to help offset price rises.
Vaclav Klaus, the federal Finance Minister, on July 17 announced that petrol prices were to rise by 50 per cent, due to an unexpected cut in Soviet oil deliveries.
Controversy over Havel's visit to Austria
Havel on July 26 paid a one-day private visit to Salzburg, Austria, together with the West German President, Richard von Weizsäcker (whom he had earlier met in Bavaria).
He opened the Salzburg music festival, but encountered a protest demonstration when he had a controversial meeting with Kurt Waldheim, the Austrian President.
Most of the world's leaders had boycotted meetings with Waldheim following allegations that he had concealed his wartime activities in the German Army.
In an interview with an Austrian newspaper Havel criticized this boycott as "a game" which had once had a moral basis but now consisted of "rather cold-blooded considerations — if one does not go, others will not go" .
In his speech at the festival, however, Havel said: "The belief that one can navigate through history and rewrite one's own biography with impunity is a traditional Central European delusion." 
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Privatization programme — Economic package
The government on July 18 took direct control of the State Property Agency (SPA), whose officials had been members of the former communist government, and a week later announced that the head of the SPA, Istvan Tompe, would be replaced by Lajos Crepi (former vice-president of the old post office).
The SPA had handled the flotation of the national travel agency Ibusz, the first state concern to have shares traded at the Hungarian stock exchange which had opened on June 21.
The opening of the stock exchange was the first step in the privatization programme announced by Prime Minister Jozsef Antall on May 22; shortly afterwards, on June 29, the government detailed further plans to take effect in August, starting with bankruptcy proceedings against about 30 large state entities, the decentralization and splitting up of another 600 companies and the privatization of some 40,000 small service concerns, subsequently adding plans to create private farm holdings.
In the event, however, the programme had to be slowed down considerably after public opposition to the handling of the flotation of Ibusz, which was officially valued at US$6,150,000.
It was claimed that most Hungarian citizens were either not informed of how to purchase the shares or could not afford to do so, and that the bulk of the issue had gone to former party bosses or to foreign institutions.
The June 29 announcement on privatization had been part of a package of economic measures designed to curb the budget deficit in line with the March IMF agreement.
Savings included reductions in subsidies for agricultural exports and increases in state controlled prices, particularly for fuel (which rose by between 19 and 45 per cent), which together amounted to $426,000,000.
At the same time the government cancelled the debts existing between state controlled companies, which were estimated at between $3,000 million and $4,500 million.
IMF approval of the package opened the way for the release on July 17 of a bridging loan of $80,000,000 from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
Social policy plan — Coal strike — New National Bank president
In order to offset the impact of the price rises the government introduced at the same time, also with effect from August, a social policy plan (worth nearly $40,000,000), targeted particularly on families; trade unions, however, described the measures as inadequate.
On July 2 a strike broke out at the Markushegy unit of the Oroszlany coalmines, when miners demanded a wage rise of up to 50 per cent, the dismissal of incompetent managers and a halt to privatization of the mines; the strike was settled on July 3 when the government acceded to most of the demands.
The president of the National Bank, Ferenc Bartha, resigned with effect from June 30 and was replaced by György Suranyi.
EUROPE
POLAND
Formation of new political party — Internal divisions in Solidarity
On July 28 an estimated 1,000 delegates from across the country attended the founding congress of the Citizens' Movement for Democratic Action Party (ROAD), which had been created on July 16 with the support of over 40 members of the 259-strong Solidarity caucus in parliament.
Two of the leading Solidarity activists of the 1980s, Zbigniew Bujak [see p. 37546]and Wladyslaw Frasyniuk, stated that they had founded ROAD to support the beleaguered government of Prime Minister Tadeusz Mazowiecki.
ROAD sought to provide a credible alternative to the Solidarity Centre Alliance political grouping, which had been established in May [ibid.]and advocated that the Solidarity trade union chairman Lech Walesa should be appointed by parliament as President.
ROAD stated that the President should be elected directly in free elections [see p. 36828 for July 1989 election by parliament of President Wojciech Jaruzelski].
In recent weeks Walesa had launched bitter attacks on the government, accusing it of delaying economic and political reform (and especially of retaining former communists in the Cabinet) and of making workers bear the brunt of the current economic austerity plan.
Walesa's critics had accused him of dangerous populism which threatened political and economic stability.
Separate meetings had been convoked by the two opposing Solidarity factions on July 1 and July 2 to canvass support among Solidarity's grassroots civic committees.
The delegates representing the civic committees indicated that they had no wish to see a split in their ranks, and unanimously endorsed Walesa as Solidarity leader, but rejected his suggestion that the civic committees be opened to other political parties — a manoeuvre interpreted as an attempt by Walesa to broaden his base of support.
They also rejected Mazowiecki's attempt to transform the civic committees into a single political party loyal to him.
On July 27, 100 deputies and senators from the Solidarity Centre Alliance had petitioned Jaruzelski to stand down so that Walesa could be named President in his place.
Jaruzelski, who had five years of his term still to run, stated in a letter read to parliament on July 28 that he would make his intentions known once there had been a debate on the timing of presidential and parliamentary elections.
Cabinet changes
In what was interpreted as an attempt to rebut Walesa's criticisms, Mazowiecki in effect dismissed three former Communists from his cabinet on July 6.
He also announced cautious proposals to revive the economy, promising a relaxation in current wage controls and increased subsidies for housing, for health services, and especially for the agricultural sector [see below for farmers' protests].
Mazowiecki also conceded that the first fully free elections should take place later in the year.
Parliament endorsed the "resignations" of the Interior Minister Czeslaw Kiszczak, Defence Minister Florian Siwicki and Transport Minister Adam Wieladek.
Their replacements were: as Interior Minister, Krzysztof Kozlowski, a former Vice-Minister of the Interior and well-known Solidarity journalist; as Defence Minister, Vice-Adml.
Piotr Kolodziejczyk, a former Communist; and as Transport Minister Ewaryst Waligorski, a Solidarity economist.
Parliament refused, however, to endorse Mazowiecki's acceptance of the resignation of Communications Minister Marek Kucharski, claiming that there was insufficient reason for him to resign.
It also refused to accept his nomination of Artur Balasz as the new Agricultural Minister in place of Czeslaw Janicki, a member of the Polish Peasant's Party (ZSL) which was part of the ruling coalition, who had resigned on July 5, claiming that the government had neglected farm policy [see below].
Walesa and Mazowiecki declared a temporary truce following a meeting on July 7 in Warsaw under the mediation of the Roman Catholic Archbishop Bronislaw Dabrowski.
They reportedly promised to work together in order to speed up the "deep reconstruction of the state" while "preserving social peace" .
The meeting followed Mazowiecki's rejection of a "challenge" to debate his differences with Walesa on July 7 in front of an open meeting in the Gdansk shipyard, the symbolic heart of Solidarity.
Farmers' protests
On July 11, acknowledging the strength of recent protests by peasant farmers who had succeeded in blocking roads throughout the country, the government made several conciliatory gestures.
These included lower interest rates on farm loans and emergency funds to enable dairies to pay off debts to farmers for unpaid milk.
The government denied that it was pursuing an anti-peasant policy, but refused to give in to demands for guaranteed minimum prices, claiming that this would run counter to its basic principles of establishing a market-based economy.
On June 29 police had forcibly expelled farmers from the Ministry of Agriculture after a three-day sit-in.
Privatization bill
On July 13 parliament passed the necessary legislation to privatize 7,600 state enterprises which comprised 80 per cent of the economy.
The bill, the centrepiece of the government's strategy to restructure the state-led economy along free-market lines, was passed by 328 votes to two with 38 abstentions.
It allowed workers the opportunity to buy as much as 20 per cent of their company's shares at half price as well as offering them low-interest loans for buying future shares once a stock market was established.
Farmers would have similar rights to buy shares in food production and allied agricultural businesses.
Solidarity factory commissions in the Gdansk shipyard and repair yards had demanded on July 3 that one-third of shares should go to the workforce (to be paid for in instalments or with bank credits) and that part of a share issue be purchased by their union to finance its activities.
Privatized companies were to be exempted from strict government wage controls and foreign share purchases amounting to more than 10 per cent of a company would require explicit permission.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Serbian referendum on constitution — Kosovo issue
In a referendum conducted throughout Serbia on July 2, the majority of Serbs voted in favour of proposals for a new constitution for the republic.
Ostensibly, this was necessary before free multiparty elections could be held [see also below].
However, the ethnic Albanian majority in Kosovo province protested that the proposed constitution would effectively strip Kosovo of the special autonomous status conferred on it (within the Serbian republic) in the 1974 Yugoslavian Constitution.
The news agency Tanjug on July 4 reported an 86 per cent turnout of the population in Serbia itself (i.e. excluding the two autonomous provinces, Kosovo and Vojvodina), and the authorities subsequently claimed that 96.8 per cent of these had supported the constitutional proposal.
On the other hand, only 25 per cent of the Kosovo electorate turned out to vote, most of these being Serbs, following calls by ethnic Albanians for a total boycott, and Tanjug reported that in Kosovo some 400 polling stations had not been opened for voting by the local authorities.
Rejecting the new constitutional proposals, a group of 114 ethnic Albanian delegates to the Kosovo Assembly issued a statement on July 2, in which they declared that Kosovo was now independent of Serbia, and that it was instead a full constituent republic within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY).
Although the 114 deputies represented an absolute majority in the 180-member Kosovo Assembly, the Assembly itself had been summarily closed by the Serbian authorities on June 26, following a decision of the Serbian Assembly to declare a situation of "special circumstances" in Kosovo because of the ongoing strikes in numerous factories, and because of alleged attacks against ethnic Serbians in the province.
Under new powers, also approved on June 26, the Serbian Assembly had been empowered to take over the affairs of the Kosovo Assembly and of other official bodies, and to suspend troublemakers.
The June 26 measure had been approved despite an attempt by ethnic Albanian deputies in Serbia to have them discussed by the Kosovo Assembly.
The Kosovo section of the League of Communists of Yugoslavia (LCY) denounced the July 2 declaration as a secessionist attempt to subsume the province within a "Greater Albania" .
The declaration also drew the condemnation of the Socialist Alliance, the umbrella group which under one-party rule united the LCY and mass organizations, and of the Vojvodina and Montenegrin Assemblies.
The SFRY Presidency itself condemned the statement at a meeting on July 11.
Amid demands that it replace all ethnic Albanian deputies, of whatever political leaning, the Serbian Assembly voted on July 5 to dissolve the Kosovo Assembly permanently and thereby dismiss the government, and to terminate the contracts of all Kosovo parliamentary officials, transferring the Kosovo body's responsibilities permanently to the Serbian parliament.
The head of Kosovo's radio and television services, and the director-general of the influential Kosovo newspaper Rilindja, were replaced on July 5 as police surrounded their respective offices, and Rilindja was temporarily banned on July 9.
Meanwhile, emergency control boards were established at a number of mines where strikes had been continuing.
Although Tanjug reported on July 6 that the situation in Kosovo was quiet, repeated protests were reported in the following days, notably in the Kosovo capital, Pristina; thousands of workers responded to calls by ethnic Albanian leaders for a one-hour daily strike, despite public threats of dismissal by the Serbian authorities.
The 114 deputies who had supported the independence move were understood in August to be facing possible criminal charges, together with all those who had struck in their support.
It had been announced, however, on June 26 that the trial of the former political leader Fadilj Hodza for instigating racial and religious intolerance [see p. 37382], had been adjourned indefinitely after defence claims of a mistrial.
Change of name by Serbian communists
The ruling Serbian Communist Party, a republican section of the LCY, voted on July 17 at the end of a two-day convention in Belgrade to combine with the pro-communist Socialist Alliance umbrella group in forming a new political party, to be known as the Serbian Socialist Party; the name change did not indicate any substantive change in the party's hitherto hardline communist policy, but rather a formal acknowledgement of the continuing trend in Eastern Europe away from the old-style communist parties.
Slobodan Milosevic, the Serbian President and a former leader of the Serbian communists, was elected president of the new party on July 17, receiving 1,299 of the votes cast against 66 for the other candidate, the Socialist Alliance leader Radmila Andeljkova.
The conference approved a party statute and programme expressing the aim of building "a new socialism in accordance with the changes of today and of tomorrow" , and elected a 111-member central committee whose members included Borisav Jovic, the current President of the SFRY Presidency.
The merger move had first been announced by the Serbian communists on June 7, with the Socialist Alliance expressing itself in favour on July 5.
Unlike other republics, Serbia had still set no date for elections, which were thought unlikely to take place before the end of 1990.
Some 30,000 anti-communist demonstrators had gathered on June 13 in Belgrade to demand the holding of early elections in the republic.
Meanwhile, opposition groups continued to protest that they were being denied access to the country's media, under the existing laws, since Serbia had yet to pass the necessary constitutional legislation permitting the formation of political parties other than the LCY.
(Observers noted in this connection that the new Serbian Socialist Party was thus itself technically illegal.)
Declaration of sovereignty in Slovenia
Relations between Slovenia and Serbia deteriorated sharply during early July, following the publication on July 2 of a formal declaration by the Slovenian Assembly in which it proclaimed the full sovereignty of the Slovenian republic.
The declaration called for the formulation of a new Slovenian constitution embodying the republic's right (i) to place its own laws above those of the SFRY;(ii) to monitor and control national defence activities on its soil;(iii) to determine its own foreign and external policy; and (iv) to create a new Slovenian legal and judiciary system.
The move followed the decision in September 1989 to affirm Slovenia's sovereignty and its right of secession from the SFRY [see pp. 36899-90], and the consequent election in May 1990 of a centre-right coalition campaigning on such a platform [see p. 37463]; on this occasion, however, no mention was made of secession.
The statement was roundly condemned on July 6 by Jovic, who called it an arrogation of the right to determine the constitutional relationship between the federation and its constituent republics.
[For earlier warnings toward Slovenia and Croatia on these issues, see p. 37463.]
Meeting Milan Kucan, the Slovenian President, on July 23, Jovic issued a severe warning against precipitate action; he added, however, that any republic would be entitled to request the right of secession from the SFRY provided its people had voted to that effect, and that the final decision would rest with the SFRY Assembly, which would consult the views of all other republics.
Meanwhile, the Yugoslavian Constitutional Court had announced on July 12 its intention to examine the legitimacy of Slovenia's July declaration of sovereignty.
Kucan told the Slovenian Assembly on July 23 that the new constitution would do away with the class principle of the old political system, placing the individual rather than the collective at the centre of the political stage.
Croatian constitutional changes — Pressure from Croatian Serbs
On July 25 the Croatian parliament approved 12 constitutional changes which in turn provoked a serious Serbian backlash.
The amendments provided in particular(i) that the word "Socialist" should be removed from the Croatian republic's name, leaving it as the Republic of Croatia, and that a new flag and coat of arms should be devised;(ii) that the Cyrillic alphabet, still the main medium for the 600,000 Serbs in Croatia (4.5 per cent of the republic's population), should be derecognized for most purposes, except in those areas where a majority still used it; and (iii) that the presidency of the republic should be replaced by a new system involving a president and six vice-presidents, while the executive council of the republic should be redesignated as its government.
Leaders of the Serbian minority in Croatia issued a statement on July 25 publicly proclaiming the sovereignty and autonomy of all Croatian Serbs, as well as their right "to determine with whom and under what regime their people will live, and how they will integrate with the other nations in Yugoslavia" .
A rally held on July 25 in Srb to celebrate this statement was attended by around 100,000 Serbs.
Launch of Alliance of Reform Forces
Federal Prime Minister Ante Markovic launched his promised new political party, called the Alliance of Reform Forces, at a rally attended by around 100,000 people on July 29 at Kozara in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Markovic reiterated that the Alliance's programme would be based around the successful programme of his federal government, and would aim at preserving Yugoslavia's unity as a pluralist community of equal nations and nationalities.
The new party was setting its sights on multiparty federal elections expected by the end of the year.
For many months opinion polls had showed high popular support for Markovic and his government, overwhelmingly a reflection of their success in rescuing the economy by wiping out Yugoslavia's hyper-inflation and bringing in a convertible dinar [see p. 37194; p. 37541].
Federal legislation on political parties
Markovic's new party was among the first to take advantage of the passage by the Federal Chamber of Yugoslavia's Federal Assembly on July 25 of a law allowing the formation of political parties "of a general Yugoslav character" .
Registration required a minimum of 100 founder members.
The only prohibitions were on parties which "continue the activity of the parties defeated in the Second World War" and on financing from abroad.
The basic norms of behaviour and activity for parties would be defined by republican laws.
Separate legislation passed on the same day banned political party cells in state and government bodies.
Constitutional amendments formally to set in place a multiparty system were still pending, however: they were passed unanimously by the Federal Chamber on Aug. 8, and it was hoped to secure the necessary ratification by the assemblies of the republics and provinces by Sept. 20.
EUROPE
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
G-24 meeting on aid to Eastern Europe
The Foreign Ministers of the Group of 24 (G-24), comprising the member countries of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and thus including all 12 European Community (EC) states, met in Brussels on July 4 to discuss aid to Eastern Europe.
They agreed to extend the aid programme (already applying to Hungary and Poland) to Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Yugoslavia and (pending unification) East Germany, on the grounds that all four had made sufficient progress towards democracy and a free market economy.
Frans Andriessen, the European Commissioner co-ordinating aid from the G-24 countries, said that Romania would also be eligible for aid once the necessary political and economic conditions had been fulfilled.
No consensus was reached on G-24 aid to the Soviet Union, which was particularly opposed by the United States Secretary of State James Baker.
The meeting expressed reserved interest in an EC study into aid for the Soviet Union, commissioned by the previous week's EC summit [see pp. 37520-21], and in Commission proposals for a general reserve facility or financial safety net of 10,000 million European currency units (about US$12,000 million) for Eastern European countries to draw on.
During a visit to the Soviet Union on July 19-20 by EC Commission president Jacques Delors, Soviet President Mikhail Gorbachev appealed for broad foreign economic co-operation which would allow the Soviet Union to adapt to a new economic system "faster and more resolutely" .
At a press conference Delors, who announced that EC experts would return to Moscow in August to draw up recommendations, warned that no judgment on reforms could be made until the Soviet government had redrafted its economic reform plan in September.
He revealed that the EC and the Soviet Union were working on a joint nuclear safety programme, and he singled out energy production, transportation and the environment as possible areas of EC involvement in the Soviet economy.
EUROPE
EAST-WEST GERMANY
For July developments in the unification process, which continued into August, see pp. 37659-61.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Resignation of Trade and Industry Secretary
The Secretary of State for Trade and Industry, Nicholas Ridley, resigned on July 14 after making controversial remarks about the European Commission and Germany's role in Europe.
Ridley, 61, had been Trade and Industry Secretary since 1989 and was one of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's closest allies.
He was replaced by Peter Lilley, hitherto Financial Secretary to the Treasury, who at 46 became the youngest member of the Cabinet.
Ridley had stated in an interview with the right-wing Spectator magazine which had appeared two days previously that European economic and monetary union was "a German racket designed to take over the whole of Europe" and must be "thwarted" .
In another passage of the interview he referred to the "arrogance" of the European Commission of "17 unelected reject politicians" , adding: "I'm not against giving up sovereignty in principle but not to this lot.
You might just as well give it to Adolf Hitler frankly."
While Ridley's remarks provoked some adverse reaction in West Germany, Chancellor Helmut Kohl described them as a "faux pas" and expressed understanding of the United Kingdom's concerns over the German role in Europe.
In the course of a government reshuffle on July 23 a number of non-Cabinet appointments were made.
Francis Maude, hitherto a Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, took over Lilley's former post as Financial Secretary to the Treasury; Tristan Garel-Jones and the Earl of Caithness became Ministers of State at the Foreign Office, and Alastair Goodlad took over from Garel-Jones as Treasurer of Her Majesty's Household (Deputy Chief Whip).
Sir George Young, a junior minister in 1979-86, became Comptroller of Her Majesty's Household (the third most senior post in the Whips' Office).
David Mellor was appointed Minister of State at the Privy Council Office with responsibility for the arts; Angela Rumbold took over his previous post of Minister of State at the Home Office and was replaced as Minister of State at the Department of Education and Science by Timothy Eggar.
Timothy Sainsbury and Lord Hesketh became Ministers of State at the Department of Trade and Industry, and Lord Brabazon of Tara became a Minister of State at the Department of Transport.
Richard Ryder was appointed Paymaster General and Peter Morrison the Prime Minister's parliamentary private secretary.
Robert Atkins took over responsibility for sport at the Department of the Environment, replacing Colin Moynihan.
Modifications to community charge
The Environment Secretary, Chris Patten, on July 19 announced a £3,300 million package to hold down the level of the community charge or poll tax, which included an improved system of rebates and other measures.
Patten told the House of Commons in a statement that government finance for local authorities (grant and business rate allocation) would rise by 12.8 per cent from £23,100 million to £26,000 million in 1991-92.
He predicted that an average poll tax bill in 1991 would be £379 compared with £357 in 1990.
An extra £310 million would be allocated in 1991 and £1,250 million over three years to extend the existing system of transitional relief to those whose bills had increased by £100 per year or more (£150 previously), benefiting a further 4,000,000 people in addition to the 7,500,000 already covered; and adjustments were made to help those faced with charges for second homes or for joint business/residential premises and those in areas being phased out of the "safety net" arrangements applying in 25 local authorities.
Patten also announced that he would make extensive use of enhanced capping powers in 1991.
Parallel announcements relating to Wales and Scotland were made on July 23 and July 25 respectively.
Banning of film portraying Rushdie
It emerged on July 21 that a Pakistani video film, International Guerrillas, portraying the British novelist Salman Rushdie torturing and killing Moslems and finally being struck dead by lightning, had been refused distribution rights by the British Board of Film Classification.
British Moslem leaders claimed that the ban was an example of British double standards, since there had been no ban on Rushdie's novel The Satanic Verses, for which he had first been condemned to death by the Iranian spiritual leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini in February 1989 [see pp. 36450-51; 37266].
A statement issued on behalf of Rushdie by the Rushdie Defence Committee on July 22 expressed opposition to the ban.
EUROPE
NORTHERN IRELAND
Killing of Ian Gow — Other IRA attacks
Ian Gow, Conservative member of Parliament for Eastbourne since 1974, was killed on July 30 when an Irish Republican Army (IRA) bomb exploded underneath his car as he was preparing to leave his home in the village of Hankham, near Eastbourne in Sussex.
Gow was for many years a close associate of Margaret Thatcher, the Prime Minister, having been her parliamentary private secretary during the first four years of her premiership in 1979-83, and a member of her government as Minister of Housing in 1983-85 and a Minister of State at the Treasury from September to November 1985.
In November 1985 he resigned from the government in protest at the signing that month of the Anglo-Irish Agreement [see pp. 34070-73], stating that he could not support the government's change of policy on Northern Ireland, including "the involvement of a foreign power in a consultative role in the administration of the province" , which he claimed would prolong and not diminish "Ulster's agony" [see p. 34072].
The Prime Minister described the murder as "a grievous loss both to me personally and also to the parliamentary life of this country and to his constituency" .
She said that all MPs must take advice on personal security very seriously for the sake of themselves and their families; Gow's name had been found on an IRA death list discovered in a south London flat in December 1988.
In a statement on July 31 the IRA said that Gow had been killed because he had been central to the formulation of British government policy decisions on Northern Ireland, including those during the hunger strikes of 1980-81 and the "shoot-to-kill" operations of 1982, and had remained a close confidant of the Prime Minister until his death.
IRA bombing of stock exchange
An intensive series of bomb and gun attacks on the British mainland [see pp. 37536-37]continued on July 20 when an IRA bomb exploded at the stock exchange building in central London, following a number of telephone warnings to newspapers, news agencies and the police.
The building was evacuated and no one was injured.
The bomb went off in the public gallery, destroying the visitors' area and blowing a hole through an external wall.
Although the stock exchange was closed for the day as a result of the explosion, trading was largely uninterrupted since the central computer system remained undamaged.
It was believed that the device might have been planted some days earlier.
Killing of three police officers and a nun
Three constables of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (RUC), travelling in an unmarked but armoured police car, were killed on July 24 when an IRA landmine exploded on a road between Armagh and Killylea in Co.
Armagh.
Sister Catherine Dunne, a nun of the Sisters of Mercy Order, who was driving towards Armagh at the time, was also killed in the explosion and her passenger, a social worker, was seriously injured.
The death of the nun greatly intensified popular reaction, and it was notable that the IRA was condemned widely in the Irish Republic over the incident.
The officers who died were named as Constable William Hanson and Reserve Constables David Sterritt and Cyril Willis.
Delay in progress of devolution talks — Anglo-Irish relations
Peter Brooke, the UK Secretary of State for Northern Ireland, announced in the House of Commons on July 5 that there was to be a delay in the progress of current devolution talks which he had undertaken since January 1990 with a view to producing new arrangements for exercising political power in the province [see pp. 37198; 37262; 37583].
During these early talks, progress appeared to have been made on Unionist demands (i) that the British government should seriously consider the possibility of an alternative to the Anglo-Irish Agrement;(ii) that the Anglo-Irish secretariat based near Belfast should be suspended before devolution talks began; and (iii) that the normal summer gap between meetings of the Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference [see below]could be defined in advance and used as an opportunity to open formal negotiations.
Towards the end of June, however, it was reported that neither the Irish government nor the Northern Ireland Social and Democratic Labour Party (SDLP) could agree to the wording of a statement which Brooke had planned to make and which was to include a consideration of the role to be played by the Irish government in devolution talks.
Throughout the talks the Rev. Ian Paisley, the leader of the Northern Ireland Democratic Unionist Party (DUP), had continued to insist that the Irish government could not be involved in the talks until new political arrangements had emerged to the satisfaction of the principal constitutional parties in the province.
The Irish government, for its part, had insisted that it must be represented throughout any such talks on the grounds that the objective was to produce an alternative to the Anglo-Irish Agreement, to which it was a co-signatory.
The Anglo-Irish Intergovernmental Conference, as provided for in the November 1985 Agreement, met in Belfast on July 17.
The meeting ended inconclusively following a further attempt by Brooke to resolve the deadlock over current discussions about devolution talks.
The key issue was the precise timing and stage at which the Irish government would enter such talks.
The meeting also discussed security and extradition, and tourism and the environment.
EUROPE
ITALY
Cabinet resignations over media bill
Five Cabinet ministers resigned on July 26-27 when Prime Minister Giulio Andreotti called a vote of confidence over a media bill.
Andreotti immediately appointed five new ministers and on July 28 the new Cabinet won a vote of confidence by 356 votes to 177.
The margin of victory indicated that the government had been supported by a number of members of the Christian Democratic Party belonging to a dissident left-wing faction around former Prime Minister Ciriaco De Mita, to which the five ministers also belonged.
The ministers resigning were Sergio Mattarella (Education), Mino Martinazzoli (Defence), Riccardo Misasi (Mezzogiorno), Carlo Fracanzani (State Participation), and Calogero Mannino (Agriculture and Forests).
Their replacements were respectively Gerardo Bianco, Virginio Rognoni, Giovanni Marongiu, Franco Piga and Vito Saccomandi.
The media law, which was given final approval by the Senate (upper house of parliament) on Aug. 5, regulated advertising time on state and private television and defined the proportions of Italian, European or other films which could be shown.
In addition it debarred from newspaper ownership any media group which owned three television channels (as did the national television company Radiotelevisione Italiana — RAI — and the Fininvest company owned by Italy's leading media magnate Silvio Berlusconi).
Media groups owning one or two television channels would have an ownership ceiling of 16 or 8 per cent respectively of the daily press market.
Although the new law would require Berlusconi to dispose of his controlling interest in the daily newspaper Il Giornale, its provisions were significantly less stringent than originally proposed, and it was criticized as allowing Berlusconi's dominant position in the Italian media to remain largely unchecked.
Overturning of Bologna bombing sentences
On July 18 an appeal court in Bologna overturned the convictions of four people sentenced to life imprisonment in July 1988 for complicity in the neo-fascist bomb attack on Bologna railway station on Aug. 2, 1980, in which 85 people were killed and over 200 injured.
Nine others convicted of lesser offences were also acquitted, all on the basis that there was insufficient evidence to sustain their convictions.
Luciano Querzoni, president of the region of Emilia-Romagna (which had Bologna as its the capital), declared that the province would take legal steps against the decision and that "justice still has to be done" .
The four whose life sentences were overturned were Valerio Fioravanti, his wife Francesca Mambro, Massimiliano Fachini, and Sergio Picciafuoco.
Among the other nine acquitted was Licio Gelli, a former grand master of the Italian P-2 Masonic Lodge [see p. 37096].
EUROPE
GREECE
Signature of agreement on US bases
The defence co-operation agreement between Greece and the United States initialled in May was signed on July 8 at a meeting in Athens between the Greek Foreign Minister, Antonis Samaras, and the US Defence Secretary, Richard Cheney.
In addition to the closure of two military bases, the USA also agreed to continue military aid to Greece at the level of US$345,000,000 for the year from October 1990 as rent for the two remaining bases, and promised Greece 62 aircraft and four naval destroyers, together worth over $1,000 million.
Opposition to the agreement was expressed both by the Turkish government, which feared that the clause on mutual defence could affect the status quo in Cyprus, and by left-wing parties in Greece, which wanted all the bases closed.
On the eve of the ratification of the agreement by the Greek parliament on July 24 there were protests in Crete, including one in Khania where two policemen were wounded.
The government gained only a narrow majority with 151 votes against 144 (with one abstention and four deputies absent).
The agreement, yet to be ratified by the US Congress, was expected to take effect by the end of September.
EUROPE
TURKEY
Renewed unrest in Kurdish provinces
An escalation in fighting between government troops and Kurdish guerrillas was reported from the south-eastern provinces during June and July.
The clashes came in the wake of reports of continuing casualties on both sides in May, and of claims by the Human Rights Association that "torture, repression and arrests are all on the rise" .
The worst incidents of fighting were reported from the provinces of Siirt and Hakkari, where at least 30 Kurdish guerrillas and nine soldiers, including a garrison commander, were killed in a week of intense fighting at the end of July.
The Independent
of July 31 reported that a regional governor had confirmed that 250 guerrillas had been killed or captured since the beginning of 1990.
Recommendations of SDPP report
On July 15 the opposition Social Democratic Populist Party (SDPP) led by Erdal Inonu approved a policy document which urged the ending of emergency rule in the south-east and the recognition of Kurdish identity and language.
Meanwhile it was reported on June 10 that 10 pro-Kurdish MPs who had broken away from the SDPP [see also p. 37593]had formed the People's Labour Party.
Release of pro-Kurdish academic
Ismail Besikci, a leading sociologist who had spent almost 11 years in prison since 1971, was released on July 27, this time after four months.
He was due to stand trial for spreading Kurdish propaganda.
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
First stage of economic and monetary union
On July 1 the first stage of the Delors plan on economic and monetary union came into effect.
Under this plan, put forward by Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission, in April 1989 [see p. 36598], the first stage involved the strengthening of economic and monetary policies among member states of the European Communities (EC) through existing institutions and the participation of all EC countries in the exchange rate mechanism (ERM) of the European monetary system (EMS).
Spain had joined the ERM in June 1989 [see p. 36741].
Of the non-participating countries (i) the Greek government announced on July 12, 1990, its intention to do so in 1993 if government fiscal measures were successfully implemented;(ii) the Prime Minister of Portugal, Aníbal Cavaço Silva, was known to favour early participation in the ERM although there was division within the government as to the exact timing; and (iii) the United Kingdom government had declared its intention to join the ERM but had not given any commitment as to when.
(Italy had committed itself to a smaller margin of fluctuation within the EMS in January 1990 — see p. 37198.)
Also on July 1 all restrictions on capital movements between most EC member countries were lifted, as envisaged in Directive 88/361 of June 1988, although a derogation for four newer member countries (Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain) gave them until the end of 1992 to comply.
[On pp. 36153-54 these target dates are incorrectly given.]
As agreed in December 1989 and June 1990 an intergovernmental conference on economic and monetary union was to be held on Dec. 13, 1990 [see pp. 37131; 37520].
Application for membership by Cyprus and Malta
Cyprus and Malta on July 4 and 16 respectively submitted formal applications for membership of the EC.
Their applications followed that of Austria in July 1989 [see p. 36822], on which the EC Commission had still to give a formal Opinion.
Consideration of the application submitted by Turkey in April 1987 had been deferred, at least until 1993, following the Commission's Opinion delivered in December 1989 [see p. 37133].
Morocco had applied for membership in July 1987 but had been rejected formally in October of that year [see page 36245].
Broadly, apart from the incorporation of East Germany following German unification [see p. 37659], the Commission's attitude was that any expansion of the EC's membership could not be considered until after the implementation of the single internal market, scheduled for the end of 1992.
The member countries of the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) were seeking establishment of a wider European economic space (EEC) in which they would have a "close and structured partnership" with the EC [see p. 37535], although it remained possible that other EFTA member countries besides Austria would opt to seek full EC membership.
Meanwhile the introduction of democratic political systems in Eastern Europe, and the efforts by several of those countries to make a transition to market economic systems, led to speculation as to whether and how the EC might extend eastwards.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Peace plan — Amal-Hezbollah fighting — Israeli air attacks
New peace initiative
The government of President Elias Hrawi launched a new peace initiative on July 11.
The plan was a further attempt to persuade the rival regime of Gen. Michel Aoun, the former Army C.-in-C. and self-declared interim Premier of Lebanon, to embrace the October 1989 Taif Accord for Lebanese national reconciliation [see p. 36986], and followed two recent efforts launched by France and the Vatican [see p. 37548].
The plan called for the reunification of "Administrative Beirut" (i.e. central Beirut as opposed to the suburbs), the withdrawal of all militias from the city and the integration of Aoun's troops into Hrawi's army, commanded by Gen. Emile Lahud.
The Arab League envoy Lakhdar Ibrahimi took the plan to all the various Lebanese parties during July, visiting Gen. Aoun in his Baabda headquarters on at least three occasions.
Eventually, on July 25, Aoun issued what amounted to a rejection of the new plan.
In response the Hrawi government introduced a series of new measures against Aoun on July 28, including a strict embargo on fuel supplies into his Beirut enclave.
At the same time increased pressure was placed on Aoun's troops to integrate and foreign diplomats were asked to avoid all contact with him.
Outbreak of serious Amal-Hezbollah fighting in southern Lebanon
Serious fighting broke out in southern Lebanon in mid-July between the two rival Shia militias, the Syrian-backed Amal and the Iranian-backed Hezbollah.
The fighting was instigated by Hezbollah, which prompted some commentators to suggest that it was part of an Iranian effort to undermine the Saudi-instigated Taif peace process.
By the end of July up to 180 people had died in the clashes and over 500 were wounded.
The fighting first erupted on July 16 when Hezbollah fighters captured the Amal-held village of Jarju in the Iqlim al-Tuffah hills south of Sidon.
The next day Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) guerrillas loyal to Chairman Yassir Arafat took up positions in the hills, ostensibly to act as a "buffer force" .
However, as the fighting developed, the 600-strong Palestinian force appeared to take Amal's side in the conflict.
Israel responded to the fighting by moving troops into its self-declared "security zone" in southern Lebanon and launching artillery attacks on the Shia battle-grounds.
At the same time, the Israelis were apparently allowing Hezbollah fighters to resupply across Israeli lines.
Israeli air attacks on Palestinian and Hezbollah bases
Israel launched a series of air attacks on Palestinian and Hezbollah camps in southern Lebanon in early July.
Both Iran and Syria accused Israel of launching the raids in an attempt to block the release of a Western hostage held in Lebanon.
Prior to the launching of the raids both Iran and Syria had indicated that a Western hostage was about to be freed (possibly Brian Keenan, a teacher with dual British-Irish nationality held since March 1986 — for his eventual release on Aug. 24 see p. 37668).
On July 6, Israeli fighter-bombers attacked two bases of the Syrian-backed Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine — General Command (PFLP-GC) in Sultan Yaaqoub village in southern Bekaa and at Nahr el-Bared camp north of Tripoli.
On July 8 Israeli fighter-bombers attacked Hezbollah bases at Ayn Bu Siwar and Jarju, killing up to five people.
According to some reports the air attacks were followed by an artillery barrage from Israeli and South Lebanese Army (SLA) forces positioned in Israeli's "security zone" .
There were further air strikes the next day against Hezbollah positions in the southern Bekaa valley.
At least 12 people were reported to have been killed and seven wounded in the attack.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISRAEL
Retention of Peres as Labour Party leader
During July the leader of the main opposition Labour Party, Shimon Peres, successfully resisted a challenge to his leadership from Itzhak Rabin, himself a former Labour leader and Prime Minister in 1974-77.
The party's political bureau voted on July 12 in favour of Rabin's proposal to hold a leadership contest before the end of the month, but on July 22 the party's central committee voted by 54 per cent to 46 per cent against this attempt to force a contest.
Rabin's challenge had followed Peres's failure to form a Labour-led coalition government after the collapse in March of the Likud-Labour coalition.
About 1,200 members of the 1,400-strong central committee took part in the July 22 vote, which effectively delayed any party leadership contest at least until 1991.
Two other leading Labour Party figures, Knesset members Gad Yaacobi and Moshe Shahal, announced their intentions of contesting the leadership in future.
The central committee also decided that future party leadership contests would take place through primary elections in which all the party's members would participate.
Peres pledged to lead Labour in militant opposition to the ruling Likud of Itzhak Shamir, saying: "The struggle now is for a credible peace process." 
The Knesset on July 11 rejected demands for a full inquiry into whether Rabin, when Defence Minister, had given illegal orders to the Israel Defence Force to beat Palestinian demonstrators and break their bones during the earlier stages of the intifada (the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories).
The demands for an inquiry had been prompted by the testimony of soldiers and officers facing disciplinary action for breaking the bones of Arab demonstrators.
Rabin told the Knesset that while he had sanctioned the use of force, he had never given illegal orders.
He said: "To the best of my recollection, at no time and in no place did I ever say" break bones'."
Resignation of ambassador to Egypt
Shimon Shamir, the Israeli ambassador to Egypt, announced his resignation on July 3, stating that "my personal beliefs are not in harmony with the programme of the present government" .
He had been appointed to the post in 1988 by Peres, who was then Foreign Minister 
Supreme Court ruling against emergency housing plan
The Supreme Court on July 17 ruled "unreasonable and illegal" the emergency regulations initiated by Housing and Construction Minister Ariel Sharon, which had been designed to speed up the building of accommodation for tens of thousands of Jewish immigrants from the Soviet Union.
In response to a petition by Knesset member Avraham Poraz, the court found that Sharon should have sought approval for the construction programme from the Knesset.
The special regulations, as approved by the Cabinet on July 1, would have allowed Sharon to circumvent building and land use approval procedures for three months, during which time 3,000 prefabricated units would have been imported and assembled in up to nine locations around the country.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
PALESTINIAN AFFAIRS
Aftermath of suspension of US-PLO dialogue
The United States during July initiated efforts through Egyptian diplomatic channels to resume the dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) formally broken off in June.
A proposal put to the PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat suggested that the dialogue could resume as soon as the PLO had disciplined the Palestine Liberation Front (PLF) for its involvement in the May 30 seaborne attack on the Israeli coast [see pp. 37443-44].
US diplomatic sources said that the initiative was being pursued secretly because of fears that it could be sabotaged by anti-Arafat Palestinian factions advocating armed struggle against Israel rather than negotiations.
Arafat, speaking on the PLO Voice of Palestine radio from the Yemen capital of San'aa on July 10, dismissed the dialogue so far as merely "a contact between two ambassadors, nothing more, nothing less" , and accused the US side of suspending these contacts at Israel's request.
Meeting of Arab League Foreign Ministers
Foreign Ministers of the Arab League held an emergency session in Tunis on July 15-16 to discuss, among other things, a joint response to the US suspension of the dialogue.
Addressing a closed session of the meeting, Arafat said that the PLO rejected the USA's conditions for a resumption, and Voice of Palestine said in a commentary on July 18 that the USA's setting of conditions for the resumption of contacts was "a blatant act of belligerence which cannot be condoned" .
In their final statement the Arab League Foreign Ministers stressed "the unity of the Arab position of solidarity with the PLO in its rejection of the US conditions for resuming the Palestinian-US dialogue" .
The League added that the USA's suspension of contacts with the PLO encouraged Israel "in its occupation and oppression" of the Palestinians.
EC Foreign Ministers' contacts in Israel
The European Communities' "troika" of Foreign ministers — of the current Commission chair Italy, its predecessor Ireland and its successor Luxembourg — told the Israeli Foreign Minister David Levi in Jerusalem on July 23 that the EC supported an urgent resumption of peace efforts in the Middle East, and that any delay in the resumption of such efforts could lead to serious consequences in the region.
The Italian Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis said that while the EC did not wish to exert pressure on Israel, political issues could not be separated from considerations about trade co-operation with that country.
At the end of the EC delegation's visit, the Israeli Prime Minister, Itzhak Shamir, rejected the EC's call to include the PLO in Middle East peace talks, and Israeli officials said that their country would resist EC attempts to exert economic pressure.
The EC summit in Dublin in June 1990 had sanctioned the appointment of an EC representative to the occupied territories to oversee the disbursement of direct aid from the EC to the Palestinians, expected to double to 12,000,000 European currency units (approximately US$15,000,000) per year by 1992.
Levi said after the EC delegation's visit that pressure or sanctions against Israel would be counterproductive and would achieve nothing.
He expected European countries to put pressure on Arab countries to enter into direct negotiations with Israel, and claimed that the EC's trust in the PLO to relinquish terrorism had been exploited by the latter.
Israeli Defence Minister's visit to USA
Israel's Defence Minister, Moshe Arens, arrived in Washington on July 20 for talks with US Defence Secretary Richard Cheney, in the highest-level contact between the two countries since Shamir's new coalition government took office the previous month [see pp. 37546-47].
Arens's visit coincided with the US State Department's postponement of a session of a joint committee which co-ordinated the disbursement of US military aid to Israel, although the State Department denied that the intention was to indicate US dissatisfaction over Israeli policies.
Arens said that the US side had indicated continuing support for the joint US-Israeli development of the Arrow surface-to-air missile programme, which involved the US company Lockheed, and on which the USA was underwriting 80 per cent of the costs.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ
Release of British nurse
Daphne Parish, a British nurse sentenced to 15 years' imprisonment by an Iraqi military court on March 10 [see p. 37332], was unexpectedly freed on July 16.
She was flown by private jet to the Zambian capital Lusaka, following a personal request for her release made by Zambia's President Kenneth Kaunda to President Saddam Hussein of Iraq.
Parish, who returned to the United Kingdom on July 18, had been arrested on Sept. 19, 1989, and charged with assisting the Observer< journalist Farzad Bazoft (hanged on March 15 — ibid.) in spying on the Al Iskandria military complex south of Baghdad.
She maintained that both of them had been innocent and that their trial had been unjust [see also pp. 36905; 36987].
Kaunda stated that a similar appeal for clemency for Bazoft had failed due to the "vicious" attack on Saddam Hussein by the British authorities and press.
The Zambian leader, currently facing serious internal unrest [see p. 37523], had previously used international statesmanship to assist him in solving domestic problems.
A personal friend, Tiny Rowland, chairman of the Observer and the British multinational company Lonrho, had reportedly approached Kaunda in March to seek his assistance over the Bazoft and Parish cases.
It was thought that Iraq had chosen to respond to the appeal from a friendly leader of the Non-aligned Movement, rather than be seen as giving in to Western pressure.
The UK government welcomed the release and expressed the hope that it would be followed by the release of a British businessman, Ian Richter), sentenced to life imprisonment on bribery and economic charges in 1986.
It was also hoped that there would be a general improvement in Anglo-Iraqi relations, which had deteriorated following the UK's efforts to thwart Iraq's acquisition of advanced missile and nuclear technology [see pp. 37332; 37390-91].
Recall of Swedish ambassador
The Swedish government recalled its ambassador, Henrik Amneus, from Baghdad on July 12, following the hanging of an Iraqi-born Swedish citizen, Jali Mehdi al Neamy, on July 11.
The Swedish Prime Minister, Ingvar Carlsson, had made a personal appeal for clemency to Saddam Hussein.
Neamy had been sentenced to death on April 30, charged with spying on Palestinian refugees in Iraq after allegedly admitting to working for Mossad, the Israeli secret service.
However, it was also reported that Neamy was an Iraqi dissident who had lived in Sweden for several years and had returned home the previous year to pay a brief visit to his family.
New Constitution
A draft constitution, drawn up by the ruling Revolutionary Command Council (RCC) headed by Saddam Hussein and approved on July 18 by the 250-member National Assembly, was published on July 30 "for public debate" before its ratification by the President.
The published version of the draft constitution, which provided for the direct election of the president for an eight-year renewable term, and allowed the president to issue emergency decrees, did not include an amendment approved by the Assembly recommending that Saddam Hussein be elected President for life.
This recommendation was in apparent contradiction to an interview given by Saddam Hussein broadcast on French television on July 9, in which he stated that he hoped that the first free and democratic presidential elections in the country's history would take place later in the year and that he would stand for re-election alongside other candidates.
The draft constitution also proposed the replacement of the RCC by a Consultative Council with 50 members, half of whom would be appointed directly by the President and the rest elected by direct secret ballot.
New political parties would be allowed, but only the ruling Arab Baath Socialist Party would be permitted to have branches in the armed forces and the police force.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
KUWAIT
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
SAUDI ARABIA
Mecca deaths
The death of 1,426 Moslem pilgrims when a tunnel collapsed in Mecca on July 2, during the Eid al-Adha (Feast of the sacrifices) at the end of the annual Haj (pilgrimage), led to strong criticism of the Saudi Arabian government from several Moslem countries.
The pilgrims, 680 of whom were later identified as Indonesian and some 600 as Turkish, died of suffocation or were trampled to death in a frantic attempt to escape, as an estimated 50,000 worshippers converged simultaneously on the 500-metre long al-Mu'aysam tunnel connecting Mecca to the pilgrim tent city of Mina, below Mount Arafat.
King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz declared that the disaster was "God's unavoidable will" , and government officials described it as an "accident" and due to "panic" following the collapse of a pedestrian access bridge, denying that a power cut had halted the air supply in the tunnel.
They stated that 27,000 million Saudi riyals (approximately US$8,000 million) had been spent over the previous seven years to improve facilities for pilgrims.
Moderate Sunni Moslem organizations in Turkey and Indonesia joined militant Shia opponents of the Saudi regime in Lebanon and Iran in calling for an international team to investigate the incident.
The Iranian government accused the Saudi authorities of a "criminal conspiracy" to kill the pilgrims and charged it with "incompetence" in the construction of facilities and management of the holy sanctuaries in Mecca and Medina, announcing on July 13 that it was to file charges of murder against the Saudi government in the International Court of Justice at The Hague.
Iran had boycotted the pilgrimage for the third consecutive year in protest both over a quota system limiting the number of pilgrims (to an estimated 1,500,000) and over the Saudi ban on political protests during the pilgrimage.
In July 1987 some 400 anti-Western demonstrators, mainly Iranian, had been killed in Mecca in clashes with the security forces [see p. 35676-77].
Diplomatic relations with China
On July 21 China's Foreign Minister Qian Qichen, the highest ranking Chinese official to visit Saudi Arabia, signed a communiqué with his Saudi counterpart Prince Saud al Faisal in the capital, Riyadh, establishing diplomatic relations between the two countries.
The agreement was a diplomatic success for China, which had seen a sharp reduction in its contacts with Western countries since the Tiananmen square massacre of June 1989 [see pp. 36720-22].
It marked the formal ending of Saudi Arabia's recognition of the regime in Taiwan as the government of China.
Relations with Taiwan were expected to be downgraded to "representative" status, but Taiwan's state-run Chinese Petroleum Corporation was expected to continue to buy the bulk of its crude oil from Saudi Arabia.
Taiwan's Foreign Minister, Frederick Chien, accused the Chinese government of having bought Saudi favour with discounts on CSS-2 long-range ballistic missiles.
Saudi Arabia had established a trade mission in Beijing in August 1989, but relations between the two countries had become strained following the suppression of Moslem revolts in the Chinese western autonomous region of Xinjiang Uygur in April 1990, which resulted in 23 deaths and in restrictions on the building of mosques and in the importation of Islamic literature [see also p. 37373].
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ALGERIA
Cabinet changes
In changes to the Council of Ministers announced on July 25 Maj.-Gen.
Khaled Nezzar became the first Defence Minister of Cabinet status appointed in 25 years.
The post had been held by the President since the overthrow of Ahmed Ben Bella in June 1965.
Nezzar, who had been appointed armed forces Chief of Staff in November 1988 following the previous month's disturbances [see p. 36506], was replaced in that post by Brig.
Gen. Abdelmalek Gueneizia.
Most of the other appointees were not senior members of the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN), as the government continued its policy of distancing itself from the party.
Sadek Boussena was given the Industry portfolio in addition to his current responsibility for Mines.
Continued disruption in the education sector was thought to have given rise to the dismissal of the Ministers of Education and the Universities, the new appointee to the latter post being upgraded to full Cabinet status.
A new post of Minister with special responsibility for Research and Technology was created.
Mouloud Hamrouche Prime Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali Foreign Affairs Ali Benflis Justice Said Chibane Religious Affairs Mohammed Saleh Mohammedi Interior Benali Henni Minister-Delegate for Local Authorities *Ali Benmohamed Education *Mustapha Cherif Universities Abdelkader Boudjemaa Youth Abdennour Keramane Professional Training Ghazi Hidouci Economy Smail Goumeziane Commerce Mohamed Ghrib Social Affairs Mohamed Kara Amar Employment Abdelkader Bendaoud Agriculture *Mohammed Kenifed Equipment Sadek Boussena Mines; Industry*** **Hassan Kahlouche Transport *Mohamed Serradj Posts and Telecommunications *Maj. -Gen.
Khaled Nezzar Defence **Hamid Sidi Said Public Health *Cherif Hadj-Slimane Research and Technology Abdelaziz Khellef Secretary of State for Maghreb Affairs Ahmed Medjhouda Secretary-General of the Government *New appointment.
**Reshuffled. ***Altered portfolio.
Algerian Council of Ministers
MIDDLE EAST
MAGHREB STATES
AMU summit
Leaders of Algeria, Tunisia, Morocco, Libya and Mauritania, the member countries of the Arab Maghreb Union (AMU) formed in February 1989 [see p. 36474], met in the Algerian capital, Algiers, on July 22-23.
In a final communiqué they agreed to accelerate economic integration of their countries by the creation of a customs union by 1995, and called for the strengthening of economic ties with their main trading partner, the European Communities (EC).
In addition five agreements were signed:(i) to promote AMU inter-regional agricultural trade;(ii) to prevent the spread of agricultural diseases;(iii) to encourage and guarantee investments;(iv) to end double taxation laws; and (v) to encourage the free movement of goods and peoples.
A common airline would also be created.
The communiqué also called for increased support for the Palestinian intifada in the Israeli-occupied territories, and for material, moral and political assistance for the reconstruction of Lebanon.
It stated that threats and the recourse to force against any Arab country threatened the Arab world in general.
A note of discord surfaced during the proceedings with Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco failing to agree on the location for the AMU's permanent secretariat and the choice of a secretary-general.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
WESTERN SAHARA
UN-supervised talks on referendum
UN-supervised talks took place in Geneva, Switzerland, on July 9 on arrangements for holding a referendum to resolve the 14-year-long dispute between Morocco and the Polisario guerrillas over the control of the Western Sahara.
On July 23 a UN fact-finding mission was to begin a visit to the region, to assess the logistical difficulties of holding such a referendum before March 1991, as well as to assess the scale and cost of the necessary supervision.
On July 8 Morocco's Foreign Minister, Abdel Latif Filali, had resisted attempts by the UN Secretary-General, Javier Pérez de Cuéllar, to persuade him to hold direct negotiations with Polisario leaders.
Background to referendum plan
In August 1988 both sides had agreed in principle to a UN peace plan calling for a ceasefire and exchange of prisoners and to a referendum designed to give the inhabitants of the territory (administered as a Spanish colony until 1976) a choice between independence or integration into Morocco.
On June 27, 1990, the UN Security Council had approved preliminary plans to establish a UN Mission for the Referendum in Western Sahara (MINURSO) to monitor a ceasefire and the referendum.
A delegation of 38 Saharan tribal elders (19 from Layoun under Moroccan control and 19 from Tindouf under Polisario control) had met in Geneva on June 4 and had broadly agreed that 74,000 people listed on the census rolls drawn up by Spain for the referendum of 1974 would be eligible to vote.
However, the Polisario officials estimated that the Saharan population had swelled to 207,000 by 1987, of whom nearly two-thirds were in refugee camps in Algeria.
The two sides disagreed on whether 100,000 Moroccan soldiers and thousands of Moroccan administrators should remain in the region during the referendum, the Polisario officials insisting that they be withdrawn beforehand, while Morocco offered to confine them to their garrisons.
INTERNATIONAL
INDUSTRIALIZED COUNTRIES
Houston summit
The heads of government of the seven major Western industrialized countries (the Group of Seven or G-7) held their 16th annual summit in Houston, United States, on July 9-11.
As in previous years, the discussions ranged widely, but the key points of debate concerned the provision of aid to the Soviet Union, the reduction of agricultural subsidies, and environmental issues (specifically global warming and deforestation).
The participants acknowledged that there had been considerable divergences of views on each of these issues, but all declared themselves satisfied with the compromises reached as expressed in the final declaration.
On economic issues, they expressed concern over continuing high unemployment, high inflation in some countries, and trade imbalances.
Hosted by US President George Bush, the meeting was attended by President François Mitterrand of France; the Canadian Prime Minister, Brian Mulroney; the West German Chancellor, Helmut Kohl; the United Kingdom Prime Minister, Margaret Thatcher; the Italian Prime Minister, Giulio Andreotti; the Japanese Prime Minister, Toshiki Kaifu; and Jacques Delors, the President of the European Commission, representing the European Communities (EC).
In the final declaration the Group of Seven welcomed "the renaissance of democracy throughout much of the world" , referring specifically to the "profound changes" which had taken place in Eastern Europe since the last summit in Paris in July 1989.
They also welcomed the prospect of a unified Germany; reaffirmed the commitment to reduce the Third World's debt burden, specifically supporting proposals to extend repayment periods put forward by the Paris Club of creditor countries; and reiterated the commitment to combat drug trafficking.
With regard to China, they maintained the financial and other sanctions imposed in 1989 in the wake of the Tiananmen Square massacre, while agreeing to reconsider them in the light of future improvements concerning respect for human rights in particular.
(The Japanese government nevertheless announced that it would resume a major aid programme to China which had been frozen in 1989, arguing that it was not in the interest of the world to try to isolate China.)
Regarding aid to the Soviet Union, the final declaration welcomed the political and economic reforms under way in that country.
The Group of Seven offered immediate "technical assistance" to help the Soviet Union move to a market economy, and agreed to commission the International Monetary Fund (IMF) to undertake a study (to be completed by the end of 1990) on the Soviet economy and to make recommendations on direct financial aid.
In this context the declaration noted, however, that prospects for economic assistance would be enhanced if the Soviet Union decided to "shift resources substantially away from the military sector and to cut support to nations promoting regional conflict" (the latter being an implied reference to Cuba).
This commitment fell short of what some of the participants had called for.
France and West Germany had presented a proposal for an immediate co-ordinated financial aid package amounting to some US$15,000 million, but the USA had argued that it could not commit itself to direct aid until the Soviet Union had reduced military spending, moved more forcefully to a market economy and curtailed its aid to Cuba.
Italy had leant towards the Franco-German proposal, while Canada, the UK and Japan had leant towards the US view, with the latter two specifically ruling out immediate direct aid.
(The outcome was also less than the Soviet Union had hoped for.
In a letter to the summit meeting President Gorbachev had asked for immediate support for his economic restructuring programme in the form of credits, technical co-operation, personnel training, joint ventures and joint projects.)
Despite the summit's deferral of direct aid, President Bush reaffirmed at the final press conference that the Group of Seven was united in its desire to help the Soviet Union, and that its decisions on this matter should be seen as "positive" .
He also announced that he would personally inform the Soviet President of the summit's decisions.
The declaration left open the possibility of bilateral aid, and the West German government subsequently pledged a loan package amounting to US$3,100 million in advance of the Gorbachev-Kohl summit on German reunification in Moscow later in July [see pp. 37659-61].
Regarding agricultural subsidies, the final declaration called for "progressive reductions in support and protection of agriculture" , including a lowering of domestic price supports and export subsidies and an easing of import barriers to agricultural products.
The USA and Canada had sought a commitment to dismantle all agricultural subsidies over the next 10 years on the grounds that such subsidies distorted world trade and formed a major impediment to the further liberalization of world trade being currently negotiated under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) within the "Uruguay Round" [see pp. 37227-28].
In the EC member states agriculture was heavily subsidized through the common agricultural policy, and their reluctance to contemplate the phasing out of subsidies had deadlocked the GATT talks and threatened a major trade war.
According to observers, the compromise agreed at Houston was acceptable to the EC countries because it recognized the special nature of EC farming as mainly family based (rather than corporate-based as in the USA), while the USA could be satisfied because the agreement spelled out what kinds of subsidies should be reduced.
The Houston compromise was expected to facilitate the latest round of GATT negotiations on trade in agricultural products which opened in Geneva on July 23.
Regarding environmental issues, the Group of Seven in the final declaration (i) committed itself to undertake "common efforts to limit emissions of greenhouse gases" ;(ii) reiterated its support for the negotiation of a "framework convention on climate change" under the auspices of the UN;(iii) committed itself to negotiating a "global forest convention" in order to curb deforestation and protect biological diversity; and (iv) agreed to co-operate with Brazil on a programme to protect the tropical rain forests in that country.
The commitment on global warming fell short of calls by European countries and Canada for specific ceilings on emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases causing global warming.
This had been resisted by the USA in particular.
INTERNATIONAL
WORLD BANK
World Development Report
The 1990 edition of the World Bank's World Development Report, published on July 16, called for a new initiative aimed at "lifting 400 million people out of poverty by the year 2000" .
It recommended a two-pronged strategy comprising (i) "the productive use of the poor's most abundant resource, their labour" ; and (ii) "improved health and education" .
Citing the cases of Indonesia, Malaysia and Thailand, the report noted that the adoption of labour-intensive development and the provision of social services for the poor had actually reduced poverty in these countries.
In parts of Latin America, however, high public-sector borrowing resulting in inflation had significantly increased poverty between 1981 and 1987.
While stressing that economic growth and helping the poor were not contradictory objectives, the report recognized that its strategy could entail "a trade-off, especially in the short run, between the interests of the poor and the non-poor" .
The report noted that the industrialized countries could improve the lot of 1,100 million people living on an average per capita income equivalent to less than US$370 a year by increasing and targeting aid to countries committed to reducing poverty.
A 10 per cent cut in defence spending could pay for a doubling of development assistance (which stood at $51,000 million in 1988), while increasing aid to the target level of 0.7 per cent of gross nation product (GNP) would raise assistance flows to $144,000 million by 2000.
If the strategy was accepted, the report estimated that the number of poor could decline to 825 million by 2000; Asia's share of the poor would fall from 72 to 53 per cent, but sub-Saharan Africa's share would rise from 16 to 32 per cent .
Growth rates of 3 per cent per annum for industrialized countries, and 5.1 per cent for industrializing countries, were forecast for the 1990s.
Per capita income was projected to rise by 3.2 per cent per annum across the developing countries as a whole, but only by 0.5 per cent per annum in sub-Saharan Africa.
INTERNATIONAL
HUMAN RIGHTS
Amnesty International report
In its annual report published on July 11 Amnesty International, the human rights organization, found that "in countless cases state torture was the price paid for being identified as sympathizers with ethnic or nationalist movements" .
Examples given included the torture of ethnic groups by Sudanese government-backed militias, the persecution by Chinese troops of Tibetans, and the crushing by Soviet troops of Georgian demonstrations in April 1989 when 20 people were killed and 3,000 injured.
In over 35 countries police and military officers, either in uniform or working in death squads, gunned down government critics; in over 20 countries opponents either disappeared or were held incommunicado.
In Africa, although hundreds of prisoners of conscience had been freed during 1989, major human rights abuses persisted, especially in Ethiopia, Liberia, Somalia and Sudan where government troops were fighting insurgents.
The Guardian noted that the report had again highlighted concern at the policy of the United Kingdom government in Northern Ireland and had placed the UK "in the same league as the Iraqi government for the way it treats the Kurds, the Somali government for the torture and murder of the Issaq tribe and the Sri Lankan government for the way it has" escalated "arbitrary arrests and torture of members of the political opposition" .
In over 60 countries the courts gave out death sentences, which were carried out in more than half these countries.
(In Iran judicial executions had increased in 1989 to at least 1,000 as a result of a new law imposing mandatory death sentences for possession of drugs.)
In Western Europe claims of ill-treatment or torture of those in custody were reported in Austria, France, West Germany, Italy, Portugal, Spain and the United Kingdom.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMONWEALTH
New Secretary-General
Chief Emeka Anyaoku of Nigeria took over as Commonwealth Secretary-General on July 1 for a five-year term.
Hitherto a Deputy Secretary-General, Anyaoku had been elected on Oct. 18, 1989, to succeed Shridath Ramphal, who retired on June 30.
Ramphal, first elected in 1975, had held the post for three successive terms.
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Cut in Soviet oil deliveries to Eastern Europe
The East European members of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON) faced grave economic hardship as a result of a decision by the Soviet Union in July to cut oil exports.
In the first week of July the Soviet authorities announced that in the third quarter of 1990 its oil deliveries to its European COMECON partners would be reduced by around 30 per cent.
The cut was due in part to a recent series of pipeline ruptures and oilfield accidents and to a 4 per cent drop in Soviet oil production in the first half of 1990 (as compared with the same period in 1989).
The main reason, however, was the reallocation of oil supplies for use in the Soviet Union (where fuel shortages were currently causing serious harvesting problems) or for export for much-needed hard currency.
The Soviet move led immediately to large price rises in Czechoslovakia and Bulgaria, where there were long queues for available supplies of petrol, and to disruption to industry and services in these countries and in Hungary and Poland.
East European anxieties over oil supplies were compounded by Soviet announcements to its East European Comecon partners, also during July, that trade should be conducted after Jan. 1, 1990, in hard currency rather than in the transferable rouble (the non-convertible COMECON accounting unit).
Moreover, Soviet oil deliveries would be charged at world prices rather than the current pricing system based on a five-year rolling average.
INTERNATIONAL
WHALING
Upholding by IWC of whaling ban
The International Whaling Commission, meeting in Noordwijk (Netherlands) on July 2-6, reaffirmed the moratorium on commercial whaling agreed in 1982 with effect from 1985 [see pp. 31828; 34717-18].
Opposition to the ban had come from the traditional whaling countries of Norway, Iceland and Japan, joined by St Vincent and St Lucia.
The ban would next be reviewed at the IWC meeting scheduled to take place in Reykjavik, Iceland, in 1991.
Norway, Iceland and Japan had proposed that they be allowed to resume limited hunting of minke whales, the smallest of the great whales and the last to be hunted commercially before the moratorium went into effect.
Much of the discussion took place in the IWC's scientific committee, which met before the conference proper, with arguments centring on the widely varying estimates of minke numbers.
Norway, for example, held that north-east Atlantic stocks amounted to 89,000, compared with the IWC estimate of 55,000.
The conference also voted to condemn the continued practice of "scientific whaling" by Norway and Japan (as permitted under the moratorium).
This did not have the authority of a ban, however.
Aside from the moratorium, the conference discussed the fate of small cetaceans (dolphins and porpoises) not presently covered by IWC restrictions.
It instructed IWC scientists to carry out a worldwide survey of population levels.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Cabinet reshuffle
Nigerian President Ibrahim Babangida carried out on Aug. 30 an extensive Cabinet reshuffle, involving the departure of nine ministers.
Three days previously he had abolished the post of chief of general staff, held by Vice-Adml.
Augustus Aikhomu replacing it with a vice-presidency to which on Aug. 30 he appointed Aikhomu; the appointment caused some surprise in that the job had been expected to go to a civilian.
The far-reaching reorganization of the government had been foreshadowed in Babangida's address broadcast on Aug. 27, marking the fifth anniversary of his taking power, when he said that "we shall from now on systematically deregulate and demilitarize the process of politics and governance in the period leading to 1992" and that his adminstration had become "critically conscious of the need to start the process" .
Chu Okongwu had been Minister of Finance until January 1990 and then Minister of Cabinet Affairs.
Maj.-Gen.
Ike Nwachukwu had chaired the tribunal which ordered the execution of 42 coup plotters in July [see p. 37602].
Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji, hitherto Minister of Budget and Planning, had been a critic of the policy of outgoing Finance Minister Chief Olu Falae who had taken a tough stance with creditors on the renegotiation of Nigeria's foreign debt.
Lt.-Gen.
Sanni Abacha had been Chief of Army Staff, in which capacity he was replaced by Maj.-Gen.
Salihu Ibrahim.
Also on Aug. 30, 12 state governors were replaced.
*Vice-Adml.
Agustus Aikhomu Vice-President *Shetima Mustapha Agriculture and Natural Resources T. O. Graham-Douglas Aviation *Chu Okongwu Budget and Planning *Olawale Adeniji-Ige Communications *Maj. -Gen.
Y. Y. Kure Culture and Social Welfare Babs Fafunwa Education **Alhaji Bonu Shariff Musa Employment, Labour and Productivity *Maj. -Gen.
Ike Nwachukwu External Affairs Maj.-Gen.
M. Gado Nasko Federal Capital Territory **Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji Finance and Economic Planning Koye Ransome Kuti Health Air Vice-Marshal Mohammed Yahaya Industry *Chief Alex Akinyele Information *Maj. -Gen.
A. B. Mamman Internal Affairs Prince Bola Ajibola Justice; Attorney General Air Vice-Marshal Nura Imam Mines, Power and Steel Jibril Aminu Petroleum Resources Air Commodore Anthony Ikazobor Youth and Sports Gordian Ezekwe Science and Technology S. J. Ukpanah Trade **Commodore Lamba Dung Gwom Transport Brig.
M. T. Kontagora Works and Housing *Alhaji Abubakar Hashidu Water Resources *Zakari Ibrahim Minister of State for External Affairs *Lt. -Gen.
Sanni Abacha Minister of Defence and Chief of Defence Staff *Alhaji Sumaila Gwarzo Minister of State for Police Affairs *New Appointment.
**Altered portfolio.
New Nigerian Council of Ministers