

MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
GULF CRISIS
Iraqi invasion of Kuwait — International Response
Iraq invaded and overran Kuwait on Aug. 2 and by the end of August had completely absorbed Kuwait into its administrative structure, despite the international condemnation of the invasion.
Shortly after the invasion United States troops, backed up by forces from various European, Arab and Asian countries, were quickly dispatched to Saudi Arabia in an attempt to shield the kingdom from Iraqi assault and to impress upon President Saddam Hussein of Iraq that he should withdraw his troops from Kuwait.
The invasion, and the subsequent entry of US forces into Saudi Arabia, had a massive impact on Arab regional politics, causing alliances and antagonisms to shift and crumble.
The Iraqi move was the culmination of several months of incident in the Middle East which appeared to be aimed at building up Saddam Hussein's anti-Western and anti-Israeli credentials whilst at the same time confirming Iraq's regional ascendency [see pp. 37332; 37390; 37471].
For many Arabs the invasion of Kuwait confirmed Saddam as the foremost pan-Arab nationalist leader and the first Arab ruler since Egypt's Abdel Gamal Nasser who was fully prepared to stand up to the USA.
Build-up to invasion
Tension between Iraq and OPEC over-producers
Tension between Iraq and Kuwait came to the world's attention in mid-July when Saddam Hussein launched a fierce attack on the policy of those Gulf states, principally Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates (UAE), whose over-production of oil he blamed for a corresponding slump in world oil prices.
The 13-member Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) had made little headway in curbing over-production during 1990.
The problem had been high on the agenda of an OPEC ministerial meeting held in Vienna in mid-March [see p. 37335], but both Kuwait and the UAE had refused to agree to production cuts.
In early May OPEC oil ministers met in emergency session in Geneva [see p. 37475]and an agreement was reached on cutting production, but the Paris-based International Energy Agency, in its June 5 report, said that OPEC output actually fell only by 400,000 barrels a day (bpd) in May, a figure which was wholly attributable to cuts in Saudi Arabian production and which was far short of the 1,450,000 bpd reduction pledged at the OPEC emergency meeting.
As other reports confirmed OPEC's failure to implement the production cuts, oil prices fell.
The "marker" price of Brent crude, the most widely traded North Sea crude, was US$15.60 per barrel as of June 5, compared with $17.50 on April 24 and $19.60 on Feb. 20.
In late June the OPEC president, Saddek Boussena, embarked on a tour of some member states in an attempt to encourage cuts in production ahead of the next OPEC ministerial meeting scheduled to take place in Geneva in late July.
Boussena's tour coincided with a series of visits by Sa'adoun Hammadi, Iraqi Deputy Prime Minister, to Kuwait, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE, during which he pressed vigorously for cuts in production to be implemented.
Breaking with normal protocol he was openly critical of Gulf over-producers, claiming that every $1.00 fall in the price of oil lost Iraq $1,000 million a year.
A report in the Middle East Economic Digest of July 13 stated that if prices held at the July 3 level ($16.03 per barrel of Brent and $13.75 per barrel of Dubai crude) then Iraq's current-account deficit for 1990 would be US$3,500 million; however, if the OPEC reference price of $18 a barrel, introduced in 1987, was achieved then the 1990 deficit would be halved.
The oil ministers of Iraq, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar and the UAE met in the Saudi city of Jeddah on July 10-11 and an agreement was reached on curbing over-production.
Kuwait and the UAE agreed to reduce their output to 1,500,000 bpd each until the reference price was restored.
This represented a cut in actual output for Kuwait of some 300,000 bpd and for the UAE of 400,000 bpd.
Iraqi criticism of Kuwait and UAE
Less than a week after the Jeddah agreement on over-production had been reached, Iraq launched a concerted, public attack on the policies of Kuwait and the UAE.
The offensive was begun on July 17 by Saddam Hussein during a speech to mark the 22nd anniversary of the "July 17-30 Revolution" .
Saddam threatened that "if words fail to protect Iraqis, something effective must be done to return things to their natural course and return usurped rights to their owners" .
He accused some (unnamed) Arab states of undermining Arab interests and security on behalf of the USA and warned that Iraq "will not forget the saying that cutting necks is better than cutting the means of living" .
On the following day Iraq radio broadcast details of a memorandum, dated July 15, which had been sent by the Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz to the Arab League Secretary-General Chedli Klibi.
This memorandum elaborated on a number of points raised by Saddam in his Revolution Day speech.
In his memorandum Aziz accused Kuwait of having deliberately pursued policies aimed at weakening Iraq during the latter's eight-year war with Iran.
During the war, Aziz claimed, Kuwait had advanced into Iraqi territory and had set up military establishments and oil installations.
Since the outbreak of the Gulf war in 1980, he stated, Kuwait had stolen vast amounts of oil from the southern section of the Rumalla oilfield.
Based on prices between 1980 and 1990, Aziz estimated that Kuwait had stolen oil worth US$2,400 million and he claimed that Iraq had every right to "retrieve" these funds.
Aziz characterized the Gulf war as a "pan-Arab battle in which Iraq had assumed the responsibility of defending pan-Arab security as well as the Gulf region in particular" .
During the war the Gulf states had provided Iraq with interest-free loans which, Aziz pointed out, were still recorded by Kuwait and the UAE as debts.
After the 1988 ceasefire agreement Iraq had attempted, unsuccessfully, to have these debts cancelled.
During the war Iraq's oil production had fallen dramatically, and to meet the shortage production had been increased elsewhere in the Gulf.
Therefore, he reasoned, "a simple calculation will show that the UAE and Kuwaiti loans to Iraq were not entirely from their treasuries but from the increases in their oil revenues as a result of the drop in Iraqi oil exports over the war years" .
Had there been a genuine sense of Arabism during the post-war period, Aziz went on, then the Gulf States would not only have cancelled Iraq's debts, but would also have organized a comprehensive Iraqi reconstruction plan.
On the issue of over-production, Aziz accused Kuwait and the UAE of recently implementing an "international scheme to glut the oil market" by exceeding their quotas.
As a result of this policy the Arab states as a whole had lost about US$25,000 million since 1987 through falling oil prices.
For Iraq, the effect had been particularly severe, occurring at a time when the country was suffering a financial crisis as a result of having fought a war against Iran on behalf of all Arabs.
Escalation of dispute
Saddam's speech and Aziz's memorandum were greeted with alarm in Kuwait.
On July 18 the Kuwaiti Army was placed on a state of alert and the recently elected National Council [see p. 37549]held an emergency session in camera to study the Iraqi charges.
Shortly afterwards the Council issued a statement denouncing the Iraqi memorandum.
A memorandum drawn up by the Kuwaiti Foreign Ministry on July 18, and sent to the Arab League the next day, stated that the Iraqi charges had "no factual basis" .
Allegations that Kuwait had moved into Iraqi territory were "a falsification of reality and a resumé of inverted truths" because it was Iraq which had a "full history of violations of Kuwaiti territories" .
The memorandum called for the formation of an Arab League committee to arbitrate on any disputed sections of the Iraq-Kuwait border.
On July 18 the Kuwaiti Foreign Minister, Shaikh Sabah al Ahmed al Jabir as Sabah, set out on an emergency tour of Kuwait's five Gulf Co-operation Council (GCC) partners (Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE).
Other Kuwaiti ministers were sent to the remaining Arab League countries, with the exception of Iraq.
Meanwhile, the events of July 17-18 motivated a number of Arab leaders to launch mediation efforts.
On July 18 King Fahd ibn Abdul Aziz of Saudi Arabia and President Ali Abdullah Saleh of Yemen both contacted Saddam and the Amir of Kuwait, Shaikh Jabir al Ahmad al Jabir as Sabah.
Chedli Klibi visited Kuwait on July 20-21 for talks aimed at calming the rapidly escalating situation.
After meeting with Klibi on July 21 Shaikh Sabah appeared optimistic of a peaceful settlement, stating that "what is between the brothers in Iraq and Kuwait is merely a summer cloud which will go away" .
On July 22 Tariq Aziz travelled to Cairo for talks with the Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak, and the following day the two held a further round of talks in Alexandria with King Hussein of Jordan.
At a press conference after the meeting Mubarak expressed his confidence that Kuwait and Iraq would "arrive at a comfortable and calm, quiet solution" .
Meanwhile, Kuna, the official Kuwaiti news agency, had reported on July 22 that the Egyptians had put forward a four-point plan to settle the dispute, which would ultimately involve a conference of the major Arab states.
In Iraq, government-controlled newspapers intensified their attacks on Kuwait on July 23.
In the first personalized attack of the Iraqi media campaign Al-Thawra, the newspaper of the ruling Baath Party, accused Shaikh Sabah of working as a US agent.
President Mubarak visited Iraq, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia on July 24, and on his return to Egypt the following day he announced that Iraqi and Kuwaiti delegations would meet in Jeddah in late July.
Mubarak also announced that Saddam had assured him that Iraq had no intention of attacking Kuwait or of moving forces towards the Kuwaiti border.
This assurance had been given in the light of US reports on July 24 claiming that Iraq had advanced two armoured divisions totalling about 30,000 soldiers towards the Kuwaiti border.
On the same day US forces in the Gulf had started hastily arranged joint exercises with the UAE Navy.
In general, the US response to the dispute had been very muted, reflecting the prevailing view in the West that the Iraqi campaign against Kuwait was primarily a scare tactic timed for the start of the OPEC conference in Geneva.
OPEC meeting — Agreement to raise reference price
Oil ministers from the OPEC countries met in Geneva on July 26-27 where they quickly reached an agreement on oil production and pricing.
The ministers agreed to raise the minimum reference price of crude by $3 to $21 a barrel for the period to the end of 1990.
At the same time it was agreed to limit total output to 22,491,000 bpd, a modest increase on the previous ceiling of 22,086,000 bpd.
The only country to have its individual quota raised was the UAE (from 1,095,000 bpd to Kuwait's level of 1,500,000 bpd, set at the November 1989 OPEC meeting — see p. 37053).
Analysts expressed the opinion that, unlike previous agreements, the Geneva accord was credible, largely because Iraq had shown itself willing to adopt the role of an OPEC "enforcer" to curb over-production.
During the conference Iraq, supported by Libya, had argued for a minimum reference price of $25 a barrel.
Venezuela had been the most outspoken critic of the Iraqi position, arguing to maintain the existing price of $18 a barrel.
The Saudi Arabians, who had been expected to support Venezuela, adopted a low key approach, leading most commentators to suggest that they had been intimidated by Iraq's belligerence.
Iran, meanwhile, had argued for a compromise price of $23 a barrel.
Breakdown of Iraq-Kuwait talks
Talks between Iraq and Kuwait which had originally been due to take place in Jeddah on July 28-29 were delayed until July 31.
Meanwhile, tension in the Gulf continued to rise despite frantic mediation efforts by King Hussein, the Saudi Foreign Minister Prince Saud al Faisal, and the PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat.
Iraqi media reports prior to the meeting were uncompromising and blunt; the daily al-Jumhuriya reported on July 30 that Iraq was attending the Jeddah talks to "retain its rights and not to hear new talks about" fraternity and solidarity "which yield nothing" .
On the day on which the talks eventually opened the Washington Post reported that six Iraqi divisions totalling 100,000 soldiers were concentrated along the border with Kuwait.
The Iraqi delegation at the Jeddah talks was led by Izzat Ibrahim, Vice-Chair of the powerful Revolutionary Command Council (RCC).
The Kuwaiti delegation was headed by Prime Minister and Crown Prince Shaikh Saad al Abdullah as Salim as Sabah.
The two sides held one two-hour session late on July 31, after which the talks were suspended.
The Iraqi delegation left abruptly for Baghdad the next day, and Sa'adoun Hammadi announced that the talks had collapsed because the Kuwaitis had not shown any serious willingness to tackle the "major damage inflicted on Iraq" .
However, a Kuwaiti official told reporters that the talks had collapsed "because Kuwait did not give in to Iraqi demands to write off debts and to relinquish some of its territory" .
According to a report in the International Herald Tribune of Aug. 1, it was likely that Iraq's "maximum demands" at Jeddah had included up to US$10,000 million in aid; $2,400 million in compensation for "stolen" oil; the cancellation of $10,000 million in debts; the renunciation of Kuwaiti claims to the southern section of the Rumalla oil field; and a long-term lease on the islands of Bubiyan and Warba, both of which lay off Iraq's short Gulf coast.
Bubiyan and Warba were of great strategic importance since Basra, Iraq's main port, remained inoperative because of a lack of agreement with Iran over the Shatt al-Arab waterway linking Basra with the Gulf.
Kuwait had been wary of Iraqi territorial ambitions ever since it gained independence from the UK in 1961.
Less than a week after achieving full independence on June 19 [see p. 18159], Kuwait was threatened by a claim to sovereignty over the whole of its territory by the Iraqi leader, Gen. Abdul Karim Kassem.
Gen. Kassem asserted that Kuwait had been an integral component of the southern Iraqi province of Basra under Ottoman rule and that Iraq had succeeded to Turkish territorial sovereignty over Basra with the dissolution of the Ottoman empire after the First World War.
Kassem failed to win international support for his claim and was deterred from pursuing it militarily by the swift dispatch of British and Arab League forces to Kuwait [see pp. 18187-90; 18355; 18934]; he was toppled in a bloody Baath-Nationalist coup in 1963, after which the new Iraqi government recognized Kuwaiti sovereignty [see p. 19668].
Kuwait was thought to have made a major financial grant to the new Iraqi regime as an incentive to improve relations, which, whilst remaining peaceful during the 1960s, were nevertheless marred by a dispute centring on Iraq's interest in Bubiyan and Warba.
Iraqi possession of the islands would afford it greatly increased access to the Gulf.
In 1973 Iraqi forces occupied Kuwaiti territory near the islands, but quickly withdrew in the face of widespread Arab disapproval.
Iraq's expansion of the port of Umm Qasr and the development of the Rumalla oil field during the 1970s meant that a settlement of the dispute became a prime Iraqi objective.
During negotiations Iraq proposed that it would recognize all of Kuwait's land borders in return for full rights to Warba island and the lease of half of Bubiyan.
But, despite a series of negotiations, demarcation was never accomplished.
The rise to power of Saddam Hussein and the subsequent outbreak of the Gulf war in 1980 led to a revival of the Iraqi claim to the islands.
However, while the eight-year war was under way Iraq was receiving substantial financial assistance from Kuwait and hence never fully pressed the claim.
Iraq's invasion of Kuwait
Iraq launched its invasion of Kuwait on Aug. 2 at 2.00 a.m. (local time), when of the 100,000 Iraqi troops massed on Kuwait's northern border an estimated 30,000 soldiers, including elite Republican Guards, crossed in the first assault.
Despite the increased tension between Kuwait and Iraq during late July, Iraq's invasion appeared to take the small Kuwaiti Armed Forces by surprise.
Iraqi troops advanced swiftly across the desert, encountering only minor artillery resistance, and entered the capital, Kuwait City, at around 7.00 a.m.
The advancing ground troops were provided with substantial air support, with fighter bombers attacking key installations in and around the city, including the airport.
In Kuwait City itself the Iraqi forces met some opposition from elite troops guarding the Amir's palace and from troops stationed in Army and Air Force barracks situated on the city's outskirts.
The Amir and the Crown Prince had both been transported by helicopter to Saudi Arabia at an early stage of the invasion.
By mid-afternoon Iraqi troops had taken control of most of Kuwait City centre, although fierce fighting continued well into the evening at Shuwaikh, the main Army barracks north of the capital.
Iraqi forces also landed on Bubiyan and Warba islands.
Early reports suggested that between 100 and 200 people were killed during the invasion, including the Amir's half-brother, Shaikh Fahd al-Ahmad al Sabah.
However, later reports indicated that the casualty toll might have been much higher.
The Independent of Aug. 7, for instance, claimed that fighting between Iraqi forces and the Kuwait Maghaweer brigade at Al Jahra barracks on Aug. 2 had resulted in over 1,000 deaths.
Iraqi justification of invasion — Reported internal Iraqi opposition
Iraq claimed that its troops had been invited into Kuwait by internal "revolutionaries" who had launched a coup against the Amir, a claim which was internationally repudiated.
A pro-Iraqi "Provisional Free Kuwaiti Government" (PFKG) began broadcasting soon after the invasion.
In its first communiqués the PFKG announced that it had replaced the "defunct and corrupt" al Sabah regime and had closed Kuwait's borders and imposed an indefinite curfew.
Iraqi radio broadcasts on Aug. 2 warned against foreign intervention in Iraq and Kuwait; in one report the RCC threatened to "turn Kuwait into a graveyard" if any country was "moved by the lust of invasion" .
At the same time Iraq closed its land borders and air space and ordered 15 infantry and armoured divisions, disbanded after the 1988 ceasefire agreement with Iran, to be re-formed.
Saddam also called for the creation of 11 new divisions, and on Aug. 4, for the expansion of the Popular Army militia to serve in both Iraq and Kuwait.
The Iraqi newspaper Al-Iraq reported on Aug. 23 that the number of volunteers for the Popular Army had reached almost 5,000,000.
In Iraq itself mass demonstrations were held on Aug. 2 to celebrate the invasion.
However, some reports suggested that there had been opposition to Saddam's decision to invade.
The Egyptian newspaper Al-Ahram of Aug. 3 reported that 120 Iraqi officers had been executed for refusing to support the invasion, a claim confirmed by Arab diplomats arriving in Syria from Kuwait in late August.
Some Western reports claimed that Iraqi troops had been told that they were invading Israel and were deeply distressed when they found themselves in another Arab state.
However, there were hardly any reports of mass defections, one exception being an account by Western diplomats of 12 Iraqi soldiers crossing into Saudi Arabia in mid-August.
On Aug. 16 the Egyptian news agency MENA reported that an abortive coup attempt had been launched in Baghdad on the previous day and that "large scale arrests" had taken place.
Meanwhile, on Aug. 25 Western intelligence reports indicated that the Iraqis had started to move northwards units of the Republican Guard Corp forces which had led the initial invasion.
The US NBC television network claimed that the redeployments were linked to internal divisions in Baghdad.
Kuwaiti response and resistance to invasion
The civilian population in Kuwait appeared to be stunned by the invasion, and although some immediately tried to escape into Saudi Arabia most simply remained in their homes.
Some reports suggested that the invasion was supported by large numbers of the estimated 400,000 Palestinian workers in Kuwait, all of whom had previously been denied Kuwaiti citizenship despite constituting the backbone of the country's middle-management structure.
Over 1,000,000 other expatriates lived in Kuwait, more than half of whom were south or south-east Asian.
The deposed Kuwaiti government established its base in the Saudi mountain resort of Taif, although the Amir and his ministers spent much of their time travelling the world to bolster opposition to the invasion.
Resistance within Kuwait was initially sporadic but became increasingly organized during August.
However, the resistance or al Muquwama posed little threat to the Iraqis, consisting in the main of poorly armed civilian-led neighbourhood committees.
A resistance radio station, Huna Kuwait ( "This Is Kuwait" ), broadcast intermittently in Kuwait.
Actions of Iraqi forces in Kuwait — Alleged build-up of troops on Saudi border
Reports on the conduct of the Iraqi troops in Kuwait varied.
Some highlighted the brutality of the Iraqis, focusing on allegations of mass rape of expatriate women.
Other reports claimed that the Iraqi forces were generally well behaved, and that many soldiers had apologized to the civilian population for the invasion.
According to some sources the situation had deteriorated when Popular Army units entered Iraq soon after the invasion.
Looting was certainly widespread, but a major part of it appeared to be organized by the Iraqi government.
The New York Times of Aug. 14 reported that Iraq had transferred between US$3,000 million and $5,000 million in gold, foreign currency and goods from Kuwait and that this had significantly increased Iraq's financial reserves which had stood at an estimated US$6,500 million before the invasion.
However, in a warning to looters Iraqi television broadcast on Aug. 16 pictures of an executed Iraqi officer hanging above his looted booty in Kuwait City.
The invading Iraqi forces had been accompanied by mukhabarat (military intelligence) officers who immediately began rounding up Iraqi opposition exiles in Kuwait City.
The roundup was centred on the predominantly Shia Moslem Bnaid al-Gar district and communist and fundamentalist Shia opposition figures were particularly targeted.
In a broadcast on Aug. 3 the RCC stated that plans had been drawn up to begin a withdrawal of Iraqi forces from Kuwait on Aug. 5.
However, at the time of the broadcast Iraqi forces were still working to secure complete control of Kuwait City, as well as of the country's ports and oil terminals.
Meanwhile, the world's attention was focused on Saudi Arabia.
US State Department reports on Aug. 3 had alleged that Iraqi forces had been spotted by reconnaissance aircraft massing on the Saudi border in preparation for a possible invasion.
Iraq categorically denied such reports, but they persisted in the West and one US news agency reported later in the day that Iraqi troops had actually crossed into the Kuwaiti-Saudi Neutral Zone.
Saudi forces were placed on red alert and the USA issued statements warning Iraq not to launch an attack on Saudi Arabia.
Formation of PFKG — Iraqi "withdrawal" claims
Details of the membership of the new "Provisional Free Kuwait Government" (PFKG) were released for the first time on Aug. 4.
Kuwaiti officials in exile claimed that the new junta was composed entirely of Iraqis and that the new Prime Minister, Col. Alaa Hussain Ali, was in fact Saddam Hussein's son-in-law.
A number of prominent Kuwait opposition figures were reportedly arrested by the Iraqi forces after refusing to participate in the new government.
Iraq announced on Aug. 5 that it had started to withdraw its forces from Kuwait, a claim which prompted US President George Bush publicly to denounce Saddam Hussein as a liar.
The Kuwait embassy in Jordan described the withdrawal as little more than a manoeuvre to disguise the theft of Kuwaiti military equipment.
On the same day the PFKG partially lifted the curfew imposed on Aug. 2 and urged key workers to return to their jobs.
The curfew was reduced even further on Aug. 17.
Formal annexation of Kuwait
Iraq formally annexed Kuwait on Aug. 8, in defiance of the imposition of UN sanctions [see below]and despite the arrival of US forces in Saudi Arabia.
The annexation was announced on the day after the PFKG proclaimed Kuwait a republic.
Following the annexation Iraq ordered all foreign embassies in Kuwait to move to Baghdad within two weeks and announced that, for security reasons, it had closed the borders to foreigners trying to leave Iraq and Kuwait.
In a move foreshadowing the annexation, Kuwait's currency, the dinar, was decreed "equivalent" to the Iraqi dinar.
According to the Independent of Aug. 8 the decree, which had the effect of reducing the Kuwaiti dinar to about one-12th of its previous value, turned one of the world's hardest currencies into "worthless paper" .
Kuwaiti banks abroad ignored the edict and continued to offer customers the pre-invasion exchange rate.
The first details of the annexation were broadcast by the PFKG on Aug. 8 when it announced that it had asked Iraq to approve a "complete full unity merger between Kuwait and Iraq, so that Saddam Hussein will be our leader" .
The RCC later announced that it had decided to "return the part and the branch, Kuwait, to the whole and origin, Iraq, in a comprehensive and eternal merger unity" .
Saddam Hussein appointed Col. Hussain, the PFKG Premier, as a Deputy Prime Minister in the Iraqi Cabinet.
The other eight PFKG Cabinet members were appointed as advisers at the Presidential Office with full ministerial rank.
The official Saudi news agency SPA reported on Aug. 20 that Col. Hussain had been "liquidated" for fear that he might "expose the aims of the Iraqi regime and reveal the secrets of the invasion operation" .
The Independent reported on the same day that control of Kuwait's security and administration was in the hands of Ali Hasan al Majid, Iraq's Minister of Local Government and architect of the government's 1987-88 military campaign against Kurdish rebels.
Following the Aug. 8 annexation Iraq initiated a programme to rename Kuwaiti towns and institutions.
The oil town of Ahmadi, for example, was renamed Al-Nida (Appeal).
Meanwhile, in the face of mounting international military opposition in the Gulf area, Iraq stepped up its security in Kuwait.
The Times of Aug. 20 reported that a battery of 10 Scud-B ballistic missiles, possibly targeted at Riyadh (the Saudi capital), had recently been moved into Kuwait.
The next day reports indicated that all oil installation, ports and water desalination plants had been mined by the Iraqi forces.
Iraq eventually announced on Aug. 28 that Kuwait had become the 19th Iraqi governorate (liwa).
The new liwa was divided into three districts, Kadhima (Kuwait City), Jahra and Al-Nida.
Another decree extended the border of Basra governorate south into Kuwait, creating the new province of Saddamiyat al-Mitlaa.
Arab response to invasion
The Iraqi invasion of Kuwait generated a series of major realignments in the Arab ranks.
A month after the invasion the full implications of that realignment could only be guessed at.
During August two distinct Arab blocs had emerged.
One included Egypt, Saudi Arabia and Syria at the core of a group fully committed to securing Iraq's unconditional withdrawal from Kuwait.
A pro-Iraqi bloc included Jordan, the PLO, Yemen, Sudan, Tunisia and Algeria.
This group supported the formulation of a settlement within the Arab ranks and emphasized that the presence of foreign, and particularly US, troops in Saudi Arabia was a major obstacle to any solution of the crisis.
Arab League meetings in Cairo — Adoption of resolution to commit Arab forces to Saudi Arabia
The first attempt by the Arab states to formulate a unified response to the invasion came late on Aug. 3, over 40 hours after Iraqi troops first crossed into Kuwait.
Some individual Arab states had already issued condemnations of the invasion.
Arab League ministers were already in Cairo on Aug. 2 attending a meeting of the Islamic Conference Organization [see p. 37668].
They convened that day, but failed to issue any resolution until late on Aug. 3.
A resolution condemning the Iraqi invasion, calling for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal, and rejecting any foreign intervention was endorsed by 14 of the 21 Arab League member countries and was opposed by six (Iraq, Jordan, Mauritania, Sudan, Yemen and the PLO).
Libya had refused to attend the meeting.
Arab League members: Algeria, Bahrain, Djibouti, Egypt, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Mauritania, Morocco, Oman, Palestine (PLO), Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria, Tunisia, UAE and Yemen.
An emergency Arab League summit, finally held in Cairo on Aug. 10 to discuss the Iraqi invasion, passed a seven-point resolution denouncing the "Iraqi aggression against" and annexation of Kuwait, and calling for an immediate withdrawal and the deployment of "Arab forces" to help Saudi Arabia and other states defend against "foreign aggression" .
No final decision was taken on which countries would contribute to the Arab force, but Egypt, Syria and Morocco subsequently announced that they would provide troops.
At the summit, which was by all accounts an exceptionally heated affair, President Mubarak broke with Arab tradition and forced through a majority vote, rather than wait for the emergence of a unanimous compromise.
The resolution was approved by 12 of the 21 Arab League countries.
Iraq, Libya and the PLO voted against the resolution; Algeria and Yemen abstained; Jordan, Sudan and Mauritania "expressed reservations" and took no position; and Tunisia failed to attend.
Under the Arab League Charter a resolution passed by a majority of votes was binding only on member states voting in favour.
Saddam's "Middle East occupations" initiative — Proposed Kuwait referendum
Saddam Hussein proposed on Aug. 12 that all Middle Eastern occupation issues, or "issues that have been depicted as occupation" , should be resolved according to one set of UN Security Council principles.
In accordance with these principles, arrangements should be made for "the immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Israel from the occupied territories in Palestine, Syria and Lebanon; Syria's withdrawal from Lebanon; a withdrawal between Iraq and Iran; and the formulation of arrangements for the situation in Kuwait" .
Implementation should begin with the "oldest occupation" (i.e. Palestine) and end with the "most recent" (Kuwait).
The initiative was immediately rejected by the USA and Israel, whilst King Fahd claimed that it "made matters more difficult" and Egypt asserted that it created "new ambiguities" .
However, the initiative was welcomed by Jordan, Yemen and the PLO and went on to serve as one of the main diplomatic planks of the pro-Iraqi Arab bloc.
Saddam's linkage of the Kuwait issue with other regional problems was greeted with enthusiasm by many Arabs, who contrasted the West's belligerent attitude over the current crisis with its virtual acceptance of Israel's long-term occupation of Arab lands.
Another Arab League meeting was held in Cairo on Aug. 30-31 and was attended by Foreign Ministers from Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Lebanon, Qatar, Bahrain, Morocco, UAE, Kuwait and Somalia, and lower-level officials from Oman, Djibouti and Libya.
At the end of this meeting a resolution was approved demanding that Iraq pull its troops out of Kuwait and pay war damages as conditions for a settlement of the crisis.
The Cairo meeting was boycotted by the pro-Iraqi Arab bloc, whose leaders were pursuing peace efforts largely dismissed by the West and other Arab states.
The culmination of these efforts was a fresh initiative broadcast over Jordanian radio on Aug. 29, which had apparently been agreed by Arafat and Saddam Hussein in Baghdad the previous day.
Under the plan Iraqi and foreign forces would withdraw from Kuwait and Saudi Arabia simultaneously and would be replaced by "Arab and international forces from the region" .
Afterwards, a referendum would be held in Kuwait on unity with Iraq.
Responses by individual states
Saudi Arabia and Gulf states
The overthrow of the Al Sabah family in Kuwait was a great shock to the other five Gulf monarchies.
However, the initial response was extremely low-key, with some states not even mentioning the invasion and not one of them directly criticizing Iraq.
The first public response came on Aug. 3 from ministers of the Gulf Co-operation Council (comprising Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and the UAE) who issued a condemnation of the "Iraqi aggression" and called for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal.
In the immediate aftermath of the Iraqi invasion attention had shifted to Saudi Arabia, which was widely viewed as Iraq's next potential target.
The USA moved rapidly to acquire Saudi, and Egyptian, approval for the deployment of US forces in Saudi Arabia to deter any Iraqi attack.
At the same time the USA pressed Saudi Arabia to cut off the vital Iraqi oil pipeline to the Red Sea outlet at Yanbu, which the Saudis did on Aug. 7.
Details of the troop deployment were formulated by the Saudis and Dick Cheney, the US Defence Secretary, on Aug. 6, and the next day Bush formally announced that King Fahd had requested that US ground forces and war-planes be dispatched to Saudi Arabia to deter Iraqi aggression; US combat aircraft and troops started to land at Dharhan in eastern Saudi Arabia that day.
With the arrival of US forces in Saudi Arabia King Fahd started to adopt a more forceful anti-Iraqi line.
In a televised speech on Aug. 9 he described the invasion of Kuwait as "the most vile aggression known to the Arab nation in its modern history" .
Iraq, meanwhile, attempted to take advantage of the presence of US troops in Saudi Arabia by calling for a holy war, or Jihad, against King Fahd in order to protect the two holy cities of Mecca and Medina from "infidel" (non-Moslem) forces.
Subsequent Iraqi reports described anti-US demonstrations and riots in Saudi Arabia.
Despite such reports there was some evidence that the crisis had generated greater support for the King, particularly among Saudi nationals; on the other hand some foreign Arab residents in Saudi Arabia, particularly Palestinians and Jordanians, were accused of being pro-Iraqi.
In early August there was considerable panic in the UAE, a country which Iraq had earlier singled out, along with Kuwait, as one of the main oil overproducers.
Initially, large numbers of expatriates started to leave the country, but with the deployment of US forces the business community appeared to regain some of its confidence.
The UAE announced on Aug. 19 that it had agreed to the deployment of Arab and other foreign forces.
Oman agreed to the stationing of foreign forces soon after Saudi Arabia; Bahrain and Qatar agreed in mid-August and late August respectively.
After its first emergency meeting on Aug. 3 the GCC Ministerial Council met again in Jeddah on Aug. 7 and reiterated its call for an unconditional Iraqi withdrawal.
GCC Defence Ministers met in Jeddah on Aug. 22 and agreed to reinforce the Peninsular Shield Force, the organization's Saudi-based rapid deployment force [see p. 34265].
Egypt
President Mubarak quickly adopted a firm and critical stance.
Commentators claimed that Mubarak was enraged and embarrassed by Iraq's invasion, after he had announced in late July [see p. 37632 above]that Saddam had assured him that Iraqi forces would not move into Kuwait.
Ostensibly, Egypt enjoyed close relations with Iraq, both sharing membership of the Arab Co-operation Council (ACC) along with Yemen and Jordan.
However, beneath the surface relations were extremely tense; differences had been highlighted, for example, in late 1989 when Iraq deported large numbers of Egyptian workers [see p. 37053].
In early August there was considerable concern in Egypt that the crisis would provoke serious domestic unrest, and some commentators intimated that junior officers might even turn against Mubarak.
However, in the event Mubarak largely carried the Egyptian public with him to the extent that even staunch opponents such as the Moslem Brotherhood supported his policies.
He was aided by a wave of anti-Iraqi feeling in the country generated by the mass of Egyptians fleeing from Kuwait and Iraq.
By mid-August as many as 100,000 Egyptians had fled, two-thirds of whom were stranded in Jordan or on the heavily congested Iraqi-Jordanian border.
Although Mubarak clearly set out his anti-Iraqi position early on in the crisis, he also openly expressed his wish to "contain" the conflict within the Arab nation.
He maintained this public position until after the Arab summit in Cairo on Aug. 10, despite having earlier approved the dispatch of US forces to Saudi Arabia.
Some reports claimed that Egyptian forces had been sent to Saudi Arabia even before the summit, at which Egypt formally undertook to send troops as part of a pan-Arab force.
The first Egyptian troops arrived on Aug. 12, with a second contingent departing from Cairo four days later.
Once Egyptian forces were in Saudi Arabia, Iraq began broadcasting anti-Mubarak propaganda in earnest.
A Voice of Arab Egypt radio station was monitored soon after the Cairo summit broadcasting attacks on Mubarak and calling on the Egyptian people to overthrow their government.
In a broadcast on Aug. 23 Saddam Hussein called on Mubarak to "take the side of the…poor of the Arab nation" and "be among the ranks of the faithful who are striving against the corrupt, the dissolute, the tyrants and the army of invaders" .
The broadcast was in reply to an Aug. 21 message from Mubarak in which he publicly appealed to Saddam to withdraw from Kuwait and thereby "save mankind from a destructive war which will leave a scorched earth" .
Syria
The Syrian government recognized an opportunity in the crisis to improve relations with many of its Arab neighbours and with the USA.
President Assad evidently took great comfort from the international onslaught on Saddam Hussein, his hated Baathist rival, and from the way the crisis reflected on another old adversary, PLO Chair Yassir Arafat.
The Syrian stance during the weeks following the invasion effectively confirmed the country's return to mainstream regional politics and led to the formation of a new close alignment between Syria and Egypt [for recent improvement in Egyptian-Syrian relations see pp. 37471; 37626].
President Assad visited Mubarak in Alexandria on Aug. 28, after which both called for an unconditional Iraqi withdrawal and a "restoration of legitimacy" in Kuwait.
President Assad had been the first Arab leader to criticize the Iraqi invasion, but there was considerable apprehension in the West that Saddam Hussein's emergence as a focus of anti-Western Arab radicalism might open the way to a rapprochement between Iraq and Syria.
However, Syria sided with the pro-Western camp at the Cairo summit and on Aug. 20 the first contingent of 1,200 Syrian troops was dispatched to Saudi Arabia.
On Aug. 13-14 the Kuwaiti Crown Prince visited Damascus and was afforded an unusually warm reception.
Visits to Damascus by US Assistant Secretary of State John Kelly on Aug. 9 and Aug. 13 and a telephone call to Assad from Bush on Aug. 12 confirmed the USA's altered perception of Syria [see p. 36180 for return of US ambassador in September 1987 after strained relations over Syria's alleged involvement in international terrorism].
Nevertheless, it was evidently with some unease that President Assad placed his troops in the Saudi desert alongside US forces.
Given the response of large sections of the Arab community to the US presence in the Gulf, commentators emphasized that Assad's strategy was a dangerous one and at the end of August Western press reports stated that large numbers of soldiers had been dispatched to Syria's eastern frontier with Iraq to put down pro-Iraqi demonstrations and riots.
Jordan
Of all the Arab states touched by Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, few were affected quite as deeply as Jordan.
Over a period of a few days during early August the world's perception of the Kingdom shifted dramatically, so that King Hussein was no longer portrayed as one of the chief US allies in the region, but instead as one of Saddam Hussein's prime collaborators.
However, the West's cool attitude towards the King over his pro-Iraqi stance was partly offset by Jordan's willingness to take in vast numbers of refugees from Iraq and Kuwait during August.
By late August about 225,000 refugees had crossed into Jordan, forcing the government to turn to international aid agencies for help.
The flow was so great that the authorities closed the border on Aug. 22-23 in order to cope with the backlog.
King Hussein's decision not to follow Egypt's pro-Western path was heavily influenced by internal considerations.
Saddam Hussein had overwhelming support from the vast majority of Jordanians, and the US intervention in the Gulf had the effect of uniting previously disparate political and social strands behind the King's stance on the crisis.
Economically, Jordan was in severe trouble before the crisis, and total adherence to a UN trade embargo on Iraq [see p. 37639 below]could mean the loss of a quarter of the country's exports; Jordan was also dependent upon Iraq for almost all of its oil supplies.
Throughout August King Hussein was under pressure on the one hand to abide by the UN resolution to impose sanctions on Iraq and denounce the invasion of Kuwait, but on the other hand Iraq and the mass of Jordanians wanted Jordan to support Saddam Hussein's anti-US crusade and keep open Baghdad's lifeline through the Red Sea port of Aqaba.
Jordan responded to the predicament by prevaricating.
The government stated its willingness to abide by the UN sanctions policy, but sought to postpone their application for as long as possible.
Meanwhile, goods continued to be transported by road from Aqaba to Iraq.
However, by the end of the month activity at Aqaba had declined dramatically, so that relatively few trucks were crossing the border into Iraq at Ruweishad.
The fall in activity was partly the result of a US naval blockade in the Strait of Tiran, although many ships had abandoned Aqaba earlier in the month for purely commercial reasons (i.e. an increase in shipping insurance rates).
Meanwhile, Jordan received offers of compensation, on condition that the sanctions were strictly imposed, from the USA, the European Communities (EC), Japan and Saudi Arabia.
On Aug. 22 Jordan's permanent representative at the UN invoked Article 50 of the UN Charter, which stipulated that any country affected by sanctions could be eligible for compensation.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Sept. 7 reported that in its memorandum submitted to the UN Security Council, Jordan had claimed that the Iraqi embargo would cost Jordan some US$4,000 million during the first 12 months and that the country's foreign debt would become virtually unmanageable.
By the time of King Hussein's Aug. 13 visit to Iraq for talks with Saddam Hussein, his efforts to contain the dispute within the Arab world had failed and he was directing his efforts at constructing an effective bloc along with the PLO, Yemen, Sudan, Algeria and Tunisia.
On the day of his visit to Baghdad mass pro-Iraqi rallies were held in Jordan, many organized by the newly-formed Arab Nationalist Democratic Coalition.
As many as 80,000 Jordanians had volunteered to fight alongside Iraq in the event of a war with the USA.
King Hussein visited the USA on Aug. 15-16 for talks with Bush at the latter's holiday home at Kennebunkport.
According to press reports the King was expected to convey a message to Bush from Saddam, which was said to include fresh proposals to solve the crisis.
However, both denied that a message from Saddam had been delivered.
By all accounts Hussein was given a cool reception by Bush, who pressed him to impose UN sanctions quickly, offering some financial compensation in return.
PLO
The PLO Chairman Yassir Arafat had firmly rallied behind Iraq during the confrontation with the West preceding the invasion of Kuwait.
Iraq's military might and Saddam's willingness openly to challenge Israel appealed strongly to a PLO leadership deeply disillusioned with the faltering Middle East peace process.
As August progressed, Arafat began to take on the role of Saddam's chief ally.
The emotional fervour in support of Saddam Hussein amongst Palestinians living in the occupied territories was so great that Arafat was largely compelled to reject the pro-Western line.
Other Palestinian groups, including the Islamic Resistance Movement (Hamas) and even Syrian-based "rejectionist" groups, also supported him in this.
By joining the pro-Iraqi camp the PLO effectively cut itself off from the moderating influences (and financial backing) of the Gulf states and Egypt, and rendered highly unlikely any prospects for a resumption of US-Palestinian talks (broken off in June — see pp. 37547; 37626-27).
Various reports during August indicated that Palestinians in the Gulf states were either being detained or expelled.
Yemen
Yemen was thrust into the heart of the Gulf crisis on account of its close links with Iraq and its current position as the only Arab member of the UN Security Council.
North Yemen had been the only country to contribute troops to support Iraq during the Gulf war.
Iraq, in turn, supported Yemen in its complex, and at times difficult, relationship with Saudi Arabia.
Both Iraq and (North) Yemen were founder members of the Arab Co-operation Council.
Like other supporters of Iraq, Yemen formally condemned the invasion and annexation of Kuwait during the early part of August, but then went on to direct its criticism at the US forces in Saudi Arabia and to press for an Arab solution to the problem.
At the Aug. 6 UN Security Council vote on the imposition of wide-ranging sanctions on Iraq [see below], the Yemeni permanent representative abstained, and Yemen again abstained on the vote at the Arab League Cairo summit.
As a member of the UN Security Council, Yemen officially announced its intention to apply UN sanctions against Iraq.
An Iraqi tanker was turned away from Aden after managing to unload a quantity of oil on Aug. 21.
However, a spate of pro-Iraqi demonstrations, and the pro-Iraqi sentiment evident in the statements of the country's leadership, especially President Ali Abdullah Saleh, indicated that Yemen's commitment to UN sanctions was at best half-hearted.
Maghreb states
The crisis created a wide degree of Arab nationalist support for Iraq within the Maghreb states.
The pressure on the governments of Algeria and Tunisia to support Iraq was particularly strong because both faced strong fundamentalist opposition movements which would inevitably capitalize on anti-US sentiment.
Of the Maghreb countries Morocco adopted the clearest anti-Iraqi line.
However, given the level of popular support for Iraq in the other countries, King Hassan's decision to support the Egyptian line wholeheartedly was generally considered risky.
King Hassan, the Maghreb's sole reigning monarch, had issued a swift and strong condemnation of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and he went on to vote in favour of the resolution adopted at the Cairo summit.
Morocco subsequently became one of only three Arab countries (i.e. together with Egypt and Syria) to send troops to the pan-Arab force to defend Saudi Arabia; some 1,200 Moroccan troops reportedly arrived in Riyadh on Aug. 12.
Throughout August Col. Moamer al Kadhafi, the leader of Libya, consistently criticized the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, but he nevertheless voted against the Cairo summit resolution.
With the build-up of foreign forces in Saudi Arabia anti-Americanism became the main thrust of Libyan policy.
As in other Arab countries, pro-Iraqi demonstrations took place throughout the month.
Algeria issued a criticism of Iraq's "storming" of Kuwait, but the government's position altered with the entry of US troops into Saudi Arabia.
On Aug. 7 the official radio station criticized Western moves to freeze Iraqi and Kuwaiti assets and the following day Foreign Minister Sid-Ahmed Ghozali called for a solution to the crisis "within an Arab framework" , describing foreign intervention as "the most catastrophic possibility" .
The entry of foreign forces into the Gulf swung public opinion strongly behind Iraq, and a number of pro-Iraqi demonstrations were held in the country during August, including a march organized by the ruling National Liberation Front (FLN) in Algiers on Aug. 15.
Of the Maghreb countries Tunisia initially adopted the most neutral attitude to the invasion.
President Zine al Abidine Ben Ali did not even attend the Arab League summit in Cairo, claiming that not enough preparation had gone into the meeting.
However, on Aug. 11, the day after the summit, he appeared on Tunisian television to condemn the deployment of foreign troops to Saudi Arabia and to call for the conflict to be confined to a "purely Arab framework" .
As in neighbouring Algeria and Libya, the popular response to the crisis was overwhelmingly pro-Iraqi, with a number of demonstrations taking place.
A government-organized pro-Iraqi demonstration in Tunis on Aug. 14 was the first legal demonstration since Ben Ali assumed power in late 1987.
Israeli response
The Israeli right sought to gain maximum advantage from the impact of the Gulf crisis on the image of Palestinian leadership in the West.
Little was done to halt mass pro-Iraqi demonstrations on the West Bank and Gaza Strip; instead they were used as evidence of Arafat's close links with Saddam Hussein's "terrorist" state.
Like their Western counterparts, the Israeli government was evidently taken by surprise by the invasion of Kuwait and questions were raised later in the month as to why Mossad (the country's intelligence service) had not known of Saddam's intentions.
Soon after the invasion Israeli officials made it clear that they were fully prepared to carry out "pre-emptive action" to halt a potential Iraqi attack.
Defence Minister Moshe Arens told the Knesset on Aug. 7 that Israel would take action as soon as any fresh "geo-strategic change" occurred, such as an Iraqi push into Jordan.
However, during the early phase of the crisis the Israeli public feared more than anything else an Iraqi chemical attack on Israel, as threatened by Saddam in April [see p. 37390].
Demands were made for the immediate distribution of gas masks, most notably by Foreign Minister David Levi on Aug. 20.
Possibly in response to the threat of a chemical attack Israel carried out a well-publicized test of its Arrow anti-ballistic missile system on Aug. 9.
After the entry of US forces into Saudi Arabia in the second week of August Israeli public pronouncements on the crisis became noticeably less strident.
Officials emphasized that Israel had no aggressive designs on any of its Arab neighbours.
According to some reports the change in emphasis was the result of pressure from the United States.
The USA was eager to play down its close links with Israel in order not to alienate potential Arab supporters.
The USA also made it clear to Israeli officials that any Israeli military involvement in the crisis would cause a radical shift in the already unstable Arab ranks, possibly leading a number of those currently allied to the USA to side instead with Iraq.
In its implications for the long-term US-Israeli military relationship, it was deeply disturbing for Israelis to contemplate the prospect of US forces fighting alongside Arab troops.
The crisis also caused renewed Israeli anxiety over US arms sales to Arab countries.
When details of a massive US arms package to Saudi Arabia were released in late August [see below], Prime Minister Itzhak Shamir openly criticized the move and called on the USA to supply Israel with an equivalent package.
US response
The USA responded to the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait by mobilizing the largest demonstration of US overseas military power since the Vietnam war.
By early September the number of US forces in the region was estimated to be well in excess of 100,000, and was continuing to increase daily.
The US government presented this exercise as designed to defend Saudi Arabia and to deter further military aggression on the part of Iraq.
The declared aim of re-establishing Kuwaiti sovereignty, it was suggested, would be accomplished by an economic blockade of Iraq, and could take some months to achieve.
At no point, however, did the USa rule out direct military action against Iraq, although US successes at the United Nations [see p. 37640 below]meant that the bellicose tone of its initial response was moderated as the month passed.
Within days of the invasion a six-vessel Indian Ocean battle group led by the aircraft carrier Independence was directed to the Gulf.
It was followed by two further aircraft carrier battle groups, one led by the Eisenhower (already in the Mediterranean), and the other by the Saratoga which was dispatched from its home port in Florida.
An Atlantic battle group led by the battleship Wisconsin was also ordered to the region.
The decision to begin sending ground units — as part of a "multinational defence force" designed to protect Saudi Arabia from the "imminent threat" of Iraqi invasion — was announced on Aug. 7, after Cheney had received assurances of military co-operation from Saudi Arabia and Egypt.
The first brigade of the US 82nd Airborne Division, numbering some 4,000 men, was dispatched within hours of the announcement, as were the first F-15 fighter bombers and AWACS radar aircraft.
Following the decision to commit US ground-based forces, estimates as to the numbers which might ultimately be deployed rose quickly and, on Aug. 10, it was widely leaked that the administration had adopted a "contingency plan" involving the use of 250,000 ground troops should full-scale fighting break out with Iraq.
Bush issued an executive order on Aug. 22 which called up US military reservists for the first time since 1968 (for the Vietnam war) and as the month progressed there was increasing US pressure for other countries (particularly its NATO allies) to contribute ground forces to Saudi Arabia.
Bush also unveiled an "action plan" , on Aug. 30, through which affluent European, Asian and Gulf countries would share the cost both of the military intervention and of a prolonged blockade of Iraq.
In addition to sending military units, the USA also imposed a complete trade embargo on Iraq which included the prohibition of exports to any entity operated from Iraq or owned or controlled by the government of Iraq.
It also froze Iraqi and Kuwaiti assets; suspended credits, loans and grants; closed Iraqi Airlines' offices in the USA and committed its military forces to the interdiction of Iraqi oil shipments in support of UN sanctions.
US Secretary of State James Baker announced on Aug. 12 that the USA had received a formal request from the deposed Kuwaiti government to enforce UN sanctions under the self-defence article (Article 51) of the UN Charter.
Although he refused to use the term "blockade" , Baker stated that the request had given US naval units the legal right to stop vessels carrying goods to and from Iraq.
Declared aims of US action
The declared aims of the US response were summarized by Bush in a televised address on Aug. 8.
They were (i) the immediate, complete, and unconditional withdrawal of all Iraqi forces from Kuwait;(ii) the restoration of the deposed Kuwaiti government;(iii) the protection of the lives of US citizens held in Iraq and Kuwait; and (iv) the establishment of regional security and stability in the Persian Gulf.
During his address Bush drew a clear parallel between Saddam Hussein and Adolf Hitler, warning: "Appeasement does not work.
As was the case in the 1930s, we see in Saddam an aggressive dictator threatening his neighbours."
Bush stressed: "America does not seek conflict…
The mission of our troops is wholly defensive…
They will not initiate hostilities, but they will defend themselves, the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia and other friends in the Gulf."
The last of the four stated US objectives was considered by some commentators to indicate an "unacknowledged agenda" which involved the removal of Saddam and the neutralization of Iraq's military capacity, particularly its chemical and nuclear weapons capabilities.
Many proponents of this view believed that, notwithstanding USA claims that war with Iraq was not the object of the mobilization, the US was waiting to amass sufficient military force and international support before unleashing a full-scale military attack upon the Saddam regime.
Despite the crisis, Bush did not alter his scheduled three-week summer vacation, and left Washington for his holiday home in Kennebunkport, Maine, on Aug. 10.
Assuring journalists that he would receive regular briefings on the development of the Gulf crisis, Bush emphasised that he did not want "to appear to be held hostage in the White House" .
There followed a great deal of news coverage of Bush fishing and playing golf, in what many commentators interpreted as an effort to avoid comparison with President Jimmy Carter, whose cancellation of public engagements in favour of a lonely vigil in the White House whilst US hostages were held in Iran in 1987-89, had projected an image of impotence.
Detention of foreign nationals — Pressure on embassies in Kuwait
The Gulf crisis was complicated by the presence of many Western civilians in the region, including some 4,000 UK and 2,500 US citizens in Kuwait and some 600 UK and 600 US citizens in Iraq.
On Aug. 9 Iraq closed its borders to foreigners trying to leave Iraq or Kuwait; on Aug. 12 Donald Croskery, a British businessman, was shot dead by Iraqi forces on the Kuwait-Saudi border; and on Aug. 16 all US and British citizens in Kuwait were ordered to surrender themselves to the Iraqi authorities or face unspecified "difficulties" .
Although there was no reliable estimate of the numbers detained, it became apparent that Iraq had moved some foreign nationals to potential military targets such as air fields and oil facilities, to deter any US air attacks.
On Aug. 19 France protested over the detention of its nationals.
Saddam stated that the foreigners would be freed only when US troops were withdrawn from the region, the blockade against Iraq was lifted and Bush gave a written assurance that the USA would not attack Iraq.
He would, however allow some 570 Austrian, Finnish, Portuguese, Swedish and Swiss nationals to leave because those countries had not sent forces to the Gulf.
Meanwhile several hundred thousand foreign workeers, mostly Egyptians, Palestinians and East and South Asians, poured out into Jordan and threatened a major refugee crisis.
The Iraqi authorities insisted upon defining the detained foreign nationals as "guests" .
Bush for his part did not refer to them as "hostages" until Aug. 20, when he told a convention of the Veterans of Foreign Wars that the Iraqi attack on Kuwait was "a ruthless assault on the very essence of international order and civilized ideals" , and condemned the detention of hostages for having violated "all norms of international behaviour" as well as the tenets of Islam and traditions of Arab hospitality.
He would, he said, "hold the government of Iraq responsible for the safety and well-being of American citizens held against their will" .
The UK Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher on Aug.22 described as a scandal the Iraqi use of foreign hostages as possible human shields.
She reacted "with repulsion" to a televised appearance by Saddam chatting to a group of hostages on Aug. 23, but Western governments were concerned to prevent their policy being dictated by concern over the possible implications for their nationals being held hostage.
The Iraqi authorities ordered all foreign embassies in Kuwait to close by Aug. 24, on which day the British and US embassies, together with others which defied the order, were surrounded by Iraqi troops but no attempt was made to remove the diplomats by force.
The evacuation went ahead of dependents of embassy staff from Kuwait and Bagdad.
The USA retaliated against the harassment of its diplomats by expelling 36 staff from the Iraqi embassy in Washington — including seven accredited diplomats — on Aug. 27, and imposing restrictions on the 19 who remained.
Saddam announced on Aug. 28 that all foreign women and children would be permitted to leave Iraq.
He also offered to hold televised talks with Bush and Thatcher, an initiative summarily dismissed by the UK and US governments.
On Aug. 21 the Iraqi ambassador to the USA suggested that Western men would also be released if the US guaranteed not to attack Iraq.
The US State Department responded by reiterating its rejection of any conditions for the release of hostages, and by emphasizing that US forces deployed in Saudi Arabia were for defensive purposes.
The UN and the international response
The UN Security Council met repeatedly during August in response to the Gulf crisis and passed five resolutions [see box], moving on from its first and immediate condemnation of the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait (Resolution 660 on Aug. 2), to impose mandatory sanctions (Resolution 661 on Aug. 6), and later to allow states to use their naval forces for "measures" to ensure implementation of such sanctions (Resolution 665 on Aug. 25), while also rejecting the Iraqi annexation of Kuwait (Resolution 662 on Aug. 9) and demanding freedom of departure from, and consular access to, foreign nationals in Kuwait and Iraq (Resolution 664 of Aug. 18).
UN Security Council Resolutions
Permanent members: China, France, Soviet Union, UK, USA.
Non-permanent members: Canada, Colombia, Côte d'Ivoire, Cuba, Ethiopia, Finland, Malaysia, Romania, Yemen, Zaïre.
Resolution 660.
Aug. 2.
Passed unanimously, but with Yemen not participating, after one-hour meeting commencing at 5.00 a.m.
Condemned Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Demanded immediate and unconditional withdrawal of Iraqi forces.
Called for negotiated settlement.
Resolution 661.
Aug. 6.
Passed by vote 13-0 with Cuba and Yemen abstaining.
Imposed mandatory sanctions against Iraqi and Kuwaiti trade, affecting all purchase or transshipment of oil and other commodities and products, banning new investment, and banning sale or supply of any products, including arms, but excepting medical supplies and foodstuffs "in humanitarian circumstances" .
Resolution 662.
Aug. 9.
Passed unanimously.
Declared Iraqi annexation of Kuwait "null and void" .
Demanded that Iraq rescind its declaration of "merger" .
Called on all states and institutions not to recognize the annexation, and to refrain from actions which might be interpreted as indirect recognition.
Resolution 664.
Aug. 18.
Passed unanimously.
Demanded "that Iraq permit and facilitate the departure from Kuwait and Iraq of the nationals of third countries" , and that consular officials be granted immediate and continuing access to such foreign nationals.
Demanded that Iraq "take no action to jeopardize" their safety, security or health.
Demanded that Iraq "rescind its orders for the closure" of diplomatic and consular offices in Kuwait and for the withdrawal of diplomatic immunity from their staff.
Resolution 665.
Aug. 25.
Passed by vote 13-0 with Cuba and Yemen abstaining.
Called with immediate effect, on member states deploying maritime forces in the area, to use "such measures commensurate to the specific circumstances as may be necessary under the authority of the Security Council to halt all inward and outward maritime shipping in order to inspect and verify their cargoes and destinations" and ensure the strict implementation of mandatory economic sanctions.
Invited all states to co-operate by political and diplomatic means to ensure compliance with sanctions.
UN sanctions
The principal sanction under Resolution 661 was the ban on importing oil from Iraq or Kuwait.
Neither country had other exports of any consequence.
The ban on all sales and supplies to Iraq and Kuwait specifically included arms; it excluded medical supplies and, in wording made less specific following an initiative by Ethiopia, the supply of food in humanitarian circumstances.
A committee on compliance was set up, comprising representatives of all 15 Security Council member countries.
On Aug. 16 Pérez de Cuéllar said that 40 countries had thus far notified him of sanctions measures, as they were required to do by Aug. 24, and on Aug. 28 the committee on compliance heard that well over half of all UN member countries were committed to the embargo.
Switzerland, although not a UN member, joined the embargo by banning oil imports and arms sales, and freezing Iraqi and Kuwaiti assets in Switzerland — the first time that the country had associated itself with UN sanctions.
Even in advance of the Security Council's Aug. 6 resolution, the Soviet Union on Aug. 2, and China on Aug. 5, joined European countries in suspending arms sales to Iraq.
Brazil, a significant trading partner of Iraq, joined the embargo but emphasised that this did not cover food for humanitarian uses.
Iran would also enforce the embargo, according to an announcement by President Rafsanjani on Aug. 24, despite the unexpected announcement by Saddam Hussein on Aug. 15 that Iraq would in effect accept Iran's terms for a peace settlement between the two countries [see pp. 37667-68].
The Financial Times published statistics of Iraq's external trade in 1989, showing exports worth US$12,080 million (99 per cent oil).
Of this total, 12.5 went to West Germany, 12.3 per cent to the USA, 9.2 per cent to Turkey, 7.9 per cent to the UK, 5.2 per cent to Japan, 5.1 per cent to France, 4 per cent to Italy, 7.1 per cent to other EC countries, and 3.7 per cent to Brazil.
Iraq's imports, with a total value of $10,290 million, came 19.2 per cent from the USA, 12.7 per cent from Brazil, 11.7 per cent from Turkey, 9.1 per cent from Japan, 6.3 per cent from France, 5.1 per cent from Italy, 1.1 per cent from West Germany, 0.7 per cent from the UK and 14.4 per cent from other EC countries (notably Benelux countries).
On the issue of financial compensation for countries unable to sustain the economic costs of applying sanctions, it was reported on Aug. 22 that Jordan faced direct costs of $1,500 million and indirect costs of $500 million in 1990, and that the UN had agreed to a special compensation package (thought to amount to some $240 million).
Bulgaria was also to get UN assistance, and other countries including Yugoslavia and Sri Lanka were expected to apply [see below for position of Turkey].
The UN position on possible use of force
The so-called "multinational force" , mobilized following the lead of the USA, had been widened by the end of August to include not only troops from certain Arab countries [see above], but also some actual or promised military participation from the UK, France, several other West European countries, Canada, Australia, Pakistan and Bangladesh [see below].
In its first declared objective for sending troops, i.e. the protection of Saudi Arabia against possible Iraqi invasion, the USA found legitimacy under Article 51 of the UN Charter which affirmed "the inherent right of individual or collective self-defence, if an armed attack occurs against a member of the organization, until the Security Council has taken the measures necessary to maintain peace and international security" .
Until late August, however, it remained a matter of disagreement within the international community as to whether force could legitimately be used to enforce UN-backed sanctions against Iraq, without a specific further UN Security Council mandate.
Article 41 of the UN Charter, covering sanctions, stated that "the Security Council may decide what measures not involving the use of armed force are to be employed to give effect to its decisions" .
Having taken such measures, as it did on Aug. 6, the Security Council could go further if sanctions "proved to be inadequate" , by taking under Article 42 "such action by air, sea or land forces as may be necessary to maintain international peace and security" , and specifically including blockade.
There was no precedent for the use of Article 42's provisions; the "Beira patrol" conducted by the UK to deter sanctions-breaking over Rhodesia in 1966-68 [see pp. 21833; 22524-26]had the approval of the Security Council but was mounted as an operation independently of it.
James Baker expressed on Aug. 10 the US view that Resolution 661 gave "the legal authority necessary to constitute such an embargo or blockade, provided the request comes from the legitimate government of Kuwait" .
(By implication, this was an attempt to present blockade as legitimate under Article 51, on self-defence.)
The US government received such a request on Aug. 12, as did the UK on Aug. 13, and both gave orders on Aug. 13 that their naval personnel should board vessels believed to be breaking sanctions and do "whatever is necessary" .
Pérez de Cuéllar on Aug. 13, and again on Aug. 17, dissociated the UN from any attempt at this stage to impose sanctions by force, but Bush on Aug. 14 reaffirmed his view that the USA was acting within its legal rights, and called for clarification of the position of the permanent Security Council members, in advance of a possible further resolution.
On Aug. 17, US naval vessels intercepted two Iraqi coasters in the Gulf, but allowed them to proceed after they were found to be empty; on Aug. 18, US vessels fired warning shots across the bows of two Iraqi tankers in the Gulf of Oman.
(The US government avoided using the word "blockade" at this time, preferring to describe its intention as the "interdiction" of sanctions-breaking.)
The French government on Aug. 19 ordered its naval commanders to apply sanctions "with firmness" ; France, however, had been among those Security Council members reportedly expressing concern on Aug. 13 over the prospect of individual members, rather than the Security Council, deciding to move to enforce a blockade.
Similar emphasis on the Security Council's authority was advocated by the Soviet Union, whose government also proposed reactivation of the effectively moribund UN Security Council Military Staff Committee to take control of any enforcement action.
By Aug. 24, when the Security Council Military Staff Committee met, the USA had drafted a proposed resolution which would give UN legitimacy to the use of the necessary force to maintain a blockade, but which would leave the decision on such interventions to the naval command (i.e. to the US Navy, in practice, or the British or French, since it was expected that those other countries which had contributed naval forces on a smaller scale would wish to avoid this controversial step).
The resolution as passed on Aug. 25 represented a significant modification of the US draft, which had referred to the use of "such minimum force as may be necessary" but was changed at Chinese insistence to read "measures commensurate to the specific circumstances" .
Action taken by European countries
The immediate moves by Britain, France, Italy and others to freeze Kuwaiti assets following the invasion, together with the strong endorsement by Thatcher (currently visiting the USA) of the US call for sanctions, were followed up by the rapid adoption of sanctions by EC member countries, participation by the UK in the US-led multinational force, the dispatch also of French helicopter-borne troops, and decisions by several European countries to send naval vessels.
Economic sanctions were agreed at an emergency EC meeting in Rome on Aug. 4, which approved a statement condemning of Iraq, pledged to work for UN sanctions, and adopted with immediate effect an embargo on oil imports from Iraq and Kuwait, appropriate measures aimed at freezing Iraqi assets, an embargo on military sales to Iraq and the suspension of military, scientific and technical co-operation.
EC Foreign Ministers met again on Aug. 10 in Brussels and resolved that "no effort or initiative would be spared" to assist their citizens trapped in Iraq and Kuwait, as well as expressing "international solidarity" with states threatened by Iraqi aggression, and offered their "assistance to Arab efforts aimed at defusing tensions and restoring international legality" .
On Aug. 21 they met again, in Paris at the initiative of the French government, and explicitly condemned Iraqi plans to group foreign hostages near military targets.
The Italian Foreign Minister Gianni de Michelis on Aug. 16 led a mission to the Middle East by the "troika" of Foreign Ministers from the previous, current and next EC president country (i.e. Ireland, Italy and Luxembourg).
Visiting Jordan, Saudi Arabia and Egypt, they expressed willingness to assist in particular with Jordan's economic difficulties arising from the crisis.
On the military side the actions of European countries were to be co-ordinated principally through the Western European Union, whose nine member countries attended a ministerial meeting in Paris on Aug. 21 (with Denmark, Greece and, exceptionally, Turkey invited to send ambassadors as observers, as well as Ireland which declined).
WEU chiefs of staff met on Aug. 27.
A NATO emergency meeting had been held in Brussels on Aug. 3, and the USA had reportedly pressed for a possible NATO "out-of-area" military response, a theme repeated when Bush and Thatcher met NATO secretary-general Manfred Wörner in Washington on Aug. 6.
The organization's North Atlantic Council, however, holding a special meeting at foreign ministerial level in Brussels on Aug. 10, excluded any military co-ordination under NATO's integrated military structures, for any hostilities outside NATO's specific geographical area.
It was agreed that "members of the alliance should contribute each in their own way" , with NATO providing only a "forum for close consultation" .
It was noted, however, that any Iraqi attack on Turkey, a NATO member, would be considered as an attack on all member countries and would draw a corresponding response from the alliance as a whole.
The United Kingdom, of all the Western countries the most strongly committed to supporting the US-dominated multinational force, announced on Aug. 9 that air support would include a Tornado squadron and surface-to-air missiles for Saudi Arabia and a ground-attack Jaguar fighter squadron for Oman; ground forces were not ruled out, but the initial response was limited to the commitment of the Royal Signals Corps in Riyadh.
The despatch of another Tornado squadron, to Bahrain, was announced on Aug. 23.
In the naval sphere the Royal Navy's Armilla patrol in the Gulf was reconstituted with two frigates ordered to join the destroyer York on Aug. 3, and three minesweepers were sent to the eastern Mediterranean on Aug. 14 and redeployed to the Gulf on Aug. 29, when another destroyer was also sent.
The UK joined the USA in declaring from Aug. 13 that it would enforce UN sanctions, believing that there was sufficient legitimacy for this on the basis of a request from the Kuwaiti Emir in exile, but obtaining UN endorsement on Aug. 25 for the use of appropriate "measures" to verify the cargoes and destination of shipping.
Foreign Secretary Douglas Hurd took principal charge of UK policy pending Thatcher's return from a holiday; at her first press conference on the crisis, on Aug. 21, she said in London that the purpose of sending UK troops was "to get the invaders out of Kuwait" , while in Helsinki on Aug. 30 she criticized the "patchy and disappointing" response of other European countries apart from France.
Hurd flew to the Gulf on Aug. 31 to pursue diplomatic contacts.
The military commitment by France began with the announcement on Aug. 6 that its naval presence was to be reinforced.
On Aug. 9, when the aircraft carrier Clémenceau was directed to the Gulf area, President Mitterrand said that France's long-standing friendly relations with Iraq, and support during its war with Iran, "allows us to say all the more clearly that we accept neither the aggression against Kuwait nor the annexation which followed" .
By Aug. 13, when Mitterrand launched a diplomatic initiative by sending emissaries to Arab and non-aligned countries, the French commitment in the Gulf region included an additional naval cruiser in a total of seven ships and 3,500 men, with heavy transport helicopters and light attack helicopters.
There were no operational plans to join up with US and UK forces on the ground in Saudi Arabia, nor for any joint chain of command in the event of hostilities.
The first decision to send French ground troops (reconnaissance units to the UAE and instructors for Saudi Arabia) was announced on Aug. 21, the French attitude having hardened significantly against Iraq following Iraqi moves against Western nationals and diplomatic privileges.
Naval vessels were also contributed by Belgium and Italy (which both on Aug. 21 confirmed that minesweepers sent initially to the eastern Mediterranean were to proceed on to the Gulf); Greece announced on Aug. 20 that a frigate would join the naval forces in the Gulf, and Spain made a similar announcement the following day.
Most controversial was the role of West Germany, where the Gulf crisis was overshadowed by the preoccupation with impending unification.
On Aug. 10 it was agreed that five minesweepers would leave for the eastern Mediterranean, but their deployment in the Gulf was ruled out.
Under its constitution West Germany (like Japan — see below) could take no part in external military activities, and by Aug. 20 Chancellor Kohl had apparently accepted that this was a definitive barrier, the view of both Foreign Minister Genscher and Defence Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg (both Free Democrats in Kohl's Christian Democrat-led coalition).
On Aug. 21 the WEU meeting in Paris was informed that the West German coalition government was to begin talks with the opposition parties on a possible amendment to the constitution to remove this barrier, but it was thought unlikely that any such measure could be enacted before German unification had been completed.
Soviet Union, Turkey, Japan and other countries
The Soviet Union acted immediately on Aug. 2 to suspend weapons shipments to Iraq, to which it had historically been the principal arms supplier.
Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, meeting US Secretary of State Baker in Moscow on Aug. 3, issued with him a joint statement condemning the invasion of Kuwait and appealing for a global ban on arms supplies to Iraq.
Shevardnadze said also that the Soviet leadership had sent a message to Saddam Hussein.
In the succeeding weeks, while maintaining a position strongly opposed to Iraq's aggression, the Soviet Union distanced itself from the US position, seeking to ensure that the enforcement of UN sanctions remained in the forefront as the means to secure an Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait, and advocating a UN framework for any enforcement action.
The Soviet Foreign Ministry on Aug. 9 issued a formal condemnation of the Iraqi annexation of Kuwait, but also expressed more general concern about the rapidly deteriorating situation.
Critical of the US deployment, the Soviet Union would not for the time being join an international force, but would consider how to respond if the UN Security Council decided on military action.
Despite its "long-standing friendly relations" with Iraq, the Soviet Union "cannot keep silent, still less tell lies" .
On Aug. 13 the Soviet Union responded coolly to Saddam's "peace initiative" of the previous day, and on Aug. 17 Shevardnadze said in Moscow after talks with West German Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher that the Security Council could soon assume a military role which could bring a rapid resolution of the crisis; the Security Council Military Staff Committee, he said, was the body whose task it was to co-ordinate military measures.
Gorbachev on the same day described Iraq's invasion as treacherous and a blatant violation of international law, calling for a political solution and warning of a possible "chain reaction endangering the whole world community" .
On a visit to Moscow on Aug. 20, the Iraqi Foreign Minister Sa'adoun Hammadi met Shevardnadze, who explained, however, that this did not imply any softening of the Soviet "firm condemnation" of Iraq.
After the Security Council's its Aug. 25 resolution on the use of "measures" by naval forces to enforce sanctions, Gorbachev said on Aug. 27 during a visit by the Egyptian Foreign Minister Esmat Abdel Meguid that "political means are not exhausted, but maximum effort is needed to avoid an armed conflict" .
On Aug. 30 he was more explicit at a press conference, urging political solutions and a calm and consistent policy to prevent escalation, and warning that "any resort to military force is unacceptable" .
The issue should be resolved, he suggested, "through the Arab factor" .
Turkey.
Responding initially with caution and merely regretting the violation of Kuwaiti sovereignty, Turkey had by Aug. 3 added its voice to calls for an immediate and unconditional withdrawal.
When Iraqi First Deputy Premier Taha Yassin Ramadan visited Ankara on Aug. 5, President Özal said that Iraq should take account of world opinion by adopting a "constructive and realistic" attitude.
Turkey's position was crucial to the effectiveness of economic sanctions.
It was a major trading partner of Iraq, and came under intense pressure to shut off Iraq's principal route for the export of oil (up to 1,600,000 bpd) through the twin pipelines across Turkish territory terminating at Yumurtalik near Dortyol in the Bay of Iskenderun.
Not until Aug. 7 did Turkey unequivocally place itself in the anti-Iraqi camp, with its decision (coinciding with a similar decision by Saudi Arabia — see above) to block the pipelines, to ban Iraqi and Kuwaiti trade (except supplies of medicines and food) and to freeze assets.
(On the previous day the Iraqis, citing "marketing reasons" , had suspended output through one pipeline and reduced to 56 per cent the flow through the other.)
Emphasising the consequent costs in economic terms, the Turkish government lobbied strongly for financial compensation and for concessions in its relations with Western countries, for example through more preferential access for Turkish textiles.
It was also reported on Aug. 27 that Saudi Arabia and the UAE had each offered 3,000,000 tonnes of oil to Turkey to replace lost Iraqi supplies for 1990.
Initial speculation that Iraq might launch a military attack on Turkey soon diminished.
The Turkish parliament on Aug. 12 voted by 216 to 151 to give the government war powers if necessary, specifying that if Iraq attacked Turkish territory it could send Turkish troops into combat and also allow foreign forces to be deployed on Turkish soil.
In public statements on the crisis, US leaders frequently praised the Turkish government's commitment, notably on the occasion of a visit by Baker to Ankara on Aug. 8.
Japan.
Preferring initially to await a UN decision before imposing sanctions, the Japanese government on Aug. 5 altered its stance and announced a ban on oil imports from Iraq and Kuwait, an embargo on sales and supplies, and the freezing of aid and investment.
There was intense US pressure for Japan to back a strong line against Iraq.
A letter to the Japanese ambassador in Washington, signed by all 100 members of the US Senate, had preceded what the US saw as Japan's belated Aug. 5 commitment on sanctions.
In the succeeding weeks Bush on several occasions telephoned Japanese Prime Minister Toshiki Kaifu, seeking Japanese financial contributions to the multinational force and assistance for countries unable to sustain the impact of imposing sanctions.
The Japanese Constitution explicitly renounced war and belligerency, and Japan had deployed no forces or military equipment overseas, even in UN missions (to which it had, however, contributed civilian personnel).
Financial assistance to the multinational force was seen in this light.
A package eventually announced on Aug. 29 covered only volunteer medical teams and transport support, as well as finance for aid to affected countries and for refugee relief (Foreign Minister Taro Nakayama, touring the region, having given assurances of support particularly to Jordan on Aug. 21 and to Egypt on Aug. 22).
On Aug. 30, however, after US criticism of the vague nature of the previous day's announcement, Kaifu announced that Japan would provide up to $1,000 million by March 1991 in non-military assistance to the "peacekeeping efforts in the Gulf region" , a commitment welcomed by Bush.
Countries making commitments in August to the multinational force, apart from the USA and those European and Arab countries as described above, included (i) Canada, a NATO member country, which announced on Aug. 10 that it would send two destroyers and a supply ship, to arrive by September;(ii) Australia, whose Prime Minister Bob Hawke announced after a telephone conversation with Bush on Aug. 10 that two frigates and a supply ship would be sent (a decision endorsed by the Cabinet on Aug. 14);(iii) Pakistan, which had some 90,000 nationals working in Kuwait, and whose President Ghulam Ishaq Khan said on Aug. 13 that it would send troops to protect the Moslem holy places, with a first contingent to leave on Aug. 17 and a total commitment expected to number 5,000-8,000; and (iv) Bangladesh, which on Aug. 15 announced a commitment in principle to send troops to Saudi Arabia numbering some 5,000 in all.
On the other hand India, which had 170,000 nationals working in Kuwait and several thousands in Iraq, limited its response to an acceptance of the need to comply with mandatory sanctions, an expression of regret at Iraq's action and a call for the withdrawal of troops.
Sri Lanka, for whose tea exports Iraq was the second largest customer and which also suffered from the impact on its expatriate nationals and the loss of their earnings, sought international compensation for its reluctant imposition of sanctions.
South Korea, for which economic links with Iraq were similarly important, was likewise regarded by the anti-Iraqi camp as reluctant to condemn Iraq.
Oil prices and output levels
The "marker" price of North Sea Brent crude, which had already risen by 60 per cent in six weeks to $24 per barrel on Aug. 3, passed $30 per barrel on Aug. 22, with production down by the 4,000,000 barrels per day of lost Iraqi and Saudi production.
The Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz said on Aug. 13, amid suggestions that Venezuela, Saudi Arabia, the UAE and perhaps Nigeria might increase output, that "OPEC states should take into consideration their interests" and warned that they might "pay hard in the future" if they followed this course.
Iran opposed a production increase, with Rafsanjani saying on Aug. 14 that it would be "treason against OPEC" to do this "in favour of the global oil-devourers" .
Nigeria's President Babangida on Aug. 16 spoke out against unilateral production increases, while Indonesia had said on the previous day that OPEC should first let the industrialized countries draw down their stockpiles.
(Western governments, grouped in the International Energy Agency, opposed stockpile reductions.)
Saudi Arabia on Aug. 18 warned that it would increase its own output by 2,000,000 bpd unless an OPEC ministerial conference was convened immediately to revise quotas within the 22,500,000 bpd overall ceiling set on July 27.
The OPEC president, Sadek Boussena of Algeria, resisted the idea of a formal conference which might split the organization, but held talks in Vienna from Aug. 27, involving those ministers who might decide to attend (in the event, all except those of Iraq and Libya).
In Vienna 10 of the 11 member countries present, but not Iran, were persuaded to subscribe to the Saudi viewpoint that production should be increased, with Saudi Arabia, the UAE and Venezuela raising their output by a total of about 3,000,000 bpd.
The ministers decided late on Aug. 28 to turn their consultations into a formal ministerial conference the following day, when the agreement was adopted, Iraq and Libya having refused a telexed invitation to attend the conference.
Chronology of August events
Aug. 1.
Talks between Iraq and Kuwait in Jeddah break down.
Aug. 2.
Iraq pushes its forces into Kuwait and swiftly gains control of the country, claiming to have been invited in by Kuwaiti revolutionaries.
The invasion meets with widespread international condemnation and many countries immediately freeze Kuwaiti assets.
UN Security Council Resolution 660 calls for an immediate and unconditional Iraqi withdrawal.
Aug. 3.
In Cairo 14 Arab League countries condemn the invasion and call for an immediate withdrawal.
Iraqi troops begin taking up positions on the Saudi border.
The USA and the UK announce that naval vessels are being sent to the Gulf.
The Soviet Foreign Minister and US Secretary of State, meeting in Moscow, jointly condemn the invasion and call for a world ban on arms sales to Iraq.
Aug. 4.
The membership of the pro-Iraqi Provisional Free Government of Kuwait is finally disclosed.
In Rome, an emergency EC meeting agrees sanctions against Iraq.
Aug. 5.
Iraq announces that it has started to pull its forces out of Kuwait, a claim ridiculed by the West.
In Kuwait a curfew is partially lifted.
Japan joins oil embargo.
Aug. 6.
The UN Security Council passes Resolution 661 invoking wide-ranging sanctions against Iraq and Kuwait.
Aug. 7.
US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney announces US decision to send ground units and combat aircraft to Saudi Arabia, as part of a multinational force.
US troops begin landing at Dhahran.
Saudi Arabia and Turkey close Iraqi oil pipelines at Mu'ajjiz and Dortyol.
Aug. 8.
Iraq formally annexes Kuwait.
President Bush tells the American people that "a line has been drawn in the sand" and that as many as 50,000 US troops may be dispatched to Saudi Arabia.
The UK announces that it will send air and naval forces to join what becomes known as the multinational force.
France also sends naval vessels to the Gulf.
Aug. 9.
In a televised address to the nation King Fahd strongly denounces the Iraqi invasion.
Iraq closes borders to foreigners trying to leave Iraq or Kuwait.
UN Security Council Resolution 662 rejects Iraq's annexation of Kuwait.
Soviet Foreign Ministry formally condemns Iraq's annexation but warns against any military action without UN approval.
Aug. 10.
A resolution to send a pan-Arab force to defend Saudi Arabia is approved by 12 countries at an emergency Arab League summit in Cairo.
Egypt, Morocco and Syria subsequently agree to supply troops.
The Iraqi authorities order all diplomatic missions in Kuwait to close by Aug. 24.
NATO's North Atlantic Council hold special meeting in Brussels, agreeing that members would contribute "each in their own way" outside integrated NATO structures.
Aug. 11.
The pro-Iraq Arab countries denounce the outcome of the Cairo summit.
The USA announces its intention to enforce a naval blockade against Iraq.
Aug. 12.
Saddam Hussein launches an initiative linking the settlement of the "occupation" of Kuwait with all other Middle Eastern "occupations" .
Pro-Iraqi and anti-US demonstrations are held in many Middle East countries.
The first Egyptian and Moroccan troops arrive in Saudi Arabia.
US Secretary of State James Baker announces that the US has received formal request from deposed Kuwaiti government to enforce UN sanctions under the self-defence article (Article 51) of the UN Charter.
Douglas Croskery, a British businessman, is shot dead by Iraqi forces on the Kuwait-Saudi border.
The Turkish Grand National Assembly votes war powers, but Turkey will only use troops against Iraq in self-defence if attacked.
Aug. 13.
Pakistan agrees to send troops to Saudi Arabia.
US and UK instruct their ships to implement naval blockade of Iraq.
France significantly increases its commitment of forces.
Aug. 14.
King Hussein of Jordan meets with Saddam in Baghdad.
The five permanent members of the UN Security Council meet to consider, at Soviet initiative, a joint military command in the Gulf under the UN.
Aug. 15.
Saddam accepts Iranian terms for a peace settlement in the Iran-Iraq war.
According to Egyptian sources an attempted coup takes place in Baghdad.
Aug. 16.
King Hussein and US President George Bush meet in Kennebunkport.
US and British citizens in Kuwait are ordered to surrender themselves to the Iraqi authorities or face unspecified "difficulties" .
Aug. 17.
Iraqi troops start withdrawing from Iran.
Iraq announces it will detain Westerners stranded in Kuwait at military installations.
Aug. 18.
UN Security Council Resolution 664 directs Iraq to allow all foreigners to leave.
A number of Westerners in Kuwait are rounded up and moved to Iraq.
Aug. 19.
The UAE agrees to the deployment of foreign forces.
Saddam offers to free Westerners held in Iraq and Kuwait in return for the withdrawal of US forces from the Gulf.
All Western nationals in Kuwait are ordered to convene in three hotels, and foreign countries are ordered to close their embassies in Kuwait.
An Iraqi vessel manages to dock in Aqaba.
Saudi Arabia threatens unilateral increase in oil production unless OPEC convenes soon in emergency session.
Aug. 20.
The first Syrian forces arrive in Saudi Arabia.
Iraqi Deputy Premier Sa'adoun Hammadi arrives in Moscow for talks.
Iraq confirms that it has moved Westerners to military bases and President Bush acknowledges that Americans in Kuwait are "hostages" .
Aug. 21.
An Iraqi tanker manages to unload some cargo at Aden, but Yemen then affirms its respect for sanctions.
At a meeting of the Western European Union several countries confirm they are sending military forces to the Gulf.
Mitterrand announces that French ground forces will be sent.
Iraq offers talks with the USA (which the US side rejects) and announces that it has completed its military withdrawal from Iranian territory.
Aug. 22.
President Bush issues an executive order calling up US military reservists for the first time since 1968.
Jordan temporarily closes its border with Iraq to ease the refugee backlog.
GCC Defence Ministers meeting in Jeddah agree to reinforce the Council's rapid deployment force.
Saudi Arabia agrees to supply Jordan with half of its oil needs.
Oil prices reach US$30 per barrel.
Aug. 23.
Saddam appears on Iraqi television with British "guests" .
Jordan temporarily closes its border to hold up the influx of refugees.
Aug. 24.
Deadline for the voluntary closure of all foreign embassies in Kuwait.
Many embassies refuse to comply with the order.
President Rafsanjani of Iran announces that he would not object to foreign troops forcing Iraq out of Kuwait.
Aug. 25.
UN Security Council Resolution 665 provides for naval vessels to take "measures commensurate" to enforce sanctions.
Aug. 26.
King Hussein arrives in Libya at start of fresh mediation effort.
Diplomats at 26 Kuwaiti missions continue to defy Iran and refuse to move to Baghdad.
Iran opens its borders to refugees from Iraq and Kuwait.
Aug. 27.
Qatar becomes the fifth Gulf State to agree to open its territory to foreign troops.
USA expels 36 Iraqi embassy staff; restrictions are imposed on the 19 who remain.
Aug. 28.
Iraq proclaims Kuwait the 19th Iraqi governorate.
Bush briefs congressional leaders on Gulf crisis.
Presidents Hafez al Assad of Syria and Hosni Mubarak of Egypt hold talks in Alexandria.
Saddam apparently approves a PLO plan including possibility of a referendum in Kuwait on union with Iraq.
Saddam announces that all foreign women and children will be permitted to leave Iraq.
Aug. 29.
A majority of OPEC members agree to support Saudi plan to increase production.
Syrian troops allegedly crack down on pro-Iraqi demonstrators in eastern Syria.
Aug. 30.
Bush unveils "action plan" through which affluent European, Asian and Gulf countries would share the costs both of the military intervention and of a prolonged blockade of Iraq.
Japan announces it will provide US$1,000 million to assist the multinational force.
Perez de Cuellar meets with Iraqi Foreign Minister Tariq Aziz in Jordan.
British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher rebukes some European countries for their lack of support in the Gulf.
Aug. 31.
A poorly attended meeting of Arab League Foreign Ministers issues a resolution calling for an immediate Iraqi withdrawal from Kuwait.
Iraq 900,000 troops (200,000 on Saudi border, 100,000 Kuwait), 3,500 tanks (270 on Saudi border, 500-1,000 Kuwait), 500 aircraft (of which 300 operational).
In Saudi Arabia approx. 86,000 troops (40,000 US, 500 UK, Saudi 38,000, Egyptian 5,000, Syrian 1,200, Moroccan 1,000), 650 tanks (100 US thus far, 550 Saudi), approx. 400 aircraft (180-240 US, 24 UK, 180 Saudi).
In UAE 40,000 troops, 200 tanks, 160 French paratroops.
Aircraft carriers USS Kennedy (E. Mediterranean), Eisenhower (in Red Sea approaching Suez), Saratoga (in Red Sea), Independence (off Oman), French Clemenceau (Gulf of Aden).
Military position as of Aug. 25 (UK press estimates)
AFRICA
SOUTH AFRICA
Suspension of armed struggle by ANC — Township violence
The African National Congress (ANC) suspended its 29-year armed struggle on Aug. 7, at the conclusion of a second round of negotiations with the government, held in Pretoria.
The government said that it had agreed to allow the phased release of around 1,300 political prisoners after Sept. 1, and the return to South Africa of around 22,000 anti-government exiles after Oct. 1.
The outcome raised expectations of full-scale negotiations on a new power-sharing constitution.
The Pretoria talks were a follow-up to the first meeting between the government and the ANC in Cape Town in May [see pp. 37440-41].
The ANC deputy president, Nelson Mandela, announced that all activities by the organization's military wing would cease.
 "There will be no further infiltration of men and arms into South Africa, and related activities of military action will be suspended," he said.
 "We hope to be able to communicate with all our people and to inform them of what we have decided." 
The government said that it would consider lifting the state of emergency still in force in Natal, and that it would give immediate consideration to repealing the Internal Security Act.
The Pretoria Minute, summarizing the agreements reached in these talks, included a commitment to mechanisms for more direct involvement of the ANC and other organizations in the running of the country at all levels.
However, the government did not obtain from the ANC any commitment to end strikes and boycotts by blacks in protest at working conditions.
Mandela indicated on Aug. 13 that a statement of intent by the government to implement a non-racial constitution might be sufficient for the ANC to call for the ending of sanctions against South Africa.
His statement, in a television interview, made it clear, however, that the ANC was still some way from deciding the timing of advocating an end to sanctions.
The government on Aug. 20 withdrew indemnity from three ANC members who played a key role in the movement's armed struggle — Chris Hani, chief of staff of Umkhonto we Sizwe (the ANC's armed wing), Ronnie Kasrills, a former Umkhonto intelligence chief, and Mac Maharaj.
All three were also South African Communist Party members [see also p. 37601].
Proposal for constitutional talks in 1991
Constitutional Development Minister Gerrit Viljoen said on Aug. 27 that negotiations on a new South African constitution should begin in 1991 and be completed within two years.
ANC leaders suggested that equal status be given to all participants in the process of drawing up a new constitution.
The ANC foreign affairs director, Thabo Mbeki, said that rival groups "must enjoy equal weight in the debate" and that "national consensus…is a critical element in the common effort to arrive at a new reality of justice and peace" .
Pressure for greater unity amongst anti-apartheid forces in South Africa was urged by the Organization of African Unity (OAU).
The ANC continued to press for the setting up of an interim government during the constitutional negotiations, whereas some other groups, including the Democratic Party and the Zulu-based Inkatha movement, favoured the current government staying in power during the transition period.
Efforts to arrange ANC-Inkatha talks on township violence
Efforts were made in late August to arrange for high-level talks in September between the ANC and Inkatha, two weeks of severe township violence in Transvaal having claimed over 500 lives.
The fighting largely involved Inkatha supporters in migrant workers' hostels, in conflict with non-Zulu township residents.
A preliminary meeting in Durban on Aug. 28 brought together a five-member Inkatha delegation and a three-member "alliance" team of the ANC, the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU) and the United Democratic Front (UDF).
The ANC had earlier resisted a meeting with Inkatha on the grounds that this would lend undue national legitimacy to what it regarded as a Zulu organization with a power base confined largely to Natal province.
The Transvaal fighting indicated to many that Inkatha and its leader, Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, were determined to destabilize the burgeoning relationship between government and the ANC.
Viljoen warned on Aug. 26 that violence and intimidation had to end before negotiations on a new constitution could begin.
Imposition of state of emergency in 27 townships
On Aug. 24 the government imposed a state of emergency in 27 townships of the Vaal Reef and banned the carrying of all potential weapons.
The regulations, introduced by Law and Order Minister Adriaan Vlok, gave the police and other security forces wide powers of arrest and detention, but did not restrict the news-gathering activities of the press.
Meetings could be banned and the townships sealed off in the event of new disturbances.
Following the declaration of the emergency, police and troops removed lorry-loads of weapons from migrant workers' hostels.
Press reports said that residents welcomed the operation, which involved the Army (seen as relatively impartial) as well as the police, who had been widely accused of ignoring or even actively encouraging Inkatha attacks.
Tens of thousands of township residents stayed away from work on Aug. 27 as a mark of protest over the township violence, coinciding with a mass funeral to bury seven of the dead.
Of an estimated 515 deaths in the townships, 126 were killed in Soweto.
Other centres of violence were Vosloorus, Kagiso, Tembisa, Katlehong, Kwathema and Tokoza.
The South African Institute of Race Relations on Aug. 25 called for special measures to contain the township violence, and for the emergency powers to be given "in an impartial manner and without the excessive use of force" .
It also condemned the system of accommodating workers in single-sex hostels and called for the provision of more housing.
Other disturbances
At least 33 people were killed in Port Elizabeth's coloured townships in the week beginning Aug. 6, as a political protest against rent increases turned into riots and clashes with police.
There was also continuing violence in Natal between Inkatha and ANC supporters; at least 10 people were killed in incidents over the weekend of Aug. 25-26.
Judicial inquiry and censure of police killings in Sebokeng in March
A judicial inquiry into the deaths of 18 people in the Transvaal township of Sebokeng in March [see p. 37305]severely censured police behaviour.
Conducted by Justice Richard Goldstone, the inquiry found that the force used by policemen was "quite immoderate and disproportionate to any lawful object sought to be obtained" , that the police had killed at least 11 people by opening fire on a protest march, and that they had shot at least 127 people who were trying to run away.
Transkei plan to hold referendum
The nominally independent homeland government of Transkei on Aug. 29 published a draft decree for a referendum, aimed at testing views on the homeland's possible re-incorporation into South Africa.
The Transkei leader, Maj.-Gen.
Bantu Holomisa, advised the South African government to give homeland parliaments a deadline to wind up their business [see also p. 37306].
Decision by National Party to open membership to all races
President F. W. de Klerk on Aug. 31 announced that the ruling National Party would open its membership to all races, since racial restrictions on party membership were in conflict with its "declared point of view against racial discrimination" and were "an obstacle to forming alliances" .
The right-wing Conservative Party (CP) accused the National Party of political surrender, and CP leader Andries Treurnicht said that his party was now alone in parliament in fighting for the self-determination and liberty of whites.
Arrest of COSATU leaders on kidnap charge
Police on Aug. 28 raided COSATU headquarters in Johannesburg and arrested the trade union federation's general secretary, Jay Naidoo, and two other union leaders after a police agent had been apprehended and paraded during a news conference given by the union.
The officials were charged with kidnap and assault and were ordered to return to court in October.
AFRICA
ANGOLA
Lack of progress in peace talks
Five days of talks between the ruling MPLA government of Angola and the rebel UNITA movement, hosted by Portuguese mediators in Lisbon, closed on Aug. 31 without making progress toward ending the country's 15-year civil war.
This much-postponed third session of talks was unable to agree on the timing of a ceasefire.
The government side insisted that a truce be agreed before discussions could take place on a new constitution which would provide for multiparty politics and free elections.
UNITA, on the other hand, refused to divorce the question of a ceasefire from consideration of its other four demands — political recognition of UNITA, confirmation of President José dos Santos's July announcement favouring multiparty politics, the setting of election dates, and the establishment of one national army.
A further negotiation session was planned for late September, but the August talks ended amid mutual accusations.
The government claimed that UNITA was stalling whilst awaiting United States congressional discussions on military aid budgets, while, for its part, UNITA alleged that the government was preparing an all-out military strike against its forces along the Angola-Namibia border, using Namibian airstrips with the co-operation of the Namibian government.
UNITA, which had unilaterally downgraded the status of its delegation shortly before the talks, further claimed that it had already made concessions including the recognition of the ruling MPLA as a political party, and of President dos Santos as head of state.
Continuing fighting — Civilian casualties
The talks took place against a background of continued military clashes.
The government claimed that its FAPLA troops had repulsed an attack on Andulo city, Bie province, on Aug. 20.
It also denied UNITA claims to have overrun the Caculuma barracks in Malange province.
UNITA on the other hand claimed that it had killed 82 government troops in these attacks and others in Cabinda and Uige provinces.
FAPLA sources put its casualty figures for UNITA attacks between Aug. 15 and Aug. 21 at 42 people killed and another 90 abducted.
There was growing concern over an estimated 780,000 people facing starvation in central and southern areas.
One development welcomed by UN officials concerned with arranging relief food supplies was the government's preparedness to drop its previous objection to the establishment of "peace corridors" providing transportation routes.
Government appointment
Lazaro Manuel Dias was appointed Justice Minister on Aug. 24, replacing Fernando José França Van-Dúnem.
AFRICA
MOZAMBIQUE
Endorsement by Frelimo of multiparty elections
President Joaquim Chissano's announcement in Maputo at the end of July that the ruling Mozambique Liberation Front (Frelimo) would abandon one-party rule was backed by the organization's central committee on Aug. 16 when it endorsed the holding of multiparty elections in 1991.
New laws would require approval by the full legislature, but the decision of Frelimo's ruling body effectively assured the abandonment of the one-party system.
The issue of the transformation to political pluralism was regarded as the main obstacle to progress in the peace talks between the government and the Mozambique National Resistance (Renamo or MNR), which resumed for a second round in Rome on Aug. 14.
However, following the successful first round in July, the three-day talks were generally regarded as disappointing.
The MNR delegation refused to discuss substantive issues about ending the conflict, and insisted that Kenyan officials act as mediators in the negotiations, whereas Frelimo preferred direct talks between the two sides.
President Chissano was critical of what he described as the MNR's "delaying tactics" .
Despite this, both sides referred to a "fruitful and illuminating exchange of ideas" .
No date was set for a planned third meeting.
MNR denial of aid from Kenya — Worsening civilian situation
The MNR leader Afonso Dhlakama denied receiving military assistance from Kenya, but the closeness of the MNR's Kenyan links were confirmed when diplomatic sources stated during August that at least one MNR military training camp operated inside Kenya, and an MNR battalion trained in Kenya was reported to have entered Mozambique on Aug. 11 near the village of Tsangano in Tete province.
The worsening situation in the central Zambezia province was revealed by a new report from Mozambique's Disasters Control Office.
Over 900,000 of the province's population of 9,000,000 had been displaced by the war, and a further 205,737 were categorized as "affected" by the emergency.
The report stated that some 703,000 people relied on food aid, a much higher figure than the 429,000 cited by the government at a donor conference in New York in April.
AFRICA
ZIMBABWE
Disagreement within ZANU over one-party rule
Proposals to alter Zimbabwe's Constitution, following the ending in April 1990 of the 10-year moratorium on constitutional changes, precipitated disagreements within the leadership of the ruling ZANU party, with President Robert Mugabe reportedly opposed by the majority of the politburo over his proposals to introduce a one-party state structure.
After a politburo meeting on Aug. 2, it was reported that 21 of its 26 members favoured abandoning the controversial proposals, preferring to see ZANU use its current huge parliamentary majority — it held 116 of the 150 seats — to push through policies to combat the country's pressing economic problems.
Mugabe's position was said to be supported only by his wife Sally Mugabe, Foreign Minister Nathan Shamuyarira and Vice-President Simon Muzenda.
On Aug. 17, however, Shamuyarira denied that the President had suffered a defeat on the issue, and criticized the media for misleading reports.
Mugabe himself, in a hardline speech on Aug. 24, insisted that ZANU still viewed one-party rule as the best guarantor of a stable democracy.
Mugabe's land reform proposals
In his Aug. 24 speech Mugabe also revealed plans for land reform, another policy area requiring constitutional change.
His proposals involved nationalization of 13,000,000 acres of farming land for distribution among 110,000 black peasants.
The state would purchase 93 per cent of the country's fertile maize- and tobacco-growing acreage, which generated 42 per cent of the country's foreign currency.
According to leaked Cabinet documents, planned compensation would total £135 million, although the farms were currently valued at £850 million, and the proposal was inevitably seen as posing a threat to the position of the country's white farming community.
Appointment of Nkomo as Vice-President
Parliament passed legislation for constitutional change to allow the appointment of two Vice-Presidents, and on Aug. 6 Joshua Nkomo, who had been leader of the opposition ZAPU party until its merger with ZANU in April 1988 [see pp. 35626; 36415]], was appointed as a Vice-President alongside Muzenda.
AFRICA
TANZANIA
Retirement of Nyerere from party chairmanship — Election preparations
Tanzania's President Ali Hassan Mwinyi was elected on Aug. 16 as chair of the ruling Chama cha Mapinduzi (CCM) party, with 1,846 out of 1,851 votes cast, in succession to the "elder statesman" leader Julius Nyerere, who had held on to the party chairmanship for five years since stepping down as state President in 1985.
The special CCM congress also elected (with similar near-unanimity) Rashidi Mfaume Kawawa, the current party secretary-general, to the post of vice-chairman.
Presidential and general elections were set for Oct. 28, and Mwinyi was chosen by the CCM as the sole candidate for the presidency.
In Zanzibar, where Idris Abdul-Wakil (the President of Zanzibar and thus Second Vice-President of Tanzania) had announced earlier in the month that he would not seek re-election, Salamin Amour was chosen by the CCM as sole candidate to succeed him.
AFRICA
SADCC
Tenth anniversary meeting
The Southern African Development Co-ordination Conference (SADCC) held a special summit meeting in Gaborone, Botswana, ending on Aug. 25, to mark its 10th anniversary.
The meeting was attended by the heads of state of Botswana, Lesotho, Mozambique, Namibia, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe, and by representatives of the other two member states, Angola and Malawi.
Links with South African liberation movements were shown by the presence of both the African National Congress secretary-general Alfred Nzo and the Pan-Africanist Congress president Zephania Mothopeng.
Placing increasing emphasis on SADCC's original purpose of promoting regional economic development, members issued a statement setting out goals of integration for the 1990s, and adding that "we look forward to welcoming a democratic South Africa into SADCC" .
On the pressing issue of food distribution, Angola and Mozambique were both facing famine and predicting shortages of 500,000 tonnes, while Zimbabwe and Zambia were forecasting substantial grain surpluses.
The SADCC executive secretary Simbarashe Makoni admitted, however, that "there was no mechanism" , either in trading or in transport terms, for local surpluses to be made available for the needs of neighbouring countries if they were unable to afford a commercial purchase.
The meeting re-elected President Quett Masire of Botswana as chairman of the organization, reappointed Makoni for a further three years as executive secretary, and agreed that its next summit meeting should beheld in Tanzania.
AFRICA
LIBERIA
Civil war — Sending of ECOWAS force — Large-scale casualties
Arrival of ECOWAS peacekeeping force
A peacekeeping force sent to Liberia under the auspices of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), known as the ECOWAS Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) and under the command of a Ghanaian, Gen. Arnold Quainoo, left Freetown, Sierra Leone, on Aug. 24, arriving in Monrovia, the Liberian capital, the following day.
Its objectives were to oversee a ceasefire and to bring to an end the civil war, thereby allowing for the formation of an interim government and the holding of free elections.
The 4,000-strong force comprised soldiers from Nigeria, Ghana, The Gambia, Guinea and Sierra Leone.
Not all ECOWAS member countries supported the intervention of the peacekeeping force.
In mid-August, President Compaore of Burkina publicly opposed the intervention, saying that ECOWAS should not undermine the efforts of the National Patriotic Front of Liberia (NPFL), led by Charles Taylor, to get rid of President Samuel Doe.
Burkina was alleged to have given Taylor's forces military and logistical assistance.
Togo also declined to contribute to the force pending a ceasefire between the three warring factions — the Doe government, Taylor's NPLF, and a rival rebel insurgent group led by Prince Yormie Johnson.
Taylor opposed the ECOMOG intervention, apparently regarding its arrival as intervention on the side of Doe just when the latter was on the brink of defeat, and threatened reprisals against nationals of the countries providing troops for ECOMOG.
(There were thought to be 2,600 West Africans, mostly Nigerians, in territory held by the NPFL; attacks on Ghanaians and Nigerians were reported at the beginning of September, and Taylor, who was reported to be holding a large number of foreigners hostage, declared war on the ECOMOG force early in September.)
Johnson's rebel forces, on the other hand, welcomed the ECOWAS force's intervention and initially agreed to a truce with Doe.
Representatives of ECOMOG held three rounds of inconclusive talks with Doe's latest chief of staff, Gen. David Brapho.
It later appeared to have succeeded in organizing talks between Johnson and Doe, managing to tread a carefully neutral path.
Large-scale civilian casualties and refugee movements
By the end of August the conflict was thought to have claimed the lives of 5,000 people.
Doe's forces put up stiffer resistance to the rebel groupings than was expected, and were able to hold the area of Monrovia around the heavily fortified executive mansion.
ECOMOG appealed for emergency food and medical aid to alleviate the suffering of civilians in and around Monrovia, and claimed to have registered for evacuation 7,000 people, mainly from Nigeria, Ghana and Guinea.
Early in August President Bush of the United States sent a contingent of US Marines to Monrovia to evacuate remaining US citizens and to protect the US embassy.
According to sources from the Office of the UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), 500,000 refugees were thought to have fled from the conflict in Liberia to the neighbouring countries — some 300,000 to Guinea, 120,000 to Côte d'Ivoire and 80,000 to Sierra Leone.
A further 1,000,000 were believed to have been displaced within Liberia, so that the conflict had led to the uprooting of 60 per cent of Liberia's population of about 2,500,000.
AFRICA
NIGERIA
Cabinet reshuffle
Nigerian President Ibrahim Babangida carried out on Aug. 30 an extensive Cabinet reshuffle, involving the departure of nine ministers.
Three days previously he had abolished the post of chief of general staff, held by Vice-Adml.
Augustus Aikhomu replacing it with a vice-presidency to which on Aug. 30 he appointed Aikhomu; the appointment caused some surprise in that the job had been expected to go to a civilian.
The far-reaching reorganization of the government had been foreshadowed in Babangida's address broadcast on Aug. 27, marking the fifth anniversary of his taking power, when he said that "we shall from now on systematically deregulate and demilitarize the process of politics and governance in the period leading to 1992" and that his adminstration had become "critically conscious of the need to start the process" .
Chu Okongwu had been Minister of Finance until January 1990 and then Minister of Cabinet Affairs.
Maj.-Gen.
Ike Nwachukwu had chaired the tribunal which ordered the execution of 42 coup plotters in July [see p. 37602].
Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji, hitherto Minister of Budget and Planning, had been a critic of the policy of outgoing Finance Minister Chief Olu Falae who had taken a tough stance with creditors on the renegotiation of Nigeria's foreign debt.
Lt.-Gen.
Sanni Abacha had been Chief of Army Staff, in which capacity he was replaced by Maj.-Gen.
Salihu Ibrahim.
Also on Aug. 30, 12 state governors were replaced.
*Vice-Adml.
Agustus Aikhomu Vice-President *Shetima Mustapha Agriculture and Natural Resources T. O. Graham-Douglas Aviation *Chu Okongwu Budget and Planning *Olawale Adeniji-Ige Communications *Maj. -Gen.
Y. Y. Kure Culture and Social Welfare Babs Fafunwa Education +Alhaji Bonu Shariff Musa Employment, Labour and Productivity *Maj. -Gen.
Ike Nwachukwu External Affairs Maj.-Gen.
M. Gado Nasko Federal Capital Territory +Alhaji Abubakar Alhaji Finance and Economic Planning Koye Ransome Kuti Health Air Vice-Marshal Mohammed Yahaya Industry *Chief Alex Akinyele Information *Maj. -Gen.
A. B. Mamman Internal Affairs Prince Bola Ajibola Justice; Attorney General Air Vice-Marshal Nura Imam Mines, Power and Steel Jibril Aminu Petroleum Resources Air Commodore Anthony Ikazobor Youth and Sports Gordian Ezekwe Science and Technology S. J. Ukpanah Trade +Commodore Lamba Dung Gwom Transport Brig.
M. T. Kontagora Works and Housing *Alhaji Abubakar Hashidu Water Resources *Zakari Ibrahim Minister of State for External Affairs *Lt. -Gen.
Sanni Abacha Minister of Defence and Chief of Defence Staff *Alhaji Sumaila Gwarzo Minister of State for Police Affairs *New Appointment.
+Altered portfolio.
New Nigerian Council of Ministers
AFRICA
SAO TOMÉ AND PRINCIPE
Approval of multiparty system
A referendum on Aug. 22 was officially recorded as showing 71.9 per cent approval for the proposed new constitution embodying the change to a multiparty system.
 "No" votes were recorded as 3.5 per cent, with 4 per cent blank votes and 20.6 per cent abstentions.
The text included a controversial recently added provision under which President Manuel Pinto da Costa would remain in office until the end of 1990, rather than Sept. 30 when his current term of office expired.
Legislative elections were scheduled for October and presidential elections for November or December.
The President would be a candidate for re-election, as would Miguel Trouvoada, Prime Minister from independence in 1975 until 1979 [see pp. 27265; 30028], who had returned to the country on May 30 after spending 10 years in exile in France.
AFRICA
CHAD
Talks with Libya
The Libyan leader Col. Moamer al Kadhafi and President Hissène Habré of Chad met in the Moroccan capital, Rabat, on Aug. 22-23 for talks hosted by King Hassan.
Both leaders agreed to submit their dispute over sovereignty over the 1,000-km Aouzou territorial strip, seized by Libya in 1973, to the adjudication of the International Court of Justice at The Hague, as stipulated in the "Algiers Accord" signed by both sides in August 1989 [see p. 36841].
In addition both sides agreed to begin direct political negotiations, at the level of heads of state and foreign ministers, to achieve a peaceful settlement of mutual grievances.
Each also undertook to halt any act of aggression against the other's territory, and to settle the issue of the prisoners of war still being held by each side.
AFRICA
KENYA
Death of bishop
The Anglican bishop of Eldoret, the Rt Rev. Alexander Muge, was killed on Aug. 13 when his car collided with a lorry as he was driving home from Busia district.
Muge was known as an outspoken critic of corruption and of the erosion of democratic freedoms [see also p. 37603 for role of churchmen in criticism of government], and had accused unnamed government members of involvement in the death in February of Foreign Minister Robert Ouko [see p. 37239].
He had said publicly on Aug. 12 that his life was in danger, and that the Minister of Labour, Peter Okondo, had told him he "might not come back alive if he went to Busia" .
Okondo resigned on Aug. 20, and was replaced on Aug. 27 by Philip Masinde.
It was announced on Aug. 18 that the government was ordering a public inquest, in response to demands for a public inquiry into Muge's death.
Memorial services on Aug. 20 and 22, and Muge's funeral on Aug. 22, attracted crowds of thousands who cheered remarks containing criticism of the government.
Accusations were shouted particularly against Energy Minister Nicholas Biwott when he attended a memorial service on Aug. 22.
The driver of the lorry involved in the fatal incident was charged on Aug. 29 with dangerous driving.
Calls for a one-day general strike went largely unheeded on Aug. 24.
Leaflets calling for this protest action had gone out in the name of the underground organization Mwakenya, and were echoed in a BBC World Service broadcast by the exiled writer Ngugi wa Thiongo, but workers were urged by the official Central Organization of Trade Unions to ignore the "seditious leaflets" , and commentators noted an understandable reluctance to identify openly with Mwakenya by supporting its strike call.
AFRICA
MAURITIUS
Controversy over move to republic status — Party realignments
The Prime Minister of Mauritius, Anerood Jugnauth, narrowly failed on Aug. 21 to secure the necessary 75 per cent support in the Legislative Assembly for proposals to change the country's constitution by making it a republic within the Commonwealth.
The proposal itself was less controversial than the party manoeuvring which had gone before it.
In July, attempting to cement a broad cross-party alliance, Jugnauth had concluded an electoral pact between his Mouvement socialiste militant (MSM) and the (similarly liberal socialist) opposition Mouvement militant mauricien (MMM) led by Paul Bérenger.
Under this pact a general election, scheduled for 1992 but possibly to be held prematurely, would be followed by the choice of Bérenger as President.
However, Jugnauth's principal current coalition partners, the more right-wing traditionalist Mauritius Labour Party (MLP) led by Deputy Premier and Foreign Minister Sir Satcam Boolell, refused either to resign or to join such an alliance.
In a long debate in parliament on Aug. 17, a number of ministers refused to back the republic bill because of the July deal with the MMM.
Jugnauth thereupon dismissed Boolell, together with two dissident MSM ministers (Seetanah Lutchmeenaraidoo — Finance, and Dinesh Ramjuttun — Social Security and National Solidarity).
Three other MLP ministers then resigned (France Roussety — Civil Service and Employment, Ramesh Jeewoolall — Housing, Lands and Environment, and Clarel Malherbe — Industry).
Jugnauth then announced that he would continue in office, as head of a minority government depending on external support from the MMM.
He would himself take on the Finance portfolio, with Minister of Agriculture Madun Dulloo taking on Foreign Affairs and further appointments to follow.
AMERICAS
UNITED STATES
Progress of budget negotiations
The budget negotiations which had begun in May [see p. 37447]between President George Bush and a bipartisan congressional panel, adjourned in deadlock on Aug. 3.
The lack of progress in these talks, which were due to resume on Sept. 5, was highlighted by the latest projection, released on July 16, from the administration's Office of Management and Budget (OMB) that the budget deficit would be $168,800 million for fiscal 1991 (beginning in October 1990).
The estimate meant that, if no agreement was reached between congress and the president, $104,800 million would be sequestrated automatically from the 1991 budget, under the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction legislation (the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act) which provided a statutory obligation to reduce the deficit to $64,000 million by 1991 and to achieve its complete elimination by 1993.
Under the terms of Gramm-Rudman, the burden of sequestration would be spread across civilian and defence programmes; those areas exempt from the cuts included social security payments, veterans' pensions and federal disability and workers' compensation payments.
Richard Darman, the OMB Director, informed his Cabinet colleagues on Aug. 7 that he had ordered the appropriate federal agencies to prepare for sequestration from Oct. 1.
Since their inception in May, the bipartisan negotiations had been characterised by acrimony and distrust, with both Republicans and Democrats accusing each other of seeking to use the budget summit for short-term political advantage.
Although the negotiators had agreed to reduce the deficit by $50,000 million in 1991, there was little consensus as to how this should be achieved, with the Democratic members of the congressional team denouncing Darman's proposals as unacceptable.
Urged to present their own reduction package, some Democrats, such as House budget committee chairman Leon Panetta, were prepared to do so.
Others, however, decried this suggestion as a Republican manoeuvre designed to deflect criticism from the President by placing the responsibility for cuts in public spending on the Democratic majority within congress.
A breakthrough appeared to have been reached in the negotiations on June 26 when Bush revised his hitherto sacrosanct 1988 presidential campaign pledge not to increase taxes, and admitted that a budget agreement would have to include not only spending and entitlement cuts, but also "increased tax revenues" .
This major concession was undermined, however, as, with the approach of the November 1990 mid-term elections, Republicans within the House voted to oppose "new taxes and all tax rate increases as a means of reducing the federal budget deficit" .
Democrats, whilst welcoming Bush's retreat on the tax issue, argued that it was unreasonable to expect Democrats to associate themselves with spending cuts and tax increases, if they could not be certain that the President could hold his own party to such a deal.
Throughout July the talks became more acrimonious with the Democrats unable to agree upon a deficit reduction package amongst themselves, and the Republicans accusing them of negotiating in bad faith.
As it became clear that the Democrats were not about to present their proposals, Bush showed his frustration when, at a private meeting on Aug. 1, he demanded that the Democratic negotiators produce their deficit reduction plan before the summer adjournment.
Unless they did so, he warned, he would abandon the bipartisan sprit of the negotiations and publicly denounce them; he also threatened to veto all spending bills and thereby trigger the automatic Gramm-Rudman cuts.
The Democrats did not accede to Bush's demand, and he returned to Washington from his holiday home in Kennebunkport, Maine, on Aug. 14 in order to hold meetings not only with the Pentagon (Defence Department) over the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37631-41], but also with budgetary advisers.
He then gave a press conference in which he launched a fierce attack upon the Democrats, accusing them of failing to produce any deficit reduction proposals and of playing politics with the budget issue.
He repeated the threats which he had made on Aug. 1, including that of allowing the full force of the Gramm-Rudman cuts to become operational.
The move backfired, however, as Bush was widely criticised by Democrats and some Republicans for making a partisan attack at a time of international crisis.
The Gulf crisis complicated the budgetary position in that it made the negotiators' original $50,000 million deficit reduction target appear unrealistically high, while increasing the threat of the economy being pushed into recession.
It also made budgetary options such as the introduction of a broad-based energy tax, or deep defence cuts [see below], politically less viable.
Congressional consideration of defence budget
Following the recommendation of its armed services committee, the Senate passed a defence bill by 79 votes to 16 on Aug. 4, which imposed deep cuts, amounting to $18,000 million, in the defence budget request of $307,000 million put forward by Bush for fiscal 1991 (beginning October 1990).
In late July the parallel committee of the House of Representatives had also agreed upon a much-reduced defence bill upon which the House was due to vote after the summer recess.
The two chambers would then attempt to reconcile the differences and agree upon a single bill.
The scale of the cuts, together with the nature of some of the projects affected, meant that there was a strong possibility that the resulting bill would be vetoed by the President.
In its $289,000 million bill the Senate dealt its most severe blow so far to the beleaguered 1983 Strategic Defence Initiative (SDI).
In the face of the administration's intense opposition, it cut $900 million from the amount requested by Bush, allocating $3,500 million for SDI, and also insisting that the emphasis of the programme was altered from research into space-based interceptors (the "brilliant pebbles" concept) to ground-based rockets and lasers.
The Senate voted narrowly to continue funding the controversial B-2 "Stealth" bomber project, 15 of which were under construction, allocating $4,600 million for the construction of two bombers during 1991 and for further research into the radar-evading aircraft.
The bill passed by the armed services committee of the House on July 31 cut $24,000 million from the administration's request.
The committee voted to end production of the B-2 on the grounds that it was too expensive (the lowest estimates suggested a cost of $865 million per aircraft) and that its mission was too ill-defined.
The bill also cut the SDI budget by almost $2,000 million, delayed or reduced the development of a whole range of advanced weapons systems — including the Advanced Tactical Fighter, the Seawolf attack submarine programme and the navy's A-12 attack aircraft — and reduced active troop strength by 129,500.
The committee also voted against the current development of two mobile inter-continental missiles (the Midgetman and the development of rail-based MX missiles) in favour of a single mobile missile system.
Blueprint for revised military strategy
Details from a confidential military strategy document for the 1990s, presented to Bush in late June by Defence Secretary Dick Cheney and Gen. Colin Powell, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, were leaked to the New York Times on Aug. 2.
The plan aimed to cut the armed forces by 500,000 from the current level of 2,100,000, to reduce overseas deployments and to establish a new organizational framework for the military.
The first comprehensive attempt by the Pentagon to adapt US strategy to the changes resulting from the political reforms in Eastern Europe, and to accede to congressional pressure to reduce military expenditure, its relevance was immediately called into doubt as the USA mounted its large-scale military deployment in the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37631-41].
The blueprint was reported to have been well received by the President, although criticized by many senior military officers.
Whereas current strategy assumed that the USA would have as little as two weeks to reinforce NATO troops in the event of the Soviet Union mobilizing for an invasion of Europe, the new plan suggested that the future response time could be as long as two years, and that this would allow the USA ample time to bring reserve divisions up to full strength.
Contest for Democratic gubernatorial nomination in Georgia
Although primary elections took place in several states during August, the contest which captured most public attention was the struggle for the Democratic nomination for governor of Georgia.
The contest ended on Aug. 7 when Andrew Young was defeated in a run-off election by Zell Miller, the state's lieutenant-governor.
In contesting the run-off, Young had become the first black candidate to progress beyond the primary stage of the electoral process for any state-wide office within the state of Georgia.
In addition to his position as one of the country's leading black politicians, Young was also a renowned liberal whose political views had been shaped through his involvement in the civil rights movement.
After serving as US permanent representative at the UN, Young had spent two terms as mayor of Atlanta, an eight-year period during which the city had been transformed into a magnet for domestic and foreign investment and had become a symbol of the "New South" .
In running for the governorship Young had hoped to emulate the success of Douglas Wilder, elected as the country's first black governor, in Virginia, in November 1989.
In the July 17 primary contest Young finished second with over 31 per cent of the total vote, but won only 15 per cent of the white vote.
He also failed to mobilize a heavy turnout amongst black voters, many of whom criticised him for ignoring them in his efforts to woo the white rural electorate.
Miller won 41 per cent of the total vote, a proportion which reflected the skill with which he conducted a campaign in which he made good use of the experience gained during his 16 years as lieutenant-governor.
The other candidates were excluded from the run-off, but Young was unable to garner a significant share of their votes, polling 38 per cent of the total compared with 62 per cent for Miller.
It was estimated that Miller out-spent Young during the campaign by a ratio of 5:1.
Following his victory Miller was due to face Republican nominee Johnny Isakson in the November 1990 election.
A millionaire businessman who was currently the minority leader in the state's House of Representatives, Isakson was considered by most commentators to be the most credible gubernatorial candidate fielded by the Republicans in Georgia for 90 years.
The state had not elected a Republican governor since the Reconstruction period which had followed the Civil War.
Trial of Marion Barry
The trial of Marion Barry, 54, Mayor of Washington DC, ended on Aug. 10 when, after eight days of deliberation, the jury convicted him on one count of possessing cocaine but acquitted him on a second charge of possession.
The jury — composed of 10 blacks and two whites — announced itself unable to reach a verdict on 12 other counts, including a further nine misdemeanour drug charges and three felony counts of perjury.
Following the jury's decision, District Judge Thomas Penfield Jackson declared a mistrial on the 12 unresolved charges and did not set a sentencing date for the single conviction.
(In mid-September US Attorney Jay B. Stephens said that there would be no attempt to obtain a retrial on the 12 outstanding charges.)
Barry had been indicted on Feb. 15 on three felony and five misdemeanour charges after he had been arrested in a hotel room on Jan. 18, having been filmed smoking crack cocaine with a former lover, Hazel "Rasheeda" Moore.
Barry had been invited to the hotel by Moore who had agreed to co-operate with the authorities in their campaign to acquire evidence of the mayor's widely alleged use of illegal drugs.
Barry was indicted on a further six misdemeanour charges on May 10, five of which related to drug possession and one to conspiracy; the trial had begun on June 4 [see pp. 37525-26].
The single charge upon which Barry was convicted alleged that he had possessed cocaine between Nov. 7 and Nov. 10, 1989, an offence which carried a maximum sentence of one year in prison and a fine of $100,000, although it was extremely rare for a prison sentence to be imposed for a first offence of this nature.
The count upon which he was acquitted, that he had allegedly bought crack cocaine from a Washington dealer on Sept. 7, was refuted by defence witnesses who testified that the mayor had not been in the vicinity of the alleged transaction on the day in question.
The jury's verdict appeared to have resulted from the acceptance by some of its members that Barry had been unfairly singled out for prosecution, a central tenet of the mayor's defence strategy.
Although during the defence summation Barry's attorney had admitted that his client had been an "occasional" cocaine user, the prosecution's case was hampered by doubts within the jury over the credibility of key prosecution witnesses including Moore and Charles Lewis, a convicted drug dealer whose evidence was responsible for four of the drugs charges against Barry.
The filmed evidence of Barry smoking crack was undermined by the prevalent opinion that the FBI "sting" operation — in which Moore lured Barry to the hotel and offered him crack — had been over-zealous to the point that it had constituted a form of entrapment.
Speaking immediately after the trial Barry, who was due to complete his third four-year term as mayor in January 1991, suggested that his political career was far from over.
Having missed the deadline to register as a Democratic candidate in the November elections, he resigned from the party on Aug. 13 and registered as an independent.
On the following day he announced that he would stand as an independent for one of the at-large seats on the city council.
Opinion surveys suggested that, despite the drug charges, Barry retained an impressive personal following, particularly within the city's 70 per cent black community.
Many commentators interpreted his decision to run for the council as a means of preserving his extensive political machine while also providing a platform within the city government from which he could launch a future mayoral bid.
Conclusion of jogger rape trial — Further verdict in Bensonhurst case
On Aug. 18, after deliberating for 10 days, a New York City jury convicted three Harlem youths of raping and brutalizing a white female jogger in New York's Central Park.
Although acquitted of attempted murder and sodomy, Raymond Santana, 15, Yusef Salaam, 16, and Antron McCray, 16, were also convicted on charges of riot, robbery and assault arising from attacks upon other people in the park on the same night.
The attacks had been committed on April 19, 1989, by a gang of some 30 youths who went "wilding" — a term which came to mean rampaging through the park perpetrating random assaults.
The brutality and unprovoked nature of the attacks, together with the fact that the victims were white and middle class — the jogger was a vice president of a leading securities firm — whilst the assailants were black or Hispanic, meant that the case received a massive degree of publicity and became symbolic of US racial tension and urban violence.
The core of the prosecution case was composed of detailed confessions in which the three accused admitted participating in the rape.
There was no independent eye-witness testimony, however, and the forensic evidence — including semen samples recovered from the jogger's body and clothes — did not prove any link with any of the accused.
Arguing that the defendants had been accused simply because they were non-white, the defence dismissed the confessions (which the youths themselves retracted) as having been extracted under police duress.
The jogger, whom almost all of the US press avoided naming, testified briefly in court on July 16.
The severity of her head injuries — when found she had lost 75 per cent of her blood and remained unconscious for almost six weeks — meant that she remembered nothing of the attack.
The only defendant to testify was Salaam, a move which most observers saw as having increased his chances of conviction.
Although tried as adults, the defendants were due to be sentenced as juveniles, which meant that the maximum prison term which they could receive was 10 years.
Three further youths were due to be tried.
Black demonstrators picketed the court throughout the trial, alleging that the prosecution of the youths was tantamount to a judicial lynching.
Foremost amongst the protesters was the Rev. Al Sharpton, a black clergyman, who appeared on Aug. 1 in the company of Tawana Brawley, a black teenager who in 1987 had claimed, falsely as it was later proved, that she had been abducted and raped by a group of white men.
Many of the protesters, together with much of the black press, attempted to publicise the jogger's name and to vilify her character, claiming variously that she had never been attacked, that she had been raped by her white boyfriend, or that she had gone to the park in search of sexual adventure.
When the jogger made her court appearance she was jeered at by pickets and denounced as a "whore" .
The highly charged atmosphere of the trial was increased by its coincidence with the trial of Washington mayor Marion Barry [see above]and the continuing prosecution of those involved in the Bensonhurst case, in which black youth Yusef Hawkins was killed by a gang of whites in Bensonhurst in 1989.
John Vento became the third white to be sentenced in connection with the Bensonhurst attack, having been convicted of unlawful imprisonment and menacing behaviour, on July 3, and was on Aug. 14 imprisoned for between 2@2/3 and 8 years.
Although the jury acquitted him on one murder charge, it was deadlocked over a second and a riot charge, and a retrial was arranged for Sept. 17.
Some black activists, such as Nation of Islam leader Louis Farrakhan, suggested that such trials, together with the AIDS and drugs epidemics, were evidence of a white plot which aimed to destroy black Americans.
Although opinion surveys suggested that most blacks rejected this notion, there appeared to be a growing acceptance of the concept that the factual reality of an event was subordinate to the racial resonance which it evoked.
In the words of the influential black leader, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, whites tended to concentrate upon facts, whilst blacks were "concerned about context" .
AMERICAS
CANADA
By-election victory for Bloc Québecois
The Bloc Québecois, a newly formed political group committed to achieving sovereignty for Quebec, recorded a decisive by-election win in east-central Montreal on Aug. 13.
It won some 70 per cent of the vote, compared with 20 per cent for the Liberal Party (which had previously held the seat) and only 5 per cent for the ruling Progressive Conservative Party (PCP).
The Bloc Québecois was formed as a result of the increase in nationalist sentiment within the predominantly French-speaking province, following the collapse in June 1990 of the Meech Lake Accord, the constitutional amendment which had sought to induce Quebec to sign the 1982 federal Constitution in return for its recognition of the province as a "distinct society" .
The Bloc was founded by Lucien Bouchard, the former Environment Minister who resigned from the federal government in May 1990 [see p. 37519], who was joined by six other defectors from the PCP and the Liberals.
Although the by-election victory of Gilles Duceppe, a union organizer and son of Quebec's best-known actor, increased the group's parliamentary strength to eight, it remained four short of the 12 members needed for recognition as an official party within the House of Commons.
There was widespread speculation that the by-election would encourage further defections, however, particularly from among the 41 PCP Quebeckers within the federal Parliament upon whom Prime Minister Brian Mulroney depended for the maintenance of his overall majority.
Although the Bloc Québecois victory was hailed as proof of the level of support for "sovereignty" within the province, the group's definition of the term remained somewhat imprecise.
It was unclear whether the Bloc demanded complete independence or was prepared to settle for greater autonomy within the Canadian confederation.
In addition to illustrating the strength of feeling in Quebec in the aftermath of Meech Lake, the by-election also suggested that the new federal group was capable of eclipsing the Parti Québecois — which held seats in the Quebec Legislative Assembly — as the vehicle for resurgent Quebec separatism.
NDP by-election victory
In a second by-election, in Oshawa, near Toronto, the New Democratic Party (NDP) held the seat of Ed Broadbent, its former federal leader who retired earlier in the year, polling over 50 per cent of the vote.
AMERICAS
CARICOM
Heads of government meeting
The 11th meeting of the heads of government of the 13 member states of CARICOM, the Caribbean Community, was held on July 31-Aug. 2 in Kingston, Jamaica.
The meeting was overshadowed by the coup attempt in Trinidad and Tobago in late July in which Prime Minister Arthur Robinson was taken hostage [see pp. 37606-07].
Trinidad was represented at the summit by Sahadeo Basdeo, Minister of External Affairs and International Trade, and at a pre-summit meeting on July 30 the assembled heads of government issued a statement in which they expressed their "unequivocal condemnation" of the coup attempt.
Sending of troops to Trinidad
Some 300 troops from four CARICOM countries (Jamaica, Barbados, St Vincent, and Antigua and Barbuda) had been assembled on nearby Barbados during the crisis in Trinidad.
Although the coup attempt was finally crushed on Aug. 1, the troops were flown to Trinidad on Aug. 3, at the request of the Robinson government, as a "precautionary" move to protect oil installations.
Neighbouring countries also began airlifting food and medical supplies to the Trinidadian capital of Port of Spain which had suffered extensive damage during the coup attempt.
Agreement on common tariff
In addition to the situation in Trinidad, the meeting — as in previous years — concentrated on the issue of regional economic integration.
Unlike its predecessors, however, the summit concluded with a series of far-reaching agreements which cleared the way for the establishment of a Caribbean common market.
The most significant breakthrough in this respect was the decision to implement a common tariff on imports from January 1991, in order to facilitate the eventual removal of all barriers to intra-community trade.
Previous attempts to establish a common tariff had foundered on the objections of the smaller CARICOM members, who feared that it would have a negative impact upon their economies.
The agreement was finally achieved after exemptions were agreed whereby nine of the member states would begin operating the system at various points after the January 1991 deadline.
The new tariff structure was accompanied by a redefinition of the rules of origin for goods traded within the community and new guidelines for levels of local value added in production.
The summit also agreed to establish a regional stock exchange from January 1991 with the cross-listing of the community's three current exchanges based in Jamaica, Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago.
It was agreed to harmonize fiscal incentives for investors and to aim at the creation of a monetary union by 1995.
Associate CARICOM membership was granted to the United Kingdom dependencies of the Turks and Caicos Islands and the British Virgin Islands, but the meeting deferred a decision on membership applications from Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
Mexico and Venezuela were granted observer status.
AMERICAS
HAITI
Censuring of President — Resignations from Cabinet
The Council of State, a 19-member advisory body established in March 1990 when the interim government was formed [see p. 37314], passed a motion of censure against President Ertha Pascal-Trouillot on Aug. 15.
The Council, a quasi-legislative body drawn from various social and economic groups, was designed to supervise actions of the interim government and possessed the theoretical right to veto government measures.
The censure motion accused Pascal-Trouillot of financial incompetence, corruption, nepotism and failure to combat the country's chronic lawlessness, and of becoming an obstacle to the electoral process.
The development marked a new stage in the deteriorating relationship between President and Council.
The head of the Council, Louis Roy, had repeatedly criticized Pascal-Trouillot's unwillingness to take action against supporters of the Duvaliers — the family whose 30-year dictatorship was overthrown in 1986 — who were largely responsible for the prevailing climate of political violence.
The government's inertia was demonstrated both by its reluctance to investigate the murder of Council member Serge Villard in June, and its failure to arrest Williams Regala, a notorious Duvalierist former military officer and minister who had openly returned to Haiti in July despite the existence of an outstanding warrant for his arrest.
Although the Duvalierists were prohibited from participating in the electoral process, their brutal disruption of the 1987 elections together with their current ability to operate outside the law, meant that most observers saw little prospect for the holding of free elections on Nov. 4, as scheduled.
On Aug. 23 seven of the 12 political organizations which had initially supported Pascal-Trouillot's appointment declared their support for the Council of State and demanded the postponement of the elections until such time as the safety of voters could be guaranteed.
The President's rejection of the demand prompted the resignation on the following day of five Cabinet ministers: Claudette Werleigh (Social Affairs); Charles Tardieu (National Education, Youth and Sports); Lionel Richard (Agriculture); Maurice Lafortune (Commerce and Industry); and Kesner Clermont (Foreign Affairs).
Pascal-Trouillot disregarded the growing clamour for her resignation and on Aug. 27 installed a new 13-member Cabinet without seeking either the advice or the consent of the Council of State.
In a speech broadcast on state radio on the same day, she insisted that the elections would be held as scheduled.
AMERICAS
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
Inauguration of President — Austerity programme and violence
President Joaquín Balaguer, 83, the controversial and narrow winner of the May 16 presidential elections following a recount [see pp. 37448; 37529], began his sixth (non-consecutive) term of office on Aug. 16.
At his inauguration Balaguer defended a government austerity plan introduced on Aug. 8 which was designed to reduce the current 60 per cent annual inflation rate and a US$1,000 million trade deficit by cutting government subsidies.
The plan had led the nine trade union federations to call a general strike on Aug. 13-14.
Widespread protests across the country, and especially in the capital, Santa Domingo, had left at least 14 people dead, with dozens reported wounded and more than 1,000 protestors arrested.
The unions threatened a further general strike on Aug. 22-23 if basic food subsidies and wages were not increased.
The austerity measures had raised the price of petrol by 83 per cent, that of sugar by 75 per cent , flour by 96 per cent and cooking oil by 300 per cent .
This was partially offset by a 30 per cent increase in public-sector wages and those of the military.
The unions had rejected an identical offer from the private sector and demanded increases of 150 per cent.
In addition the peso was devalued against the US dollar from US$1=Ps7.3 to US$1=Ps10.2 in order to stimulate exports and to reduce arrears on the US$4,000 million foreign debt.
AMERICAS
HONDURAS
Army action to end strike by banana workers
On Aug. 4 President Rafael Callejas ordered 500 troops, supported by light tanks, to end a 42-day strike organized by the 8,500-member banana workers union (SITRATERCO), the longest labour dispute in the country for 30 years.
At least two strikers were reported to have been wounded and two more badly beaten as the Army dislodged strikers from their occupation of the installations of the Tela Railroad Company, a subsidiary of the United States United Fruit Company.
SITRATERCO had originally demanded a 60 per wage increase but, according to its general secretary Nicolas Rivera, it accepted a government-mediated offer of 25 per cent following the Army's intervention "to protect the lives of our members" .
A threatened general strike, called by a coalition of unions known as "the Fighting Platform" , failed to materialize as the Army moved in.
[For solidarity strikes and action by public-sector health workers in June see p. 37526.]
Bananas were Honduras's principal export, and the banana workers' strike was expected to cost US$60,000,000 in lost production.
It came at a time of growing interest among member countries of the European Communities (EC) in new sources for cheaper supplies of bananas, following the relaxation of the preferential access granted to certain African and Caribbean countries covered by the EC's Lomé Convention agreement [see pp. 37210-11].
AMERICAS
CENTRAL AMERICA
Security Commission meeting
The Deputy Ministers of Defence and Foreign Affairs of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua, together with observers from Panama, the UN and the Organization of American States (OAS), met in the Costa Rican capital, San José, on July 31-Aug. 1.
They agreed on a timetable of negotiations aimed at limiting the strength of their armed forces and involving regular meetings of a Central American Security Commission, which would supervise the preparing of an inventory of each country's weapons and troops, and would establish the limits or restrictions on the size of regional armies.
The whole process was subject to each country's "military needs according to its realities" including "domestic conflicts or subversive movements" .
The communiqué issued at the end of the San José meeting expressed the hope that the agreement would "consolidate the pacification and democratization process and generate a climate of confidence and security" in the region.
Economic integration plan
The Economy Ministers of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua met in Tegucigalpa, the capital of Honduras, on Aug. 1.
They agreed to develop an economic integration plan proposed by five Central American presidents in the Antigua Declaration of June 1990 [see p. 37526].
On Aug. 18 a further meeting took place in Alajuela, 30 km from San José, involving economy ministers, central bank presidents, economists, business leaders and representatives from international organizations (including the World Bank, the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)).
They discussed means of restructuring, strengthening and reactivating the process of economic integration as envisaged in the Economic Action Plan for Central America (PAECA)[ibid.].
AMERICAS
COLOMBIA
Inauguration of new President — Constitutional Assembly
On Aug. 7 the Presidents of Argentina, Ecuador and Venezuela, along with the United States Vice-President, the provisional President of Haiti and officials from 79 other countries, attended the inauguration of President César Gaviria Trujillo, 43, who had been elected on May 27 [see pp. 37450-51].
The inauguration was held amid a massive security operation in the capital, Bogotá.
In his speech Gaviria identified "narco terrorism" as the principal threat to democracy, and promised to confront it "without concession" .
However, he emphasised that the controversial policy of his predecessor, Virgilio Barco Vargas, to extradite drug traffickers to stand trial in the United States, would not be the sole or primary weapon in the campaign against the drug cartels.
He promised additional internal measures, including special courts, secure prisons and special protection for judges, but added that increased international co-operation was needed to spread the financial cost of drug enforcement in order to ensure stricter controls on drug distribution networks, money laundering, and the sale of arms and chemical components.
He proposed that an international court be established to try drug cases.
Gaviria stated that the economy needed a "shake-up" in order to increase its size and competitiveness and to make it attractive to foreign investors.
Benefits would accrue from the privatization of state companies, he said, although the government would recognise its "social objective" to raise public living standards and maintain public services.
Constitutional Assembly — Dismissal of judges
Gaviria also announced that a Constitutional Assembly to discuss constitutional reforms would be convoked on Nov. 25, in which left-wing guerillas could participate if they were prepared to abandon violence.
He promised that the government would do its utmost to dismantle right-wing paramilitary death squads and insisted that the armed forces must respect human rights because national defence also meant the upholding of the law.
It was reported on Aug. 1 that 30 of the country's 60 active investigative judges had been dismissed for incompetence, the head of the Department of National Security (DAS), Gen. Miguel Marza Márquez, stating that they were "responsible" for unsolved crimes [see p. 37529 for dismissals from armed forces and police].
New Cabinet
A new Cabinet of "national unity" had been named in advance of Gaviria's inauguration, although he emphasised that he was not seeking to form a coalition government.
The Cabinet included seven members from the ruling Liberal Party (PL), four members of the Conservative Party (PSC) and, most notably, Antonio Navarro Wolff of the April 19 Movement (M-19, the former guerrilla group), who had been the presidential candidate of the left-wing Democratic Convergence (Convergencia Democrática) alliance.
Gen. Oscar Botero, the Defence Minister under the previous regime, was retained in his post.
Julio César Sanchez (PL) Interior Luis Fernando Jaramillo (PL) Foreign Affairs Rudolf Hommes Rodriguez (PL) Finance and Public Credit Jaime Giraldo Angel (PSC) Justice Gen. Oscar Botero Restrepo (Ind.)
Defence Juan Felipe Gaviria Gutiérrez (PL) Public Works Francisco Posada de la Pena (PSC) Labour Maria del Rosario Sintes Ulloa (PSC) Agriculture Antonio Navarro Wolff (M-19) Health Luis Fernando Vergara (PL) Mines, Energy Ernesto Samper Pizano (PL) Economic Development Alberto Casas Santamaria(PSC) Communications Alfonso Valdiveso Sarmiento (PL) Education 
New Colombian Cabinet
Death of drug cartel leader
Gustavo de Jesús Gaviria Rivero, 43, the effective head of the Medellín drug cartel while its leader (and his cousin) Pablo Escobar Gaviria remained in hiding to escape an intensive government manhunt, was shot dead by the security forces in a gun battle in Medellín on Aug. 11.
Security chiefs claimed that this was the most damaging blow yet struck against the cartel, which had already lost two prominent figures, José Gonzalo Rodríguez Gacha (shot dead by police on Dec. 15, 1989 — see p. 37119) and its military leader John Jairo Arias Tascón, who was shot dead in June during a police operation.
The death of Gaviria Rivero was expected to provoke an new upsurge in violence following two weeks of relative calm since the Medellín cartel's declaration of a unilateral truce on July 27.
However, Inravision Television in Bogotá reported on Aug. 13 that it had received a faxed message from the cartel which stated that the truce would remain in force.
Death of guerrilla leader
Jacobo Arenas died of a heart attack on Aug. 10 at the age of 74.
An active guerrilla leader since the early 1960s, he had been a founder member in April 1966 of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), which had developed into one of the most durable guerrilla groups on the sub-continent, maintaining an estimated 60 fronts across the country and a force of 4,000-6,000.
Arenas had remained a hard-line Stalinist who opposed the political reforms under way in the Soviet Union.
AMERICAS
VENEZUELA
Debt agreement
On Aug. 21 agreement was reached with 450 private creditor banks to restructure US$21,000 million of debt.
In response to government options presented to them, the banks agreed to (i) exchange US$6,600 million of old debt for new 30-year government bonds carrying a fixed interest rate of 6.75 per cent underwritten by the United States Treasury;(ii) repurchase $1,500 million of debt instead of the $7,000 million the government had requested;(iii) provide $5,700 million in fresh loans for investment in development;(iv) the exchange of old debt for new government bonds offering temporary reductions in interest rates on $2,500 million;(v) new bonds offering $1,630 million equal to a 30 per cent reduction in principal.
The agreement represented the finalization of the March 1990 debt negotiations [see p. 37313].
Contrary to prior expectations the current Gulf crisis [see pp. 37631-41], carrying with it the prospect of increased prices for Venezuelan oil, had reportedly had little influence on the negotiations.
AMERICAS
PERU
Protests over austerity measures
A two-day strike was launched on Aug. 21 by 70,000 miners, coinciding with a general strike called by the two leading trade union confederations in protest at government austerity measures announced on Aug. 8.
The strike action came as the culmination of two weeks of widespread price riots and strikes by 80,000 public sector workers, during which 7,000 people were arrested and an estimated four killed, with 12 others wounded, as the Army and the police confronted protestors looting shops and markets around the country.
Raids on farms were also reported and public transport was paralysed in the capital, Lima, as bus operators withdrew services.
The government, anticipating the unrest, had declared a state of emergency in 11 provinces on Aug. 7 and placed the armed forces in direct control of Peru's 11 main cities, including Lima and its port of Callao, suspending all constitutional guarantees.
On Aug. 13 there had been a related wave of violent attacks by Maoist Shining Path (Sendero Luminoso) guerrillas and those of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement (MRTA).
These attacks, the most serious since President Alberto Keinya Fujimori took office on July 28, included an explosion when a car containing a bomb was rammed into the presidential palace, causing extensive damage but no casualties.
Six people were killed and dozens more reportedly injured in further bomb attacks and shootings in Lima, Cuzco, Ayacucho and the Andean village of Huasta, whose mayor was assassinated.
The Aug. 8 austerity programme had raised the price of low-grade petrol by 3,100 per cent, and ended government subsidies on staple foodstuffs and services, whose prices rose by 300 to 500 per cent .
Fujimori was accused by trade union and opposition leaders of having betrayed his election pledge not to introduce "shock" methods to deal with hyperinflation and the recession [see pp. 37371; 37528].
The government sought to offset the immediate effects of the price increases by a special bonus to public sector employees, equivalent to their July salary.
Private-sector employers were instructed to follow suit by Aug. 11.
A further edict of Aug. 18 raised the monthly minimum wage from 4,000,000 intis to 16,000,000 intis.
Labour Minister Carlos Torres y Torres acknowledged that this would leave minimum wages well below the necessary minimum for subsistence, estimated at 87,000,000 intis (approximately US$270), but stated that any further increase would raise inflation and bankrupt small businesses.
In addition to the price increases the government abolished the complicated currency exchange system, stating that the inti would be allowed to find its free market level.
On Aug. 9 the unofficial street rate stood at US$1.00=360,000 intis.
In an attempt to reduce the budget deficit, an immediate "temporary" 10 per cent tax was imposed on exports, a 50 per cent tax was imposed on petrol, a general 14 per cent sales tax was introduced and the most privileged social and business sectors were asked to pay a one-off "solidarity contribution" .
The maximum customs tariff on imports was set at 50 per cent and the minimum at 10 per cent.
Dismissal of police chiefs
On Aug. 2 Fujimori continued his policy of replacing senior figures in the security forces [see p. 37608]by ordering the retirement of 24 police generals, including Gen. Juan Zarate, head of the national anti-narcotics police unit.
In addition 70 lower ranking police officers were also replaced.
No official reason was given for the dismissals but commentators interpreted them as adding to the shift of power from the police to the Army.
AMERICAS
BRAZIL
Labour unrest
A 50-day strike in the automobile industry ended on Aug. 1, when Autolatina, the Brazilian holding company for the Ford and Volkswagen car manufacturers, claimed that it had lost sales worth over US$300 million.
The Ford car plant had been shut down in late July after striking metalworkers ransacked the plant.
The return to work settlement included a bonus of 15 per cent on top of a wage rise of 59 per cent.
According to Labour Ministry figures, the number of working days lost in strikes had risen from 2,267,878 days in April to 10,221,700 in May and almost 30,000,000 in June.
The number of workers involved in strikes had risen from 225,000 in May to 1,000,000 in May and to 1,500,000 in June.
Wage indexation
On Aug. 22 the Congress failed in an attempt to override the government's veto on legislation to restore the automatic indexation of wages to the current inflation rate.
The government had vetoed the proposal in late July, the abolition of automatic wage indexation (which would have covered 85 per cent of the workforce) having been a principal element in the government's anti-inflation programme announced in March [see pp. 37312-13].
On Aug. 20 President Ferdinand Collor de Mello had stated in a televised speech that a return to automatic indexation would result in hyperinflation, company bankruptcies, mass unemployment and deep recession.
AMERICAS
PARAGUAY
Cabinet changes
The dismissal of Luis Maria Argaña as Foreign Minister in late July, after he stated publicly that the ruling Colorado party would never give up power (contrary to the government's pledge to hold free elections in 1993), was followed in mid-August by the resignation of the entire Cabinet, to allow President Andrés Rodriguez to conduct a reshuffle.
Alexis Frutos Vaesken, the outgoing Justice and Labour Minister, became Foreign Minister.
His former portfolio was taken over by outgoing Deputy Interior Minister Hugo Estigarribia Elizache.
Raúl Torres was appointed Agriculture Minister and, most controversially, Angel Roberto Seifart Education minister; opposition politicians accused Seifart, an active right-wing member of the Colorado Party leadership, of having the same authoritarian leanings as his predecessor Dionisio González Torres.
The distribution of the remainder of the portfolios was unchanged.
Arrest of Gustavo Stroessner
Gustavo Adolfo Stroessner, the son of the exiled former president Alfredo Stroessner, was reported to have been arrested by the Brazilian police on Aug. 9 in response to an extradition request by the Paraguayan government.
Wanted on corruption charges, he was to remain in Brazilian custody until extradition proceedings were completed.
His father was currently being tried in absentia on similar charges in the Paraguayan capital, Asunción.
AMERICAS
ARGENTINA
Election of Menem as Peronist leader
Resignation of Cafiero following Buenos Aires provincial referendum
Antonio Cafiero, governor of Buenos Aires province, resigned as chairman of the ruling Justicialist Party (the official title of the Peronists) on Aug. 6 following his emphatic defeat in a provincial referendum the previous day.
With voting legally compulsory, 67.2 per cent of the Buenos Aires province's electorate (of over 7,500,000 people) rejected a joint Peronist and Radical Party (UCR) package of 98 amendments to the province's constitution, designed to give more autonomy to local councils; 32.8 per cent voted in favour of the changes.
The reforms were supported by President Carlos Saúl Menem, the other provincial governors and congressional deputies and senators.
They included clauses to devolve power by increasing the autonomy and economic power of local councils.
An opposition "No" campaign, backed by elements from the far right to the far left, claimed that the proposed reforms were a device to allow the municipalities to create new taxes.
They also accused Cafiero of seeking to keep himself in office by introducing a clause allowing him to stand for re-election in the 1991 gubernatorial elections.
Election of Menem — Resignation of UCR provincial president
Menem was elected as the new Justicialist Party chairman on Aug. 10, and his brother Eduardo Menem as vice-chairman.
This extended the control of the Menemismo faction to cover both the party and the government; it marked a decisive defeat for Cafiero's trade union and social democratic faction, which was expected to dissolve itself.
Menem's victory was interpreted as clearing the way for him to forge alliances with national and provincial parties of the left, centre and right.
Leopoldo Moreau, the Radical Civil Union (UCR) president in Buenos Aires province, also resigned, marking a similar defeat for his faction — the Movement for Renovation and Change — at the hands of the Current of National Opinion faction led by congressional deputy Frederico Storani.
AMERICAS
LATIN AMERICA REGIONAL
Conference on establishment of common market
The Presidents of Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela were joined by presidential representatives from Bolivia and Peru for a two-day conference in Bogotá, the Colombian capital, on Aug. 4-5 to discuss the "Enterprise for the Americas Initiative" proposed by United States President George Bush on June 27 [see p. 37526].
In a Andean Declaration on the initiative, the participants agreed to work with other Latin American countries and the USA in order to formulate the necessary mechanisms to bring it into existence.
They expressed the hope that the commercial aspects of the initiative would materialize within the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trades (GATT) "Uruguay Round" negotiations on access to markets [see pp. 37227-8; 37476]so that trade barriers could be eliminated.
They called on the USA to agree to the transfer of new technologies, and to remove non-tariff barriers (which affected almost 50 per cent of Latin American exports to the USA) in order to encourage increased domestic and international investment in the region.
They also stressed that Latin America's foreign debt problem had to be addressed during negotiations on the initiative.
The current progress of the February 1990 Cartagena anti-drugs accord, signed by Bolivia, Colombia, Peru and the USA, in February 1990 [see pp. 37243-44], was also analysed.
The meeting agreed that the agreements reached in Cartagena needed to be "dynamized" and their implementation strengthened.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAKISTAN
Dismissal of Bhutto government
The Pakistan People's Party (PPP) government of Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto was dismissed after 20 months in office by President Ghulam Ishaq Khan on Aug. 6.
The President, who acted under Article 58 of the Constitution, also dissolved the National and provincial assemblies, imposed a state of emergency and swore in an interim government led by Ghulam Mustapha Jatoi, leader of the Combined Opposition Parties (formed in June 1989 — see p. 36736).
Ghulam Mustafa Jatoi Prime Minister Sahabzada Yaqub Khan Foreign Affairs Ghulam Mustafa Khar Water and Power Choudhry Shujat Hussain Industries Rafi Raza Production Sartaj Aziz Finance, Economic Affairs, Planning and Development Malik Mohammad Naeem Khan Communications Mian Zahid Sarfraz Interior and Narcotics Control Mir Hazar Khan Bajrani Science and Technology Lt. Gen. (retd) Abdul Majid Malik Petroleum and Natural Resources Syeda Abida Hussain Information and Broadcasting Roedad Khan Without Portfolio Noor Jehan Panezai Health, Special Education and Social Welfare Islam Nabi Housing Works Nasir Mengal Labour, Manpower and Overseas Pakistanis Makhdoom Shafiquzzaman Culture and Tourism Amir Hussain Law, Justice and Parliamentary Affairs Pir Aftab Hussain Shah Food, Agriculture and Cooperatives Kazi Abdul Majid Abid Education Ilahi Bux Soomro Commerce Syed Ijlal Haider Zaidi Adviser Kamal Azfar Special Assistant
New Pakistan Cabinet
The interim government, a coalition of conservative parties, was bound more by common hostility to Bhutto than by a consensus on policy.
By Aug. 29 Bhutto's opponents had reportedly agreed to forge a common front but remained divided into factions led respectively by Jatoi, Nawaz Sharif (Chief Minister of Punjab province until dissolution), Mohammad Khan Junejo (Prime Minister in 1985-88 under Gen. Mohammad Zia ul-Haq) and by Zia's son Ejaz ul-Haq.
Outlining the grounds for his action, Khan accused Bhutto's government of corruption, abuse of power and of other acts "in contravention of the Constitution and the law" .
He also announced that elections would be held on Oct. 24.
Bhutto responded by dismissing charges of corruption as a "slander campaign" , and declared that although the President's call for fresh elections constituted a "smokescreen" , her party would "go to the people" if required.
She accused the President of carrying out a "constitutional coup d'etat" , hinting that he was party to a conspiracy involving sections of the Army, especially military intelligence.
(It was announced on Aug. 23 that the head of military intelligence, Maj.-Gen.
Asad Durrani, had been promoted to replace Gen. Shamsur Rahman Kallu, a Bhutto appointee, as head of the Inter-Services Intelligence Agency.)
Bhutto's dismissal came after months of ethnic violence in Sind [see pp. 37150-51; 37204; 37246; 37452-53]and sharp disagreements with the Army over domestic and foreign policy.
Public criticism of Bhutto had intensified following her government's handling of widespread political violence in Sind in May [see pp. 37452-53]and in June, when conflict between rival groups of Sindhi nationalists and members of the Muhajir party, the Muhajir Qaumi Movement [see p. 37246], resulted in the death of an estimated 400 people.
A further estimated 50 people were killed in a series of bomb explosions in Hyderabad on July 15, and the Guardian of July 16 reported that about 3,000 people had been killed in communal violence in the province since 1985.
Bhutto's relations with the Army deteriorated after her refusal to impose martial law in Sind under Article 245 of the Constitution.
Differences stemmed also from reports that Bhutto was seeking to erode the influence of the Army in the formulation of the country's policy towards Afghanistan and to adopt a more conciliatory approach to the resolution of the Kashmir problem.
Matters came to a head when Bhutto's attempt to recommend changes in the tenure and promotion of senior officers was seen as a move to create "extra-institutional loyalties" .
Bhutto's confrontation with rival governments in the provinces, particularly Punjab [see pp. 36525; 37204]; her differences with Muslim fundamentalist parties [see p. 36525]and her uneasy relationship with the President [see p. 37203], also contributed to her political demise.
In the weeks preceding her dismissal, she was beset by rumours of dissent within her own party and on Aug 5 it was announced that the Combined Opposition Parties intended to table a motion of no confidence against her government.
Investigation of corruption charges
On Aug. 24 the interim government announced that 11 special courts, empowered to "disqualify" from contesting elections those whom it found guilty, would investigate charges of corruption against ex-ministers.
The Special Courts for Speedy Trial Ordinance 1990 promulgated by the President on Aug. 28 approved the creation of more courts operating at district level.
Fears were expressed that these additional courts would enable the government to try anyone connected in any capacity to the PPP, and many observers considered that the real purpose of the tribunals was to bar PPP members from contesting elections.
Bhutto herself dismissed them as "kangaroo courts" and told journalists on Aug. 26 that "we do not accept any tribunal nor do we have any intention to appear before it" .
The Independent of Aug. 27 reported that Bhutto also faced a murder charge: a writ filed on Aug. 25 by members of the Muhajir community (descendants of Urdu-speaking immigrants) accused her of responsibility for the death of several people during an incident on May 26 when police opened fire on a crowd in Hyderabad, Sind [see p. 37452].
She was also reportedly suspected of passing sensitive information to India.
In a report in The Times of Aug. 28 it was confirmed that police had filed criminal charges against Bhutto's husband, Asif Ali Zardari, on grounds of illegal possession of arms, as well as on corruption charges.
Enforcement of travel ban
It was reported on Aug. 8 that the interim government had instructed immigration officials to prevent members of Bhutto's government and the PPP from leaving the country.
However, on Aug. 12 her mother Begum Nusrat Bhutto, who had been senior Minister without Portfolio in her government [see p. 36525], left Karachi on a flight to London.
Both Jatoi and the new Interior Minister, Zahid Sarfraz, denied on Aug. 14 and 23 respectively that any political leader or member of parliament was subject to exit controls.
Reports of a "deal" allowing Bhutto to leave if she renounced politics were dismissed on Aug 14 as "fictitious" by the Information Minister, Syeda Abida Hussain.
Arrest of party activists
The International Herald Tribune of Aug. 15 reported that up to 100 PPP members had been detained, some without charges.
A report in The Times of Aug. 25 confirmed that prominent PPP leaders had gone underground following attempts by the interim government to implicate the party in shooting incidents in Karachi on Aug. 22 in which 34 people were reported killed.
Re-election of President of Azad Kashmir
Sardar Abdul Qayyum Khan was re-elected President of Azad Kashmir, i.e. the Pakistan-controlled area, on Aug. 27 by a joint sitting of the Legislative Assembly and the Azad Kashmir council in Muzaffarabad.
Out of a total of 55 votes, Qayyum polled 32 while his rival Sultan Mahmud Choudhury secured 23.
Qayyum's election was expected to heighten the political crisis which had ensued since the electoral defeat in July of his party, the Muslim Conference, by a coalition led by the PPP.
At the time Qayyum, whose party was aligned to the Islamic Democratic Alliance, a dominant partner in the recently appointed interim government in Islamabad, refused to swear in the new Cabinet led by Mumtaz Rathore.
Qayyum's re-election led observers to conclude that the crisis could worsen as Rathore's government coalition faced both an opposition President, and a hostile federal government in Islamabad with effective control over the state's finance and bureaucracy.
Meanwhile, Rathore warned the Pakistani government against dismissing his Cabinet or interfering in the affairs of Azad Kashmir.
ASIA — PACIFIC
INDIA
Dismissal of Devi Lal from Cabinet
Devi Lal, the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Agriculture, was on Aug. 1 dismissed from the Cabinet.
Lal, whose power base lay in the support of peasant farmers in Haryana state, had been a focus of controversy throughout his term of office [see pp. 37031; 37315; 37452; 37610].
This culminated in an interview which he gave to the Illustrated India Weekly in which he criticized Prime Minister V. P. Singh as "weak" and repeated allegations of corruption against two other Cabinet ministers, Arun Nehru and Arif Mohammed Khan.
The Prime Minister, under considerable pressure following his previous hesitation in dealing with Lal, immediately recommended to the President that Lal be removed from office.
Singh's actions received broad support both within the Janata Dal and beyond.
On Aug. 3 the party's parliamentary group passed a vote of confidence in his leadership "without opposition" .
The only dissenting voice came from the Uttar Pradesh MP Chandra Shekhar, a long-standing factional opponent of the Prime Minister.
Leaders of the parties allied with Janata Dal in the ruling National Front coalition expressed their agreement with the action.
L. K. Advani, president of the Bharatiya Janata Party, on whose parliamentary support Janata Dal depended, also voiced support, while E. M. S. Namboodiripad, general secretary of the Communist Party of India (Marxist), another source of essential parliamentary support, expressed the view that the affair was an internal matter which would not affect his party's attitude to the government.
In his public statements on the dispute Lal portrayed it both as a factional struggle, between himself and members of Janata Dal who had come from the Prime Minister's Jan Morcha group, and as a conflict between urban politicians and a representative of rural India.
Lal hit back by mobilizing his rural supporters in a massive public rally in Delhi on Aug. 9, the anniversary of a Sikh separatist bomb attack on a bus in Haryana [see p. 36851].
Reports placed the attendance at between 250,00 and 500,000.
He used the occasion to assemble a broad front of rural leaders.
Speakers at the rally included Chandra Shekhar and the influential peasant leader Mahendra Singh Tikhait, Kanshi Ram, the president of the Bahujan Sama party which had a following among North Indian untouchable castes, and Prakash Singh Badal, leader of a faction of the Sikh Akali Dal.
In his speech to the rally Lal indicated that he was remaining within the Janata Dal, but was prepared to leave if he believed that the party was departing from its principles.
Crisis over job reservations
The government announced on Aug. 7 that it would implement the recommendations of the Mandal Commission and reserve 27 per cent of government and public-sector jobs for members of the "backward classes" (a category referring to members of economically disadvantaged caste groups who were not considered "untouchables" ).
On top of the existing reservations for "untouchables" castes, this brought the total proportion of reserved jobs to 49.5 per cent of all public-service posts.
The move aroused widespread protests from upper-caste students.
Demonstrations began in Bihar state on Aug. 11, when student groups attacked public buildings and railway lines.
On Aug. 24 Delhi police used tear gas to disperse demonstrating students outside Parliament.
The protests spread throughout north Indian cities, and on Aug. 29 the students were joined by groups of striking professional people.
The Delhi authorities closed the city's schools and withdrew buses because of continuing violence.
The government issued a clarification on Aug. 29 pointing out that the new reservations applied only to jobs and not to educational places.
Talks and clashes over Kashmir — Creation of National Security Council
A second round of bilateral talks between Indian and Pakistani officials took place on Aug. 10-11 [for first round, held in July, see pp. 37610-11].
The foreign secretaries of the two countries did not deal with the political issues in the Kashmir crisis but focused on military confidence-building measures.
While assurances were offered that India had no war plans, the Pakistan representative expressed unease at India's refusal to alter the deployment of its forces in the Kashmir border area.
Pakistan on Aug. 13 accused Indian forces of attacking a border outpost; India denied the accusation.
On Aug. 20-21 Indian and Pakistani forces exchanged heavy artillery fire across the ceasefire line.
The security forces had on Aug. 6 captured Yasin Malik and Hammid Sheikh, two senior military commanders of the Jammu and Kashmir Liberation Front.
The level of violence in Kashmir appeared to be rising, one of the worst incidents taking place on Aug. 11 when 28 militants were reported killed in an attack on a military convoy.
The Lok Sabha (lower house of parliament) on Aug. 21 approved the imposition of President's rule on the state — previously under Governor's rule — and granted special powers to the security forces to deal with "disturbed areas" of the state.
V. P. Singh announced on Aug. 24 that the government was creating a National Security Council, which he would head, to deal with internal and external security problems.
ASIA — PACIFIC
BANGLADESH
New Army Chief of Staff
Maj.-Gen.
Nuruddin Khan, commander of the Bangladesh Army's 9th Division, replaced Lt.-Gen.
M. Atiqur Rahman as Army Chief of Staff on Aug. 31.
Lt.-Gen Rahman had held the post since August 1986 when he had been appointed in place of President Hussain Mohammad Ershad [see p. 34812].
On Aug. 15 Commodore Amir Ahmad Mustafa had replaced Rear-Adml.
Sultan Ahmed as Chief of Naval Staff.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SRI LANKA
Government offensive to relieve besieged Jaffna fort — Attacks on Moslems in east
The siege of Jaffna fort in the north of Sri Lanka, where some 250 government troops were still trapped and surrounded by the forces of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam (LTTE), continued throughout August.
A major offensive was launched on Aug. 22 in an attempt to relieve the siege, after the government had abandoned its earlier suggestion that it might evacuate the fort and turn it over for use by the International Red Cross.
The uncompromising attitude of the government at this time was reflected in a proposal announced on Aug. 10 to evacuate Tamils from the whole Jaffna peninsula (where about 1,000,000 of them lived) and house them in refugee camps at Vavuniya while the military sought to "annihilate" the LTTE.
Announcing a curfew and dropping leaflets on Aug. 21 to warn of impending air strikes, the government brought up some 5,000 additional troops by ship and plane.
A contingent which had landed at Karainagar naval base on Kayts island sought to fight its way to Jaffna via Mandativu island (which the government claimed to have captured on Aug. 25) and along the heavily mined Pannai causeway.
According to government claims, over 250 LTTE rebels were killed between Aug. 22 and Aug. 26, including over 100 shot down from a helicopter as they cycled to reinforce LTTE positions near Kopay.
The intensified aerial bombardment and resulting civilian casualties came in for strong criticism, with all the opposition groups in parliament (hitherto supportive of military action against the LTTE) subscribing to a statement which described it as an inhuman action against the people.
Parliament voted on Aug. 25 by 116 to 68 to extend the state of emergency for a further month.
Earlier, there had been fighting at Mannar on Aug. 1 as the LTTE attacked an advancing troop convoy; naval artillery was used against rebel positions on Aug. 3 for the first time since the resumption of large-scale fighting on June 11; and a major clash took place on Aug. 4-5, involving the repulsing of an unsuccessful rebel attack against the Jaffna fort.
This attack signified the LTTE's rejection of a government initiative to create a demilitarized zone in the urban area around the fort itself.
Estimates of those killed since June 11 were revealed on Aug. 17 from government sources, but all government claims were rejected by the LTTE as gross distortions.
According to these figures the nine-week period had been the bloodiest of the civil war to date, with 3,350 deaths in all.
The previous day the government had stated that 1,001 LTTE guerrillas had been accounted as dead and 682 civilians killed in crossfire.
Attacks against Moslem civilians
The government accused the LTTE of responsibility for a series of horrific massacres of Moslem civilians in the first half of August.
The LTTE for its part blamed government forces, saying that the killings were "meticulously planned and executed, and blamed on the LTTE at a time when the Sri Lankan government is trying to purchase weapons from Middle Eastern Moslem countries" (a reference to a visit made by Ranjan Wijeratne, Plantations Minister and Minister of State for Defence, to Iran, Libya and Egypt in early August).
Leaders of the Moslem community, concentrated around the Batticaloa region, estimated in mid-August that over 500 had been killed since June, and 387 in August in the Batticaloa and Amparai districts.
The Sri Lanka Moslem Congress called for the Moslem community to arm itself for self-defence in view of the government's inability to provide adequate protection.
The bloodiest massacres were on Aug. 3, when 140 reportedly died in attacks at two mosques in Kattankudy; on Aug. 6, when 58 bodies were recovered after two incidents; and on Aug. 11-12, when 100-170 were reported killed at Eravur in the Batticaloa region.
Government troops killed over 40 Tamils whom they held responsible for the Aug. 6 incidents, after Wijeratne had declared that "we will show no mercy to these Tamil terrorists, criminals who do not deserve to live" .
Over 100 more Tamils were reportedly killed in further reprisals against refugee camps and villages on Aug. 12-14.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CAMBODIA
Security Council peace plan
The five permanent members of the UN Security Council (France, China, the Soviet Union, the United Kingdom and the United States) held their sixth meeting on the Cambodian problem on Aug. 27-28 and worked out a possible framework for a solution.
This represented the first time that all five states had agreed on all aspects of ending the Cambodian conflict.
If actually implemented, the plan would involve the largest UN force ever deployed, with up to 10,000 troops and an equivalent number of civilians and an estimated cost of £1,500 million (approximately US$2,918 million).
The plan called for establishing a supreme national council (SNC), as agreed at the Tokyo meeting in June [see p. 37533], composed of 12 "representative individuals of authority" who had to be mutually acceptable.
The SNC would occupy Cambodia's UN seat, perhaps as early as the next UN General Assembly in September.
(The United States and West European countries had indicated that they would not support the continued accreditation of the National Government of Cambodia or NGC, formerly known as the CGDK, whose three component elements were the Khmers Rouges, the supporters of Prince Sihanouk and the anti-communist Khmer People's National Liberation Front led by Son Sann.)
The SNC would turn over most of its powers to the UN until a new Cambodian government was elected; the UN would probably administer defence, foreign affairs, finance, public security and information.
Prince Sihanouk was recommended as nominal leader of the SNC in the interim period.
The Security Council plan called for an initial ceasefire followed by phased disarmament.
It also covered the halting of military supplies to the warring factions, the holding of free elections, protection of human rights, and international guarantees for a permanently neutral and sovereign Cambodia (including a clause allowing for the enforcement of this).
There was guarded optimism that all Cambodian factions (the three NGC elements and the State of Cambodia (SOC) regime based in Phnom Penh) would accept the UN framework, as it was widely expected that the five states would put pressure on the respective factions they supported.
The SOC, without actually rejecting the plan, gave the least enthusiastic response, with strong reservations about disarmament and about the SNC assuming direct control of key ministries, which was seen as amounting to the dissolution of the SOC government.
Vietnam, supporting the SOC position, rejected the disarming of government forces, and made it clear that it envisaged an SNC with a largely symbolic function rather than real authority.
The Khmers Rouges, on the other hand, expressed agreement in principle on the composition of the SNC, and endorsed the disarming of all factions.
First US-Vietnamese talks on Cambodia
The first formal talks between the USA and Vietnam on Cambodia were held at the UN on Aug. 6, leading to a great deal of speculation about the lifting of the US-led trade embargo on Vietnam and eventual normalization of US-Vietnamese relations.
The last significant talks, in 1978, had stumbled over US considerations of Chinese interests and on problems inherent in the negotiations, and halted altogether after the Vietnamese invasion of Cambodia.
The US Secretary of State, James Baker, had indicated in July 1990 that early normalization was a possibility if Vietnam compromised on the Cambodia issue.
The Aug. 6 meeting, lasting 3@1/2 hours and involving Trinh Xuan Lang, Vietnam's permanent representative at the UN, and Kenneth Quinn, a US Deputy Assistant Secretary of State, was regarded as relatively low-level, and the USA tried to minimise its significance.
However, both sides described the talks as useful and businesslike, and agreed to hold further talks soon, at the same level.
The talks covered the holding of elections in Cambodia, the prevention of a return to power by the Khmers Rouges, administration in the transitional period before elections, the restoration of peace and the country's permanent neutrality, and the issue of US prisoners of war and soldiers missing in action (POW-MIA).
The USA wanted to discuss all aspects of the Cambodian problem, including internal aspects.
Vietnam, however, maintained that internal issues should be discussed with the SOC government in Phnom Penh; it was only willing to talk about the international aspects of the problem, and urged the USA to expand the talks to include the SOC government.
National Assembly session — Purge and ministerial and party changes
The 19th session of the first Cambodian National Assembly was held in Phnom Penh on Aug. 3-9 and was presided over by Chea Sim, the Assembly's President.
In his opening address, Chea Sim referred to "obstacles and difficulties" for which a "common, fundamental solution" was needed.
The session appeared to be dominated by consideration of economic problems in particular.
Delegates called on the Council of Ministers to "pay attention to enhancing people's confidence in the new regime" and to promoting economic development, and spoke out against price rises and "random, state-private economic exploitation" .
Amendments to the 1990 state budget were approved.
The Assembly also approved the leadership purge of June and July, when six high-ranking officials in the ruling Khmer People's Revolutionary Party (KPRP) had been arrested for trying to set up a new party [see also pp. 37598-99].
Formally dismissed were Vandi Ka-on, member of the Council of State and Chairman of the Assembly's legislative commission; Ung Phan, Minister of Communications, Transport and Posts; and Chheng Phon, Minister of Information and Culture and member of the Assembly's legislative commission.
Yith Kim Seng, Minister of Health, was also relieved of his duties.
Chem Snguon was voted on to the Council of State; Ros Chhun became Minister of Transport, Communications and Posts; Hang Chuon became Minister of Information and Culture; Yin Chaili became Minister of Health; and Yos Son became Minister of Education.
The August session of the KPRP political bureau "decided to rectify the functions" of some leading cadres.
Altogether the reshuffle involved 12 officials at regional and national level.
Changes affected the KPRP central committee's organization and its co-ordination commissions of the KPRP central committee, and the Council of Ministers, in which Nghon Nhel replaced Say Chhum as Minister of Agriculture.
Say Chhum became "standby" Vice-Chairman of the Council of Ministers, and there were other changes at deputy ministerial level.
Earlier, on July 30, a KPRP communiqué had announced the expulsion of Ung Phan from the party central committee "due to his betrayal" , and the retirement of Chheng Phon for health reasons.
The July communiqué also announced that the next KPRP congress, due before the end of the year, would be postponed.
The last congress had been in 1985.
Penetration of SOC territory by Khmers Rouges
Neither the SOC forces nor the guerrilla forces made significant gains in terms of control of territory during August; the SOC forces on the whole maintained their positions, while the guerrillas continued to launch attacks and hold positions for a few hours before retreating.
The main areas of fighting were in the north-western provinces of Battambang (especially in the Sisophon area), Banteay Meanchey and Siem Reap-Oddar Meanchey (especially around Chikreng), but the guerrillas, dominated militarily by the Khmer Rouge component, also claimed victories in Kampot and Kompong Speu in the south and in the central provinces of Kompong Chhnang and Kompong Thom, especially around Kompong Svay and Stoung.
Although they did not succeed in holding much territory, they proved their ability to penetrate deep into SOC-held territory.
The heaviest fighting, with the most casualties, was in the north-west.
The guerrillas also continued to report alleged movements of Vietnamese troops, claiming that over 3,000 entered Cambodia in the beginning of August.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MYANMA
Violence at demonstration
With the approach of the second anniversary of the brutal suppression of pro-democracy demonstrations by the State Law and Order Restoration Council (SLORC), and no sign of the regime handing over power to the National League for Democracy (NLD) despite the latter's sweeping electoral victory in May 1990 [see pp. 37457-58; 37612], there was a marked increase in tension and a renewal of violence at protests in early August.
The NLD on Aug. 2 called for demonstrations to mark the Aug. 8 anniversary of the beginning of the 1988 protest.
In Mandalay, Burma's second city, there were persistent rumours of shootings prior to the holding of a demonstration on Aug. 8.
On that day some 5,000 students and others, led by monks, began a peaceful protest which turned into a violent confrontation with police when a student raised the "fighting peacock" , symbolizing defiance of the SLORC.
Police moved in to arrest him, stones were thrown and police then reportedly opened fire.
Various reports indicated a death toll of between two and seven, including two monks.
A SLORC statement on Aug. 10, however, described this as "merely a rumour spread by unscrupulous elements" .
In subsequent days there was an increase in the troop presence on the streets in Yangon (Rangoon), the capital, while on Aug. 14 it was reported from Thailand that anti-government forces in various parts of Myanma had resumed military activities, ending a three-month post-election lull.
ASIA — PACIFIC
THAILAND
Cabinet reshuffle
A major Cabinet reshuffle carried out on Aug. 26 by Prime Minister Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven was notable for the replacement of both Finance Minister Pramual Sabhavasu and Foreign Minister Air Chief Marshal Siddhi Savetsila.
Pramual was moved to become a Deputy Prime Minister.
Siddhi, who had been Foreign Minister for 10 years but was considered hostile to Chatichai's Cambodia policy and to any rapprochement with Vietnam [see p. 37654], was dropped altogether from the government.
The reshuffle was widely seen as an attempt to deflect allegations of corruption.
This issue had come to a head in July, with the tabling of a no-confidence motion in parliament, and the live broadcasting of the July 18-20 debate on national television.
Chatichai's coalition, then comprising six member parties, controlled 229 seats in the 347-member House of Representatives, and survived the vote with the apparently overwhelming majority of 220 to 38, but only after most opposition members had walked out in a mark of protest.
It was noted that most of the ministers from Chatichai's own Chart Thai party retained their posts in the August reshuffle.
Maj.-Gen.
Chatichai Choonhaven (Chart Thai) Prime Minister; Defence **Pramual Sabhavasu (Chart Thai) Deputy Prime Minister *Thongyod Chittavira (Social Action Party) Deputy Prime Minister **Maj. -Gen.
Sanan Khachornprasat (Democrat Party) Deputy Prime Minister **Gen.
Mana Rattanakoses (Rassadorn) Deputy Prime Minister *Gen.
Arthit Kamlan-Ek (Thai People) Deputy Prime Minister Boon-eua Prasertsuwan (Chart Thai) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office Korn Dapparungsi (Chart Thai) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office Prasong Boonpong (Chart Thai) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office Chaisiri Ruangkanchanaset (Social Action Party) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office Supatra Masdit (Democrat Party) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office Col. Phol Rerngprasertvit (United Democratic Party) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office Police Capt. Chalerm Yubamrung (Muan Chon) Minister Attached to Prime Minister's Office *Virabongsa Ramangura Finance **Subin Pinkayan (Social Action Party) Foreign Affairs **Chuan Leekpai (Democrat Party) Agriculture and Co-operatives Montree Pongpanit (Social Action Party) Transport and Communications*** *Amaret Sila-on (Social Action Party) Commerce Banharn Silpa-Archa (Chart Thai) Interior Police Lt.-Gen.
Chamras Mangkalarat (Chart Thai) Justice Prachuab Chaiyasan (Democrat Party) Science, Technology and Energy **Gen.
Tienchai Sirisamphan (Rassadorn) Education Marut Bunnak (Democrat Party) Public Health Police Gen. Pramarn Adireksarn (Chart Thai) Industry **Anuwat Wattanapongsiri (Chart Thai) University Affairs *New appointment.
**Altered responsibilities.
***Altered portfolio.
Reshuffled Thai Cabinet
Arthit Kamlang-ek, an influential former Supreme Commander of Armed Forces and Army C.-in-C., had since May 1988 been leader of the Thai People party, whose 17 members had voted with the government in the July no-confidence motion, and which thus now joined the ruling coalition.
Amaret Sila-on was a prominent industrialist, while Virabongsa Ramangura was a non-party economics expert, with a reputation for fiscal conservatism; he had been economics adviser both to Chatichai and to his predecessor Gen. Prem Tinsulanonda.
ASIA — PACIFIC
LAOS
Visit by Japanese Foreign Minister
The visit to Laos by Taro Nakayama, the Japanese Foreign Minister, on Aug. 2-3 was the first by a senior Japanese minister since the formation of the Lao People's Democratic Republic in 1975.
It followed a visit to Japan in November 1989 by Kaysone Phomvihane, Chairman of the Lao Council of Ministers and general secretary of the ruling Lao People's Revolutionary Party (LPRP), which had resulted in a substantial Japanese aid package to Laos [see p. 37287].
On Aug. 2 Nakayama and his Lao counterpart, Gen. Phoune Sipaseuth, signed three economic aid agreements which provided for a Japanese aid package to Laos totalling 1,636,630,000 yen (approximately US$11,000,000).
Assistance would be given (i) to pay off debts incurred during recent construction work on the Nam Ngum hydroelectric dam;(ii) to repair one of the dam's generators; and (iii) for agricultural projects in the area around Vientiane, the capital of Laos.
ASIA — PACIFIC
CHINA
Premier's south-east Asia tour
Li Peng, the Chinese Premier, began a nine-day tour of three south-east Asian countries on Aug. 6, designed to improve relations with non-communist countries in the region and to ease fears of China as a security threat.
Li's entourage included Foreign Minister Qian Qichen and Minister for Foreign Economic Relations and Trade Zheng Tuobin.
Restoration of diplomatic relations with Indonesia
Li's visit to Indonesia on Aug. 6-11 concluded several months of negotiations on restoring diplomatic relations [see pp. 37612-13].
Relations were formally normalized on Aug. 8 following talks with President Suharto on Aug. 7 during which Li Peng proposed to "let bygones be bygones" .
The memorandum of agreement stipulated that neither side should interfere in the other's internal affairs.
At a press conference, Li subsequently said that China would not use its Army against any other country, and had no intention of "utilizing" the Chinese-Indonesian community.
The memorandum also reiterated each side's non-recognition of dual nationality, and Li later urged Chinese nationals living in Indonesia to respect the laws of their country of residence.
Indonesia's trade and economic relations with Taiwan were to be unaffected by the resumption of ties, although the memorandum noted China's appreciation that Indonesia had "consistently" recognized the administration of the People's Republic as the sole government of China, of which Taiwan was an integral part.
Speaking at a banquet in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, on Aug. 7, Li stressed the importance attached by China to the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN), and said that differences in social systems should not affect the development of friendly relations and mutual trust.
Talks were also held between the two countries' Foreign Ministers, who discussed the Cambodian question, and between the Ministers of Economic Relations and Trade.
A trade accord was signed in which each country accorded the other most-favoured-nation status.
Agreement with Singapore to establish diplomatic relations — Visit to Thailand
Li visited Singapore on Aug. 11-13, where he agreed with Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew to conclude negotiations on establishing diplomatic relations "as early as possible" .
Referring to Singapore's military co-operation with Taiwan, Li told a press conference on Aug. 12: "This is a fact, and we should not mind it too much." 
He said that "proper arrangements" would be made after the establishment of diplomatic ties.
Li also told reporters that China would not object to the participation of the Taiwan and Hong Kong "economies" in the Asia-Pacific Economic Co-operation (APEC) forum, although it was not prepared to join APEC as one of "three Chinas" [see p. 37613].
Li arrived in Bangkok, the Thai capital, on Aug. 13 for a two-day "working visit" to Thailand.
He held talks with Prime Minister Chatichai Choonhaven on bilateral issues and on the Cambodian problem, on which subject the Chinese side expressed confidence in the search by the five permanent members of the UN Security Council for a peaceful solution [see p. 37654].
Calling the tour a "complete success" , Li told embassy staff in Bangkok that the visit had raised China's international prestige, strengthened understanding with ASEAN, and helped to promote a solution to the Cambodian problem.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MONGOLIA
Final election results
Final results of the multiparty elections held on July 29 showed the Mongolian People's Revolutionary Party (MPRP) winning 85 per cent of the votes for the 430-seat People's Great Hural.
In cases where MPRP members had stood as opposition candidates there was some confusion over the exact allocation of seats, but according to the elections commission, the MPRP won 357 seats, and the pro-MPRP Mongolian Revolutionary Youth League won nine seats.
Among the opposition parties, the Mongolian Democratic Party won 20 seats, the Social Democratic won four seats, the National Progress Party won six seats, and 29 seats went to independents.
The MPRP also won 31 seats in the Little Hural.
Repolling took place on Aug. 26 in 24 constituencies where no candidate had received the minimum vote or where ballot papers had been spoiled.
According to a radio commentary on Aug. 7, there were complaints from the opposition that they had not had enough time to campaign effectively, and instances were cited of bullying by MPRP election supervisors.
There were also calls for improvement of the election law.
Conference of Mongolian Association of Unemployed — Establishment of Ministry of Labour
The first conference of the Mongolian Association of Unemployed took place on Aug. 9.
The association, which grew out of the Mongolian Democratic Party in May 1990, demanded representation in the People's Great Hural, asking other parties to cede two seats and claiming that there were 90,000 unemployed people in Mongolia; the official figure was 30,000 out of a total population of 2,000,000.
On the same day, the Ministry of Labour was established, and on Aug. 18 Choyjamtsyn Badamhand was appointed Minister, the first woman to hold such a position.
Visit by US Secretary of State
James Baker, the United States Secretary of State, paid an official visit — the first by a US Secretary of State — scheduled for Aug. 2-5 but cut short on Aug. 3, following the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Baker met the senior Mongolian party and government leaders: Punsalmaagiyn Ochirbat, the Chairman of the People's Great Hural Presidium; Sharavyn Gungaadorj, the Chairman of the Council of Ministers; Foreign Minister Tserenpilyn Gombosuren; and the general secretary of the MPRP, Gombojavyn Ochirbat.
Baker also held talks with opposition leaders who expressed willingness to discuss the formation of a coalition with the ruling party and government.
At a press conference on Aug. 3, Baker said that he felt that "the commitment to genuine reform is real" .
His discussions with Mongolian leaders, he said, had also covered developments in the Asia-Pacific region and in US-Soviet relations.
The two sides signed a consular convention, an agreement on sending American Peace Corps volunteers to Mongolia, and a commercial agreement.
Baker promised aid worth US$1,100,000 and special trade status to assist reform efforts towards a market economy, following the "free and fair" elections on July 29.
Initial agreement on reciprocal most-favoured-nation status was also reached, to be finalized when the condition of free emigration was met as required by US law.
ASIA — PACIFIC
NORTH-SOUTH KOREA
Border debacle — South Korean domestic political developments
Impasse arising from planned opening of North-South border
In early August more than 61,000 South Korean citizens, many of whom had relatives in North Korea, applied for permission to make an unprecedented visit to the North.
The mass registration followed the July 20 statement by President Roh Tae Woo that the South Korean border would be opened for five days from Aug. 13.
Although the government had suggested that anyone who applied would be permitted to make a visit, the Justice Ministry banned at least 42 dissidents from leaving South Korea on the grounds that their visit would "severely hurt national interests" .
It also insisted that the North Korean government had to accept the full list of names and guarantee the safe return of all who made the trip.
The North Korean Prime Minister, Yon Hyong Muk, in a telephone message on Aug. 9 to his Southern counterpart, Kang Young Hoon, stated that he would only accept the list of visitors if the South met three preconditions.
These were (i) the abolition of the draconian National Security Law relating to sedition and espionage;(ii) admission of a North Korean "consolation" delegation to visit three South Korean dissidents imprisoned under the National Security Law for having made unauthorized visits to the North; and (iii) the authorization of South Korean dissidents to attend a pro-unification rally due to be held in Panmunjom on Aug. 15, the anniversary of Korean liberation from Japanese colonial rule.
A South Korean government spokesman described the preconditions as "absolutely preposterous and unacceptable" .
South Korea made an eleventh hour concession on Aug. 12 by suggesting that the North might be permitted to select only those whom it wished to receive from the 61,000 names on the list.
Nevertheless, on Aug. 13 no North Koreans attended a meeting arranged by the South to hand over the list.
Therefore, although the South established "an international port of entry" on the southern bank of the Injim river — complete with immigration control and currency exchange facilities — not a single person was permitted to cross the border in either direction during the entire five-day period.
Agreement to hold Premiers' summit
The border-opening debacle and the wave of mutual recrimination which it engendered appeared to threaten the tentative July agreement to hold the first ever summit between the Premiers of the two Korean states in Seoul, the South Korean capital, on Sept. 4-7.
On Aug. 30, however, a meeting in Panmunjom agreed the final procedural details of the meeting, which would involve a seven-member North Korean delegation, led by Yon Hyong Muk, and accompanied by 33 assistants and 50 journalists.
The talks were due to include discussions of measures to reduce tension between the two states and to promote bilateral exchanges.
Effect of border-opening issue on South Korean domestic politics
With the border opening looking increasingly doubtful in the week preceding Aug. 13, members of several South Korean dissident groups attempted to make their own way to Panmunjom but were turned back at police roadblocks.
A few did succeed in reaching the border, however, and on Aug. 13 at least 15 dissidents cut through a barbed wire fence only to be arrested as they rushed towards the Demilitarized Zone which divided the two Korean states.
Dissidents also protested against the continuing United States military presence in South Korea on the grounds that it hampered unification dialogue with the North.
On Aug. 14 at least 79 protesters were arrested at the US Eighth Army headquarters in central Seoul, after a car had been rammed through the main gate.
On Aug. 15 itself some 3,000 riot police clashed with 10,000 dissidents who had gathered at Yonsei University in western Seoul with the intention of marching to the Panmunjom rally.
The police used armoured vehicles and tear gas to contain the protesters who were armed with rocks and petrol bombs.
There was further violence, including attacks upon US installations, on the following day.
In his Aug. 15 Liberation Day national address, Roh attacked North Korea for using "preposterous reasons and excuses" for not opening the border.
In an interview published in a local newspaper on the same day, Roh defended the National Security Law as a "defensive law designed to protect our liberal democratic system from subversive activities" .
Arrest of South Korean radicals accused of plotting coup attempt
The South Korean police announced on Aug. 22 that 48 people, including 10 soldiers, had been arrested for planning to overthrow the government.
Seventeen of those arrested, including the soldiers, were detained on Aug. 21, whilst the others were arrested in separate operations which had been under way since March.
Police claimed that the 48, many of whom were students, had formed an organization called the Revolutionary Working Class Fighters' Federation which aimed at the establishment of a socialist state.
All were charged under the National Security Law which provided for a maximum penalty of death by hanging.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PHILIPPINES
Government offer to negotiate with rebel forces
Bombing campaign by right-wing rebels
At least 17 bombs exploded in Manila, the capital, in the last two weeks of August in what appeared to be a concerted destabilization campaign by dissident right-wing elements within the military.
The explosions followed an announcement by Col. Gregorio "Gringo" Honasan, a fugitive since leading a 1987 coup attempt [see pp. 35709-12], that his rebel forces would resume "tactical operations" which had been suspended since the Cabanatuan City earthquake in July.
The campaign, together with the circulation of increased rebel propaganda within the armed forces, intensified rumours that a fresh coup attempt was about to be launched against the government of President Corazon Aquino.
Aquino's response was twofold.
Although she refused to declare a state of emergency, loyal forces were placed on full alert and, at the government's request, the House of Representatives approved legislation which made participation in a coup attempt a specific crime punishable with up to life imprisonment.
Aquino also attempted to ease the pressure on her beleaguered government by offering on Aug. 29 to negotiate ceasefire agreements with any or all of the three groups — right-wing rebel soldiers, Moslem secessionists and the communist New People's Army (NPA)— engaged in military conflict against her.
NPA release of hostages — US withdrawal of Peace Corps workers
The government's overture to the NPA was of particular significance, for it undermined consistent government claims that popular support for the 21-year guerrilla struggle was dwindling.
In recent months the guerrillas had waged a successful assassination campaign against members of the security forces — including the June 11 killing of Col. Saturnino Dumlao, one of the highest-ranking victims of the guerrilla war — and against US personnel.
All 261 US Peace Corps volunteers had been evacuated from the Philippines in June after one of their number, Timothy Swanson, was kidnapped by the NPA on the island of Negros on June 13.
Swanson's abduction followed that of a Negros-based Japanese aid worker, Fumio Mizuno, who was seized by the NPA on May 29.
Both men were released unharmed on Aug. 2, after a three-day ceasefire had been arranged on the island.
The US authorities claimed that the decision to evacuate Peace Corps workers had been taken on the basis of general intelligence concerning NPA intentions, and that Swanson's abduction had only become known after the decision had been made.
Nevertheless, at a time of ongoing negotiations over the future of US bases, the withdrawal opened an embarrassing diplomatic rift between the two countries.
Aquino, who had insisted that foreign nationals were safe in the Philippines, criticized the decision to suspend the volunteer programme, saying that it had been made hastily and without consultation with the host country.
ASIA — PACIFIC
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Interim peace accord in Bougainville conflict
A government team led by Foreign Minister Michael Somare signed an interim peace agreement on Aug. 5, with a delegation representing the secessionist Bougainville Revolutionary Army (BRA), following eight days of negotiations on board the New Zealand naval supply ship Endeavour.
The agreement surprised many observers because the talks had appeared deadlocked over the issue of independence for the copper-rich island of Bougainville, with each side accusing the other of responsibility for atrocities committed during the two-year guerrilla struggle.
Rumours of lawlessness and factional fighting had increased since the government had withdrawn its troops in March and the BRA had made a unilateral declaration of independence in May.
The latter move prompted the government to retaliate by establishing a blockade around the island and withdrawing all services from the inhabitants.
The so-called Endeavour Accord, which provided for the immediate lifting of the blockade and for the restoration of communications, education, health and power services, was reached after the two sides agreed to set aside the independence question for further talks within the next eight weeks.
In return for the government's concession, the leader of the BRA delegation — Joseph Kabui, provincial Premier of Bougainville — agreed not to hinder the return of central government personnel (but not security forces) to the island.
Notwithstanding the progress of the talks, however, the long-term prospects for peace, and for the reopening of the Bougainville Copper Mine, remained uncertain at the end of August.
Although the government suggested that it was prepared to offer some degree of autonomy to the island, the prospect of losing the tax revenue from the mine, together with the potential effect upon other provinces within the country's ethnically diverse structure, suggested that the government would be unprepared to accept BRA's stated aim of full independence.
ASIA — PACIFIC
AUSTRALIA
New Premier of Victoria
Joan Kirner became the second woman to lead an Australian state government when she was elected Premier of Victoria, on Aug. 9, by the state's ruling Australian Labor Party (ALP).
She replaced John Cain, who had been Premier since 1982 when the ALP had regained power within the state after 27 years in opposition [see p. 31634].
Cain's resignation on Aug. 7 was in response to pressure from within his party arising from the severe financial difficulties experienced by his government after the failure of several state-owned enterprises.
This trend had culminated in a loss of A$1,300 million (approximately US$1,020 million) by Tricontinental, the merchant banking arm of the State Bank of Victoria, through which Cain had attempted to promote industrial regeneration within the state.
During his eight years as Premier Cain's government, widely considered to be relatively free from financial corruption, had prohibited nuclear warships, decriminalized brothels, enacted freedom of information legislation, reformed licensing laws and increased expenditure on education.
Kirner, a former state Education Minister and the leader of the party's Socialist Left parliamentary faction, was considerably further to the left than her predecessor and, whilst her election was welcomed by the state's strong trade union movement, it was condemned by the opposition Liberal Party and the business community.
Whilst eschewing Cain's plans to sell state-owned utilities to help fund the budget deficit of more than A$1,000 million, Kirner's 1990-91 budget — unveiled at the end of the month — included tax increases of A$580 million, public spending cuts of A$508 million and some 8,000 public service redundancies.
The new government also agreed to sell the beleaguered State Bank of Victoria to the Commonwealth Bank, an institution owned by the federal government.
The sale was to be financed by the flotation of around 30 per cent of the Commonwealth Bank, a proposal that was bitterly attacked by left-wing members of the ALP within the federal parliament.
ASIA — PACIFIC
SOUTH PACIFIC
South Pacific Forum annual conference
Representatives from the 15-country South Pacific Forum met in Port Vila, Vanuatu, on July 31-Aug. 1, for the organization's 21st annual conference.
Although many familiar Pacific issues were discussed — including drift-net fishing and the liberation struggle within the French territory of New Caledonia — the conference was dominated by the single issue of United States plans to use Johnston Atoll, some 1,130 km south-west of Honolulu, as an incineration site for its stockpile of chemical weapons currently stored in West Germany.
According to the proposed US schedule the Johnston incinerator — the only such facility currently in existence — would undergo 16 months of testing before beginning to destroy chemical weapons already stored on the atoll (those which had been removed from Okinawa in 1971), and would then incinerate those weapons currently based in West Germany.
The entire programme was due to be finished by April 1997, but most experts doubted that this would be achieved.
Despite assurances from US Defence Secretary Dick Cheney that only the Okinawa and German weapons would be destroyed at Johnston, the fear persisted in many Pacific countries that the USA would abandon plans to build incinerators on the American mainland and would use the Johnston facility much more widely than had been hitherto suggested.
There were even suggestions that the atoll — an unincorporated territory of the USA, controlled since 1934 by the US military — might eventually be used for the reciprocal destruction of Soviet chemical weapons.
The governments of Australia and New Zealand gave qualified support for the plan, but the remaining Pacific states were strongly opposed to it, arguing that the region should not be used as a dumping ground for highly dangerous substances.
The conference rejected an Australian proposal endorsing the transfer of the West German stockpiles, but also stopped short of demanding an outright halt to the entire incineration project, calling instead for the US government to close the incinerator as soon as the current programme had been completed.
China sent an observer to the conference for the first time, although observer status was denied to the New Caledonian FLNKS-sponsored "provisional government of Kanaky" , and to of an Australian "Aboriginal provisional government" .
The Prime Minister of Fiji, Ratu Sir Kamisese Mara, blocked any discussion of his country's new Constitution which had been promulgated earlier in July [see pp. 37613-14].
The Constitution's overt discrimination against Fijians of Indian origin had been condemned both in Australia and New Zealand.
EUROPE
EAST-WEST GERMANY
NATO membership for united Germany — Third round of "two-plus-four" talks — EC membership arrangements
Major East-West issues and internal matters concerning the impending unification of Germany were resolved during July and August.
After talks in Stavropol (North Caucasus, Soviet Union) on July 15-16 Helmut Kohl, the West German Federal Chancellor, and President Gorbachev of the Soviet Union reached an historic agreement on the future role of a united Germany in the international system of alliances.
Gorbachev declared at a joint press conference on July 16 that "the united Germany, sovereign in every way, will say to which bloc it wants to belong" , thus effectively conceding that Germany could be a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
The resolution of this issue, which until then had been a major sticking point [see pp. 37259; 37303; 37379; 37466; 37535], paved the way for the resolution of outstanding issues in the third round of "two-plus-four" talks on July 17.
Other points of the agreement outlined at the press conference included the concession that although West German troops could be stationed in East Germany, NATO structures could not be extended to East German territory as long as Soviet soldiers remained there.
The approximately 370,000 Soviet troops remaining in East Germany would be withdrawn in three to four years, a process for which Germany would provide financial assistance.
The number of German troops was to be reduced to 370,000 within three to four years.
Germany would renounce possession of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons, and would sign the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty.
The two leaders also agreed to negotiate a Soviet-German treaty to cover security, economic, technological and cultural matters.
At a press conference in Bonn on July 17 Kohl emphasised Germany's continuing commitment to the process of European unification, which had to develop alongside the process of German unification.
The agreement followed a NATO meeting in London on July 5-6 when member countries redefined the organization's strategies and goals, and NATO committed itself to a limitation of the size of Germany's armed forces [see pp. 37599-600].
At home Gorbachev's position had been strengthened by his re-election as general secretary of the Communist Party at its congress on July 2-13 [see p. 37616].
Hans-Dietrich Genscher and Eduard Shevardnadze, the Foreign Ministers of West Germany and the Soviet Union respectively, met in Moscow on Aug. 17.
In addition to the Gulf crisis, they addressed questions concerning the modalities of Soviet troop withdrawals from East Germany, and plans for a German-Soviet treaty.
The West German Finance and Economics Ministers, Theo Waigel and Helmut Haussmann, also visited Moscow, on Aug. 24-25, to discuss matters relating to assistance for the Soviet economy and German-Soviet economic and technological co-operation.
Two-plus-four talks on border issue
The third ministerial-level round of "two-plus-four" talks on German unification was held in Paris on July 17 and reached agreement on the question of the German-Polish border.
In discussions on this issue, which Poland also attended [see pp. 37302-03 for agreement that Poland should do so], Poland was offered a treaty, to be negotiated immediately following unification, restricted to the issue of the border, with a further treaty, to be negotiated later, to deal with other matters of German-Polish relations.
The final "two-plus-four" meeting was to be held in Moscow on Sept. 12 and would produce a formulation for a unification agreement including the termination of "four-power" rights in Germany prior to the first all-German elections, scheduled for Dec. 2, 1990.
EC reactions to unification
The accelerated process of German unification raised problems for the European Communities (EC).
With the implementation from July 1 of economic and monetary union between the two Germanies [see below], East Germany was brought within EC customs union arrangements.
From Aug. 1 East German agriculture also became subject to EC regulations, a change which became associated with a rapid worsening of farm incomes in East Germany [see below].
Studies by EC Commission staff in preparation for unification identified a range of issues needing special arrangements and transitional provisions.
The most important areas were agriculture, energy, environmental pollution, competition regulations, and foreign trade.
East German nuclear power plants would have to be closed down immediately, because they could not meet EC safety norms.
Air and water pollution levels were such that EC standards could only be applied in stages.
State subsidies to agriculture would have to be abandoned.
The sale of state-owned industries had to be managed so that EC competition safeguards were not breached, and the East German government agreed in July to abide by EC competition regulations even prior to unification.
Existing trade agreements between East Germany and east European countries (especially the Soviet Union) would have to remain in place for the time being, but imports under these agreements would have to be confined to the territory of East Germany.
The net cost of the inclusion of East Germany in the EC was estimated by the Commission at about £345,000,000 (approximately 242,000,000 European currency units) each year until 1993.
On Aug. 21 the EC Commission agreed at a special meeting in Brussels to adopt a package of proposals covering legal and financial aspects of the inclusion of East Germany in the EC.
Many of these measures would require the approval of the European Parliament and the Council of Ministers, although it was likely that, if such approval were not obtained before unification, the Commission would apply the measures on an emergency basis.
West German politicians also sought an enlargement of the European Parliament.
After unification it was proposed that about 16 politicians from East Germany should attend with observer status and that at the next elections to the European Parliament (scheduled for 1994) Germany's representation in the Parliament would be increased from its present 81 members to 97.
Crises in East German coalition
During July and August the East German coalition government led by Lothar de Maizière of the Christian Democratic Union (CDU) came under increasing pressure, especially over differences concerning procedures for unification and for the all-German elections scheduled for Dec. 2.
Proposals by de Maizière, which were supported by his East German CDU, by the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS — the successor to the Socialist Unity Party, the former ruling East German communist party) and by the West German CDU, would have delayed unification until immediately after the elections.
Under such an arrangement the electoral system in East Germany would have been that used in March for the elections to the Volkskammer (East German unicameral parliament — see pp. 37300-02).
This would have benefited some of the smaller parties in East Germany, such as the PDS and the German Social Union (DSU — the small East German equivalent of the Bavarian Christian Social Union — CSU), since they would not have had to surmount the 5 per cent hurdle required under the West German system to gain representation.
The Social Democrats (SPD) and the Liberals (FDP) in both West and East Germany favoured unification before the election, ensuring that the existing West German electoral system would be used throughout Germany.
In protest at de Maizière's proposals, the FDP on July 24 withdrew from the coalition.
(The two FDP members of the Cabinet were requested by de Maizière to continue to carry out their duties.)
Negotiations on the treaty regulating the unification process [see below]also led in July to disagreements between the CDU and the SPD.
The SPD parliamentary group in the Volkskammer voted on Aug. 7 to remain in the coalition, but reversed this decision on Aug. 19-20 after de Maizière had made Cabinet changes against the SPD's wishes.
These changes, made on Aug. 15 in view of the deteriorating economic situation, involved the dismissal of Finance Minister Walter Romberg (SPD) and Food, Agriculture and Forestry Minister Peter Pollack (independent, nominated by the SPD), and the acceptance of the resignation of two others, Economics Minister Gerhard Pohl (CDU) and Justice Minister Kurt Wünsche (independent).
De Maizière accused Romberg of mismanaging state funds since the introduction of economic and monetary union and of failing to give proper leadership in his ministry.
The four vacant ministries were taken over by former state secretaries as follows: Gunter Halm of the FDP (Economics), Peter Kauffold of the SPD (Food, Agriculture and Forestry), Werner Skowron of the CDU (Finance), and Manfred Walther of the CDU (Justice).
Acting on the unanimous recommendation of the party's presidium and the executive committee of the parliamentary group, a plenary meeting of the SPD parliamentary group on Aug. 19 voted by 60 to five to leave the coalition, although the chairman of the group, Richard Schröder, spoke and voted against doing so.
On Aug. 20 the remaining SPD ministers resigned from the government.
Thereafter (i) the Foreign Affairs portfolio was taken by de Maizière;(ii) Health Minister Jürgen Kleditzsch took responsibility for Labour and Social Affairs;(iii) Education and Science Minister Hans-Joachim Meier took responsibility for Research and Technology;(iv) Lothar Engel was made responsible for Trade and Tourism;(v) Hans-Jürgen Niehof took responsibility for Posts and Telecommunications; and (vi) Kauffold was replaced by Gottfried Haschke at the Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry.
The government crisis reopened the question of the timing of unification.
It also raised doubts concerning the ability of the East German government to ensure the passage of a state treaty on the terms for unification, since without the support of SPD votes the requisite two-thirds majority was unlikely to be obtained in the Volkskammer.
Introduction of economic and monetary union
Economic and monetary union between East and West Germany took effect from July 1.
From that date the deutschmark became the currency in East Germany, border controls were removed (except for some categories of foreigners), price controls were abolished (except for rent, public transport and certain other utilities), the West German systems of welfare, wage bargaining, banking and labour laws became applicable in East Germany, West German rates of value added tax and certain other West German taxes became payable, and rights to own and transfer landed property were introduced.
A report on the economic outlook for Germany, published by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) on July 5, was optimistic about the prospects for the unified German economy, forecasting growth rates of 4 per cent for 1990 and 3@1/2 per cent for 1991, with the additional costs of unification estimated at about 1 per cent of gross national product (GNP), a level which the report regarded as manageable without significant tax increases, though the report did warn that wage increases in East Germany could eliminate jobs.
West German 1991 budget
In early July Finance Minister Theo Waigel presented the West German budget for 1991.
Central government spending relating to costs of unification was DM9,000 million (US$1.00=DM1.6491 as at July 9, 1990) out of a total budgeted expenditure of DM324,000 million [for West German 1990 budget and supplementary budget see p. 37678].
This budget was withdrawn by Waigel on Aug. 9, however, in response to the pace of unification negotiations, and he promised that a new budget would be presented to the Bundestag soon after unification had occurred.
Protests in East Germany
The deteriorating economic situation in East Germany provoked strikes and demonstrations by industrial employees and farmers.
Employees in the metal and engineering industries were involved in a series of strikes on July 5 and 6, and settled on July 13 for pay increases of 20 per cent, a 40-hour week and a 12-month job-security guarantee.
On July 11 chemical workers accepted a 35 per cent pay increase and the promise of payment for a "13th month" in the year.
On July 23, after one-hour warning strikes on July 10, rail workers secured a pay increase of DM300 per month.
Farmers were among the hardest hit by economic and monetary union.
Their low productivity, high levels of (now-withdrawn) state subsidy and overmanning meant that they could not compete with agricultural products from West Germany and other EC countries.
Weeks of protest led to provision of DM1,650 million in emergency aid, but this did not improve the situation significantly.
On Aug. 15 protests throughout East Germany involved 250,000 farmers who took part in demonstrations and erected blockades on the streets.
On Aug. 21 and 29, public transport and a number of other public services were affected by warning strikes, aimed at obtaining wage increases and greater job security.
Unemployment rose from 272,000 in July (3.1 per cent of the workforce) to 350,000 at the end of August (4.17 per cent of the workforce), with an additional 10 per cent of the workforce employed only on a short-time basis.
Economic experts predicted that the unemployment rate would rise to over 1,000,000 by 1991.
East German budget — New Treuhandanstalt president
The Volkskammer approved on July 22 a budget for the second half of 1990.
This provided for expenditure of DM64,150 million and revenue of DM29,400 million.
Of the resulting deficit of DM34,700 million, DM24,700 million would come from the West German government and DM10,000 million from loans raised on the capital markets.
However, officials admitted on July 29 that the deficit was likely to be greater than originally estimated, because of lower-than-anticipated tax revenues and increased expenditure especially on unemployment benefit and health and social service payments [for May 1990 agreement on German unity fund and East German budget deficit predictions see p. 37467].
Reiner Gohlke, executive president of the Treuhandanstalt (trustee agency) which had responsibility for overseeing the restructuring of the state-owned businesses in East Germany, resigned on Aug. 20 because of policy disagreements with other members of the governing board [see p. 37536 for his appointment where his post is wrongly given as chair].
His position was filled by the former chair of the board, Detlev Rohwedder, who was succeeded as chair by Jens Odenwald, chairman of the West German Kaufhof retail stores chain.
In a statement on Aug. 26 Rohwedder was optimistic about the prospects for the Treuhandanstalt, particularly once unification had removed obstacles presented by the existence of two governments and two legal systems.
Uncertainties concerning ownership of land and buildings, the state of the balance sheets of East German companies and labour costs had discouraged Western companies from investing in East German companies, but on Aug. 17 the first major investment agreement was announced.
Essen Ruhrgas (35 per cent of shares) and Hannover BEB Erdöl und Gas (10 per cent) were to invest in the Leipzig Gas enterprise (the remaining 55 per cent of shares would be sold to other investors).
On Aug. 22 a new company formed by three leading West German companies agreed to take 75 per cent of shares in the East German state-owned electricity concern, with the remaining 25 per cent to be made available to other investors.
Further controversy over election and unification date
The worsening economic situation and political and legal uncertainties led de Maizière to propose on Aug. 3 that the date for unification and for the all-German elections be brought forward to Oct. 14 (the date for elections in the reconstituted East German Länder — states).
Chancellor Kohl concurred.
Resistance to this proposal came especially from the SPD in both East and West Germany, which supported the idea of early unification but not of bringing forward the elections in the West.
Since an earlier election date would require the premature dissolution of the Bundestag by means of a constitutional amendment requiring the votes of the SPD to achieve the necessary two-thirds majority, Kohl on Aug. 9 abandoned plans for early elections and reconfirmed Dec. 2 as the election date.
This left open the date for unification.
As a compromise between those desiring unification in September and those wanting a later date, the Volkskammer agreed on Aug. 23 to accept Oct. 3 as the date on which unification would take effect.
The vote was 294 to 62, with only the PDS voting against the proposal.
Re-establishment of Länder
The Volkskammer passed a law on July 22 which provided for the re-establishment of the five Länder abolished by the East German government after the war: Brandenburg, Mecklenburg-West Pomerania, Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, and Thuringia.
(East Berlin would have the status of a Land pending unification.)
Agreement on electoral system
On Aug. 2 agreement was reached by representatives of the governments of East and West Germany on the electoral system to be used for the all-German election.
Despite the concerns of the smaller parties in East Germany, the agreement adopted the existing West German system almost without change, including the provision that a party would normally need 5 per cent of the vote to qualify for seats.
Two important concessions were made, restricted to the 1990 election only.
First, any small party could link its lists, for the purposes of calculation of the 5 per cent rule, to the lists of a larger party, provided those two parties had not competed against each other in any Land (the "piggyback" procedure).
Secondly, normal time limits for electoral procedures such as submission of nominations were reduced because of the special circumstances of the December elections.
This agreement unexpectedly failed to obtain the required two-thirds majority in the Volkskammer on Aug. 9 because of the absence of some members of the coalition parties (the vote was 258-63).
It was, however, passed by the Volkskammer at a subsequent session on Aug. 22, by a vote of 294-74.
Unification of East and West German Liberal parties —
The Liberals on Aug. 11 became the first to merge their West and East German organizations, forming a joint party known as "FDP-the Liberals" at a party congress in Hannover.
The chairmen of the three East German liberal parties (the Association of Free Democrats — BfD, the German Forum party — DF, and the East German FDP) presented written requests for incorporation into the West German FDP.
Otto Graf Lambsdorff was elected chair of the new party by 524 votes to 72, while the leaders of the BfD and the East German FDP were elected as additional deputy chairmen of the FDP.
Because of the special circumstances surrounding the process of German unification, new elections for party office would be held in 1991.
The membership of the new party was estimated to be 200,000, treble that of the West German FDP alone.
Earlier resignations from DSU
Peter-Michael Diestel (the Interior Minister) resigned from the DSU on July 2, and later joined the CDU, after failing to be elected as DSU chairman by the party congress in Leipzig on June 30.
Hans-Wilhelm Ebeling (a co-founder and former chair of the DSU) and three other prominent members of the party also resigned on July 2, all attributing their resignations to a shift to the right by the DSU.
Signature of state treaty on unification
The legal arrangements for unification were contained in a second state treaty (the first state treaty having been that providing for economic and monetary union — see pp. 37466-67).
This 900-page treaty was signed by Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble for the West German government and by the Parliamentary State Secretary to the Prime Minister Günther Krause for the East German government at a ceremony on Aug. 31 in East Berlin.
Its chief provisions were as follows.
Unification would take place on Oct. 3, 1990, by accession of East Germany under Article 23 of the West German Basic Law.
Until a new parliament was elected (i.e. on Dec. 2), 144 delegated members of the Volkskammer would sit as interim observers in the Bundestag.
Oct. 3 was to be a national holiday.
The Bundesrat (West German upper house of parliament) was to be reconstituted according to a new allocation system, giving seats to each Land according to population from a minimum of three — as currently — to a maximum of eight (instead of the present maximum of five).
Berlin would be the capital of Germany, but the location of the seat of government would be decided by the new parliament.
Special regulations governing the ownership of land and buildings in East Germany, especially for new investors, came into force.
Files of the East German State Security police ( "Stasi" ) would, for the time being, remain in East Germany (and not go to the West German state archive in Koblenz).
Existing East German laws on abortion would continue to apply for two years pending a new law to be passed by the all-German parliament (thus resolving the issue which had caused most dispute among the parties at the end of negotiations on the treaty).
EUROPE
EUROPEAN COMMUNITIES
Commission proposals on EMU
An internal document containing the European Commission's official proposals for economic and monetary union (EMU), prepared in anticipation of the intergovernmental conference scheduled for December in Rome, was made public on Aug. 21 by the Commission's President, Jacques Delors.
It recommended that the second stage of the process towards EMU, as envisaged in the 1989 Delors plan [see p. 36598], should begin on Jan. 1, 1993, and should be as short as possible.
It also proposed that the proposed European central bank, Eurofed, should be independent of national governments and of the European Community (EC) authorities and should have a democratic responsibility.
The Commission's paper expressed opposition "in principle" to high national budget deficits, but contained no direct proposals for EC control in this respect, as had earlier been suggested by Delors.
The EC monetary committee, on the other hand, had concluded in a report in July that "in full EMU the Council [of Ministers]should have legal power to enforce the reduction of actual or planned deficits which it finds excessive…and be required to use that power" .
Unveiling the proposals, Delors called on the United Kingdom government to clarify how far it intended to go towards EMU.
He stated that the proposals made by the UK Chancellor of the Exchequer, John Major, on June 20 for a gradualist approach to EMU via the introduction of a parallel currency, the "hard ecu" , contained some very practical elements and that these might be taken more seriously if the UK were to demonstrate a full commitment to EMU.
The EC monetary committee was to examine the UK proposals at a special meeting on Sept. 4.
EUROPE
PENTAGONALE GROUP
Inaugural summit in Venice
The two-day inaugural summit of the "Pentagonale" grouping of mid-European states, comprising Austria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Italy and Yugoslavia, ended on Aug. 1 in Venice (Italy).
Taking part were the Prime Ministers and Foreign Ministers of the five states (with Deputy Premier Claudio Martelli standing in for Italian Premier Giulio Andreotti); observers attended from the European Commission, the World Bank, the European Investment Bank and the new European Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
The prime mover in setting up the group, which had been launched in Budapest in November 1989 (Czechoslovakia had joined in May 1990), had been Italian Foreign Minister Gianni De Michelis.
Initially the stated aim had been to promote economic and cultural co-operation, but the revolutionary developments in Eastern Europe since 1989 had added a new dimension, the grouping coming to be viewed as a vehicle for bringing emergent east European democracies into the Western fold.
De Michelis freely admitted that the Italians now also saw in the Pentagonale the means to create a counterweight to the political and economic power of a united Germany.
The summit set up working parties to examine specific issues of regional co-operation, and produced outline agreements on a number of economic initiatives including the construction of new road, rail and telecommunications links.
Emphasis was given in the final summit declaration to overcoming ethnic conflict and guaranteeing minority rights (a thorny issue for all member countries).
Areas of contention were brought to light during the summit, however, notably Austria's objections to the other countries' reliance on nuclear power, and opposition by Italy to admitting other states (specifically Poland) to the group.
EUROPE
UNITED KINGDOM
Guinness trial verdicts
One of the longest trials in English criminal history ended on Aug. 28, after 107 days in court, when three of the four defendants in the so-called Guinness scandal case were given prison sentences at Southwark Crown Court, following their conviction on 28 charges relating to an illegal share support scheme involving more than £15,000,000 of covert payments.
Ernest Saunders, the former chairman of the brewing and distilling company Guinness plc, had been convicted on Aug. 27 on two charges of conspiring to contravene the 1958 Prevention of Fraud (Investments) Act, on eight charges of false accounting and on two charges of theft, and was sentenced on Aug. 28 to two concurrent terms of five years and 3@1\2 years respectively.
Saunders, who had resigned the chairmanship in January 1987, had been charged in October of that year [see pp. 35727-28]; he was cleared by the jury, however, of shredding documents relating to the case.
Gerald Ronson, the chief executive of the Heron Corporation, a privately owned property and petrol retailing company, had been convicted on one conspiracy charge, two false accounting charges and one theft charge, and was sentenced to one year's imprisonment as well as being fined £5,000,000 — the largest fine ever imposed by an English court.
Anthony Parnes, a stockbroker, had been convicted on four false accounting charges and two theft charges, and was imprisoned for two concurrent terms of 30 months and 18 months.
Ronson and Parnes were each ordered to pay £440,000 towards the costs of the prosecution.
Sentence was suspended until Sept. 25 on Sir Jack Lyons, an independent financier, who had also been convicted on two conspiracy charges, three false accounting charges and one theft charge.
The defendants had been accused of orchestrating an illegal scheme to boost the value of Guinness shares above their normal market levels, at the time of Guinness's ultimately successful takeover bid for the Distillers Company in 1986.
By raising the apparent value of Guinness's shares in this way, they had hoped to attract the approval of Distillers' shareholders, who were being offered the inflated Guinness shares in part payment for their Distillers holdings.
The support manoeuvre had been undertaken in order to outbid an existing takeover offer for Distillers from the Argyll supermarket group; in April 1986 a majority of Distillers' shareholders voted to accept the Guinness bid, then valued at £2,700 million (US$5,180 million), and the merger of Guinness and Distillers was duly completed after clearance from the Office of Fair Trading.
During the trial the prosecution had alleged that Saunders had authorized large covert payment to numerous persons, including Ronson, in return for their commitment to buy Guinness shares.
The first such claims had been made in 1987 by Ivan Boesky, a United States arbitrageur, during federal investigations into allegations of insider dealing for which he was subsequently imprisoned [see p. 36017].
Boesky claimed that he had put £40,000,000 into the Guinness share support scheme; when Guinness shares subsequently slumped, he claimed that the company had compensated him by agreeing to invest $100,000,000 in his arbitrage investment fund.
These issues were due to be investigated at a second trial, to start on Jan. 14, 1991, when the senior financiers Roger Seeling, David Mayhew and Lord Spens were to stand trial for accepting the money.
An extradition warrant had been issued in the USA for a fourth defendant, the former Guinness director Thomas Ward, who was a US citizen.
During his summing up, Mr Justice Henry had instructed the jury to reject Saunders's claim that it had been a "victimless crime" because no-one appeared to have lost money through it.
Sentencing the three men on Aug. 28, he said that the offence had been an attack on the integrity of the stock market, and that he wished "to send a clear message that those who seek commercial advantage by acting dishonestly…can expect little mercy from the courts" .
EUROPE
FINLAND
Withdrawal of SMP from government
The Finnish Rural Party (SMP) on Aug. 24 withdrew from the governing coalition following a disagreement over pensions in the 1991 budget.
The smallest of the four coalition parties (the others being the National Coalition Party (KK), the Social Democratic Party (SSDP) and the Swedish People's Party (SFP)), the SMP, which currently held nine of the 200 seats in parliament, had had only one minister in the Cabinet — Raimo Vistbacka, the Communications Minister, who was replaced by Ilkka Kanerva, who also took responsibility for transport.
Harri Holkeri (KK) Prime Minister Pertti Paasio (SSDP) Foreign Affairs Pertti (Salolainen (KK) Foreign Trade +Tarja Halonen (SSDP) Justice Jarmo Rantanen(SSDP) Interior ++Elisabeth Rehn (SFP) Defence +Matti Louekoski (SSDP) Finance Ulla Puolanne (KK) Finance (Second) Ole Norrback (SFP) Education Anna-Liisa Kasurinen (SSDP) Education (Second) Toivo T. Pohjola (KK) Agriculture and Forestry Ilkka Kanerva (KK) Transport and Communications Ilkka Suominen (KK) Trade and Industry *Mauri Miettinen (KK) Social Affairs and Health +Tuulikki Hämäläinen (SSDP) Social Affairs and Health (Second) Matti Puhakka (SSDP) Labour Kaj Bärlund (SSDP) Environment *Appointed Dec. 31, 1990. +Appointed Feb. 28, 1990. ++Appointed June 30, 1990.
Finnish Cabinet
as at Sept. 1, 1990
EUROPE
GREECE
Conviction of former Pasok minister
A specially established criminal tribunal on Aug. 11 sentenced a former Pasok Deputy Finance Minister, Nikos Athanasopoulos, to three years' imprisonment for criminal fraud and forgery.
He was found guilty of direct involvement in the illegal sale to the European Communities (EC) in 1986 of 20,000 tonnes of Yugoslavian maize, presented as Greek produce to avoid paying EC duties.
Soulis Apostopoulos, the head of the state-owned trading company ITCO, was sentenced to three years and eight months, while four Finance Ministry and customs officials received suspended sentences and one former ITCO official was acquitted.
The EC had fined Greece $2,500,000 over this fraud case in 1987.
Others awaiting trial by the same court for corruption during Pasok's eight-year term of office (1981-89) included the former Prime Minister, Andreas Papandreou, who stated after the verdict that not Athanasopoulos and his actions but "a collective political decision by a government" had been on trial.
EUROPE
SOVIET UNION
Gorbachev-Yeltsin alliance on market economy — Russian economic sovereignty moves
In a development with far-reaching implications, USSR President Mikhail Gorbachev and Russian Federation President Boris Yeltsin on Aug. 1 agreed jointly to sponsor a commission of experts which within one month would "draft a concept for the transition to a market economy" .
The work of the commission, comprising senior USSR and Russian Federation government members, would be based on a radical draft programme announced by Yeltsin on July 20 which envisaged a 500-day dash to a full market economy in the Russian Federation.
This agreement was the most substantive evidence yet that Gorbachev was now seeking to build a coalition of centre and left-wing forces.
Furthermore, in late August Yeltsin told the Japanese Kyodo news agency that he had achieved a "personal reconciliation" with Gorbachev.
At a meeting on Aug. 29 Gorbachev and Yeltsin endorsed a plan produced by the commission which drew heavily on the Russian "500 days" programme.
However, this failed to secure unequivocal backing when it was presented to a joint session of the Presidential and Federation Councils on Aug. 30-31.
That meeting ordered a new working group to try to reconcile the plan with the more cautious programme of Prime Minister Nikolai Ryzhkov in time for the opening of a crucial debate in the USSR Supreme Soviet on Sept. 10.
USSR-Russia disputes over banking, export sovereignty
Despite the Gorbachev-Yeltsin alliance on reform, Gorbachev on Aug. 23 placed himself in conflict with the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet, issuing a presidential decree overruling an Aug. 9 decree by that body's presidium.
The Russian decree, forbidding export of strategic commodities from Russia (particularly diamonds, metals, oil, gas and uranium) without the Russian authorities' approval, invalidated USSR export agreements with foreign partners, but leaders had since stated that existing contracts would be honoured and only future deals vetted.
Gorbachev stated that the Russian decree was illegal, but stressed that delimiting the powers and property of the centre and republics would be part of a new union treaty.
A disagreement between the USSR State Bank (Gosbank) and the Russian Federation state bank was behind a decree issued by Gorbachev on July 29 which called on republican Supreme Soviets to refrain from passing legislation disrupting the country's finance and banking system.
The decree reaffirmed central banking control pending the conclusion of a new union treaty.
This was tempered by a commitment to run banking policy, until the treaty was signed, through a Gosbank Council comprising Gosbank chair Viktor Gerashchenko and the heads of the state banks in the union republics.
On July 13 the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet had passed a resolution asserting its authority over the republic's state bank and other banks which it ordered to convert into commercial banks issuing shares.
On July 23 Gerashchenko had denounced the moves and instructed all Russian banks to obey Gosbank and not the Russian Federation Supreme Soviet.
In reply Russian Federation state bank deputy chair Valery Savanin had accused Gerashchenko of violating Russia's sovereignty.
Bilateral economic links between republics
The Prime Ministers of Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania, together with representatives of the governments of the Russian Federation, Byelorussia and Moldavia and of the Moscow and Leningrad city and regional councils, met in Tallinn (Estonia) on Aug. 5 to discuss the creation of direct inter-republican and inter-regional economic links, bypassing central USSR control.
A common market between the three Baltic republics had already been agreed in April [see p. 37462].
On Aug. 15 the governments of the Russian Federation and Lithuania signed an agreement on bilateral trade and economic co-operation for 1991, and on the following day Byelorussia and Azerbaijan signed a trade and economic agreement for 1991 based on mutually advantageous exchanges of Azerbaijani oil and fruit and vegetables for Byelorussian technologies and manufactures.
Creation of controversial Integral association in Estonia
The Estonian government at the beginning of August accused the central USSR authorities of attempting to rob the republic of the economic sovereignty granted to it in 1989 [see pp. 36825; 37045].
It was complaining about the creation in July of a USSR government-sponsored cartel called Integral, incorporating enterprises in Estonia previously supervised by all-Union ministries in Moscow, which would trade only within the centrally controlled Soviet economy and thus completely outside the Estonian legislative and fiscal systems.
Potentially Integral might embrace 60 per cent of Estonia's capital stock.
Dismissal of Deputy Premier over cigarette shortage
Vladilen Nikitin was dismissed on Aug. 30 as one of the three USSR First Deputy Prime Ministers and as Chair of the State Commission for Foodstuffs and Procurements because of planning and production failures leading to a chronic cigarette shortage.
This had galvanized the normally long-suffering Soviet consumers as no other previous shortage (out of the total population of 285,700,000 there were an estimated 106,500,000 cigarette smokers).
Since late July in cities across the country there had been work stoppages and demonstrations in protest at the lack of cigarettes, in many cases degenerating into rioting.
Officials blamed the shortage on a combination of problems ranging from unanticipated demand, factory shutdowns because of equipment breakdown, a shortfall in imports because of changed COMECON trading arrangements, and even the nationalist turmoil in Armenia, where most filters were made.
Legalization of small businesses
The USSR Council of Ministers on Aug. 9 passed a resolution which, with immediate effect, allowed private individuals to establish, buy or sell businesses and to hire labour.
In effect this represented the first retreat from Marxism's prohibition on private ownership of the means of production since the abandonment in 1928 of Lenin's New Economic Policy (NEP).
Private businesses would be limited in the size of workforce, from a maximum 200 employees in an industrial of construction company down to a maximum 15 employees in the retail sector.
In contrast to existing laws on co-operatives, the resolution stipulated that a licence application to set up a business must be answered by the local council within 14 days, and could be refused only if the proposed business activity contravened regulations (sectors closed to small businesses included sale or production of medicines, weapons, precious metals and stones, and pornography).
If these conditions were not met, the would-be entrepreneur could seek legal redress.
The new companies would also differ from co-operatives in that they would operate with unlimited liability.
They would enjoy major tax concessions, including 50 per cent rebates in their first year and 25 per cent in their second.
Restoration of citizenship to Solzhenitsyn and others
President Gorbachev issued a decree on Aug. 15 revoking decrees adopted between 1966 and 1988 which had deprived "a number of persons now living abroad" of their Soviet citizenship.
It was confirmed shortly afterwards that the list of beneficiaries featured 23 prominent exiles, including writers Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn and Vladimir Voinovich, poet Irina Ratushinskaya, historian Lev Kopelev, chess player Viktor Korchnoi, and physicist Yury Orlov.
On Aug. 16 Solzhenitsyn issued a statement repudiating the restoration of his citizenship because the decree failed to address the accusation of treason levelled at him at the time of his expulsion from the Soviet Union in 1974.
On Aug. 23 he refused an invitation from Russian Federation Premier Ivan Silayev to visit Russia as his guest.
A separate presidential decree of June 30 had restored citizenship to the exiled writers Vladimir Maximov, Zhores Medvedev and Aleksandr Zinoviev.
Blanket rehabilitation of Stalinism victims
Gorbachev on Aug. 13 issued a decree which called on the Union and republican governments to draft legislation by Oct. 1 to restore civil and socio-economic rights to peasants who had suffered imprisonment, exile and expropriation during collectivization, and to all citizens persecuted for "political, social, ethnic, religious or other reasons" between the 1920s and the 1950s.
He declared that the rehabilitation of the victims of Stalinist repressions was essential for society's "moral regeneration" .
Hijackings
A two-day hijacking of a Soviet airliner ended in Karachi (Pakistan) on Aug. 20 with the peaceful surrender of the hijackers.
The aircraft was hijacked by 15 convicts who overpowered guards escorting them on a flight from Neryungri to Yakutsk (East Siberia).
They ordered it to return to Neryungri, where 41 women and children passengers and six hijackers left the plane (two accomplices now joined the remaining original hijackers, however).
The plane continued to Krasnoyarsk, where it was refuelled, and then to Tashkent, where a fresh crew took over.
After overnight negotiations the authorities agreed to refuel the plane and let it fly to Pakistan on condition that the remaining 38 passengers and crew would be released on arrival.
The Pakistan authorities, however, only agreed to let the plane land at Karachi because it was perilously low on fuel.
After two hours the hijackers surrendered, requesting political asylum.
Between June 9 and Aug. 31 there were five other hijackings of Soviet domestic flights (three to Stockholm and two to Helsinki) and nine unsuccessful hijack attempts.
Most were committed by young men acting alone.
The perpetrators of four of the hijackings were refused asylum and extradited to the Soviet Union (despite the lack of a formal Swedish-Soviet extradition agreement).
However, on Aug. 16 the Swedish Supreme Court ruled that Mikhail Mokretsov, 19, who had hijacked an airliner to Stockholm on July 5, should stand trial in Sweden (he had attempted suicide while in custody, and had been pronounced mentally unfit to face extradition).
Sovereignty issues and developments in the republics
Election of nationalist President and Prime Minister in Armenia
The Armenian Supreme Soviet on Aug. 4 elected Levon Ter-Petrosyan as its Chair (de facto Armenian President).
He defeated Armenian Communist Party first secretary Vladimir Movsisyan by 140 votes to 80.
On Aug. 13 the Supreme Soviet elected as Chair of the Council of Ministers Vazguen Manukyan, Ter-Petrosyan's nominee.
Both Ter-Petrosyan and Manukyan had been imprisoned between December 1988 and May 1989 for membership of the Karabakh Committee, set up in 1988 to campaign for Armenian control of Nagorny Karabakh.
Both were leaders of the pro-independence Armenian Pan-National Movement, formed in November 1989.
Armenian independence declaration
The Supreme Soviet on Aug. 23 adopted by 183 votes to two a declaration of Armenia's "independent statehood" .
This proclaimed that the Republic of Armenia (i.e. dropping the adjectives Soviet and Socialist) was a sovereign state in which its constitution and laws took precedence.
It would form immediately its own army and police ( "foreign" troops could be deployed only with Armenia's permission), and had the right to control its own natural resources, banks, economic policy and foreign relations.
All Armenians living abroad had the right to citizenship.
The declaration claimed for Armenia inviolable borders which included Nagorny Karabakh.
The session also restored to official use the red, blue and orange tricolour flag of the independent Armenian state which existed in 1918-20.
Commentators noted that although it stopped short of declaring immediate secession from the Soviet Union, with this declaration Armenia technically went further towards independence than any other republic save Lithuania.
Extension of deadline for surrender of militias
Referring to Gorbachev's decree of July 25 that illegal militias disband and surrender their weapons [see p. 37618], Ter-Petrosyan declared immediately after his election that "resolving the militia crisis" would be a top priority.
He stated: "If troops from Moscow do not intervene, we can settle the problem between ourselves." 
On Aug. 7 he called on the militias to swear an oath of allegiance to the Supreme Soviet.
Ter-Petrosyan flew to Moscow on Aug. 8 for consultations with USSR leaders including Internal Affairs Minister Vadim Bakatin.
As a result, Ter-Petrosyan announced on Aug. 9 that the Soviet authorities had agreed to extend the deadline for militias to surrender (it had been due to expire that day), and that the Armenian authorities should handle disarming the militias without interference by Soviet forces (reportedly at Bakatin's request, Gorbachev issued a decree on Aug. 11 from his holiday retreat in the Crimea extending the deadline for two months).
Defying Gorbachev's July 25 decree, the Armenian militias had intensified operations to steal weapons [ibid.].
After a lull around the time of Ter-Petrosyan's negotiations in Moscow, on Aug. 19-22 there was a sudden escalation of armed clashes along the Armenia-Azerbaijan border, with regular Soviet troops fighting Armenian guerrillas who attacked villages inside Azerbaijan.
On Aug. 24 the Armenian government agreed to the creation of a special security zone along the border to be manned by Soviet Interior Ministry troops.
State of emergency — Disbanding of Armenian National Army
On Aug. 29 the Armenian authorities' plans to disarm the militias were thrown into crisis.
In the early hours a Supreme Soviet deputy, Viktor Aivanzian, was shot dead at the headquarters of the Armenian National Army (ANA — the largest militia group, claiming 160,000 members), where he had gone with a contingent from the Armenian Pan-National Movement (to which the ANA was refusing to subordinate itself) to discuss a shooting incident of the night before.
The Supreme Soviet declared a state of emergency, including a night curfew, and ordered the ANA to disband by 10 p.m. that evening.
When the ANA failed to comply, Armenian Interior Ministry detachments and members of the Armenian Pan-National Movement's paramilitary wing raided the ANA headquarters early on Aug. 30.
This resolute action secured the surrender of the ANA's entire command, which announced the ANA's dissolution and called on its members to lay down their arms.
Other republican sovereignty declarations
Turkmenia on Aug. 22 and Tadjikistan on Aug. 25 joined the list of republics declaring sovereignty and the precedence of their constitutions and laws over those of the Soviet Union.
The Turkmen declaration was notable for pronouncing the republic a nuclear and chemical weapons-free zone.
Karelia on Aug. 10 became the first of the Soviet Union's 20 autonomous Soviet Socialist republics (ASSRs) to issue a sovereignty declaration.
It stated that Karelia's constitution and laws took precedence over those of the Russian Federation and the Soviet Union, but that some of Karelia's state powers were voluntarily delegated to Russia, of which it remained part.
Similar declarations were made by Komi on Aug. 30 and Tataria on Aug. 31.
Secession declarations by Gagauz minority (Moldavia) and Abkhazia (Georgia)
A congress of representatives of Moldavia's Gagauz minority on Aug. 19 announced the foundation of a separate "Republic of Gagauzia" comprising areas of southern Moldavia where the 153,000 Turkic-speaking Gagauzes were concentrated.
It requested recognition from President Gorbachev and from the USSR and republican Supreme Soviets.
The congress, in the town of Komrat, was responding to a decision by the Moldavian Supreme Soviet on July 27 to reject proposals to create within Moldavia an autonomous Gagauz republic or region.
On Aug. 20 the Moldavian government ruled these secession moves unconstitutional, and two days later it outlawed the Popular Front-style Gagauz Khalky (People's) Movement.
The Supreme Soviet in the Abkhaz ASSR voted on Aug. 25 (with barely half of its 140 deputies in attendance) to declare independence from Georgia and restoration of the full republican status Abkhazia had enjoyed between 1921 and 1930.
The declaration accused Georgia of having illegally annexed Abkhazia.
On the following day the Georgian Supreme Soviet Presidium pronounced the Abkhaz declaration invalid, and action groups representing Abkhazia's majority Georgian population began protest rallies and a rail blockade of Sukhumi, Abkhazia's capital.
The Abkhaz Supreme Soviet itself rescinded the declaration on Aug. 31.
Ethnic tensions in Tuva
Riot police were despatched early in August to the Tuva ASSR (part of the Russian Federation, beside the Mongolian border) to prevent clashes between native Tuvans and Russians who constituted over one-third of Tuva's 300,000 population.
Growing unemployment was blamed for a campaign of violence by Tuvan militants intended to drive out the Russian population, which had arrived mostly in recent decades to exploit Tuva's mineral wealth and virgin farmland (Tuva joined the Soviet Union only in 1944, having been previously the nominally independent state of Tannu-Tuva).
Georgian electoral law
The Georgian Supreme Soviet on Aug. 20 adopted legislation providing for multiparty elections in the republic on Oct. 28.
The publication on Aug. 1 of drafts of three variants of the electoral bill had brought to an end an opposition blockade of Georgia's main rail link with the rest of the Soviet Union.
Beginning on July 26, the sit-in protest at the key Samtredia rail junction had been held in support of allowing discussion of the bill throughout the republic prior to the start of debate in the Georgian Supreme Soviet on Aug. 17.
Opposition leaders accused the authorities of having unilaterally ceased consultations with them on the bill, and were also seeking an undertaking that the elections would go ahead as scheduled.
On July 30 Georgian President Givi Gumbaridze warned that the action was threatening Georgia with anarchy and "armed conflict" , but with some 25,000 travellers and 500,000 tons of cargo stranded on trains the authorities capitulated on July 31 after negotiations with opposition leaders.
Nevertheless, adoption of the bill was only pushed through after an angry demonstration outside the Supreme Soviet building on Aug. 18 in protest at blatant delaying tactics by Gumbaridze.
EUROPE
ROMANIA
Release of Marian Munteanu — Renewed demonstrations
Marian Munteanu, 28, the president of the League of Students, who had been badly beaten and arrested on June 14 during the crackdown against anti-communist demonstrators in Bucharest's University Square [see pp. 37544-45], was released from detention on Aug. 2.
In a statement Prosecutor-General Gheorghe Robu said there was no longer any reason to believe that Munteanu's release from "preventive detention" would endanger public order, although Munteanu remained under investigation pending possible charges.
Nine other people arrested in the June demonstrations were released with Munteanu; a further 43, including National Democratic Party president Nica Leon, were released on Aug. 10.
Protest meetings had been held throughout Romania in July over the authorities' refusal to release Munteanu and others detained since the violence in Bucharest on June 13-15.
Condemnation from international human rights groups had forced the Prosecutor-General's department to reveal that Munteanu was accused of leading demonstrators in attacks on the police headquarters, and that 185 people were still in detention.
The subject had been raised at a meeting between Prime Minister Petre Roman and President Mitterrand of France in Paris on July 18.
The Bucharest Prosecutor's Office announced on Aug. 23 that 28 people, including prominent opposition figure Dumitru Dinca, had been charged formally with public order offences relating to the events of June 13-15.
On the same day the chairman of the commission investigating the June events disclosed that miners were being questioned over their involvement in the violent crackdown against the anti-government demonstrators and the subsequent ransacking of opposition leaders' offices and homes.
Roman had already declared in July that there would be prosecutions of miners.
New anti-government protests
Demonstrations resumed in University Square on the evening of Aug. 22 when protesters staged a six-hour occupation, chanting anti-government slogans and complaints about food shortages (especially the reintroduction earlier that day of sugar rationing for the first time since the December 1989 revolution).
They erected barricades to block traffic, but these were removed following peaceful negotiations with police.
The main group of demonstrators had broken away from an authorized rally in a nearby square called by the Revolution Party (Christian Democratic).
Party leaders disavowed responsibility for the demonstration, as did the League of Students in a telephone statement by Munteanu to Bucharest Radio.
There were more violent scenes on the following evening, when police wielding batons ejected a group of around 100 demonstrators who blocked traffic into University Square and stoned cars.
Similar incidents occurred on Aug. 24-26 and Aug. 28.
On no occasion did the number of protesters reach more than a few hundred.
The mayor of Bucharest on Aug. 28 declared an indefinite ban on all meetings and demonstrations in central Bucharest's main squares.
Workers' protests in Brasov
On Aug. 22 some 30,000 workers protested in Brasov (Romania's second largest city) about shortages of raw materials which were paralysing machine-building factories, and poor working conditions and food supplies.
Gathered in a city stadium, they declared themselves unconvinced by promises of improvements made by senior officials despatched from Bucharest to address them following warning strikes on Aug. 20 organized by the independent local Infratirea ( "Fraternity" ) trade union federation.
A further strike was held on Aug. 27-30 in the key Brasov Tractor Enterprise to demand that Roman come to the city to discuss workers' grievances.
Privatization bill
A bill on reorganizing state economic enterprises into autonomous units and commercial companies was passed in both parliamentary chambers on July 25 and promulgated by President Ion Iliescu at the beginning of August.
It required 80 per cent of state companies (including farms, but excluding railways, mines, utilities and defence industries) to transfer 30 per cent of their assessed value to a National Privatization Agency (established on Aug. 31).
This would issue bonds free of charge to each citizen who had worked for at least five years, which could be exchanged for shares in any enterprise.
After a year these shares could be sold freely.
On Aug. 10 it was reported that over 47,000 commercial licences had been issued since the relegalization of small-scale private enterprise in February [see p. 37252].
Legislation was passed on Aug. 8 to curb widespread black marketeering.
Licensed private traders would be allowed to make a profit of no more than 10 per cent on unprocessed goods bought from state or co-operative enterprises, or 20 per cent if their merchandise had been repackaged or stored.
Traders breaching these rules could be fined up to 60,000 lei (approximately US$3,180) and have profits confiscated.
EUROPE
YUGOSLAVIA
Autonomy moves by Croatia's Serb minority
The conflict between Serbs and Croats, the most potent of the ethnic rivalries threatening the country's stability and integrity, came to the fore during August.
Calling of unofficial autonomy referendum
In line with their July 25 proclamation of sovereignty and autonomy for the 600,000-strong Serb minority community in Croatia [see p. 37622], community leaders organized in a so-called Serbian National Council issued a statement on July 31 rejecting amendments to the Croatian Constitution [ibid.].
Calling a referendum on demands for immediate cultural autonomy, they also demanded political and territorial autonomy for Serbs in Croatia if the latter was to gain greater sovereignty in a redefined Yugoslav confederation.
Voting was to take place over two weeks beginning on Aug. 19.
Croatia's new right-wing government (elected in April-May 1990 — see pp. 37381; 37463) had given assurances that individual and cultural rights were guaranteed to all people in the republic, However, for many Serbs the ascendancy of the ruling Croatian Democratic Union (HDZ) revived the fear of Croat nationalist extremism and the memory of atrocities committed against Serbs by the fascist Croat ustasha movement, which had governed Croatia as a puppet state of the Axis powers during the Second World War.
The Croatian Justice Ministry on Aug. 3 banned the holding of a referendum.
On Aug. 14 Croatian President Franjo Tudjman declared that "we will not allow the creation of a state within a state" .
He claimed that the referendum was a key element in a conspiracy by Serbs both inside and outside Croatia to destabilize the republic and overthrow his administration in order to create a centralized, Serb-dominated Yugoslavia, or else a "Greater Serbia" .
Uprising in Knin
Tensions ahead of the referendum boiled over on Aug. 17.
After reports that police reservists in the predominantly Serb town of Benkovac had been disarmed, by order of their Croat superiors, Serbs took to the streets there and in nearby towns.
In Knin, residents set up barricades on all approach roads to prevent Croat police arriving to stop the referendum, and local reservists carrying firearms (some stolen from the town's police station) patrolled the streets.
The Croatian government declared that these events represented an "armed uprising against the Croatian state" .
Initial reports that the local garrison of the (Serb-dominated) Yugoslav People's Army had turned out to assist the Knin insurgents proved to be false (on Aug. 14 Serbian National Council leader Jovan Raskovic had called for army protection should the referendum be prevented).
Nevertheless, it was officially reported that on Aug. 17 three Croatian police helicopters which had been dispatched to Gracac, a town near Knin where Serbs had taken over the police station and were distributing arms, had been intercepted en route by two Yugoslav air force jets and forced back to base.
The referendum began on schedule on Aug. 19 in the 11 districts of Croatia with majority Serb populations.
Voting was reported to be brisk, with a 100 per cent turnout in the Knin district, although there was criticism that many voters remained unclear about what kind of autonomy they were being asked to vote for.
Polling stations were also opened in Belgrade (the Serbian and federal capital) on Aug. 24-27 for Serb residents born in Croatia.
Some normalization of the security situation in Knin began on Aug. 21, although only after a demonstration by several thousand residents had secured an undertaking from the local police chief that no disciplinary action would be taken against policemen who had sided with the insurgents.
However, barricades and armed patrols reappeared in Knin on Aug. 24 after an emergency session of the Croatian Assembly passed a resolution outlawing "parallel" government bodies and voluntary armed formations.
The handling of the whole referendum affair was widely regarded by commentators as a humiliation for Tudjman's administration.
Dismissal of Suvar — New Croatian Premier
The Aug. 24 Croatian Assembly session dismissed Stipe Suvar as Croatia's member of the federal Collective State Presidency (in which he was also Vice-President).
Croatian Premier Stjepan Mesic was elected to replace him after it was decided that the communist Suvar was not a fitting representative of the present Croatian administration.
This followed accusations during angry debate on the Knin affair that the Presidency had shown partiality towards the Serb cause.
Josip Manolic was elected to replace Mesic as President of the Croatian government.
Mine disaster
The worst mine disaster in Yugoslav history occurred on Aug. 26 at the Kreka coal mine in Dobrnja (Bosnia-Hercegovina) when a huge explosion claimed the lives of at least 170 miners.
They were killed when methane or coal dust ignited in a fireball which ripped through shafts and tunnels nearly 3 km from the mine entrance.
Only three miners were brought out alive.
Work had resumed at the mine only two days before the disaster following a 15-day strike over pay and poor safety conditions.
EUROPE
BULGARIA
Arson attack on BSP headquarters
The Sofia headquarters of the ruling Bulgarian Socialist Party (BSP) were gutted on the evening of Aug. 26 by a fire started by opposition demonstrators.
Up to 10,000 people had massed outside the building to protest against the continuing presence on its roof of a communist red star, the National Assembly having decreed on Aug. 24 the removal of all "non-Bulgarian" symbols from public places.
(This decree had in fact been proposed by the BSP in response to threats by opposition protesters to set fire to themselves if the symbols were not removed; on the very day of its approval workmen had taken down a hammer and sickle crest adorning the facade of the BSP headquarters.)
Several hundred of the demonstrators stormed the building.
A fire was started on the ground floor, and, as it took hold, they ransacked offices and piled furniture and documents on a bonfire in the square outside.
Police did not restore order until commanded to do so in the small hours of Aug. 27 by President Zhelyu Zhelev (who had rushed back to Sofia from Varna, on the opposite side of the country).
There were 39 arrests.
BSP leader Aleksandur Lilov blamed "fascists" and "reactionary forces" in the political opposition.
In a parliamentary debate on Aug. 28 this was challenged by the opposition Union of Democratic Forces (which like all major parties roundly condemned the attack), the UDF secretary Petur Beron hinting instead that the attack might have been instigated by communist provocateurs.
However, the BSP allegation appeared borne out by police statements made on Aug. 27 that witnesses had seen Konstantin Trenchev, chair of the UDF-affiliated Podkrepa trade union, inciting the storming of the building.
At the end of the month Trenchev was reported to be in hiding.
Meanwhile, police who had been guarding the BSP headquarters were accused of dereliction of duty because of their minimal resistance to the demonstrators.
This accusation prompted the resignation on Aug. 30 of acting Interior Minister Stoyan Stoyanov, who had been appointed following the resignation on July 27 of Atanas Semerdzhiev [see p. 37619].
EUROPE
ALBANIA
Adherence to Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty
Albania on Aug. 16 announced that it would be the 141st signatory country to the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty [see pp. 22787-90].
A decree of the People's Assembly Presidium stated that the instruments of Albania's adherence would be deposited soon with the governments of the United States, United Kingdom and Soviet Union.
It was reported on Aug. 9 that Albania had been granted observer status at the Vienna talks on confidence- and security-building measures (CSBM), part of the Conference on Security and Co-operation in Europe (CSCE).
EUROPE
HUNGARY
Election of national President
Following several months of political uncertainty the Országgyülés (National Assembly) voted on Aug. 3 by 295 votes to 13 in favour of the election of Arpad Göncz as national President.
Göncz, who was a member of the Alliance of Free Democrats (SzDSz) and the only candidate, had held the post on an interim basis since the beginning of May [see page 37465].
There had been considerable controversy over the method of presidential election, which had originally been expected to take place with up to half a dozen candidates in January 1990 prior to the legislative elections of March-April [see pp. 37325-26; 37380).
The Hungarian Socialist Party (HSP), which had won a far smaller representation in the Országgyülés than it had hoped, had campaigned for a referendum on the issue (in an attempt to avoid indirect election within the legislature), which was held on July 29.
In the event, however, only 13.8 percent of the electorate voted, well short of the 50 per cent required; of those who voted, 85.9 per cent favoured direct election and 14.1 indirect election.
In his acceptance speech Göncz made particular mention of leading opponents of the Soviet intervention of 1956 as his friends and mentors and promised that he would "serve the nation's independence, free thought, the free word, the idea of free faith in a homeland, the defence of social justice which is fulfilled in human rights…[and]Hungarian democracy" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
IRAQ-IRAN
Dramatic acceptance by Iraq of peace offer
The Iranian news agency IRNA announced on Aug. 15 that Iraq had accepted Iran's terms for a comprehensive peace plan based on the implementation of UN Security Council Resolution 598 of July 1987 [see p. 35600]and on the recognition of the 1975 Algiers accord [see pp. 27053-54]which Iraq had rejected before invading Iran in September 1980.
In a letter dated Aug. 14, the Iraqi President Saddam Hussein informed the Iranian President Ali Akbar Hashemi Rafsanjani that Iraq had agreed (i) "to adopt the 1975 agreement" (i.e. the Algiers accord, which divided the Shatt al-Arab waterway between Iran and Iraq];(ii) to withdraw as of Aug. 17 an estimated 100,000-250,000 Iraqi troops from Iranian territory officially totalling 2,600 sq km; and (iii) to begin the immediate repatriation of an estimated 30,000 Iranian prisoners of war.
The Foreign Ministers of Iran and Iraq had held a meeting on July 3 in Geneva, mediated by the UN Secretary General Javier Pérez de Cuéllar.
This meeting was the first direct contact between the two countries since their acceptance of the August 1988 ceasefire agreement [see pp. 35600; 36167; 36171], although the Iraqi side had in April and May 1990 proposed the holding of a summit meeting in Mecca, Saudi Arabia.
The Geneva talks were described by Pérez de Cuéllar as of "psychological" importance in preparing the ground for future peace talks within the framework of Resolution R98 and the Iraqi News Agency (INA) reported on July 6 that Saddam had received a letter of thanks from Rafsanjani for the assistance and sympathy shown by the Iraqi government and people to the Iranian earthquake victims [see p. 37522].
However, in a letter addressed to Saddam on Aug. 8, the Iranian had noted that "no substantial progress" had been made, and cast doubt on the usefulness of holding negotiations at a higher level.
Iranian response to Aug. 14 peace offer
Saddam's latest concessions marked a significant improvement over those offered in letters to Rafsanjani dated July 31 and Aug. 3, in which he reportedly "stepp[ed] back" from Iraqi claims over the Shatt al-Arab waterway and proposed Iraqi troop withdrawals within two months.
Both these earlier proposals had been rejected by Rafsanjani on Aug. 8 on grounds that "the tone…does not suit the required atmosphere in the peace talks process" .
Responding to the latest Iraqi peace initiative on Aug. 15 the Iranian Foreign Minister, Ali Akbar Vellayati, described it as "the greatest victory for the Islamic Republic of Iran within its lifespan" .
Subsequent Foreign Ministry reaction was, however, more cautious, with officials expressing "satisfaction" while stressing that Iran would continue to press for the complete acceptance of Resolution 598 including provisions relating to international help with post-war reconstruction, and condemnation of the guilty party in starting the Gulf war, followed by war reparations.
Defence analysts and Western diplomats considered that Saddam's haste to conclude a peace treaty with Iran stemmed primarily from his concern to redeploy an estimated 24 Iraqi divisions (about half the Iraqi Army) stationed on the Iraq-Iran border.
In his letter of Aug. 14 Saddam had underlined his determination "not to keep any of Iraq's potential outside the arena of the great duel" and it was widely believed that this implied either an intention to consolidate Iraqi gains in Kuwait or launch an attack against Saudi Arabia.
Observers also considered that Saddam's efforts to resume peace talks had been designed both to "neutralize" Iran in preparation for Iraq's August invasion of Kuwait, and to secure its assistance in any war between Iraq and its Arab and Western adversaries.
In his letter to Rafsanjani on Aug. 14 Saddam had stressed the importance of a peace treaty between Iran and Iraq as the basis of "a new life" in which "we could co-operate in preserving the Gulf as a lake free from foreign fleets and powers" .
Implementation of peace agreement — Continued Iranian condemnation of Iraqi invasion
It was reported on Aug. 21 that Iraq had completed the withdrawal of its troops, which had begun on Aug. 17 and that almost all of the estimated 70,000 to 100,000 prisoners of war (POWs) held by Iran and Iraq had been exchanged, with the last due to be released in September.
The Middle East Economic Digest of Aug. 31 also reported that as a gesture of goodwill Iraq had allowed thousands of Iranians to leave Kuwait for Iran by crossing Iraqi territory at the border between Khorramshahr and Basra.
The withdrawal of Iraqi troops and the return of Iranian POWs between Aug. 17 and 21 did not, however, result in any official Iranian statement signifying Iran's intention to join Saddam's "holy war" against the Western military presence in the Gulf.
On Aug. 17 IRNA reported Rafsanjani as having told the Turkish President Turgut Özal during a telephone conversation that "peace with Iraq is a different issue, and we hold to our view that Iraq must evacuate its forces from Kuwait so as to create the necessary conditions for the re-establishment of peace and tranquillity" .
Statements from other Iranian leaders suggested, however, that there was still a notable difference of opinion as to whether Iran should support public condemnation of Iraq's invasion of Kuwait, or whether Iran's primary interest lay in showing its hostility to the Western arms build-up in the Gulf.
IRNA reported on Aug. 14 that Ahmad Khomeini, the son of the late Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, had described Saddam Hussein as "a modern-day Hitler" but added that "if the USA should wish to build up her troops in the region with the idea of dominating the region then our revolutionary troops will counter that device" .
On Aug. 17 Ayatollah Moussavi-Ardebli told a Friday prayer meeting that "Saddam's occupation [of Kuwait]…cannot be answered by another act of aggression" .
On Aug. 21 the Speaker of the Iranian Majlis (parliament), Ayatollah Mehdi Karrubi, was reported to have told an open session of the Majlis that while Iran condemned the US military presence in the Gulf region, "we announce explicitly that Iraq's aggression against Kuwait is condemned" .
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
ISLAMIC CONFERENCE ORGANIZATION
Annual Meeting of ICO Foreign Ministers
The 19th session of the Islamic Conference Organization (ICO) Foreign Ministers' conference met in Cairo on Aug. 1-5 under the chairmanship of the Egyptian Foreign Minister Ahmed Esmat Abdel Meguid, and was attended by representatives from all member states (now 44, since the unification of Yemen in May 1990; Mozambique was given observer status on Aug. 1, joining Nigeria and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus).
Proceedings of the conference were frequently adjourned to accommodate emergency meetings of Arab Foreign Ministers called to discuss the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
On the opening day of the conference, the Saudi Arabian Foreign Minister Prince Saud al Faisal urged the United States to resume its dialogue with the Palestinians [see also p. 37626].
Farouq Qaddumi, head of the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) delegation, told delegates that increased Jewish migration from the Soviet Union to the "occupied Arab territories" had led to "a slackening of international efforts to establish peace in the Middle East" .
The Secretary-General of the ICO, Hamid Algabid, also presented a report on the Afghan situation.
On July 31, the Afghan government had criticized the ICO Foreign Ministers' decision in Riyadh in March 1989 [see p. 36537]to allocate "the Republic of Afghanistan seat…to the Afghan opposition based in Pakistan" .
A communiqué issued on Aug. 5 stressed that "the Palestinian problem is the Moslems' primary concern" and underlined the ICO's "support for the Afghan mujjahedin" .
It "condemned the Iraqi aggression against Kuwait" and "demanded the withdrawal of the Iraqi forces from Kuwaiti territory" .
Iraq, Jordan, Mauritania, the PLO and Sudan abstained from endorsing this part of the communiqué.
It was later confirmed that Libya and Djibouti had also refrained from approving the resolution.
MIDDLE EAST
TUNISIA
New Foreign Minister
On Aug. 28 President Zine el-Abidine Ben Ali appointed a close personal aide, Habib Boulares, as Foreign Minister in place of Ismail Khelil.
The appointment of Boulares was considered to reflect the current prominence in Tunisian foreign policy of the Gulf crisis [see pp. 37631-41]and Arab relations, since Khelil had seen foreign debt and relations with creditor countries as his main preoccupation.
Shortly beforehand, Ben Ali had dismissed the secretary of state for national security, Mohamed Larbi Mahjoubi, who (like Khelil) had only been appointed in March 1990.
MIDDLE EAST — ARAB WORLD
LEBANON
Release of hostages
Release of Swiss hostages
Two Swiss Red Cross workers taken hostage in Lebanon in October 1989 were released in the first half of August.
Emanuel Christen, 33, and Elio Erriquez, 24, had both been kidnapped on Oct. 6, 1989, in Sidon.
No group had claimed responsibility for the kidnappings but a statement issued by the Palestinian Revolutionary Factions (PRF, a group believed to have links with the radical Fatah Revolutionary Council or "Fatah rebels" ) on Aug. 7 claimed that Christen and Erriquez would be released within 24 hours.
In the event, only Christen was handed over to Syrian officers in West Beirut on Aug. 8.
Syrian sources claimed that logistical problems had delayed the release of Erriquez and confirmed that he would soon be freed.
Erriquez was eventually released to the Syrian authorities in West Beirut on Aug. 13.
On Aug. 14 the president of the International Committee of the Red Cross, Cornelio Sommaruga, issued a statement thanking the Libyan leader, Col. Moamar al Kadhafi, for his role in securing the release of the two hostages.
Sommaruga also thanked President Assad of Syria, President Chadli of Algeria, the Iranian government, and the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO).
Release of Keenan
Brian Keenan, a teacher with dual British-Irish nationality, was handed over to Syrian Army officers in West Beirut on Aug. 24 and was immediately driven to Damascus to be freed and flown home.
Keenan had been kidnapped on April 11, 1986, while working at the American University of Beirut.
Reports in early July had suggested that Keenan's release was imminent, but subsequent Israeli air attacks on Lebanon had apparently led the kidnappers to delay the operation [see p. 37626].
Keenan was released by the Islamic Dawn Organization, a group which claimed to have released the US hostage Frank Reed in April 1990 [see p. 37391].
However, Keenan, along with most other Western hostages, was believed to have been held by Islamic Jihad, an underground faction of the pro-Iranian radical Shia Hezbollah organization.
The Iranian government appeared to have played a major role in facilitating Keenan's release, an article in the Tehran Times of Aug. 26 claiming that Keenan's release was "the result of months of indefatigable efforts deployed by Iran, aimed at the freedom of all Western hostages" .
The article commented: "It is now up to the West to reciprocate by helping the release of all Iranian hostages, but also of the Lebanese Shiites and the Palestinians who are prisoners at the hands of Israel." 
INTERNATIONAL
DISARMAMENT
Baker-Shevardnadze talks
At a series of informal meetings in the Siberian city of Irkutsk on Aug. 1-2 the US Secretary of State, James Baker, and the Soviet Foreign Minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, discussed a wide range of issues, including outstanding differences on the terms of the planned treaty on strategic arms reductions (START), the date for a third summit between President Bush and President Gorbachev, moves to resolve the regional conflicts in Afghanistan and Cambodia, and the possibility of US economic aid to the Soviet Union.
On arms control issues, an announcement by the Soviet side that it would stop producing rail-mounted strategic nuclear missiles from the beginning of 1991 was the one concrete outcome of the talks.
This move was welcomed by Baker, who said, however, that it would not alter the US position in the START negotiations.
Both sides reaffirmed their intention, declared at the Washington summit in June [see p. 37518], to finalize the terms of the START treaty by the end of the year.
It was also agreed that the treaty would be signed at the next superpower summit, which was due to be held either late in 1990 or early in 1991.
At a concluding press conference both sides acknowledged that there had been "some achievements" , although there was no major breakthrough, regarding the regional conflicts in Afghanistan and Cambodia.
Both stressed their commitment in principle to promote settlements there by means of elections monitored by the UN.
Regarding Afghanistan (on which there had been speculation that an agreement on a ceasefire was imminent, in view of recent political developments in the country and an unexpected visit by President Najibullah to Moscow in the week preceding the Irkutsk talks), both sides agreed on the need for elections, but remained at odds over the transition process.
According to Soviet sources, however, the US side had softened its previous position that Najibullah would have to be removed from power before elections could be held, and was now considering a compromise under which he would remain President but would give up control of the military, the security police and the media to non-partisan bodies.
Progress on Cambodia appeared to be minimal, not least, according to observers, because the superpowers had far less influence in south-east Asia than in Afghanistan.
During a five-day trip to South-east Asian countries prior to the Irkutsk meeting, Baker had failed to secure the support of the region's foreign ministers for the recent significant shift in US policy towards Cambodia [see p. 37598], involving the withdrawal of US support for the three-party opposition coalition and the opening of direct talks with Vietnam.
Regarding economic co-operation, Soviet sources reported that Shevardnadze had presented Baker with a 15-page outline of possible areas for economic and scientific co-operation between the two countries.
These included capital investment by US companies in the Soviet Union and co-operation on space projects (including a joint flight to Mars), environmental problems and medical research.
At the end of the Irkutsk talks Baker left for Mongolia, but he cut short his visit to meet Shevardnadze in Moscow on Aug. 3 to discuss the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait, which had been launched the previous day [see pp. 37631-41 for coverage of Gulf crisis, including Baker-Shevardnadze joint statement].
INTERNATIONAL
COMECON
Contracts disputes with East Germany
East German decisions to cancel contracts and revalue the mark against the convertible rouble (the accounting unit for trade within COMECON — Council for Mutual Economic Assistance, or CMEA) sparked off a dispute with its COMECON partner Czechoslovakia.
This came to light on Aug. 7 after the collapse of a fourth round of negotiations on exchange rates between the East German Economics Minister Gerhard Pohl and the then Czechoslovak Foreign Trade Minister Slavomir Stracar.
Complaining that Czechoslovakia was being called upon to "underwrite German reunification" , Stracar announced that from Aug. 9 the crown was to be revalued against the convertible rouble for trade with East Germany.
(The East Germans had set the mark at 2.34 to the rouble, instead of 1.70, for all COMECON trade, while the Czechoslovak move took the crown's rate from 13 to 20 to the rouble for trade with East Germany.)
Stracar called for Czechoslovak firms to halt all but essential imports from East Germany, complaining that the East Germans had broken trade agreements for 1990.
East German companies, he said, suffering the adverse effects of German economic union, had defaulted on import contracts worth 230 million roubles for vehicles, machinery, chemical products and raw materials; other contracts had been left uncompleted and tourism agreements unfulfilled.
East Germany was Czechoslovakia's second biggest trading partner after the Soviet Union.
On Aug. 18 the Hungarian Prime Minister Jozsef Antall raised the issue of compensation for cancelled contracts by East German companies.
His East German counterpart Lothar de Maizière), who was in Hungary to commemorate the 1989 East German exodus through the open Austria-Hungary border which had helped topple the East German communist regime, promised trilateral Hungarian, East German and West German talks on the issue.
INTERNATIONAL
COMMODITIES
Dissolution of International Tin Council
The International Tin Council (ITC) founded under the aegis of the UN in 1956 and composed of 22 tin producing and consumer countries [see p. 14988]dissolved itself on July 31.
One if its last acts had been to settle debts amounting to £182,500,000 (US$297,657,500 as at April 2, 1990) in an out-of-court settlement with 36 creditors on March 30.
The dissolution of the ITC came in the wake of what was alleged to have been one of the biggest cases of commercial default in recent history.
The crisis began in October 1985 after the ITC's buffer stock ran out of funds, leaving gross debts of £900 million and tin prices tumbling from £9,000 a tonne to £3,500 a tonne by the middle of 1986 [see pp. 34518-20].
The failure of the ITC to arrive at a negotiated settlement with its creditors, who claimed that they were owed a total of £513 million, led to a protracted battle in English courts [see pp. 35293; 36635].
On Oct. 26, 1989, the House of Lords, sitting as the final court of appeal, ruled that while the ITC and its members had a moral responsibility to its creditors, the creditors had no contractual claims under English law against the 22 member states of the ITC.
INTERNATIONAL
SPACE RESEARCH
Venus mapping mission of Magellan spacecraft
The US Magellan spacecraft launched in May 1989 [see p. 36674]was successfully placed in an elliptical orbit around the planet Venus on Aug. 10.
Its mission was to provide a detailed relief map of the surface by using radar to penetrate the atmosphere, which was 90 times thicker than the Earth's atmosphere and had a temperature of 900 degrees Fahrenheit.
It was expected that measurement of surface heat radiation would provide clues to the planet's chemical composition and the reasons behind the planet's "greenhouse effect" .
ASIA — PACIFIC
TAIWAN
BASIC DATA
Area: 36,000 sq km.
Population: 19,672,612 (official est.
December 1987).
Capital: Taipei.
Language: Chinese (Mandarin).
Religion: Buddhism; also Islam, Daoism, Christianity and Confucianism.
Armed forces: 405,500 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$3,748 (1986).
Currency: new Taiwan dollar (US$1.00=NT$27.1064 as at July 16, 1990).
The government of Taiwan (formerly Formosa) is derived from that which ruled the Chinese mainland prior to the 1949 communist revolution it maintains its claim to legal jurisdiction of this lost territory and continues to designate itself as the Republic of China.
Under the terms of the 1947 Constitution legislative authority is vested in a National Assembly which receives legislative proposals from the Legislative Yuan.
The majority of the members of both bodies hold lifetime seats, having been originally elected in 1947-48 to represent constituencies on the Chinese mainland.
Executive power is in the hands of a President who is elected for a six-year term by the National Assembly.
Martial law, which was imposed in 1949 and which greatly hindered the development of an effective opposition to the ruling Kuomintang (KMT — Nationalist Party), was revoked in July 1987 and replaced by a National Security Law [see pp. 35378-79].
President Chiang Ching-kuo died on Jan. 13, 1988, and, in accordance with the Constitution, was immediately succeeded by Lee Teng-hui, hitherto Vice-President [see p. 35715].
Lee was confirmed as chairman of the Kuomintang at its 13th national congress held in early July 1988 [see p. 36871]; he had held the post in an acting capacity since Chiang's death.
Lee was elected President by the National Assembly on March 21 [not March 20 as given on p. 37319], 1990, and inaugurated in May [see pp. 37318-19; 37454-55].
**Gen.
Hau Pei-tsun Premier *Shih Chi-yang Vice-Premier Clement Chang Communications Vincent Siew Economic Affairs *Mao Kao-wen Education Wang Chien-shien Finance **Chien Fu Foreign Affairs *Hsu Shui-teh Interior *Lu You-wen Justice **Chen Li-an National Defence **Shirley Kuo Chairman of Council for Economic Planning and Development Council; without Portfolio Chang Chien-han Without Portfolio *Chang Feng-hsu Without Portfolio Chao Yao-tung Without Portfolio *Chou Hong-tao Without Portfolio *Huang Kun-hui Without Portfolio **Kuo Nan-ung Without Portfolio **Kuo Wei-fan Without Portfolio Li Kuo-ting Without Portfolio *Wang You-tsao Without Portfolio *Wu Hua-peng Chairman of Commission of Mongolian and Tibetan Affairs *Tseng Kuang-shun Chairman of Commission of Overseas Chinese Affairs *No change.
**Altered responsibilities.
Taiwan Executive Yuan
POLITICS/SECURITY
KMT developments
Following its poor showing in the December 1989 elections [see p. 37122]the ruling Kuomintang attempted to confront the causes of its loss of support.
The main driving force of this exercise was President Lee Teng-hui who would himself face election in parliament in March 1990 [for which see pp. 37318-19].
The 66-year-old President, an agricultural economist by training, was generally regarded as a more approachable and pragmatic politician than his predecessor, and therefore better equipped to manage the process of political liberalization which had begun in the last months of Chiang's presidency.
Significantly, Lee was Taiwan-born and therefore representative of a newer tendency within the KMT, which had traditionally been dominated by older conservative elements from the mainland who had arrived after the communist victory there.
The special position of this mainland group in the Legislative Assembly was guaranteed by the Constitution.
The assumption within the KMT was that the "old men" of the party would disappear by "natural processes" , but the election results suggested that these processes were not rapid enough to appease either the growing sense of Taiwanese nationalism in the country or the related impatience at the slow pace of democratization.
Lee hoped to minimize the electoral consequences of this by encouraging the older members to retire, but with limited success.
Paradoxically, the progress made by the opposition in the elections — which their own intransigence had helped to bring about — was taken by the conservatives as a justification for their continued political presence.
Retirement at a time when the opposition was strong was seen by many among them as a dereliction of duty.
The conservative election strategist, Kuan Chung, however, was dropped after the poll.
James Soong, the secretary-general of the KMT (appointed in June 1989 — see p. 36734), accepted that the December elections had been a setback for the party but insisted that the process of democratization would continue.
Meanwhile, the reformist wing of the party, the New Kuomintang Alliance, became increasingly active.
There were signs in the run-up to the December election of the increasing bitterness of these internal conflicts in the KMT.
In October the then Justice Minister, Hsiao Tien-tsang, resigned after being implicated in an influence-peddling scandal over land re-zoning.
Such corruption was not unexceptional in the KMT, and Hsiao's exposure and resignation were seen by a number of observers as part of the continuing feud between mainlanders and islanders in the party.
Hsiao, as a Taiwan-born protégé of Lee, offered an attractive target to the old-guard.
Divisions within DPP
The main opposition grouping, the Democratic Progressive Party (DPP), which had doubled its parliamentary representation in the December elections, was, like the KMT, subject to internal division over the issue of Taiwanese nationalism.
One faction within the DPP, the New National Alliance, was openly separatist and, despite its illegality, advocated the abandonment of the historical claim over the mainland.
When Yu Teng-fa, 87, the patriarch of the Taiwanese opposition, was found dead in mysterious circumstances in October 1989, different theories implicated both the KMT old-guard and the anti-KMT separatists in his presumed murder.
Ironically, opposition to Taiwanese nationalism united the older KMT fundamentalists and their implacable enemies, the communist regime in China.
The DPP, as a broad-based opposition movement, was also divided on left-right lines.
A radical wing broke away to merge with the leftist Workers' Party.
Return of opposition activists
In the later months of 1989 several exiled opposition activists returned to Taiwan to participate in the campaign for the December elections.
Despite the process of democratization, the government continued to pursue a number of these dissidents through the courts.
The most prominent of these was Hsu Hsin-liang who returned secretly to Taiwan in September after a decade in exile in the United States.
Hsu had twice previously attempted to return to Taiwan but had been quietly turned away by officials nervous of the publicity a trial would attract.
While in custody he formally joined the DPP.
He was sentenced to 10 years in prison for sedition, including remarks made abroad after leaving Taiwan.
The severity of the sentence was interpreted in various ways.
On the one hand it was seen as an attempt by the government to forestall criticism from the hard-line conservatives in the KMT in the run-up to the presidential election.
Alternatively it was seen by some as a warning to the opposition that the process of democratization would have its limits.
Difficulties confronting government
The political instability surrounding the new parliament, created both by the vigour of the DPP's opposition and the conflicts within the KMT, vitiated the government's capacity to deal with a range of social and economic problems.
Shortly after the opening of the Legislative Assembly in February 1990 it was calculated that there was a backlog of some 300 parliamentary bills awaiting debate.
There was widespread feeling that urgent legislative action was required to deal with increasing economic problems and with a sharp deterioration in law and order.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 7.1% (1988 est.)
Current-account balance +US$12,400 m. (1988 est.)
Trade balance +US$11,000 m. (1988 est.)
Total external public debt US$2,900 m. (1988 est.)
Gross domestic product US$121,900 m. (1988 est.)
Inflation rate 5% (1989)
Principal trading partners Japan, USA, West Germany, Hong Kong 
Economic situation
During 1989 Taiwan's growth slowed considerably as a result of both inflation and of an ever-strengthening currency.
Inflation rose from 1.3 per cent in 1988 to 5 per cent in 1989 while the new Taiwan dollar was exchanged at US$1.00=NT$26.00 as against US$1.00=NT$40.00 in 1985.
It was predicted that 1990 would be a second year of zero export growth as high inflation, tight credit, a labour shortage and a brain drain all squeezed the manufacturing sector.
Gross national product (GNP) was expected to grow by about 6 per cent in 1990 but this had to be seen against a similar percentage inflation rate.
The hitherto buoyant Taiwan stock exchange suffered an unprecedented decline during 1989 and in the first half of 1990.
The trade surplus for the first quarter of 1990 was down 35 per cent on the same period in 1989 and there was increasingly frequent talk of a recession as the major economic indices fell.
The country experienced something of a flight of capital as investors sought alternative outlets in more favourable economic climates.
Investment in mainland China continued to grow, with US$540,000,000 flowing to Fujian province alone in the first quarter of 1990.
An overall increase of 4.4 per cent was expected in investment on the mainland during 1990 which, according to Chinese officials, would bring Taiwanese investment in the mainland to US$4,400 million during the year.
Trade with China, although extensive, remained "indirect" because of the sensitivities of the political relationship.
In March 1990, however, the Taiwan government lifted restrictions on business travel to the mainland.
It was widely believed that all restrictions on economic relations would be removed once an appropriate formula of agreement could be devised which would be acceptable to nationalist sensitivities.
There was little doubt that when this liberalization took effect there would be a rush for places in the Chinese "special economic zones" where Taiwan's major problems of high labour costs and the limited availability of land did not exist.
Taiwan had lagged behind some of the other economic "tigers" of the region in terms of deregulation.
Up until the late 1980s fixed interest rates and strict exchange controls were still in place.
Deregulation was expected to be completed by 1993-95 but there was concern at the prospects for the economy in the intervening period.
The government hoped to arrest the overall decline in domestic investment by "restructuring" industrial production away from the labour-intensive manufacture of goods such as toys and textiles towards more capital-intensive high technology products.
Encouragement in this direction was to be provided by tax incentives and state-subsidized research and development.
The Asian Development Bank expected this shift to improve the investment climate in the longer term.
The effects of labour shortages and the appreciating currency was not restricted to the growth rate and investment activity.
Taipei became one of the most expensive capitals in the world.
It was also one of the most polluted, both because of insufficiently controlled industrial emissions and its high density of population.
Personal insecurity was meanwhile increased by a rapidly deteriorating law and order situation which was fuelled by arms smuggling from the mainland.
The consequent unattractive quality of life led to a reappraisal of their commitment to Taiwan by a number of foreign companies.
The territory's ambition to become a major financial centre like Tokyo and Singapore, therefore, came to seem increasingly unrealistic.
Application for GATT membership
A long-term government plan came to fruition at the beginning of 1990 when it was announced that Taiwan was to apply to accede to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
As the world's 13th largest exporter there was much economic force in the argument for Taiwanese accession.
In a letter to Arthur Dunkel, the GATT Director-General, on Jan. 1, the then Minister for Economic Affairs, Chen Li-an, sought entry for the "customs territory" of "Taiwan, Penghu, Kinmen, Matsu" — a formula which avoided the assertion of sovereign statehood.
In mid-January, however, the Chinese ambassador in Geneva described Taiwan's potential membership as "utterly illegal" and objected to the application being discussed.
China's view was that Taiwan could only enter GATT as part of China.
When GATT was formed in 1948 China had been among the founder members, but its membership had lapsed after the withdrawal of the nationalists to Taiwan.
China sought readmission in 1986 but its application had yet to be finally considered [see pp. 34588; 35030; 37227].
FOREIGN
Relations with mainland China continued to dominate Taiwan's foreign policy throughout 1989 and into 1990.
While the more open approach of recent years was maintained with the expectation of closer and more direct economic relations, the suppression of the pro-democracy movement on the mainland [see pp. 36720-21]provided Taiwan with a considerable propaganda weapon against China.
In December 1989 an unofficial Taiwan-China "trade mediation" group was established in Hong Kong to ease the theoretically illegal but rapidly increasing trade relations between the two territories.
A long-standing Taiwanese prohibition on its entertainers performing on the mainland was lifted in February 1990 and restrictions on academic exchanges were also eased.
In the same month a ban on the import of a large range of chemical and agricultural products from the mainland was removed.
The previous month though saw the much publicized reception of dissident exiles from the mainland who were to be allowed to settle in Taiwan.
In February, however, it was reported that the group would not after all be allowed to become permanent residents because of doubts about their dissident credentials.
As in the past, the recognition of Taiwanese sovereignty, actual or implicit, was a major source of conflict with the mainland.
At the beginning of 1990 the Chinese government protested strongly to France about plans announced on Jan. 3 to sell six frigates to Taiwan.
This, China claimed, amounted to "direct interference in China's internal affairs" .
France, whose relations with China were already strained after the former's strong criticism of the Tiananmen Square repression, defended the deal on the grounds that the vessels would be sold without armaments.
The arrangement did not therefore, according to the French, constitute a weapons sale.
The Chinese view prevailed, however, and the agreement was rescinded on Jan. 9.
Throughout 1989 China had been concerned at what it described as Taiwan's "dollar diplomacy" aimed at "buying" recognition from a number of poorer countries.
During the year Taiwan gained diplomatic recognition from Liberia, Bahamas, Belize and Grenada.
This followed the government's establishment of a US$1,200 million development fund for "friendly nations" .
Taiwan's aid capacity was considerable, with its foreign reserves of US$73,000 million being second only to those of Japan.
By mid-1990 Taiwan had achieved recognition by 26 states.
The government, however, was reluctant to co-operate with a US plan by which it would use some of its abundant currency reserves to tackle the Third-World debt crisis.
The proposal was for Taiwan to bail out Costa Rica's relatively small debt of US$1,500 million.
Despite Costa Rica's recognition of Taiwan the government remained unenthusiastic.
Taiwan was not a significant creditor nation and, it was suggested, would require a considerable quid pro quo from Washington for such an undertaking.
There was particular concern in China over what was seen as a developing relationship between Taiwan and the Philippines, despite the latter's formal recognition of China.
The relationship with the Philippines was associated with a more general interest among the member states of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), as well as Australia, in attracting Taiwanese investment capital.
Taiwanese investors agreed to build a US$2,000 million industrial park on Batam Island, one of the flagships in Indonesia's struggle to move the Indonesian economy from its dependence on oil revenues.
The attraction of Indonesia to the Taiwanese lay in its cheap labour, plentiful land for development, and the easy availability of raw materials.
Similar considerations lay behind an agreement in December 1989 to establish an industrial zone in Vietnam which would establish 60 labour-intensive factories just north of the capital Ho Chi Minh City.
The agreement with Vietnam was indicative of a more flexible attitude to relations with communist countries.
At the end of 1989 a Taiwanese delegation returned from the Soviet Union after apparently fruitful discussions about prospects for trade in Soviet raw materials and Taiwanese consumer goods.
Indirect trade with the Soviet Union was worth about US$128,000,000 in 1989, having been virtually non-existent two years previously.
It was widely expected that the formal ban on direct trade with the Soviet Union would be lifted in 1990 leaving only mainland China, Albania, Cuba and North Korea on the prohibited list.
TAIWAN/HONG KONG/MACAO
HONG KONG
BASIC DATA
Area: 1,071 sq km.
Population: 5,674,000 (1988).
Capital: Victoria.
Languages: English and Chinese (official — Cantonese being most widely spoken).
Religion: Buddhism; also Confucianism, Islam, Hinduism, Daoism and Christianity.
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: Army 7,540 (British, Gurkha and Hong Kong personnel); Navy/Marines 700; Air Force 265 (June 1988).
GNP per capita: US$9,230 (1988).
Currency: Hong Kong dollar (US$1.00=HK$7.7610 as at July 16, 1990).
Hong Kong island was ceded to the United Kingdom under the Treaty of Nanking in 1842; the Kowloon Peninsula was acquired by the convention of Peking (Beijing) in 1860; the New Territories were leased from China in 1898 for a period of 99 years.
In 1984 the UK conceded that in 1997, upon the expiry of the lease on the New Territories, China would regain sovereignty over the whole of Hong Kong.
Initialled in September 1984, the Sino-British Joint Declaration contained detailed assurances on the future of Hong Kong, with China guaranteeing the continuation of the territory's capitalist economy and life-style for 50 years after 1997 [see pp. 33655-60].
Hong Kong is administered by a British-appointed Governor (currently Sir David Wilson) who presides over an Executive Council (with four ex-officio members and 10 nominated members) and a Legislative Council (Legco) consisting of three of the ex-officio Executive Council members, seven other ex-officio members, 20 appointed members and 26 elected members (12 chosen by an electoral college and 14 by "functional constituencies" ).
POLITICS
Launch of new political party
The first political party in Hong Kong, the United Democrats of Hong Kong, was launched on April 23, 1990, led by Martin Lee, a prominent campaigner for greater democracy in Hong Kong [for Lee's expulsion in October 1989 from Basic Law Drafting Committee see pp. 36974-75].
The new party was expected to be the main opposition grouping in the colony's reformed legislature, which was to have almost a third of its members chosen by general election [see p. 37248].
Developments in refugee situation
In evidence to the UK House of Commons select committee on foreign affairs on July 11, 1990, Francis Maude, then a Minister of State at the Foreign and Commonwealth Office with special responsibilities for Hong Kong, stated that with regard to the influx of Vietnamese "boat people" into the colony, he did not exclude mandatory repatriation in future and said that the voluntary scheme was working well.
He reported that voluntary repatriations from Hong Kong to Vietnam since March 1989 totalled 3,387, while another 1,471 volunteers remained in the colony waiting to return to Vietnam.
The total number of boat people in Hong Kong remained at 54,274 [for new UN plan for boat people see p. 37319].
Current-account balance +US$2,840 m. (1988) Trade balance -US$740 m. (1988) Budget surplus HK$9,300 m. (1990-91) Inflation rate 10.1% (1989)
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth 3% (1989)
Announcement of airport project
Sir David Wilson, in his annual address to the Legislative Council in October 1989 announced that the government was to embark upon a £10,000 million development project to build a new airport, to expand its container port facilities and to construct extensive transport links to connect them to the urban and industrial areas.
The new airport was to be built at Chek Lap Kok, a largely uninhabited island north of Lantau island.
It was expected that the airport would be capable of handling 80,000,000 passengers a year, while the port extensions would increase fivefold the colony's present cargo handling capacity.
Wilson hoped that since the private sector had already been successful in developing the port and cross-harbour tunnels, that many local and international developers would be keen to co-operate with the government in these projects.
Wilson also announced that a new Hong Kong Technology Centre was being planned as part of the overall strategy to boost the economy, that an International Business Committee would be set up as a means of tapping the talents of overseas businesspeople for the benefit of the whole community, and that £1,600,000 would be spent to bring pollution under control.
Publication of Securities (Insider Dealing) Bill
The government published on June 30, 1989, the Securities (Insider Dealing) Bill, the principal purpose of which was to tighten definitions of the practice of insider dealing and to introduce new penalties.
The definition of insider dealing would be expanded to include those contemplating a takeover bid as well as people using inside information.
Those found guilty of insider dealing would face a series of civil penalties including disqualification from the directorship or management of a company for up to five years.
The legislation followed the 1987 world stock market crash which had led to a controversial four-day closure of the Hong Kong stock exchange and the subsequent arrest of a number of officials on corruption charges [see pp. 35742; 36764; and below].
New mergers and takeovers code
A new mergers and takeovers code was published on April 4, 1990, by the colony's Securities and Futures Commission (SFC), which had been established in May 1989 following the 1987 stock market crash [see p. 36764].
The code proposed the creation of a two-tier administrative system to allow for the easier processing of non-controversial mergers and takeovers, the referring of important or unusual cases to a full Takeovers Committee (which would be renamed the Takeover and Mergers Panel), the right of appeal to a new independent Takeovers Appeal Panel, and the retention of 5 per cent as the maximum amount of shares which a person controlling between 35 and 50 per cent of shares in a company could further purchase in any 12-month period.
The new code would be subjected to a three-month consultation period and was expected to become effective in the autumn of 1990.
Stock exchange trials
The Hong Kong Court of Appeal on March 6, 1990, overturned a High Court decision of Nov. 9, 1989, that two of the commercial corruption charges brought in October 1988 against Ronald Li, the former chairman of the colony's stock exchange [see p. 36764], would not be pursued.
A number of corruption charges remained outstanding against Li and eight other defendants.
1990/91 budget
The 1990/91 budget was announced on March 7, 1990, by the Financial Secretary, Piers Jacobs.
The basic tax structure remained unchanged, but with a taxation cut of 0.5 percentage point, bringing personal tax down to 15 per cent and corporate profits tax to 16.5 per cent, while duties were raised by 30 per cent on petrol and diesel, by 10 per cent on alcohol, and by 25 per cent on tobacco, and there were increases in car and betting taxes.
Jacobs announced a budget surplus of HK$9,300 million for the financial year ending March 1990 [for details of 1989/90 budget see p. 36764].
FOREIGN
Relations with Japan
Taro Nakayama, the Japanese Foreign Minister, visited Hong Kong on Nov. 3-4, 1989, when he offered moral support for the colony in the future and help on the Indo-Chinese refugee problem.
He said that Japan would contribute 50,000,000 yen (equivalent to approximately US$350,000) to assist with the refugee voluntary repatriation programme and would help to expand the refugee holding centre in the Philippines.
ASIA — PACIFIC
MACAO
BASIC DATA
Area: 16.92 sq km.
Population: 443,000 (1988).
Capital: Macao City.
Languages: Portuguese and Cantonese (official); English widely spoken.
Religion: Roman Catholicism and Chinese Buddhism.
Av. life expectancy: 71 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 1,800 (Comando de Forças de Segurança — Comforseg)(1989).
GNP per capita: P42,100 (1987).
Currency: pataca (US$1.00=P8.0587 as at July 16, 1990).
Under the 1976 Organic Law promulgated in Portugal, Macao, hitherto a Portuguese Overseas Province, was redefined as a Special Territory under Portuguese administration; it will revert to Chinese rule in 1999, the Chinese government having already, in 1988, established a Macao Special Administrative region.
Executive power is vested in the Governor (currently Carlos Melancia), who is assisted by five Secretaries-Adjunct with executive powers, and who presides over a Superior Council of Security and over a Consultative Council.
The Legislative Assembly of Macao, enlarged under the new 1990 organic Law [see below], has 23 members, of whom seven are government appointees, eight are indirectly elected by business associations and eight are elected by direct universal suffrage.
POLITICS
Approval of new Organic Law
The Legislative Assembly unanimously approved on March 27, 1990, the final draft of the territory's new Organic Law, which, by transferring power from Portugal to Macao's Governor and an enlarged Legislative Assembly [see above], gave administrative, economic, financial and legislative autonomy to Macao.
Portugal's Assembly of the Republic approved the new law on April 17, 1990, which was to be in force from May 10, 1990, until the transfer of power to China at the end of 1999.
Proposals to amend the 1976 Organic Law had been contained in the campaign of the "grand alliance" — an amalgam of pro-Chinese and business interests and Macanese (people of mixed Chinese and Portuguese blood)— for the October 1988 elections to the Legislative Assembly [see p. 36765].
Immediately after the elections a subcommittee was set up by the Legislative Assembly to study the proposals, but progress was for the time being halted, after objections from the Chinese government, as reported in the Far Eastern Economic Review of Sept. 21, 1989.
Sources claimed that China had reservations about a possible expansion of the number of directly elected members of the Legislative Assembly, but more importantly that greater democratic reform in Macao might encourage similar moves in Hong Kong [see pp. 37672-73].
Meetings of Joint Liaison Group and Basic Law committees —
The Sino-Portuguese Joint Liaison Group, first convened in April 1988 [see p. 36765], held its fifth meeting in Lisbon, the Portuguese capital, on Aug. 1-2, 1989, when Macao's participation in the International Maritime Organization and in the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade were discussed.
The sixth meeting was held on Dec. 5-8.
The inauguration of the Basic Law Advisory Committee took place on May 28, 1989, following a preparatory meeting on April 26.
Delegates from the Basic Law Drafting Committee [for formation of which in August 1988 see p. 36765]visited Macao during 1989 and 1990; on March 17, 1990, mainland and Macao members of the Drafting Committee, at the end of 13-day visit to Macao by the mainland members, attended a public hearing meeting organized by the Advisory Committee, and a further meeting between members of the Advisory and Drafting Committees was held on April 17.
Assurances by China following Tiananmen Square massacre — Arrest of students — Visit by Macao Governor to China
After the Joint Liaison Group's August 1989 meeting [see above]it was reported by the French news agency Agence France-Presse on Aug. 3 that Chinese officials responsible for the transfer of Macao had assured their Portuguese counterparts that the recent crushing of the pro-democracy movement in China (the June 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre — see pp. 36720-21), would not jeopardize the terms of the 1987 transfer agreement [see pp. 35063-64], and on Aug. 18 Li Peng, the Chinese Premier, was reported as stating that the work on the Macao issue was unaffected by the recent "turmoil" in China, with the meetings of the Sino-Portuguese group proceeding normally.
The Canton city authorities confirmed on Aug. 16 that three Macao students at Jinan University in Canton, Chen Tse-Wei, Chin Kuo-tung and Liang Tsao-hua, had been arrested on a charge of "involvement in helping illegal elements to flee the country" .
Governor Carlos Melancia paid a five-day visit to China on Oct. 4-9, 1989, during which he held talks with Zhou Nan, then a Chinese Deputy Foreign Minister, Ji Pengfei, the Director of the Chinese State Council's Hongkong and Macao Affairs Office, and Li Peng.
Melancia said that the Portuguese government handled its relations with China in a responsible way and would always strictly abide by the Sino-Portuguese Joint Declaration on the Macao issue.
Li Peng expressed satisfaction with the smooth implementation process of the declaration, and stated his appreciation of the Portuguese government's prudent attitude towards China's quelling of the "counter-revolutionary rebellion" [see pp. 36587; 36640-42; 36720-22].
Chaos following announcement of amnesty for Chinese illegal immigrants
The Portuguese authorities announced on March 28, 1990, an amnesty for the parents of Chinese illegal immigrants who had already secured residence in Macao.
Although some 4,200 residency permits were accordingly made available, it was reported that 30,000-40,000 such immigrants gathered at a greyhound stadium on March 29 where the applications were to be processed.
Violent and chaotic scenes occurred as thousands of people became involved in a desperate attempt to register.
Police fired warning shots into the air and many people suffered broken bones in the crush; more than 100 people were injured and 1,000 arrested in the incident.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 16.16% (1988)
Trade balance US$203 m. (1988)
Budget surplus US$15 m.
Gross domestic product US$2,600 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 4.7% (1987)
Principal trading partners (1987) Exports: North America, EC, Asia and Pacific; Imports: China, Japan, Hong Kong 
Start of construction of international airport
Construction of a long-awaited international airport began in September 1989.
The airport was to be built over the sea, partly on piles and partly on reclaimed land off Taipa Island, which was itself to be the subject of major development.
A 10-hectare industrial estate was planned, and also a race course, in both of which Taiwanese investors had expressed a strong interest.
EUROPE
DENMARK
BASIC DATA
Area: 43,093 sq km.
Population: 5,133,000 (1988).
Capital: Copenhagen.
Language: Danish.
Religion: Christianity (91% Evangelical Lutheran Church).
Av. life expectancy: 76 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 31,600 (9,215 conscripts, 800 women)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$18,470 (1988).
Currency: krone (US$1.00=DKr6.4397 as at June 11, 1990).
In the Kingdom of Denmark legislative authority is vested jointly in the monarch, currently Queen Margrethe II, and in a unicameral parliament (Folketing), whose 179 members are elected for a four-year term.
An early general election was held on May 10, 1988 [see pp. 36050-51], and a new centre-right coalition government comprising the Conservative People's Party (Det Konservative Folkeparti — Con.), the Venstre Liberals (Venstre — Lib.) and the Radical Liberals (Det Radikale Venstre — Rad.
Lib.), was formed on June 3, with Poul Schlüter remaining as Prime Minister.
Although Denmark retains responsibility for foreign affairs, the judiciary and the monetary system of the Faroe Islands, the islands have their own government (Landsstyret or Landsstyrid) which is responsible for internal affairs, including fisheries.
There is a unicameral parliament (Lagting or Loegting) and two Faroese representatives sit in the Danish parliament.
The Prime Minister of the Faroe Islands is Jogvan Sundstein [for January 1989 formation of government see p. 36943].
Internal autonomy was introduced in Greenland on May 1, 1979 [see p. 29692], after 70.1 per cent of registered voters in Greenland had approved this step in a referendum in January 1979 [see p. 29487].
Otherwise Greenland remains an integral part of Denmark.
Internal legislative authority lies with a parliament (Landsting) and executive authority with the government (Landsstyre), while two representatives are sent to the Danish parliament.
The Prime Minister of Greenland is Jonathan Motzfeldt.
Poul Schlüter (Con.)
Prime Minister Uffe Ellemann-Jensen (Lib.)
Foreign Affairs Henning Dyremose (Con.)
Finance Niels Helveg Petersen (Rad.
Lib.)
Economic Affairs Hans Engell (Con.)
Justice Anders Fogh Rasmussen (Lib.)
Fiscal Affairs Knud Enggaard (Lib.)
Defence Bertel Haarder (Lib.)
Education and Research Ester Larsen (Lib.)
Health Kent Kirk (Con.)
Fisheries Knud Kirkegaard (Con.)
Labour Thor Pedersen (Lib.)
Interior; Nordic Affairs Knud Oestergaard (Con.)
Transport Anne Birgitte Lundholt (Con.)
Industry Agnete Laustsen (Con.)
Housing Laurits Toernaes (Lib.)
Agriculture Jens Bilgrav-Nielsen (Rad.
Lib.)
Energy Ole Vig Jensen (Rad.
Lib.)
Cultural Affairs Lone Dybkjaer (Rad.
Lib.)
Environment Aase Olesen (Rad.
Lib.)
Social Affairs Torben Rechendorff (Con.)
Ecclesiastical Affairs; Communications 
Danish Cabinet
POLITICS
Local elections
In elections held on Nov. 21, 1989, to around 5,100 seats on the country's 14 county councils and 275 municipal councils, the ruling Conservatives incurred major losses, but the right-wing populist Progress Party (Fremskridtspartiet — FrP) made significant gains.
Support for the Liberals and Radical Liberals, the junior coalition partners, and for the opposition Social Democratic Party (Socialdemokratiet — SD) increased slightly.
The Conservatives' share of the vote was 14.6 per cent, compared with 19.8 per cent in the previous local elections in 1985 [see pp. 34505-06].
The Progress Party, which advocated reductions in taxation and tougher immigration laws, tripled its share from 2.3 per cent to 6.9 per cent.
The SD, by far the most popular single party, polled 35.5 per cent.
According to observers the significance of the vote in terms of national politics was that it would increase the likelihood of the minority government seeking to secure the support of the Progress Party for the 1990 budget, which was due to be voted on in parliament in December [see below].
Cabinet changes
The Prime Minister, Poul Schlüter, carried out a Cabinet reshuffle on Oct. 5, 1989 [as indicated in Cabinet list on p. 36943], following the election of the Justice Minister, Hans Peter Clausen, as Speaker of the Folketing two days earlier.
The two main changes were the appointments of (i) Hans Engell (Con.), the parliamentary leader and a former Defence Minister, as Justice Minister; and (ii) Kent Kirk (Con.) as Fisheries Minister in succession to Lars Gammelgaard.
Kirk became known internationally as "Captain Kirk" in 1983 when he had led a fleet of fishing boats across the North Sea to challenge the 12-mile exclusion zone declared by the United Kingdom government [see pp. 32340; 33681].
Connie Hedegaard took over from Engell as the Conservatives' parliamentary leader.
The reshuffle had become necessary after parliament had refused to re-elect its Speaker, Erik Ninn-Hansen (Con.).
A former Justice Minister who had been elected Speaker only the previous January [see p. 36943], Ninn-Hansen had come under considerable criticism for a directive which he had issued in 1988 as Justice Minister to immigration authorities to give low priority to reuniting the families of Sri Lankan Tamil refugees living in Denmark.
The directive had subsequently been sharply criticized by the parliamentary ombudsman, and the government eventually rescinded it, but Ninn-Hansen had refused to step down as Speaker over the issue.
In addition to the resignation of Finance Minister Palle Simonsen [see p. 36984], there were two further resignations in late 1989:(i) the Industry Minister, Niels Wilhjelm, resigned on Dec. 2 to become director of a credit organization and was replaced by Anne Birgitte Lundholt, previously the chair of the national furniture organization; and (ii) the Health Minister, Elsebeth Kock-Petersen, resigned on Dec. 7 for personal reasons and was replaced by Ester Larsen, a county councillor.
The new appointments did not change the party balance within the Cabinet.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 1.1% (1989 provisional)
Trade balance +US$1,861 m. (1988)
Current-account balance -US$1,800 m. (1988)
Overall balance of payments +US$1,309 m. (1988)
Budget deficit DKr5,100 m. (1989)
Gross domestic product US$88,657 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 5.3% (1989)
Unemployment 8.6% (1988)
Principal trading partners West Germany, Sweden, UK 
Adoption of 1990 budget
The draft 1990 budget presented by Simonsen, while still Finance Minister, on Aug. 23, 1989, provided for revenue of DKr277,500 million and expenditure of DKr280,300 million.
The deficit of DKr2,800 million would be about half that for the previous year.
In order to meet this target the government proposed expenditure cuts of around DKr8,000 million, to be found primarily by improved productivity in the public sector, reductions in subsidies to businesses and the housing sector, the shedding of 3,000 civil-service jobs by 1993, and the sale of state assets.
The budget also contained a number of tax reforms which Simonsen called "the most radical of the century" .
It provided for a cut in the top rate of income tax from 68 to 52 per cent, a cut in corporation tax from 50 to 35 per cent (later amended to 40 per cent ), and a range of cuts in excise duties on consumer goods.
The tax reductions would be financed by broadening the tax base, extending charges for certain local services, and reducing the state's contribution to the unemployment benefit system (financed also by employers and trade unions).
The government (which controlled only 67 seats in the Folketing) subsequently began negotiations over the budget with the other parties.
When discussions with the SD broke down in November, the defeat of the bill and possible early elections were considered likely.
However, on Dec. 1 an agreement was reached between the three coalition partners, two smaller centre parties outside the government and, for the first time, the FrP, whose bargaining position had been strengthened after its strong showing in the local election a week earlier [see above].
The most important amendment agreed as part of the compromise was the rescinding of a proposed 20 per cent tax on interest payments on consumer loans.
Bank mergers
The two largest commercial banks, Danske Bank and Handelsbanken, on Nov. 14, 1989, announced their merger (under the name Danske Bank) as from the beginning of 1990.
Provinsbanken agreed on Dec. 13 to join the new Danske Bank, another merger, between three smaller banks to form Unibank Danmark, having been announced on Dec. 6.
Danske Bank became the largest bank in the Nordic region, with Unibank slightly smaller in terms of overall capital assets.
The bank mergers, which followed a wave of company mergers in 1989, were intended to improve the competitiveness of the financial sector in the European single market due to come into being in 1992.
Legal complications over Great Belt project
A dispute between the Danish government and the Commission of the European Communities (EC) concerning the legality of the tender terms and the procedures for the granting of the contracts for the construction of a road-rail link between the islands of Zealand and Fünen [see p. 36944], one of Europe's largest infrastructure projects, was settled out of court on Sept. 22, 1989.
The Commission had decided in July 1989 that serious transgressions of EC law had occurred in the allocation of contracts, with Danish interests having been given preferential treatment.
It then took the Danish government to the European Court with a demand that construction work be stopped and tenders reopened.
A settlement was reached during the first sitting of the court.
The Commission dropped the case when the Danish side agreed that the tenders had contained clauses contravening the principle of non-discrimination enshrined in the 1957 Treaty of Rome.
Unsuccessful tenderers would be able to seek compensation in the Danish courts.
FOREIGN
Uffe Ellemann-Jensen, the Foreign Affairs Minister, announced on May 3, 1990, that the United States would close its military base in Soendre Stroemfjord in Greenland in 1991.
He saw the closure of the base, which included a strategically important air base as a "sign of international detente" .
In response to the changes in Eastern Europe the Danish and East German governments each lifted visa requirements for a visit of up to three months to the other country as from May 15, 1990.
Visa requirements were similarly abolished with Czechoslovakia and Hungary as from June 15.
A bilateral agreement on the protection of natural environment was signed with Poland on June 13.
NORTHERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
WEST GERMANY
BASIC DATA
Area: 248,713 sq km.
Population: 61,049,000 (1988).
Capital: Bonn.
Language: German.
Religion: Christianity (Protestantism and Roman Catholicism).
Av. life expectancy: 75 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 494,300 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$18,530 (1988).
Currency: Deutsche Mark (US$1.00=DM1.6532 as at July 16, 1990).
Under its 1949 Basic Law (Constitution), the Federal Republic of Germany (West Germany) is a "democratic and social federal state" whose organs are (i) the Federal Diet (Bundestag), the lower house of parliament, comprising 497 members elected for a four-year term by a mixed system of proportional representation and direct voting, and 22 members elected by the West Berlin House of Representatives;(ii) the Federal Council (Bundesrat), the upper house of parliament, comprising 41 members of the governments of the Republic's 10 Länder (states) and four representatives appointed by the West Berlin Senate;(iii) the Federal President (Bundespräsident — currently Richard von Weizsäcker) elected for a five-year term by the Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung) comprising the members of the Bundestag and an equal number of delegates nominated by the Länder parliaments; and (iv) the federal government (Bundesregierung) consisting of the Federal Chancellor (Bundeskanzler — currently Helmut Kohl) elected by the Bundestag on the proposal of the Federal President and his or her ministers.
Representatives of West Berlin, which is not a constituent part of the Federal Republic, in both the Bundestag and Bundesrat have since May 1990 for the first time had full voting rights in both bodies.
At the last general election in January 1987 the coalition comprising the Christian Democratic Union (Christlich-Demokratische Union — CDU), the Christian Social Union (Christlich-Soziale Union — CSU) and the Free Democratic Party (Freie Demokratische Partei — FDP), which had been in power since October 1982, was returned to power with a reduced majority [see pp. 35014-15].
The other two parties represented in the Bundestag were the Social Democratic Party (Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands — SPD) and the Greens (die Grünen).
Helmut Kohl (CDU) Chancellor Hans-Dietrich Genscher (FDP) Vice-Chancellor; Foreign Affairs +Wolfgang Schäuble (CDU) Interior Hans A. Engelhard (FDP) Justice *Theo Waigel (CSU) Finance Helmut Haussmann (FDP) Economics Ignaz Kiechle (CSU) Food, Agriculture and Forestry Norbert Blüm (CDU) Labour and Social Affairs +Gerhard Stoltenberg (CDU) Defence Ursula M. Lehr (CDU) Women, Youth, Family Affairs, and Health +Friedrich Zimmermann (CSU) Transport Klaus Töpfer (CDU) Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Reactor Safety Christian Schwarz-Schilling (CDU) Post and Telecommunications *Gerda Hasselfeldt (CSU) Building Dorothee Wilms (CDU) Inter-German Relations Heinz Riesenhuber (CDU) Research and Technology Jürgen Möllemann (FDP) Education and Science +Jürgen Warnke (CSU) Economic Co-operation *Rudolf Seiters (CDU) Head of the Federal Chancellery Hans Klein (CSU) Government Spokesperson *New appointment in April 1989 reshuffle.
+Altered responsibility in April 1989 reshuffle [i.e. not as wrongly given on p. 36597].
West German Cabinet
POLITICS
Pressure on "red-green" coalition in West Berlin
The West Berlin coalition government, comprising the SPD and the environmentalist Alternative List (Alternative Liste — AL), formed in March 1989 [see p. 36530]was put under pressure during 1989 by rioting in March and again on May Day, the latter resulting from a "revolutionary May Day" rally in the Kreuzberg district, where there were many anarchists who regarded the AL's position in the coalition as a "betrayal" .
On May 21 Berlin deputies rejected a CDU motion, effectively of no confidence, to the effect that the coalition should be held responsible for the May Day rioting.
A declaration in April by the governing coalition emphasized the environment, social progress and social justice as major planks in the coalition's programme, and disagreement later arose with the federal government in Bonn concerning among other matters the SPD/AL coalition's proposal to ease restrictions on asylum-seekers arriving in West Berlin.
 "Red-green" coalition in Munich
Following municipal elections in Bavaria on March 18 and April 1, 1990, in which the CSU lost votes to the SPD across the state, the SPD mayor of Munich, Georg Kronawitter, reached agreement on an alliance with the Greens at the end of April.
Lower Saxony — Formation of "red-green" coalition
In Lower Saxony the CDU local party executive on Sept. 6, 1989, expelled Kurt Vajen, a CDU backbencher, for his close relations with the right-wing Republican Party (die Republikaner — REP), thus creating an exact balance between the centre-right CDU/FDP ruling coalition and the SPD/Green opposition.
The following day, however, an SPD delegate, Oswald Hoch, defected from his party group to stand as an independent, restoring the government's one-seat majority.
Following the Land elections on May 13, 1990, in which the CDU lost control of the state for the first time since the mid-1970s [see p. 37467], the SPD and the Greens reached agreement on the formation of a "red-green" coalition.
Gerhard Schröder (SPD) was sworn in on June 21 at the head of a Cabinet in which the Greens held two portfolios: Women's Affairs and a newly created portfolio of Relations with the Bundesrat.
Following the May elections the distribution of seats was SPD 71 (66 in the last elections in 1986 — see pp. 34503-04); CDU 67 (69); FDP 9 (9); Greens 8 (11).
North Rhine-Westphalia
The distribution of seats after the North Rhine-Westphalia elections on May 13, 1990 [see also p. 37467], was SPD 122 (125 in 1985 elections — see p. 33747); CDU 89 (88); FDP 14 (14); Greens 12 (0).
Schleswig-Holstein — Barschel affair
Gerhard Stoltenberg (the federal Defence Minister — see p. 36597) resigned in April 1989 as CDU party chairman in Schleswig-Holstein, following a period of setbacks for the CDU, including the scandal surrounding the former (CDU) Minister President, Uwe Barschel — see pp. 35722-23; 36045).
On Sept 25, 1989, a Swiss inquest found that Barschel, who had been found dead in a Geneva hotel room in October 1987 shortly after he had been forced to resign as Minister President of Schleswig-Holstein, had died of a drugs overdose and that there was no evidence to suggest that he had been murdered.
However, on Nov. 15 at the request of Barschel's family an appeals court agreed to reopen the case for further examination.
Ruling against enfranchisement of foreigners in local elections
The Federal Constitutional Court (Bundesverfassungsgericht), ruling on Oct. 12, 1989, against allowing foreigners with long-term residence to vote in local elections, ordered Schleswig-Holstein to drop plans for such legislation which had been introduced earlier in the year [see p. 36531].
The case had been brought by the CDU which was widely perceived as anxious not to lose votes to the Republicans [see below].
Republicans' electoral performance
In communal elections in North Rhine-Westphalia on Oct. 1, 1989, the Republicans gained support at the expense of the two largest parties, especially in the towns; in municipal elections on Oct. 22 they gained seats on the councils of most major towns in Baden-Württemberg [for success in Berlin Land elections — see p. 36403].
During the campaign for elections to the European Parliament (EP) in June 1989 [see pp. 36737; 36874-75]they successfully capitalized on opposition to controversial proposals that foreigners should be enfranchised for local elections throughout European Community (EC) member states.
Its campaign theme was "First Germany, then Europe" [see below].
There was brawling at the Republicans' conference in West Berlin in July 1989 and in mid-October a splinter group calling itself the Democratic Republicans of Germany (Demokratische Republikaner Deutschlands) was formed in Hannover.
At a further party congress held in Rosenheim, Bavaria, on Jan. 13-14, 1990, there was internal conflict and a heavy police presence as the party agreed its new programme for the immediate reunification of Germany with its capital in Berlin.
The programme placed German unity before European unity and on the latter point the goal was defined as "not a united Europe but a Europe of the fatherlands" .
However, following its 1989 electoral successes, the Republicans made little headway in the Jan. 28, 1990, Land elections in the Saarland [see p. 37197]or in the March local elections in Schleswig-Holstein [see p. 37330].
During the campaign for the East German general election in March 1990 [see pp. 37300-02]the party leader, Franz Schönhuber, was repeatedly denied entry to the country and the party was anyway forbidden to participate in the elections because of its neo-Nazi sympathies [see pp. 37260; 37301].
After the Land elections in Lower Saxony and North Rhine-Westphalia in May Schönhuber was obliged to resign as party leader [see p. 37467].
He was then expelled from the party on June 30 but readmitted on July 4 and at a party congress on July 7 was re-elected as party leader by 373 votes to 179.
The Times of July 9 described the party as "on the verge of disintegration due to a vehement dispute between its moderate wing, led by Schönhuber, and its extreme neo-Nazi faction" .
Internal divisions within Greens
Recriminations continued within the Greens following the party upheavals of 1988 [see p. 36496].
A party congress was held on March 3-5, 1989, in Duisburg, where the so-called "realists" (Realos) were voted into the key posts [see p. 36531], reflecting the congress's mood of seizing the opportunity to co-operate with the SPD.
On Oct. 31 it was announced that Otto Schily, a leading member of the moderate Realos, was leaving and joining the SPD.
By the time of the party's conference in Dortmund on June 9-10, 1990, however, the newly elected three-member rotating leadership was dominated by the so-called "fundamentalists" (Fundis).
The party reiterated its opposition to the state treaty on German economic and monetary union [see pp. 37466-67; 37535-36]and opposed premature all-German elections.
It favoured the formation of an all-German Green party as a confederation in which the two parties would retain considerable autonomy and also advocated (in contrast to the East German Greens) a broader radical-ecological alliance with East German citizens' movements such as the Independent Women's Union and the United Left [see p. 37301].
Formation of the Greys
On July 12, 1989, the Grey Panthers, formerly a group of some 25,000 members within the Greens reflecting the interests of older citizens, split away and set itself up as a new political party called the Greys (die Grauen).
Led by Trude Unruh, 64, the chair of the Grey Panthers who had been elected to the Bundestag in 1987 on the Greens' list, the party's main concerns were to be campaigning for better pensions and for better conditions in nursing homes and countering "ageist" attitudes.
Communist Party congress
The 10th party congress of the German Communist Party (Deutsche Kommunistische Partei — DKP) was held in Dortmund in late March 1990.
Herbert Mies (party chairman since 1973, who had been re-elected unopposed in early 1989 — see p. 36497) had announced his resignation in October 1989, and was replaced by a four-person council comprising Helga Rosenberg, Rolf Priemer, Heinz Stehr (all members of the former presidium) together with Anna Frohnweiler.
The DKP had long been dependent on the East German Socialist Unity Party of Germany (SED — ultimately renamed the Party of Democratic Socialism (PDS) in February 1990 — see p. 37260) and had suffered as a result of the changes in East Germany; the ending of financial support from the SED had led to a scaling down of operations.
The "conference of renewal" was relatively thinly attended and characterized by conflict between "modernizers" and "conservatives" ; it ended with the adoption of a new party statute, valid for only one year, and including commitments to an orthodox Marxist-Leninist line as well as to German unification.
Death of Herbert Wehner
With the death of Herbert Wehner on Jan. 19, 1990, at the age of 83, West Germany lost one of its most prominent political figures.
A member of the SPD in 1923-27, and of the Communist Party of Germany (KPD) in 1927-46 and an exile during the Nazi period, he rejoined the SPD in 1946, and was prominent in drafting the reformist 1959 Godesberg Programme, which eventually brought the SPD to power.
A Bundestag member from 1949 to 1983, during the CDU/CSU/SPD "grand coalition" (1966-69) he served as Minister for All-German Affairs.
With Chancellors Willy Brandt and Helmut Schmidt he was seen as one of a leadership "troika" during the 13-year period of SPD-led governments (1969-82).
Political refugees
West Germany's liberal asylum laws resulted in an increasing number of refugees: in 1988 103,076 people (including over 29,000 Poles and nearly 15,000 Turks) had sought asylum, compared with 57,379 in 1987.
After an examination procedure lasting on average 13 months, only about 9 per cent were found to be genuine political refugees, but many others stayed on illegally or were permitted to do so on humanitarian grounds.
[For March 1989 imposition of visa requirements for Yugoslavs and Turks as well as for nationals of 19 Third World states in line with EC policy harmonization see p. 36531.]
Settlers from Eastern Europe
On June 6, 1989, Interior Minister Wolfgang Schäuble announced cuts in the social, housing and tax benefits for settlers (Aussiedler) from Eastern Europe (mostly ethnic Germans from Poland but also from Romania and the Soviet Union).
These benefits had been a source of rising discontent and had contributed to the electoral success of the Republicans [see above].
On March 28, 1990, the Cabinet agreed to tighten procedures for ethnic Germans from Eastern Europe, requiring them to apply for West German citizenship in their country of residence rather than simply coming to West Germany.
Some 377,000 East Europeans (excluding East Germans) came to West Germany in 1989 and nearly 100,000 had already arrived in 1990.
On Dec. 13, 1989, the Cabinet approved new immigration laws designed to restrict the number of immigrants from non-EC countries but also to improve the status of the 4,500,000 non-Germans living in West Germany.
This was subsequently approved by both houses of parliament and was due to come into effect on Jan. 1, 1991.
With the opening of the East German border in November 1989 the flow of refugees from East Germany (Übersiedler) increased still further and created serious social problems [for easing of travel restrictions over the border between Hungary and Austria see pp. 36894-95; 37170].
On Nov. 7 the federal government adopted an emergency housing programme to build 100,000 dwellings per annum at a cost of some DM2,000 million a year.
In January 1990 the Bonn government set up a special working group to examine the benefits open to refugees from East Germany following widespread discontent.
For example, refugees from East Germany were entitled to a full pension: more, in some cases, than West German workers who had paid contributions all their working life.
[For March 1990 decision to stop some benefits to East German immigrants see p. 37301.]
Rabta affair
In a Bundestag debate on the Rabta affair [see pp. 36385; 36411]on Jan. 18, 1989, Schäuble, then Head of the Federal Chancellery, announced that the federal government had received as far back as August 1987 information that Imhausen-Chemie, a West German company, had been involved in the construction in Libya, of a plant deemed by United States intelligence to be capable of manufacturing chemical weapons.
An SPD motion, which called on the government to produce a report on the affair, was approved.
In a further debate in the Bundestag on the same day, Hans-Jochen Vogel, leader of the Social Democrats, accused the government of incomprehensible slowness in its reaction to intelligence reports and of damaging West Germany's reputation abroad.
On Feb. 15 Helmut Haussmann, the Economics Minister, had announced tougher legislation covering the export of materials and technology capable of application in the manufacture of nuclear, chemical or biological weapons.
Maximum prison sentences would be 15 years.
Jürgen Happenstiel-Imhausen, chairman of Imhausen-Chemie, resigned at the end of March over the affair and was arrested on May 9.
On June 27, 1990, at the end of a 16-day trial, he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment for breaking foreign trade laws, for not declaring income liable to taxes DM16,000,000, and for playing a "decisive role" in the planning and construction of the Rabta complex [for attempted suicide of managing director of Imhausen-Chemie in February 1989 see p. 36477].
On June 29, 1989, West German police had raided a Düsseldorf company, Rheineisen Chemical Products GmbH, in connection with alleged shipments to Iran of chemicals capable of manufacturing mustard gas.
Public opposition to NATO training flights and manoeuvres
The controversy over low-level military training flights [see p. 36497]abated somewhat in 1989 and agreement was reached in September for slower and shorter low-level training sorties by North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) Air Forces [see p. 37226].
The issue arose again in 1990 when, on April 17, two Canadian Air Force F-18 aircraft collided near Karlsruhe, about 200 km south-east of Bonn, killing one of the pilots.
Public discontent at the presence of the allied forces — regarded in some quarters as "forces of occupation" — was expressed in other ways.
Citizens' action groups protested at the environmental damage caused by NATO manoeuvres and, in August 1989, the SPD called for an end to the special rights and privileges enjoyed by the allied forces.
Within the West German Bundeswehr (the armed forces) there was falling morale due to a perceived decline in popular support.
Abandonment of Wackersdorf reprocessing plant
On May 31, 1989, work was suspended on the construction of the nuclear reprocessing plant at Wackersdorf, in eastern Bavaria.
The project was formally abandoned on June 6.
The electricity utilities had decided to use cheaper reprocessing facilities in France and the UK.
Within two months of the decision the West German companies Siemens and BMW had announced investment plans for the site.
The Wackersdorf reprocessing complex had been under construction for seven years behind barricades.
Demonstrations at the site had led to more than 4,000 arrests [see p. 34445].
In mid-April VEBA, which as one of West Germany's largest power generators held a 23.5 per cent stake in the Wackersdorf project, signed a contract with Cogema for reprocessing at its plant in La Hague in France.
The other main nuclear generator, RWE, already had a contract with British Nuclear Fuels (BNF) in Sellafield, UK.
Both companies were thought to have taken these steps because of fears that a future SPD government would abandon the plant.
Gene technology legislation
A court ruling on Nov. 8, 1989, blocked the plans of the West German chemical concern Hoechst to produce insulin using the techniques of gene technology.
The plans had been challenged by environmentalists on the grounds that gene technology involved unknown safety risks.
The decision was seen as representing a setback not only to Hoechst but also to other large West German chemical concerns, such as Bayer and BASF.
On March 30, 1990, the Bundestag approved a gene technology law which aimed to create a legal framework to regulate the area and remove the legal uncertainties that had existed before, including those resulting from the Hoechst case.
Under the legislation gene technology would be regulated by a new body, the Central Committee for Biological Safety, which would be responsible to the Health Ministry in Bonn.
Upon reaching the Bundesrat the legislation encountered further problems and no less than 254 amendments were tabled.
Many of these were accepted during compromise negotiations, resulting in tighter regulations than originally proposed.
Industry feared that even quite harmless products might have to be subjected to lengthy and costly hearings as a result.
EC legal threat on drinking water
On July 13, 1989, the European Commission sent to the West German government a "reasoned opinion" that West German drinking water failed to meet the standards set under a 1980 EC directive.
The problems stemmed from the presence of nitrates and pesticide pollution of drinking water [see also p. 37209].
Ferry collision
Three people were killed and 15 injured when a Japanese-owned container ship Nordic Stream collided with a Danish-owned ferry Hamburg on Nov. 9, 1989, in West German territorial waters.
An inquiry was opened to ascertain why the accident had occurred when both ships had apparently been warned by the West German coastguard that they were on a collision course.
[For April 1990 ferry fires in North Sea see p. 37389.]
SECURITY
Defence policy changes
A further result of changed international circumstances was the agreement to reverse the decision, confirmed as recently as January 1989 [see pp. 36497-98], to lengthen military service from 15 to 18 months.
This decision (announced following Kohl's April 1989 Cabinet reshuffle) was incorporated into a December 1989 announcement of plans to reduce the armed forces from 495,000 to 420,000, with further cuts to follow, depending on the progress of talks on conventional forces in Europe (CFE) in Vienna.
By January 1990 the FDP was calling for a reduction to 350,000 personnel and a reduction in conscription to 12 months.
The SPD was also calling for defence spending cuts [see also below], including the cancellation of the European fighter aircraft (EFA or Eurofighter), which was to be built by a European consortium including British Aerospace [see p. 37212].
On March 12, 1990, Stoltenberg called for an end to the stationing of battlefield nuclear weapons on West German territory on the grounds that their relevance would be lost with German unification.
[For February 1990 differences within governing coalition on this issue see p. 37260; for March 1990 defence cuts in supplementary budget see below; for "two-plus-four" on security implications of German unification see pp. 37466; 37659.]
Hunger strike by RAF prisoners — Presidential pardon
In February 1989 a small number of Red Army Faction (Rote Armee Fraktion — RAF) prisoners began a hunger strike in protest at "isolation torture" in which 33 prisoners were at one stage taking part.
The hunger strike sparked off divisions between those Länder ruled by the SPD and those ruled by the CDU or CSU, since the former were prepared to make some limited concessions by allowing very small groups of RAF prisoners to have contact with each other.
In the event the hunger strike was called off on May 12, 1989, on the basis of the concessions offered by the SPD-ruled Länder: concessions not implemented in the other states.
Sympathetic action during the hunger strike had included fire-bomb attacks during April in a number of cities including Münster, Frankfurt and West Berlin.
The hunger strike was interpreted in some quarters as an attempt by the RAF prisoners to increase their influence on the command structure outside prison.
In its annual report on anti-constitutional groups and activities (Verfassungsschutzbericht), published in late November 1989, the Interior Ministry had estimated that the RAF was led by a core group of 15, with some 250 militant followers and a further 700-750 sympathisers.
In May 1989 President von Weizsäcker pardoned Angelika Speitel, an RAF member sentenced to two terms of life imprisonment in 1979 [see pp. 29495-96; 30353].
Speitel had reportedly renounced the armed struggle and was not associated with the hunger strike; she was released on June 30, 1990, having served 12 years of her sentence.
Only two other "reformed terrorists" convicted of murder had ever been pardoned in West Germany: Klaus Jünschke [see p. 28922], who was released on July 16, 1988, after serving 16 years in prison and Manfred Grashof [ibid.], who was released on March 1, 1989, after serving 17 years.
Abortive RAF attack
In March 1990 it appeared that a further RAF attack had been averted.
A letter was received in Bonn from the RAF "Command Unit Juliane Plambeck" , claiming responsibility for an attack on Ignaz Kiechle, the Food, Agriculture and Forestry Minister.
However, the attack, which was thought to have been planned for Kiechle's 60th birthday party on March 3 in Bavaria, had not taken place and a further letter from the RAF stated that it had been called off due to a "mistake in co-ordination" .
Discovery of Palestinian bomb-making equipment
In April 1989 a series of houses were raided in West Germany and bomb-making equipment was found, which was thought to be associated with the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine-General Command (PFLP-GC).
On April 17 one of the bombs discovered, a radio bomb, exploded at the federal police headquarters in Wiesbaden, near Frankfurt, killing one officer and critically injuring another.
The PFLP-GC was allegedly linked to the bombing of the Pan American Boeing 747 which crashed on to Lockerbie, Scotland, on Dec. 21, 1988, killing 270 people [see pp 36409-10].
Current-account balance +US$48,400 m. (1988) Trade balance +US$78,800 m. (1988) Budget deficit US$20,000 m. (1989) Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 1.7% (1988) Gross domestic product US$1,199,400 m.
Inflation rate 2.9% (1989) Unemployment 7.9% (December 1989) Principal trading partners France, UK, Italy, Netherlands 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth +4% (1989)
1990 budget and supplementary budget
The 1990 budget as passed by the Bundestag in December 1989 provided for a 3 per cent increase in expenditure and a federal budget deficit of DM26,900 million (as compared with DM28,000 million as envisaged for the 1989 budget — see p. 36498 — and one of DM20,000 million actually achieved in 1989).
Developments in East Germany necessitated a supplementary budget which was announced by the Cabinet on Feb. 14, 1990, and approved by the Bundestag on March 30.
The supplementary budget provided for DM6,800 million in increased expenditure bringing total expenditure to DM306,900 million.
This was primarily to be financed by increasing the deficit by DM5,900 million (which was therefore expected to rise to nearly DM33,000 million) but also by expenditure cuts, most notably of DM545 million on defence.
Of the increased expenditure DM5,800 million was to go either directly or indirectly to East Germany, while DM220 million was for food aid to the Soviet Union and DM60 million for humanitarian aid to Romania.
Introduction of tax reforms
The third stage came into effect on Jan. 1, 1990, of the tax reform process begun in 1986 [see pp. 36045-46; 36498].
This stage was intended primarily to benefit employees and small and medium enterprises.
One component of the tax reform had already been abandoned, namely the withholding tax on most forms of savings and investments.
Introduced in January 1989, one year ahead of schedule, it had encountered resistance from financial institutions and criticism from the Bundesbank, the federal bank.
On June 16, 1989, the Bundestag voted to abandon the tax.
The West German financial community had claimed that the tax had led to a flight of capital out of the country, thus creating upward pressure on domestic interest rates.
The decision to abolish the tax was also a blow for the European Commission's plans to introduce an EC-wide withholding tax.
A further tax reform (especially of corporate taxation) was planned for 1993.
1989 economic performance
The Federal Statistical Office announced on March 14, 1990, that West German gross national product (GNP) grew by 4 per cent in 1989, the largest increase for 10 years.
Domestic demand had increased dramatically in the fourth quarter of 1989 as a result of the influx of East German immigrants.
Haussmann confirmed the buoyant state of the West German economy, with around 413,000 more in employment in 1989 than in 1988 and a moderate rate of inflation of just under 3 per cent per annum.
Haussmann indicated that the West German economy was well placed for a continuation of these favourable trends and, more broadly, for the challenges presented by the political and economic transformation in East Germany and for completion of the EC internal market by the end of 1992.
He urged employers and trade unions to show restraint in the 1990 wage round.
In January Norbert Blüm, the Labour and Social Affairs Minister, had announced that unemployment had crept above 2,000,000 in December 1989, but taking into account the arrival of some 700,000 ethnic Germans the overall unemployment rate had fallen from 8.4 to 7.9 per cent.
Controversy surrounding Daimler-Benz takeover of MBB
On Nov. 17, 1989, the takeover of Messerschmidt-Bölkow-Blohm (MBB), the country's largest aerospace company, by Daimler-Benz, the motor industry group, was finalized, bringing together two companies with a joint turnover in 1988 of some DM80,000 million.
The Federal Cartel Office had on April 20, 1989, objected to the proposed takeover on the grounds that it would lead to market domination in the arms, aerospace and truck industries by Daimler-Benz, which in recent years had taken over another aerospace company, Dornier, the electrical concern AEG and the engineering company MTU.
Although these reservations were shared by the FDP, the government itself was in favour of the takeover, above all on the grounds of rationalizing participation in the European Airbus project (MBB being a major beneficiary from state subsidies relating to the project), and following a majority report in favour by the German Monopoly Commission on Aug. 2, Haussmann on Sept. 8 delivered his final decision approving the takeover.
Conditions laid down by Haussmann along the lines of those set out by the Monopoly Commission, that the companies divest themselves of certain divisions which, if merged, would be against German interests in the arms industry, were eventually agreed to by both MBB and Daimler.
Further assurances were sought, following their meeting on Oct. 10, by the mayors of Hamburg and Bremen (states which held stakes in MBB) and the Minister Presidents of Schleswig-Holstein and Lower Saxony (as interested parties), who were concerned that the merger could lead to a transfer of work away from MBB factories in Hamburg and Bremen to those of Daimler-Benz in southern Germany.
Announcement of Siemens-Nixdorf merger
On Jan. 10, 1990, the electronics and industrial giant Siemens AG announced that it would merge with another West German company, Nixdorf AG.
Nixdorf, one of West Germany's leading computer manufacturers, had been under severe financial pressure during 1989.
According to Datamation magazine the new company would be the world's sixth largest computer and information systems company.
FOREIGN
EUROPE
NETHERLANDS
BASIC DATA
Area: 33,937 sq km(land only).
Population: 14,760,000 (1988).
Capital: Amsterdam; seat of government: The Hague.
Language: Dutch.
Religion: Christianity (62% — 36% Roman Catholic, 26% Protestant); most of the rest do not profess a religion.
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 103,600 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$14,530 (1988).
Currency: gulden (guilder) or florin (US$1.00=1.9024 guilders as at June 11, 1990).
The Kingdom of the Netherlands (comprising the Netherlands in Europe, the Netherlands Antilles, and Aruba) is a hereditary and constitutional monarchy whose three parts nominally enjoy full autonomy.
The monarch, currently Queen Beatrix, retains largely formal prerogatives, exercising executive authority through the Council of Ministers.
Bills may be proposed by the Crown (advised by a Council of State) and the 150-member Second Chamber (Tweede Kamer) of the bicameral parliament (Staten-Generaal), while the 75-member First Chamber (Eerste Kamer) can approve or reject, but not amend, such bills.
As the result of a general election on Sept. 6, 1989 [see p. 36900], the outgoing coalition government comprising the centrist Christian Democratic Appeal (Christen-Democratisch Appel — CDA) and the liberal People's Party for Freedom and Democracy (Volkspartij voor Vrijheid en Democratie — VVD) was replaced on Nov. 2 by a new coalition comprising the CDA and the Labour Party (Partij van de Arbeid — PvdA)[see p. 37050].
Ruud Lubbers (CDA) Prime Minister and Minister of General Affairs Wim Kok (PvdA) Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance Ien Dales (PvdA) Home Affairs Hans van den Broek (CDA) Foreign Affairs Jan Pronk (PvdA) Development Co-operation Relus ter Beek (PvdA) Defence Koos Andriessen (CDA) Economic Affairs Hirsch Ballin (PvdA) Justice Gerrit Braks (CDA) Agriculture and Fisheries Jo Ritzen (PvdA) Education and Science Bert de Vries (CDA) Social Affairs and Employment; Netherlands Antilles and Aruba Hanja May-Weggen (CDA) Transport and Public Works Hans Albers (PvdA) Housing, Physical Planning and Environment Hedy d'Ancona (PvdA) Welfare, Health and Culture 
Netherlands Council of Ministers
POLITICS
Local elections
In municipal elections on March 21, 1990, both ruling parties encountered reverses.
The CDA's share of the vote, at 32.7 per cent, although marginally up on its result for the last municipal elections in 1986 [see p. 34309], compared aversely with 35.3 per cent in the September 1989 general election [see p. 36900].
The PvdA's support fell to 24.8 per cent, more than 5 percentage points below its 1986 result.
The main winners in the elections for 607 municipal councils were the centre-left Democrats "66 (Democraten" 66 — D'66) and Green Left (Groen Links), an alliance of three smaller left-wing parties.
D'66 won 12.5 per cent, compared with 5.5 per cent in 1986 and 7.9 per cent in the general election; and Green Left won 7 per cent , up from 5.4 and 4 per cent respectively.
Support for the opposition VVD was 2.9 per cent down on 1986, but stable compared with the 1989 general election, when it gained 14.6 per cent of the vote.
The results, and in particular the significant losses incurred by the PvdA, were widely attributed to voters' dissatisfaction with a lack of new policies introduced by the new centre-left government.
The gains scored by D'66 and Green Left were attributed to concern about the environment.
Resignation of VVD leader
The floor leader of the VVD, Joris Voorhoeve, resigned on May 1, 1990, to be succeeded by former Defence Minister Frits Bolkestein.
Voorhoeve had been widely criticized within the party for the decision to withdraw support from the previous CDA-VVD coalition in May 1989, which precipitated the early election and a serious setback for the VVD.
He had been elected floor leader in 1986, a post which in the Netherlands political system was comparable to that of party leader.
SECURITY
Escalation of football violence
In the country's worst incident of football violence thus far, 19 supporters were seriously injured in two explosions caused by home-made bombs at a match between two top teams, Ajax Amsterdam and Feyenoord Rotterdam, in Amsterdam on Oct. 22, 1989.
Five youths were arrested in connection with the attack.
Violence at and related to football matches had become a serious problem in the Netherlands in recent years.
Among the worst incidents were serious clashes between rival fans at a World Cup qualifying match between the Netherlands and West Germany in Rotterdam in April 1989 and the abandonment of an international club fixture in September in Amsterdam after the goalkeeper from the visiting team had been hit by an iron rod.
In August 1989, at the start of the 1989-90 season, the government introduced an identity-card system for supporters in an attempt to curb violence, but this was abandoned shortly afterwards when fans refused to comply and local authorities declared that they could not enforce it.
Final eviction of Amsterdam squatters
In November 1989 the 300 remaining squatters in Amsterdam were evicted, amid serious disturbances, from the buildings which they had illegally occupied for many years.
The evictions marked the end of the squatters' movement, which at its most successful had provided housing for some 10,000 people.
A phenomenon arising in the early 1970s owing to a housing shortage in the city, squatting had declined in recent years after the introduction of a major low-cost housing programme.
Terrorist attacks
A group identifying itself as Revolutionary Anti-Racist Action (RARA) claimed responsibility for arson attacks on two military police stations on March 19, 1990.
On March 26 a RARA subgroup named after Juan José Crespo Galende, a Spaniard who had died in detention in Spain in 1981 while on hunger strike [see p. 31369], claimed responsibility for a bomb attack on the Justice Ministry.
The attacks caused considerable damage but no injuries.
Although the precise aims and composition of RARA remained unclear, the organization appeared to have been formed in 1986 to protest against the "criminal policies" of the Netherlands authorities towards asylum seekers.
In recent letters to Netherlands newspapers the organization announced a broadening of its targets to include apartheid and racism at home as well as abroad.
Between October 1989 and March 1990 there occurred a number of attacks on Spanish diplomatic missions: on Oct. 26, 1989, an explosive device wrecked the car of the Spanish consul-general in Rotterdam; the following day two grenades were launched against a Spanish embassy building in The Hague; on Dec. 6 a bomb exploded at the embassy itself.
All the attacks caused considerable damage, but no one was injured.
In a further development, two passers-by were killed on March 8, 1990, in a gun attack on the residence of the Spanish consul-general in The Hague.
The Basque separatist organization Euskadi ta Askatasuna (ETA) claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Netherlands media, however, doubted the validity of claims since ETA rarely operated outside Spain.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 2.7% (1988)
Current-account balance +US$5,410 m. (1988)
Trade balance +US$3,750 m. (1988)
Budget deficit US$13,000 m. (6% of GNP)(1988)
Gross domestic product US$227,487 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 0.7% (1988)
Unemployment 12.3% (1988)
Principal trading partners West Germany, Belgium, France, UK 
Adoption of 1990 budget
The main features of the 1990 budget, originally introduced on Sept. 19, 1989, and reintroduced substantially unaltered and adopted after the formation of the new centre-left government in November [for which see p. 37050], were the following:(i) a general cut in income taxes by 10 percentage points, including a reduction in the top rate from 72 to 60 per cent; and (ii) a major programme for cleaning up the environment.
The budget, allowing for expenditure of 176,700 million guilders, was the least austere for many years.
The Prime Minister, Ruud Lubbers, declared that the programme of austerity and fiscal conservatism of the previous government had paid off and that the Netherlands economy had become "healthier…and has emerged from the serious slump of the late 1970s and early 1980s" .
The budget deficit, which had reached 10 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 1983, would amount to 5 per cent in 1990, according to government forecasts.
The budget set aside 5,700 million guilders for environmental measures in 1990.
Most of this would be spent as part of a five-year programme launched in May 1989 [see pp. 36666-67].
The budget contained little detailed information on the subsequent financing of the programme, the issue over which the previous government had fallen.
EUROPE
BELGIUM
BASIC DATA
Area: 30,519 sq km.
Population: 9,867,000 (1988).
Capital: Brussels.
Languages: Dutch spoken in North (Flanders), French spoken in South (Wallonia)(both official); small German-speaking minority in East.
Religion: Christianity (majority Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 75 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 92,400 (3,500 women, 36,700 conscripts).
GNP per capita: US$14,550 (1988).
Currency: Belgian franc (US$1.00=BF34.0077 as at July 16, 1990).
The Kingdom of Belgium seceded from the Netherlands in 1830, its Constitution being based on that established in 1831.
The constitutional monarch (currently King Baudouin), as head of state, has limited powers (including the appointment of "formateurs" to negotiate the formation of new governments), but nevertheless serves as a unifying influence within a linguistically divided country.
The legislature comprises a 212-member Chamber of Deputies elected by a system of proportional representation for a four-year term, and a 182-member Senate, of whom 106 senators are directly elected, 50 are elected by provincial councils, a further 25 are co-opted by the elected members and one Senator by right, the heir to the throne.
Following a general election on Dec. 13, 1987, Wilfried Martens, the outgoing Prime Minister, eventually succeeded in May 1988 in forming a new coalition government comprising the two Christian Social parties (the Flemish Christelijke Volkspartij — CVP — and the Walloon Parti social chrétien — PSC), the two Socialist parties (the Flemish Socialistische Partij — SP — and the Walloon Parti socialiste — PS), and the Flemish nationalist People's Union (Volksunie — VU)[see pp. 36048-49; the articles on pp. 36737 and 36873 on the Belgian elections in June 1989 to the European Parliament incorrectly listed the governing coalition parties as being the CVP, PSC, VU, the liberal Flemish Freedom and Progress Party (Partij voor Vrijheid on Voornitgang — PVV) and the Walloon Liberal Reform Party (Parti réformateur et libéral — PRL), the last two having been in opposition since May 1988].
Wilfried Martens (CVP) Prime Minister Philippe Moureaux (PS) Deputy Prime Minister; Brussels Region; Institutional Reform; National Education (Francophone) Willy Claes (SP) Deputy Prime Minister; Economic Affairs and Planning; National Education (Flemish) Jean-Luc Dehaene (CVP) Deputy Prime Minister; Communications; Institutional Reform Melchior Wathelet (PSC) Deputy Prime Minister; Justice and the Middle Classes Hugo Schiltz (VU) Deputy Prime Minister; Budget and Scientific Policy Mark Eyskens (CVP) Foreign Affairs Philippe Maystadt (PSC) Finance Robert Urbain (PS) Foreign Trade Raymond Langendries (PSC) Civil Service Marcel Colla (SP) Posts and Telecommunications Philippe Busquin (PS) Social Affairs Guy Coëme (PS) National Defence Louis Tobback (SP) Interior, Modernization of Public Services and National Scientific and Cultural Institutions André Geens (VU) Co-operation and Development Gilbert Mottard (PS) Pensions Luc Van den Brande (CVP) Employment and Work *Excluding Secretaries of State.
Belgian Cabinet*
POLITICS/SECURITY
New minister
On May 3, 1990, Gilbert Mottard, was appointed Minister for Pensions, replacing his fellow PS member Alain Van der Biest, who became Minister for Local Government, Public Works and Water in the regional government of Wallonia.
Criticism and reform of security services
Louis Tobback, Interior, Modernization of Public Services and National Scientific and Cultural Institutions Minister, announced on May 7, 1990, that the state security system, which he described as "useless" , was to be drastically reformed [for setting up in June 1988 of investigation into gendarmerie see p. 36775].
On June 5 Martens announced further details of the reforms which were to include:(i) the demilitarization of the gendarmerie which would in future report to the Ministry of Interior rather than to that of Defence;(ii) a 10-year service limit for senior positions throughout the three branches of the security services (the communal police, investigative police and the paramilitary gendarmerie); and (iii) improved co-operation and co-ordination between the security services and town councils.
(The day before Martens's announcement Albert Raes, the head of the Belgian security services since 1977, announced his resignation.)
The announcements were prompted by a parliamentary report claiming that the entire police force was over-bureaucratic and bungling.
It recommended merging the three, often competitive, branches of the security services, as well as disarming the gendarmerie.
The report suggested that corruption had reached such a point that several officers had connived in a plot to topple the government in the early 1980s.
The alleged plot was said to have consisted of five so far unsolved supermarket killings in which 28 people died and which were apparently carried out by a clandestine right-wing movement to discredit the state [see also p. 34893].
Two journalists investigating the allegations had their homes raided and notes confiscated by police in the weeks prior to the publication of the report.
An earlier investigation into corruption and infighting within different factions of the Brussels criminal investigation department had led on April 21 to the suspension of several officers and to the dismissal of their chief, Franz Reyniers, charged with fraud and accepting bribes.
Assassination of arms dealer — Death of protester
Gerald Bull, a British artillery exporter and leading figure in the Brussels-based Space Research Corporation (SRC), was shot and killed in Brussels on March 22, 1990, in a murder apparently linked to Bull's alleged co-operation with Iraq's "supergun" programme [see pp. 37390-91].
Bull had been convicted in 1980 in the United States of arms smuggling, but the SRC denied any involvement in illegal arms trade.
On May 7 a woman protester was killed by a ricochet bullet shot from the gun of a gendarme in a demonstration at an arms factory (Poudreries Réunies de Belgique) alleged to be connected with the Iraqi supergun affair.
Over 500 of the company's workers were protesting at the possible closure of the British-controlled company, following reports that its main creditor bank had threatened to withdraw funding.
Assassinations of Jewish and Albanian community leaders
The leader of the 30,000-strong Jewish community, Joseph Wybran, was shot in Brussels on Oct. 3, 1989, and died the following day.
Two groups claimed responsibility for the murder: one — Brussels-based — calling itself Young Palestine, Proud and Free the other, under the name Soldiers for Justice, claimed the killing from Lebanon.
The Soldiers for Justice group had already claimed responsibility for the murder in March 1989 of the head of the Moslem community in Belgium [see p. 36538], and for the 1988 kidnapping in Lebanon of a Belgian doctor, Jan Cools, who was freed on June 15, 1989 [see pp. 36365; 37164].
The police, however, did not dismiss the possibility of the involvement in Wybran's murder of extreme right-wing groups, particularly since a neo-Nazi training camp was found on Dec. 27, 1989, near the Dutch border.
One of the leaders of the 15,000-strong ethnic Albanian community in Belgium, Enver Hadri, was killed in Brussels on Feb. 25.
Hadri had been active in the organization of protests over the treatment of ethnic Albanians in the Yugoslav region of Kosovo.
His colleagues blamed the murder on the Serbian and Yugoslav authorities.
Bombs at universities in Brussels
A bomb blast in a lecture theatre at the French-speaking Catholic University of Leuven, on the outskirts of Brussels, injured 48 students on Feb. 16, 1990.
The incident was similar to a bomb blast at the Free University of Brussels on Dec. 1, 1989, when a suitcase exploded in an auditorium (injuring three students) and two other bombs failed to detonate.
A year earlier on Dec. 6, 1988, another bomb had exploded at the Free University, but no one claimed responsibility for the attacks.
Defection of Soviet spy
A Soviet spy identified in reports as Igor Cherpinski, a third secretary at the Soviet embassy in Brussels, defected to the USA according to a report in La Libre Belgique, a leading newspaper, of June 5, 1990.
According to the report he had defected several weeks earlier and numbered among his contacts an official at the Commission of the European Communities (EC), the Brussels ambassador of a Western country, a senior civil servant in the Belgian Defence Ministry, and a close associate of Tobback.
Increased sentences in Heysel stadium trial
An appeal court in Brussels on June 26, 1990, ruled that the prison sentences imposed on 11 of the 14 British football supporters involved in the Heysel stadium disaster in 1985 [see pp. 36597; 36774]should be increased from three to five years.
The initial three-year sentences on two others was confirmed while the other person was freed.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
Real GNP growth 4.5% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$3,756 m. (1989)
Trade balance +US$1,802 m. (1989)
Budget deficit BF397,000 m. (1989)
Budget deficit (as % of GDP) 6.6% (1989)
Gross national product US$164,760 m. (1989)
Inflation rate 3.1% (1989)
Unemployment 8.5% (1989)
Principal trading partners EC, USA 
Liège financial troubles
Liège municipal council found itself bankrupt in September 1989, when Gemeentekrediet, a publicly owned financial institution which gave credit to municipalities, refused to grant the city a new loan (in addition to its debts which already totalled BF30,000 million), unless a guarantee from the Walloon regional government was obtained.
The latter proposed an 18-point austerity plan but this was rejected by the council, and on Oct. 2 some 5,000 municipal workers went on strike in protest at the non-payment of their salaries.
Two weeks later the municipal council decided to accept the recovery plan, which included more than 1,000 redundancies, thereby unblocking the new loan.
[For similar problems in Liège and other cities in 1983 see p. 32938.]
Reduced 1989 budget deficit
The Budget and Scientific Policy Minister, Hugo Schiltz, announced on Jan. 3, 1990, that the 1989 budget deficit had turned out to be BF397,000 million, which was substantially lower than forecast [see p. 36775].
The main reason for the better than expected results appeared to be a delay in expenditure by the regional governments but in the longer term he said that cuts in public expenditure had helped to reduce the budget deficit from a peak of almost 13 per cent of gross national product (GNP) in 1982 to 7.8 per cent in 1988 and 6.6 per cent in 1989.
However, indebtedness had at the same time gone up from 90 per cent of GNP to a January 1990 level of 120 per cent, the second highest in Western Europe.
Schiltz declared that the economy had performed exceptionally well in 1989, with real GNP growth estimated at 4.4 per cent(4.2 per cent in 1988).
Unemployment levels had improved, falling to 9.7 per cent from 10.6 the previous year, while inflation had increased to 3.1 per cent in 1989 (1.2 per cent in 1988) but it was still considered to be under control.
OECD report
A report published on Sept. 6, 1989, by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) had warned the government that it must "move more boldly in reducing the budget deficit" .
However, the report claimed that if the steady rise in public indebtedness were to be halted the regions, which controlled 40 per cent of all public spending, had for several years to join the central government in observing strict fiscal discipline.
EUROPE
LUXEMBOURG
BASIC DATA
Area: 2,586 sq km.
Population: 371,000 (1988).
Capital: Luxembourg-Ville.
Languages: Letzeburgish (official); French (administrative), German (written language of commerce and press).
Religion: Christianity (95% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 800 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$22,600 (1988).
Currency: Luxembourg and Belgian franc (US$1.00=LFr or BF34.0077 as at July 16, 1990).
The Grand Duchy of Luxembourg is a constitutional hereditary monarchy in which the head of state, the Grand Duke, currently Grand Duke Jean, exercises executive power through a Council of Ministers led by the President (Prime Minister — currently Jacques Santer).
There is also a Council of State, nominated by the monarch and comprising 21 members, which acts as the supreme administrative tribunal and has some legislative functions.
Primary legislative authority is exercised through the unicameral Chamber of Deputies, elected every five years.
In a general election in June 1989 [see pp. 36739-40]the Christian Social Party (PCS) and the Socialists, which had governed in coalition since June 1984 [see p. 33298], were returned to power.
Jacques Santer (PCS) Prime Minister; Treasury; Culture Jacques Poos (Soc.)
Deputy Prime Minister; Foreign Affairs; Security Services; Foreign Trade; Aid and Development Jean Spautz (PCS) Interior; Public Housing; Urbanism Fernand Boden (PCS) Family; Middle Classes; Tourism Jean-Claude Juncker (PCS) Finance; Labour; Budget Marc Fischbach (PCS) Education; Justice; Civil Service Rene Steichen (PCS) Agriculture and Viticulture; Minister Delegate for Culture and Research Robert Goebbels (Soc.)
Economy; Public Works; Transport Johny Lahure (Soc.)
Social Security; Health; Sport; Youth Alex Bodry (Soc.)
Environment; Territorial Administration; Energy; Post and Information Mady Delvaux (Soc.)
Secretary of State attached to Lahure Georges Wohlfart (Soc.)
Secretary of State attached to Poos 
Luxembourg Council of Ministers
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3% (1988)
Trade balance -US$700 m. (1988)
Gross domestic product LFr240,990 m. (1988)
Gross national product LFr261,000 m. (1989)
Inflation 3.4% (1989)
External trade increased considerably in 1989, reflecting a boost in exports, particularly of chemicals and steel, to Belgium, France and West Germany, as well as a growing internal demand for imports.
Growth remained strong, with gross national product (GNP) increasing by 4.2 per cent and domestic demand boosted by higher wages and more jobs in the service sector.
Ending of dual exchange rate
Belgium and Luxembourg on March 2, 1990, abolished the dual exchange rate used within their monetary union which pegged the Luxembourg-Belgian franc for current commercial transactions while allowing the rate for financial transactions to float freely.
The margin between the two rates had been zero for several weeks, reflecting the strength of the franc.
The measure was part of the policy adopted by both governments entirely to free capital movements as envisaged in the European Community (EC) plan for economic and monetary union.
[For June 1990 official linking of Belgian franc with West German deutsche mark see p. 37521.]
Bankers' protest
The 150-member Association of Luxembourg Banks and Bankers on Jan. 31, 1990, protested to the Luxembourg Monetary Institute against tough rules introduced in November 1989 to prevent money laundering.
The rules were introduced in a memorandum from the Institute explaining to banks the duties imposed on them by the law on drug trafficking passed by parliament in July 1989.
The bankers complained about the "practicability" of the new rules and the harsh penalties imposed on banks failing to check the "actual economic beneficiaries" of accounts and holding companies.
[For earlier legislation on banking secrecy see p. 36947.]
FOREIGN
The ambassador to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), Guy de Muyser, resigned on April 25, 1990, after allegations by United States intelligence sources that he had passed classified information to the Soviet Union and the withdrawal by the Luxembourg government of his NATO top security clearance.
EUROPE
FRANCE
BASIC DATA
Area: 543,965 sq km.
Population: 55,873,000 (1988).
Capital: Paris.
Languages: French; small minorities speak Breton and Basque.
Religion: Christianity (80% Roman Catholic); Moslem and Jewish communities.
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 466,300 (1989).
GNP per capita: US$16,080 (1988).
Currency: French franc (US$1.00=F5.5446 as at July 16, 1990).
Under its 1958 Constitution (revised in 1960, 1962, 1963, 1974 and 1976) executive power in the Fifth French Republic is vested in a President, who is directly elected for a seven-year term by universal suffrage and by an absolute majority of votes cast.
The country is governed by a Council of Ministers, led by a Prime Minister, which is appointed by the President and is responsible to the bicameral Parliament, the highest legislative body which comprises a 319-member Senate (upper house), one-third of whose seats are renewed every three years in indirect elections, and a 577-seat National Assembly (lower house), elected for a five-year term by universal suffrage.
Following his re-election as President in May 1988 François Mitterrand appointed as Prime Minister Michel Rocard, who in turn formed a minority government dominated by members of the Socialist Party (Parti socialiste — PS)[see pp. 35978-81].
A general election in two rounds was held on June 5 and 12, after which Rocard formed a new and mainly Socialist Party government on June 28, but including also members of the Union for French Democracy (Union pour la démocratie française — UDF) grouping and the Left Radical Movement (Mouvement des radicaux de gauche — MRG) as well as a number of "technocratic" non-party members [see pp. 36227-29].
Apart from metropolitan France there are four overseas departments (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique and Réunion), two overseas collectivités territoriales (Mayotte, and St Pierre and Miquelon) with a status between that of an overseas department and an overseas territory, and four overseas territories which have the least degree of autonomy (French Polynesia, the French Southern and Antarctic Territories, New Caledonia and the Wallis and Futuna Islands).
Michel Rocard (PS) Prime Minister Ministers of State Lionel Jospin (PS) National Education, Youth and Sport Pierre Bérégovoy (PS) Economy, Finance and Budget Roland Dumas (PS) Foreign Affairs Michel Durafour (UDF) Civil Service and Administrative Reforms Ministers Pierre Arpaillange Keeper of the Seals; Justice Jean-Pierre Chevènement (PS) Defence Pierre Joxe (PS) Interior Roger Fauroux European Affairs Michel Delebarre (PS) Equipment and Housing; Transport; the Sea Jean-Pierre Soisson (UDF) Labour, Employment and Vocational Training Jacques Pelletier (UDF) Co-operation and Development Jack Lang (PS) Culture, Communication, Major Works and the Bicentenary Louis Le Pensec (PS) Overseas Departments and Territories Henri Nallet (PS) Agriculture and Forestry Paul Quilès (PS) Postal Services, Telecommunications and Space Jean Poperen (PS) Relations with Parliament Claude Evin (PS) Solidarity, Health, Social Protection and Government Spokesperson Hubert Curien (PS) Research and Technology Jean-Marie Rausch (UDF) Foreign Trade *Excluding Ministers-Delegate, Secretaries of State attached to the Prime Minister and Secretaries of State attached to Ministries.
French Council of Ministers*
POLITICS
Immigration issue
During late 1989 and the first part of 1990 immigration and race relations were key political issues [for October 1989 "headscarves" controversy, December Front National electoral successes p. 37134].
Government policy centred on the question of integration through schooling in the values of the Republic rather than on multicultural education.
It focused on improving training, employment prospects and housing, and on breaking up ghettos.
Present immigrants would stay and gradually acquire citizenship once fully integrated.
In addition the government intended to strengthen and toughen measures to deal with new immigration by trebling the annual budget of the Office français de protection des réfugiés et apatrides (OFPRA) and of the appeals commission, in order to process requests for asylum much more quickly and to deal effectively with those rejected.
On the question of whether or not to grant immigrants the right to vote in local elections, Michel Rocard, the PS Prime Minister, stated that the "extension of the right to vote in local elections to immigrants must be the consequence of successful integration, not its prerequisite" .
Pierre Mauroy, the first secretary of the PS and a former Prime Minister, along with a number of human rights associations, proposed "a citizenship based on residence" , while former President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing of the liberal UDF proposed a referendum on the issue.
On March 27, 1990, Paul Bouchet, president of the national consultative commission on human rights, published a report on racism in France, which had been in preparation since October 1989.
It detected a sharp increase in verbal threats and in openly avowed and commonly accepted racism [for January 1989 increase in racist attacks see pp. 36403-04].
On April 2, 1990, the opposition held a convention on immigration designed to work out an alternative immigration policy which would be a compromise between the perceived laxity of the government and the extremism of the Front National (FN).
Delegates did not, however, manage to agree on the proposal for a nationality law referendum put forward by former President Valéry Giscard d'Estaing of the liberal UDF.
On April 4 Rocard called a conference to endorse a plan to strengthen anti-racist legislation and tolerance of immigrants.
The conference was boycotted by Jacques Chirac, mayor of Paris and leader of the Gaullist Rally for the Republic (Rassemblement pour la république — RPR) and by Giscard d'Estaing.
[For May 1990 desecration of Jewish graves at Carpentras cemetery see p. 37468.]
A new law introducing more stringent measures against racism and anti-Semitism was approved by the National Assembly in a first reading on May 3, 1990, and in a final reading on June 30 (it was not considered by the Senate, which saw no need for textual revisions).
The new law, which was introduced by the French Communist Party (Parti communiste français — PCF), strengthened the provisions of a 1972 law against racism.
Under the new law those found guilty of racial discrimination or incitement to racial hatred or violence would face heavier fines, imprisonment and could be declared ineligible for public office; it became an offence to contest the existence of Nazi concentration camps, gas chambers and other evidence of crimes against humanity committed during the Second World War.
(On May 23 the FN president, Jean-Marie Le Pen, was ordered to pay token damages of 1 franc for describing Nazi gas chambers as a "point of detail" in the history of the Second World War.)
Authorization of prosecution of Le Pen — FN congress
The FN on March 30-April 1, 1990, held in Nice its eighth congress since the party's creation in 1972; it was attended by 1,600 FN delegates.
Le Pen, who was re-elected unopposed as president, referring to calls by mainstream conservatives for a tougher stand on immigration, claimed that the party had effectively seized the leadership of the French right.
At the congress delegates sought to establish the party as more than a single-issue party concerned exclusively with the repatriation of immigrants.
On Dec. 11, 1989, by a vote of 178 to 91, the European Parliament (EP) agreed to a request from Pierre Arpaillange, the French Minister of Justice, to allow Le Pen (who was also an MEP) to be brought to trial on charges of slandering in September 1988 the French Minister of State for Civil Service and Administrative Reforms, Michel Durafour, in a pun with anti-Jewish overtones [see p. 36230].
The vote was also influenced by references which he had made relating to the "double nationality" of the Secretary of State for Planning, Lionel Stoléru, who was of Jewish origin, as well as by allegations referring to a "Jewish internationale" and its role in the "creation" of an "anti-national spirit" .
On March 12, 1990, the EP voted by 140 to 61 to authorize prosecution for the latter statements.
In both instances the debate centred on the inviolability of the principle of parliamentary immunity rather than on Le Pen's comments which met with widespread condemnation.
Defection of former FN supporters
Earlier, on Oct. 5, 1989, Yvon Briant, president of the National Centre of Independents and Peasants (Centre national des indépendants et paysans — CNIP) announced that 14 former leading members of the FN had joined the CNIP.
Briant hoped for the creation of a "dynamic conservative pole" as a "fourth pillar" of the political opposition, alongside the present "triangular structure" of Gaullists, liberals and centrists which, in his view, doomed the opposition to a minority position.
FN by-election performance
On Feb. 12, 1990, the second round of voting in the municipal by-election of Le Luc (Var department) saw an alliance between the head of the RPR-UDF list and that of the FN which defeated the incumbent socialist mayor.
The alliance was strongly criticized by UDF and RPR leaders with the exception of Giscard d'Estaing who did not comment [for question of alliance with FN in March 1989 local elections see p. 36530].
In Villeurbanne-Sud in the first round of a by-election for a cantonal seat in the Rhône department on June 10, 1990, the FN candidate won 27.65 per cent of the vote, beating the UDF-supported RPR candidate, who won 17.2 per cent, into third place.
Although the PS candidate, who won 36.81 per cent in the first round, subsequently won the seat in the second round on June 17 with 63.29 per cent of the vote, the election highlighted the widespread concern at the level of support for the FN.
Right-wing party political developments — Formation of Union pour la France
Several attempts were made within the ranks of the French right to establish a united movement which would appeal to the electorate.
On June 24, 1989, in Lyons, a right-wing faction known as the Renovators (Rénovateurs) met to discuss the future of the opposition in the light of the June European election result [for April 1989 Renovator challenge to RPR-UDF leadership see p. 36706].
They pledged to strive "for the constitution of a large common political formation which would be pluralist and decentralized" .
Two UDF leaders, who were also present, Pierre Méhaignerie, president of the Centre of Social Democrats (Centre des démocrates sociaux — CDS) and François Léotard, president of the Republican Party (Parti républicain — PR), the largest group within the UDF, declared themselves ready to "break the structures" of their respective formations.
On several occasions Giscard d'Estaing tried to broker a merger between the UDF and the RPR [see p. 36706].
In October 1989 he called for the fusion of seven parties into "one big party of the centre-right by the beginning of 1992" .
Chirac (re-elected as RPR leader in February 1990-see p. 37262) favoured the setting up of "primary elections" to designate a single right-wing candidate for the presidential elections due in 1995.
Chirac and Giscard d'Estaing announced on June 27, 1990, that they had agreed to form a "confederation" (rather than a merger) of the UDF and RPR, to be known as the Union for France (Union pour la France — UPF).
Under the agreement the UPF would run single candidates in the parliamentary elections due in 1993 and introduce United States-style primaries to select a single right-wing presidential candidate two years later.
Although designed to counter support for the FN [see Villeurbanne cantonal election above], the agreement was criticized by Léotard, who claimed that the FN would still have the upper hand since the new UPF lacked credibility.
Giscard d'Estaing's resignation from National Assembly
On Nov. 3, 1989, Giscard d'Estaing gave up his seat in the National Assembly, which he had held since 1984, in order to comply with a law forbidding politicians from holding more than two elective offices.
He remained a member of the EP and president of the regional council of his native Auvergne.
In resigning his seat he also lost the chairmanship of the Assembly's commission on foreign affairs and on Nov. 16 Michel Vauzelles (PS) was elected to succeed him.
Party political developments concerning presidential majority
On July 4, 1989, Guy Gennesseaux, leader and founder of the centre-left French Democratic Party (Parti démocrate français — PDF — which had broken away from the Radical Socialist Party in 1982 when the latter refused to leave the UDF), announced that his party was joining the centre-left grouping, Presidential Majority (majorité présidentielle).
On Nov. 24 three-quarters of the delegates at the 18th congress of the Unified Socialist Party (Parti socialiste unifié — PSU) voted to disband the party which had been formed in 1960.
Two days later a new political movement was formed joining the defunct PSU and the Nouvelle Gauche (a dissident communist movement established at the time of the 1988 presidential elections and led by Pierre Juquin — see p. 35979 for his candidature).
It was called the Red and Green Alternative (L'Alternative rouge et verte) and described itself as "socialist, autogestionnaire (an anarcho-syndicalist concept favouring workers' self-rule or self-administration), feminist, ecologist and internationalist" .
There were several attempts at organizing a non-socialist, centre-left wing within the Presidential Majority.
On Feb. 20, 1990, the MRG and the Association of Democrats (Association des démocrates — a heterogeneous grouping of leading centrist personalities from which the left sought to gain support at the time of the 1988 presidential elections) announced the conclusion of an agreement aiming to develop "the second force within the presidential majority" .
On March 24 Jean Charbonnel, a former RPR deputy, announced the formation of the National Co-ordination of a United France (Co-ordination nationale de la France unie), comprising the MRG, the Association des démocrates and the Convention for the Fifth Republic (Convention pour la Cinquième République).
French Communist Party
At a meeting of the PCF on Feb. 12, 1990, Charles Fiterman, a politbureau member and a former minister, suggested ending the party's policy of "democratic centralism" and updating its ideology in the light of events in Eastern Europe.
Four months earlier his call on Oct. 17, 1989, for a French perestroika ( "restructuring" ) and a "modern communist identity" had been denigrated as "social-democratic" in a virulent campaign led by the PCF secretary-general Georges Marchais.
(However, Marchais himself declared on French television on April 10, 1990, that he and his party had been "duped" over the years by communist leaders in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.)
Corruption
In connection with the Carrefour du développement (Development Crossroads) development aid scandal which came to light in mid-1986 the Commission d'instruction of the High Court on April 4, 1990, brought an end to investigations into the activities of Christian Nucci, the (Socialist) Minister-Delegate for Co-operation and Development at the time [see pp. 35126; 36706].
The commission dismissed charges of forgery of private and public documents, and in addition applied a December 1989 amnesty for offences committed before June 1989 against rules governing party political financing, in connection with allegations that Nucci had used funds to further his own election as a National Assembly deputy.
The commission's five magistrates nevertheless openly criticized the amnesty law which they invoked in their ruling [see also below].
During 1989 the Luchaire affair, concerning French arms sales to Iran between 1982 and 1986 when such sales were embargoed, threatened to develop into a major political scandal affecting the Defence Ministry and political parties on both the left and right [see p. 35982].
Investigations into the affairs of senior officials of the Luchaire company had been initiated on March 13, 1986, by the Defence Ministry, but on June 16, 1989, the examining magistrate, Michel Legrand, found that there were no grounds for prosecution.
Legrand denied any credibility to allegations of dividends paid to the PS by Luchaire.
He alluded, however, to the military administration's complicity in the Luchaire arms exports and criticized the Defence Ministry's use of "defence secrecy" in the selection of evidence for the trial in which it was the prosecuting party.
In October 1989 the opposition unsuccessfully attempted to establish a parliamentary commission of inquiry into the affair.
During 1989 Jacques Médecin, the mayor of Nice, was the target of 80 separate tax investigations related to irregularities in his tax returns and a network of international business interests.
On Nov. 17 he was charged with misuse of public funds.
Party financing and electoral campaign laws
New laws governing the financing of political parties and electoral campaigns, with provision for an amnesty for those who had offended before June 15, 1989, were introduced by the government in June 1989 [for similar laws approved in 1988 see pp. 35981-82].
However, parliamentary debate on the bill was postponed until the autumn session since there was much public criticism of PS politicians many of whom were expected to be among the several thousand likely to benefit from the amnesty.
On Dec. 22, 1989, the National Assembly in its second reading approved the amnesty as part of the (ordinary) law on the rules governing the financing of political parties.
The (organic — having to do with the structure of the administration) law on the financing of electoral campaigns was passed by the Senate on April 12, 1990.
It was then submitted to the Constitutional Council (which had earlier objected to parts of the law on procedural grounds), which on May 4 declared the law to be in accordance with the Constitution.
Magistrates' protests
Several magistrates' and lawyers' unions protested at the handling and the outcome of both the Luchaire and the Nucci affairs and at the amnesty law, citing these as proof of the subordination of the judiciary to political power and of the existence of a two-speed system of justice (i.e. one for elected officials and one for ordinary citizens).
They called for a reform of judges' status and of the conseil supérieur de la magistrature to make it "truly independent from political power" .
Proposed defence spending cuts
On May 23, 1989, the government announced total defence budget savings of F17,000 million for 1990 and 1991.
Development of all major new weapons programmes would nevertheless continue but over a longer time span.
These projects included a nuclear-powered aircraft carrier (the Charles de Gaulle, which was to be commissioned in 1998 rather than 1996), an additional ballistic-missile submarine, a new model tank, and Rafale, a planned new fighter aircraft [see pp. 36106; 36430].
In addition the size of certain orders was to be scaled down.
None of France's nuclear deterrent programmes was to be affected except that nuclear tests on the Mururoa atoll in the South Pacific would be reduced from eight per year to six.
The total volume of French defence spending for the period 1990-93 which was to have been around F470,000 million,(in line with a 1987 law providing for a 6 per cent annual growth rate in real terms), was to be cut by approximately F42,000 million.
Procurement spending for 1990 would rise by 2.7 per cent in real terms to F103,000 million and by 4 per cent in 1991 to F107,000 million.
On Oct. 9, 1989, following Rocard's use of the procedure authorized by Article 49.3 of the Constitution (whereby in the absence of a motion of censure a law was adopted on its first reading), the RPR presented a motion of censure on the arms expenditure bill which obtained only 159 of the of 289 votes required to gain a simple majority.
The law, which provided F437,800 million for defence equipment spending, was adopted on Dec. 18, 1989.
Death of Hernu
Charles Hernu, Defence Minister in 1981-85, died in Lyons of a heart attack on Jan. 17, 1990, at the age of 66.
A prominent figure in the PS, he was Defence Minister at the time of the sinking of the Greenpeace ship Rainbow Warrior in New Zealand in July 1985 [see pp. 33852-54]as a result of which he was obliged to resign in September 1985 [see p. 34565].
Criminal code reform
As called for by Mitterrand in January 1989 [see p. 36404], the government in the following month presented its programme for modernizing the criminal code which dated from the Napoleonic era.
First presented to the Senate in February 1986, the government's revised programme divided the code into three parts, the first of which was passed by both houses on May 17, 1990.
The aim of the new code was to "protect the individual against all wrongs which might affect their person, their freedom, their security, their dignity or their environment" as opposed to the old code which gave precedence to the defence of the state.
Under the revised code new principles were introduced, notably (i) the penal responsibility of legal entities of public and private law such as companies, trade unions and political parties (a measure aimed at new crimes such as fraud, hazardous working conditions and pollution);(ii) the concept of an "instigator" of a crime (who would be liable to criminal prosecution and punishment on a similar basis as the "perpetrator" of a crime); and (iii) the extension of "legitimate self-defence" to cover defence of property.
Constitutional Council reform
Proposals put forward by Mitterrand on July 14, 1989, that the right of referral to the Constitutional Council (Conseil constitutionel) should be extended to individual citizens resulted in a draft law which was approved by the Council of Ministers on March 28, 1990.
This allowed an individual citizen to request that case be referred to the Constitutional Council if he or she felt that fundamental rights were being undermined.
The bill was passed by the National Assembly at its second reading on June 21, but on June 28 the Senate voted to reject the version of the bill approved by the National Assembly on the grounds that it did not take into consideration the Senate's amendments.
SECURITY
Discontent within armed forces
Disenchantment over pay and working conditions first appeared in the gendarmerie, a branch of the police whose military status did not allow its members to form trade unions or to complain publicly.
Starting in the summer of 1989, several gendarmes publicized their grievances in anonymous letters to the press.
Moreover, after Minister of Defence Jean-Pierre Chevènement had convened a round table meeting and promised to upgrade conditions, the expression of discontent spread to other branches of the armed forces.
On Jan. 6, 1990, Chevènement announced a re-evaluation of military pay which proposed a series of premiums and indemnities, but was met with some disappointment and scepticism by the military which was increasingly critical of the discrepancy between the growth in spending on military material and that on personnel.
[For 1988 report on relations between gendarmerie and national police see pp. 36706-07.]
New head of DGSE
On March 22, 1989, Claude Silberzahn, the government official responsible for the fall of Vice-Adml.
Pierre Lacoste, the secret service chief allegedly involved in the Rainbow Warrior bombing [see pp. 34565-68], was appointed chief of the Direction générale de la sécurité extérieure (DGSE — the external secret service).
Silberzahn, a 54-year-old civil servant, replaced Gen. François Mermet to become the sixth head of the agency in seven years.
On July 4, 1989, the Army announced that Dominique Prieur, the DGSE agent convicted of taking part in the bombing, had been promoted from captain to major [for May 1990 UN adjudication on Rainbow Warrior affair see p. 37459].
Trial of AD members
The trial opened in Lyons on April 16, 1989, of 20 members of the "Lyons branch" of the extreme left-wing group Direct Action (Action directe — AD) before a special assize court of the Rhône in which seven magistrates substituted for the popular jury.
The defendants faced charges arising from three murders, three armed assaults and 32 armed robberies committed between 1980 and 1986.
Unlike the "internationalist" Parisian group led by Jean-Marc Rouillan [see p. 36404], the Lyons-based group was noted mainly for robbing banks or armoured security vehicles.
On June 29 André Olivier, the ideological leader, Max Frérot, the explosives expert, and Emile Ballandras were sentenced to life imprisonment.
Two other accomplices, Bernard Blanc and Joëlle Crepet, were sentenced to 20 and 18 years in prison respectively.
The court gave short or suspended sentences to 13 other defendants.
Four leaders of the Paris group — Rouillan, Georges Cipriani, Nathalie Ménigon and Joëlle Aubron who were all serving life sentences [ibid.]— began a hunger strike on April 20, 1989, to demand political prisoner status and a relaxation of isolation conditions which they ended on July 21.
On Feb. 5, 1990, they began a similarly motivated one-week hunger strike.
Sentences for other extremist attacks
On Dec. 15, 1989, Habib Maamar, 27, from Tunisia, was sentenced to life imprisonment by a special assize court for two bomb attacks in Paris.
The first was made on Aug. 20, 1984, against the Banque Leumi and the second on Feb. 23, 1985, against a department store when one person was killed.
On March 9, 1990, Fouad Ali Saleh, 31, a pro-Iranian Moslem fundamentalist accused of organizing a terrorist network responsible for a wave of bombings in Paris between December 1985 and September 1986 in which 13 people were killed, was sentenced to 20 years in prison.
He was convicted of conspiracy to carry out terrorist acts, of drug trafficking and of illegal possession of explosives.
French intelligence claimed that his group was linked to the Lebanese Iranian-backed Hezbollah which allegedly had supplied the explosives.
Eight accomplices were given lesser prison sentences as were eight others who were condemned in absentia.
Corsica
Michel Prada, a mediator appointed by Rocard on April 23, 1989, to defuse the crisis provoked by the strikes and blockade of the island [see p. 36708]submitted his report on Sept. 13, 1989.
He denied any uniqueness in the Corsican situation and argued that a solution to Corsica's problems required only "the most ordinary means" .
He also stated that the Corsican economy could develop harmoniously around the tourism industry.
By contrast the Interior Minister, Pierre Joxe, advocated greater internal autonomy.
On Aug. 22, 1989, the last three Corsican nationalist militants held in French prisons were released.
This brought the number of such prisoners freed to 52 since the National Liberation Front of Corsica (Front de libération nationale de la Corse — FLNC) had announced a truce in May 1988 [see p. 36227].
On Nov. 7, 1989, the truce was broken by the FLNC which claimed responsibility for the bombing of two buildings under construction in Santa Lucia di Porto Vecchio in the north of the island.
On Dec. 11, 40 holiday homes under construction were blown up in the north-western town of Calvi.
The bombings appeared to indicate a new strategy of bombing tourist complexes while observing its declared suspension of military activities.
Translation of Satanic Verses
On July 17, 1989, the French translation of Salman Rushdie's controversial novel, The Satanic Verses, went on sale.
Tribunals rejected requests from several French Moslem groups to order the seizure of all copies of the book, and the petitioners vowed to pursue their action by "all legal means" .
In March 1989 Rocard had reacted to public calls for the assassination of Rushdie by saying that "any further calls for violence or murder will lead to immediate criminal prosecution" .
[For Rushdie affair see pp. 36450-51.]
Assassination of Marseilles district mayor
Armand Gallo, a general practitioner and local councillor, was charged on Jan. 26, 1990, with organizing the murder 10 days earlier of Jean-Jacques Peschard, 59, the socialist mayor of Marseilles' seventh district.
On Jan. 29 he was also charged with involvement in the murder on May 18, 1988, of the owner of a private clinic, Léonce Mout.
The killings were reported to be part of a private hospital war in Marseilles in which surgeons and speculators appeared to be prepared to kill in order to gain control of private clinics.
The affair also involved two local councillors elected on the list of Robert Vigouroux, the dissident socialist mayor of Marseilles [see p. 36530].
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3.4% (1989)
Current-account balance -US$3,522 m. (1988)
Trade balance -US$8,100 m. (1988)
Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 0.2% (1988)
External deficit as % of GDP 0.4% (1989)
Gross domestic product US$949,440 m. (1988)
Inflation rate 3.6% (1989)
Unemployment 9.6% (1988)
Principal trading partners West Germany, Italy, Belgium-Luxembourg 
1990 budget
On Sept. 20, 1989, Pierre Bérégovoy, Minister of State for Economy, Finance and Budget, announced a 1990 budget designed to keep inflation down while sustaining economic growth.
Eventually passed on Dec. 20 the budget increased public spending by 5.3 per cent to F1,217,700 million, while holding down the budget deficit to F90,000 million, a reduction of F10,000 million from 1989 [see p. 36707].
The rise in government expenditure especially benefited the education budget which was increased by 8.6 per cent to F228,000 million.
Other priority areas included research, environment, justice and culture.
The budget also reflected a willingness to bring France's fiscal system more into line with European Community (EC) partners.
Tax cuts totalling F16,700 million, included F4,400 million worth of cuts in savings taxes and a further reduction of corporation tax on reinvested income, while distributed profits remained taxable at 42 per cent; there was a reduction in the lower rate of value added tax (VAT) for medical goods from 5.5 to 2.1 per cent (on Sept. 6 Bérégovoy had announced that the top rate of VAT would be cut from 28 to 25 per cent ).
Tax increases in other areas, including a new tax of 1.3 per cent on incomes exceeding F40,000 million, would only partly compensate for the cuts.
Economic performance
The French government was praised for its stable and coherent economic policies since 1983 in the annual survey on that country of the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), published in April 1990.
The survey predicted that France would have lower inflation and higher growth than the OECD average in 1990 for the first time since 1970, with retail price inflation expected to be 2.9 per cent and growth estimated at 3.1 per cent in 1990.
Although acknowledging the deterioration of the trade balance in industrial goods, which indicated problems in competitiveness, the report played down the significance of the foreign trade deficit.
The increase in the industrial trade deficit was partly compensated for by surpluses on services and tourism so that the current-account deficit remained small in relation to gross domestic product (GDP)(under 0.4 per cent).
In addition prospects were favourable due to a "remarkable" reduction of inflation and an increase in investment.
However, the unemployment rate, at 9.3 per cent despite the creation of 250,000 jobs in each of the last two years, remained one of the highest among the OECD member states.
Growing economic inequality
On Nov. 22, 1989, the Centre d'Etudes des Revenus et des Coûts (CERC) published a report revealing growing inequalities in France.
The survey reported that the 1980s had seen a reversal of the 1960s and 1970s trend towards narrower income differentials.
It ascribed this to much slower growth in salaries compared with incomes derived from real estate and securities, and more broadly to the industrial restructuring and financial liberalization imposed in anticipation of the single European market in 1992.
The report demonstrated that the 1980s austerity measures had disproportionately affected blue collar workers in comparison with white collar workers.
New rules on insider trading
On July 1, 1989, a law was adopted on "security and transparency of financial markets" which strengthened the investigative and enforcement powers of the commission on stock exchange operations (commission des opérations de bourse — COB), the French equivalent of the United States Securities and Exchange Commission.
It also prescribed new regulations governing tender offers.
The reforms were widely seen as a reaction to public controversy over insider trading practices sparked by the emergence in January 1989 of the Pechiney affair [see pp. 36403; 36706].
Privatization report
On Nov. 7, 1989, a National Assembly commission of inquiry into the privatization of 13 state-owned companies during 1986-88 [see p. 36707]published its report.
Stating that the criteria for evaluating of public enterprises had been "designed more to ensure the success of the [privatization]operation rather than its profitability" , the commission claimed that state companies had been deliberately undervalued by between F8,300 million and F19,600 million.
It also criticized the privatization commission responsible for the evaluations, which was composed of members nominated by the Finance Minister.
The report pointed to favouritism and conflict of interest between the then Chirac government and business relations.
Altered status of Renault
On April 29, 1990, after two days and two nights of filibustering by Communists, Rocard forced through a guillotine measure, transforming the Renault motor company from a régie (which worked for the "exclusive interest of the nation" , was not subject to the same financial controls as ordinary companies, did not until 1970 have any share capital, was able to implement more progressive wage and labour policies, and remained ultimately under Ministry of Industry control) into an ordinary public limited company.
The change of legal status, in which the state remained the controlling shareholder with 75 per cent of capital, meant that Renault could implement a share-swap alliance concluded in February 1990 with the Swedish vehicle manufacturer Volvo [see also p. 37161].
Peugeot strike
Employees of the Peugeot motor company, France's largest private company, staged a two-month strike which ended on Oct. 23, 1989, to demand higher wages and better conditions.
The deadlock was broken when a government-appointed conciliator persuaded the Peugeot chairman to agree to talks as soon as a 19-day sit-in at the Mulhouse plant was ended.
Peugeot said that it had lost production of 49,000 cars as a result of the strikes.
Public-sector strikes
On Oct. 5, 1989, prison officers agreed to return to work after a month-long strike affecting 70 of France's 180 penal institutions over demands for pay parity with the police force.
On Oct. 2 the government had sent in troops to maintain order.
In January 1990 tense relations between the Justice Ministry and the warders' unions, as well as low staff morale, were widely seen as the indirect cause of a series of 28 prison escapes in six weeks.
A five-month strike involving tax collectors, customs officers, statisticians and government accounts officers protesting at low wages as well as at archaic and deteriorating facilities ended in November 1989.
Fear of the conflict spreading to other ministries, along with memories of a series of strikes which Rocard attempted to settle case by case in the autumn of 1988 [see pp. 36707-08], led him to seek a single settlement with public employees.
In October he announced negotiations to review all civil service wage and career structures dating back to 1946.
Transport policy
On June 12, 1990, the French government announced government funding worth F190,000 million to extend and improve its high-speed TGV (train à grande vitesse) network to cover 4,432 km by 2015.
This programme would be in addition to government funding already budgeted for a high-speed rail link to the French side of the Channel Tunnel.
[For United Kingdom policy on Tunnel rail links see pp. 37158; 37585.]
Shelving of Loire dam scheme
On Feb. 7, 1990, the Secretary of State for the Environment, Brice Lalonde, told a Cabinet meeting that it was doubtful whether two of the four Loire dam projects would go ahead.
He declared that "the Loire must remain a free and living river, where only its excesses are brought under control" .
The government had initially promised to help an organization of local authorities, EPALA, to build a system of dams to control flooding, feed irrigation reserves and supply hydroelectric energy.
Although the project was supported by many prominent politicians, the government bowed to growing environmental concerns, made clear in the March 1989 local elections in Le Puy in which the Greens obtained 22 per cent of votes, and to lobbying by European environmental groups.
Lalonde said that the government would seek alternative solutions to the energy demands of farmers and industrialists.
FOREIGN
Relations with Soviet Union
On Dec. 29, 1989, Joxe, the Interior Minister, visited his Soviet counterpart, Vadim Bakatin, in Moscow.
They agreed upon the need for co-operation between their two ministries, especially in the fight against drugs, organized crime and terrorism.
On Jan. 15, 1990, an agreement was signed in Paris by Lev Voronin, a First Deputy Chair of the Soviet Council of Ministers and Bérégovoy, on economic, industrial and scientific co-operation between France and the Soviet Union, which replaced one concluded 25 years earlier.
It stemmed from a declaration on principles of co-operation signed during a meeting between Mitterrand and the Soviet President, Mikhail Gorbachev, in Paris in July 1989 [see pp. 36821-22], and envisaged among other things the setting up of a single intergovernmental commission to replace existing commissions.
France was cited by Voronin as being the Soviet economy's second most important investor after West Germany and in 1989 over 30 Soviet-French enterprises were set up.
On March 29, 1990, the commission met in Moscow and discussed barriers to Franco-Soviet trade and the bilateral deficit.
France accepted a postponement of the repayment of Soviet trade debts amounting to nearly F1,000 million and Bérégovoy announced the creation of a F20 million annual programme to train 6,000 aspiring Soviet executives.
Relations with USA
An article entitled The Covert French Connection by Richard Ullman published in Foreign Policy in mid-1989 revealed the existence of a secret US policy to assist France in the development of an effective strike force.
This policy indicated past US appreciation of France's role in confronting the Warsaw Pact and the will to encourage the de facto readmission of France into the integrated command of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO).
On May 28, 1989, Chevènement confirmed the existence of an agreement concluded in 1961 and amended in 1985, under which France and the USA exchanged classified nuclear information without transferring nuclear formulas.
He insisted that this did not imply French dependence on foreign technology.
NORTHERN AND WESTERN EUROPE
AUSTRIA
BASIC DATA
Area: 83,857 sq km.
Population: 7,563,000 (1988).
Capital: Vienna.
Languages: German (99%); Croat and Slovene.
Religion: Christianity (about 89% Roman Catholic, about 6% Protestant).
Av. life expectancy: 74 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 42,500 (20,500 conscripts)(1989).
GNP per capita: US$15,560 (1988).
Currency: schilling (US$1.00=Sch11.9009 as at June 11, 1990).
The Republic of Austria was established in May 1955.
The Federal President (Bundespräsident, currently Kurt Waldheim) is elected for a six-year term by universal suffrage and cannot serve more than two terms of office.
The President's functions are primarily ceremonial but include the appointment of the Federal Chancellor (Bundeskanzler or head of government, currently Franz Vranitzky) and, at the Chancellor's recommendation, the other members of the government.
Legislative power is vested in a bicameral parliament consisting of a 183-member National Council (Nationalrat, the lower house) and a 63-member Federal Council (Bundesrat, the upper house), which together form the Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung).
As a result of a general election held on Nov. 23, 1986, a "grand coalition" of the Socialist Party of Austria (Sozialistische Partei Österreichs — SPÖ) and the conservative Austrian People's Party (Österreichische Volkspartei — ÖVP) was eventually formed on Jan. 14, 1987, and sworn in on Jan. 21.
The new Cabinet comprised eight ministers from each party and a non-party Justice Minister [see pp. 35087-88].
Franz Vranitzky (SPÖ) Federal Chancellor Josef Riegler (ÖVP) Vice-Chancellor; Federalism and Administrative Reform in the Federal Chancellery Alois Mock (ÖVP) Foreign Affairs Ferdinand Lacina (SPÖ) Finance Franz Löschnak (SPÖ) Interior Walter Geppert (SPÖ) Employment and Social Affairs Rudolf Streicher (SPÖ) Public Economy and Transport Wolfgang Schüssel (ÖVP) Economic Affairs Franz Fischler (ÖVP) Agriculture and Forestry Robert Lichal (ÖVP) Defence Erhard Busek (ÖVP) Science and Research Marilies Flemming (ÖVP) Environment, Youth and Family Affairs Hilde Hawlicek (SPÖ) Education, Arts and Sport Egmont Foregger Justice Harald Ettl (SPÖ) Minister at Chancellery (Health; Public Services) Günter Stummvoll (ÖVP) Minister of State to Finance Minister Johanna Dohnal (SPÖ) Minister of State to Chancellor (Women's Questions)
Austrian Cabinet
POLITICS
Change in electoral law
The Nationalrat on Feb. 28, 1990, approved an amendment to the electoral law, with effect from March 17, to give Austrians living permanently or temporarily abroad the right to vote in Nationalrat and federal presidential elections and in referendums in their home country.
About 260,000 people living abroad were eligible.
Regional elections
In provincial elections in Vorarlberg on Oct. 8, 1989, the ÖVP retained its 20 seats and an overall majority in the Landtag (provincial parliament), suffering only marginal losses of votes.
Martin Purtscher (ÖVP) was confirmed in office as the provincial governor for a further five-year term.
The SPÖ [not Social Democrats as stated on p. 36528]registered its worst result in the province since 1945, but the centre-right liberal Freedom Party of Austria (Freiheitliche Partei Österreichs — FPÖ) nearly doubled its share of the vote compared with 1984 [see p. 33357]and doubled its share of seats.
The provincial parliament in Carinthia on May 8, 1989, elected Jörg Haider, the FPÖ leader, as provincial governor for a five-year term at the head of a coalition of the FPÖ (11 seats) and the ÖVP (eight seats).
In the March 12 elections in Carinthia the FPÖ had overtaken the ÖVP to become the second largest party in the province [see p. 36528].
In communal elections in Innsbruck on Sept. 24 the FPÖ and the local version of the Green Alternatives (Grüne Alternativen — GA) won seats and votes from both the ÖVP and the SPÖ, although the ÖVP remained the strongest party; in Salzburg province on Oct. 8 the FPÖ improved its position while the SPÖ and the ÖVP both suffered losses; in Lower Austria and Styria on March 25, 1990, the ÖVP retained its dominant position despite losing votes and seats to the FPÖ and the GA, while the SPÖ remained the second largest party; and in Vorarlberg on April 1 the SPÖ lost its absolute majority on the Bregenz municipal council, which was taken over by an ÖVP chair.
Party developments
At its congress in Vienna on May 19-20, 1989, the ÖVP elected Josef Riegler, the former Minister of Agriculture and Forestry and now Vice-Chancellor, as the new party chair; the Foreign Minister, Alois Mock, who had resigned as Vice-Chancellor in April [see p. 36596], was elected honorary president.
The ÖVP's general-secretary, Helmut Kukacka, was confirmed in office and three new additional vice-chairs were elected.
At its party conference in Graz on Nov. 24-25 the ÖVP endorsed a plan for an "eco-social market economy" .
At a conference in Graz on Oct. 19-22 the SPÖ re-elected Franz Vranitzky, the Federal Chancellor, as party chair.
The conference approved an electoral programme, Social Democracy 2000, also opening the way to a social market economy.
The Austrian Communist Party (Kommunistische Partei Österreichs — KPÖ) at its congress in Vienna on Jan. 20-21, 1990, accepted the decision of Franz Muhri, who had been chair for 25 years, not to stand for re-election.
In his place two new young joint chairs were elected, Walter Silbermayr (formerly a party secretary) and Susanne Sohn.
Reparations to Jews
In a departure from the stance of previous governments, the government announced in February 1990 that over the next five years it proposed to pay Sch300,000,000 in reparations to Austrian Jews who had fled the country after the Anschluss (the forcible union of Austria with Nazi Germany in 1938) and who had not previously received compensation.
The money would be spent to pay social insurance benefits to people who had been persecuted and driven out of the country at the time of the Anschluss and were now living in countries such as Israel and the United States, and a small proportion would be devoted to projects in Austria.
Dismissal of federal deputy
An FPÖ federal deputy, Helmut Weiss, was in October 1989 forbidden by the FPÖ chair, Haider, to take up his seat in the Nationalrat and was also obliged to give up his seat in the Bundesrat, after he had made controversial statements about the Nazi era.
Weiss reportedly cast doubts in comments to the daily Neue A-Z on Oct. 10 on the existence during the Second World War of gas chambers for the extermination of Jews.
Report on Lucona affair
Udo Proksch, a key figure in the Lucona insurance affair [see p. 36404]who had been on the run since 1988, was detained at Vienna airport on Oct. 2, 1989.
He went on trial on Jan. 30, 1990, charged with the murder of six crew members of the cargo ship Lucona when it blew up off the Maldives in January 1977, the attempted murder of six other crew members who survived, and attempted fraud.
Also on trial with Proksch were Hans Peter Daimler, currently in custody in West Germany, and an Army officer, Johann Edelmaier.
The parliamentary commission charged in January 1989 with the inquiry into the Lucona affair presented its report on June 28 (which the FPÖ refused to sign on the grounds that it treated those concerned too leniently).
The report was highly critical of Karl Blecha and Leopold Gratz, the two senior SPÖ politicians who resigned in January 1989 over the affair.
It found that Blecha had instructed officials including the police to slow down the inquiry against Proksch, had suppressed incriminating files and had brought disciplinary measures against officials working on the inquiry, as well as giving incomplete information to parliament on a number of occasions as regards the progress of the inquiry.
It concluded that Gratz had also played a key role in the affair and had intervened to have Proksch released from preventive detention in 1985.
A third former minister, Harald Öfner (FPÖ), who held the Justice portfolio in 1983-86, was accused in the report of shelving the inquiry during his term of office, and several senior members of the judiciary were also implicated.
Noricum affair
The trial opened in Linz on April 4, 1990, of 18 executives of the state-owned Voest-Alpine engineering group and its subsidiary Noricum for illegally supplying arms to Iran via third countries in 1984-86, during the Iran-Iraq war, in contravention of Austria's neutral status [see pp. 35792; 36561].
A judicial investigation had opened on July 7, 1989, into the possible involvement of Blecha, Gratz and a former Federal Chancellor, Alfred (Fred) Sinowatz, and the court dealing with the affair began preliminary inquiries in September into the role played by the SPÖ Finance Minister, Ferdinand Lacina (Minister for Transport and State Industries at the time); similar inquiries were also initiated into the former Defence Minister, Friedhelm Frischenschläger (FPÖ), and a former Minister of the Interior and of Foreign Minister, Erwin Lanc (SPÖ).
A parliamentary commission of inquiry into arms sales to Iran was set up on Sept. 27 and its report, presented on April 2, 1990 (without SPÖ agreement), contained serious criticism of senior politicians and of the Voest-Alpine group's decision to manufacture howitzers and other weapons.
It acknowledged that all Noricum's weapons sales to Argentina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Jordan, Libya, Poland and Thailand, had been means of providing Iran and Iraq with arms and could have been prevented, particularly if Gratz had had the destination certificates examined.
It concluded that Sinowatz, Blecha and Gratz bore the chief political responsibility, but that other members of the government were also to blame.
Developments in Androsch and Waldheim cases
The Supreme Court in Vienna on March 2, 1989, rejected an appeal by the former Vice-Chancellor and general manager of the Creditanstalt-Bankverein, Hannes Androsch, against the fine imposed on him in March 1988 for perjury in giving false testimony to a corruption investigation [see p. 35792].
After completion of an 18-month inquiry a report was released by the United Kingdom Defence Ministry in October concluding that the Austrian President, Kurt Waldheim, was not involved in the execution of six British prisoners of war in Greece in 1944, while a junior officer in the German Army, although he knew of their capture and probable fate [see pp. 34691-92; 35790-91; 36560].
Waldheim continued to be banned from entering the United States because of his alleged participation in the execution and maltreatment of Allied prisoners and in the deportation of Jews.
The Foreign Ministry announced on Sept. 18 that it was downgrading diplomatic relations with Israel, which was refusing to appoint an ambassador while Waldheim remained President.
[See p. 37620 for Waldheim's informal meeting in July 1990 with President Havel of Czechoslovakia and President von Weizsäcker of West Germany.]
Immigration restrictions
During 1989 a total of 21,882 people, nearly twice as many as in 1988 and most of them from Eastern Europe, sought asylum in Austria, and during the first three months of 1990 the numbers reached 5,000, most of them being Romanians who were arriving at a rate of 200 per day in late February.
The government with effect from March 15 imposed restrictions at its border with Hungary to slow down the inflow of East Europeans.
Entrants were henceforth required to prove either that they had enough currency for a temporary stay, or a visa for another country.
Parliament also approved stricter laws allowing the deportation of illegal immigrants, wider powers for border police, and checks on potential refugees disembarking from aircraft.
Austria had on Jan. 17 also reimposed a visa restriction for Turkish people, initially for three months.
and statesman of international acclaim, died in Vienna on July 29, 1990, at the age of 79.
Deaths of Kreisky and Bettelheim
Bruno Kreisky, SPÖ Federal Chancellor from 1970 to 1983
Born in Vienna of Jewish parents he studied law and economics before fleeing from the Nazis to Sweden in 1938 [see p. 23912].
First as a diplomat, later as Foreign Minister in 1959-66 and then as Chancellor he shaped the foreign policy priorities of post-war Austria.
He was one of the first proponents of detente towards eastern Europe and became the first Western head of government to receive Arab leaders such as Yassir Arafat of the Palestine Liberation Organization and Col. Kadhafi of Libya.
At home he developed a system of close co-operation between management and trade union leaders which successfully improved economic performance and kept down unemployment.
It was only after the SPÖ failed to win an absolute majority in the general election of 1983 that he stood down.
Bruno Bettelheim, an internationally known child psychotherapist born in Vienna, committed suicide at the age of 86 on March 13, 1990, the 52nd anniversary of the Anschluss.
Bettelheim's outlook was informed by his experiences in the concentration camps of Buchenwald and Dachau in 1938-39, and he was particularly renowned for his work with severely disturbed and autistic children.
Bettelheim was professor of educational psychology and psychiatry at the University of Chicago in 1952-73 and director of the university's Orthogenic School, a residential facility for disturbed children, in 1944-73.
SECURITY
In a report published on Jan. 9, 1990, the human rights organization Amnesty International detailed 128 cases of maltreatment of detainees by the police over the past five years.
Most cases occurred in the first 48 hours of detention (until July 1988 Austrian law allowed detainees to be held incommunicado for 48 hours).
Amnesty International urged the government to put into practice the provisions of the 1984 UN Convention against Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment [see pp. 33618-19], which Austria had ratified in 1987.
In response the Interior Minister, Franz Löschnak, announced on Jan. 23 that police would receive better psychological training and that police doctors would make random examinations of detainees.
Current-account balance +Sch200 m. (1989) Trade balance -Sch85,900 m. (1989) Budget deficit (as % of GNP) 3.7% (1989) Gross domestic product US$118,680 m. (1988) Inflation rate 2.9% (1989) Unemployment 6.8% (1987) Principal trading partners West Germany, Italy, Eastern Europe 
ECONOMY
Economic indicators GDP growth 3.8% (1989)
OECD report
According to a report from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in March 1990, the economy had expanded vigorously over the past 2@1/2 years with growth averaging about 4 per cent annually, boosted in 1989 by an income tax reform [see p. 36561].
Unemployment and inflation were below the average of other OECD countries but the report warned that recent wage settlements were higher than previous ones and that inflation could revive.
The report recommended greater efforts by Austria to increase the competitiveness of its domestic markets.
1990 budget
The 1990 budget presented to the Nationalrat on Oct. 17, 1989, provided for a total expenditure of Sch 549,000 million, an increase of Sch20,200 million over 1989.
Real growth of 3 per cent and an unemployment rate of 4.7 per cent were predicted, as were a reduction in the net budget deficit to 3.5 per cent of gross domestic product (GDP), with a long-term aim of a reduction to 2.5 per cent by 1992 as laid down in the SPÖ-ÖVP joint programme of 1987 [see p. 35088].
New National Bank president
Following the death of the president of the National Bank, Hellmuth Klauhs, on April 27, 1990, Maria Schaumayer was appointed as his successor with effect from June 1.
FOREIGN
Customs blockade by lorries over night driving ban
Drivers of Italian heavy goods vehicles began a blockade of customs posts at the border with Austria on Sept. 13, 1989, causing tailbacks of several thousand lorries at the Brenner Pass and other crossing points over the next eight days.
The blockade was in protest at Austrian plans (announced in June) to reduce the volume of heavy goods traffic by banning night driving for lorries over 7.5 tonnes emitting noise levels over 80 decibels on transit motorways and parallel trunk roads as from Dec. 1, and by delaying the granting of the annual quota of transit permits for lorries.
Most Italian goods were transported by road, and Austria accused Italy of failing to comply with an agreement to transfer freight to the railways.
The Italian Transport Minister, Carlo Bernini, said on Sept. 19 that an agreement had been reached with the truck drivers' union under which all drivers seeking transit permits would be able to cross until the end of the year.
A broader compromise was reached on Nov. 7 between the European Community (EC) Transport Commissioner, Karel van Miert, and the Austrian Transport Minister, Rudolf Streicher, to exempt from the night driving ban for six months lorries carrying perishable goods, milk, live animals and newspapers, with the possibility of other individual exemptions.
The West German Transport Minister, Friedrich Zimmermann, announced in November that Austrian lorries would be banned from driving at night in Germany, and a similar ban was announced by Italy on Dec. 13.
A Swiss ban on night driving by lorries had been in force since 1933.
Chancellor's visit to USA
Vranitzky began a one-week visit to the USA on May 3, 1990, during which he had talks with President George Bush.
Discussions centred around developments in Eastern Europe, and the effect which Austria's proposed membership of the EC might have on its neutral status.
EUROPE
SWITZERLAND
BASIC DATA
Area: 41,293 sq km.
Population: 6,673,000 (1989).
Capital: Berne.
Languages: German (73.5%), French (20.1%) and Italian (4.5%)(official); Raeto-Romansch (1%).
Religion: Christianity (Protestant and Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 77 yrs (1988).
Armed forces: 3,500 (regular) and recruits (two intakes of 18,000 each for 17 weeks); reserves totalling 625,000.
GNP per capita: US$27,260 (1988).
Currency: Swiss franc (US$1.00=SFr1.4176 as at July 16, 1990).
The Swiss Confederation has a republican, federal Constitution under which the 20 cantons and six half-cantons retain considerable autonomy.
Legislative powers reside with the bicameral Federal Assembly (Bundesversammlung) comprising the upper house (Ständerat) of representatives from the cantons and the lower house (Nationalrat or National Council) directly elected by proportional representation.
Executive power lies with the Federal Council (Bundesrat) of seven members elected by the Federal Assembly, which also elects in December for the succeeding year two Federal Council members to be President and Vice-President (head and deputy head of state, currently Arnold Koller and Flavio Cotti respectively).
Since 1959 the republic has been governed by an unchanged four-party coalition of the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP), the Social Democratic Party (SPS), the Radical Democratic Party (FDP) and the Swiss People's Party (SVP).
René Felber (SPS) Political (Foreign) Affairs Otto Stich (SPS) Finance and Customs Jean-Pascal Delamuraz (FDP) Public Economy Adolf Ogi (SVP) Transport, Communications and Energy Flavio Cotti (CVP) Interior Arnold Koller (CVP) Justice and Police Kaspar Villiger (FDP) Military (Defence)
Swiss Bundesrat
POLITICS
Referendums and initiatives
In an initiative on June 4, 1989, "for the protection of peasant farms and against animal factories" , 51 per cent(773,084) voted against the proposal and 49 per cent (742,207) in favour; participation nationally was 35.2 per cent .
The initiative, instigated by the Association of Small and Medium-sized Farmers, would, if approved, have provided for the present heavy government agricultural subsidies to be allocated exclusively to family-run farms.
On the same day as the referendum on the abolition of the Army on Nov. 26 [see p. 37049]a proposal to raise the speed limits introduced in 1985 [see p. 33423]was rejected by 62 per cent(1,835,421), while 38 per cent (1,126,181) voted in favour.
In a referendum on April 1, 1990, in which participation was 40.5 per cent nationally, the electorate rejected six proposals, four designed to halt various road-building projects (rejected by between 71.5 and 66 per cent), one concerning changes in the organization of the judiciary (rejected by 52.6 per cent ) and one on new wine industry regulations (rejected by 53.3 per cent ).
Cantonal and municipal elections
In elections to the Aargau grand council on March 5, 1989, the national coalition parties lost 12 seats to the Car Party (Autopartei), supporting the rights of car owners — see p. 34252) hitherto unrepresented in Aargau and six to the Greens (who now had a total of 11).
In the Neuchâtel elections on April 9 Green groups won seven grand council seats from the coalition parties, while in Solothurn on April 30 the Car Party entered the grand council with seven seats and the Greens increased their representation from four in 1985 to nine.
In elections in Geneva on Oct. 15 to the cantonal parliament, the extreme right-wing anti-foreigner Vigilance party lost 10 of the 19 seats which it had won in 1985 [see p. 34253], the Greens increased their share from eight to 13 and the Car Party failed to win any representation.
In the Berne elections on April 29, 1990, the coalition parties retained their domination of the grand council.
In municipal elections in Lausanne on Oct. 28-29, 1989, the extreme right-wing National Action for People and Homeland (NA) lost all of the 16 seats on the council which it had won in 1985 [see p. 34253].
In elections in Zurich on March 4, 1990, the city council was won from the centre-right by a Socialist-Green majority, the NA losing six of its 11 seats.
Party developments
At an FDP congress in Neuchâtel on March 31-April 1, 1990, Bruno Hunziker resigned from the post of president which he had held since 1984 [see p. 32998]and was replaced by Franz Steinegger.
At the SPS congress in Basle on April 28 Peter Bodenmann was elected party president in succession to Helmut Hubacher; the SPS executive on May 11 elected two women vice-presidents, Ursula Ulrich and Francine Jeanprêtre.
On May 3, 1989, the Democratic Social Party of Fribourg (Demokratische-Sozialen Partei des Kantons Freiburg — DSP) was founded in Fribourg as an offshoot of the SPS under the leadership of Félicien Morel.
A leading Swiss communist, Jean Vincent, died in Geneva on March 15, 1989, aged 83.
He had been a deputy in parliament for the Swiss Party of Labour from 1944, when it was founded, to 1986, having represented the Communist Party from 1936 until it was banned shortly before the Second World War.
He was secretary-general of the Swiss Party of Labour from the 1950s onwards and subsequently its president and then honorary president.
Decision to allow women to join Swiss Border Guard
The Finance Ministry announced in May 1989 that women would be eligible to enter the Swiss Border Guard from 1990 as a move towards greater sexual equality, although they would not carry out paramilitary duties.
Decriminalization of conscientious objection
The Nationalrat voted in December 1989 by 77 votes to 29 (Greens and Social Democrats) to decriminalize conscientious objection and to replace the existing prison sentence with community work.
Unarmed service would also be officially allowed henceforth on conscientious grounds.
Asylum statistics
The government said on Jan. 18, 1990, that 24,425 people, 38 per cent of them Turkish, had sought asylum in Switzerland in 1989 (but that only 821 applications were approved).
This compared with 16,726 in 1988, itself a 53 per cent increase over 1987 [see p. 36499].
According to figures released in January 1990 there were 1,040,325 foreign residents in the country in 1989, making up 15.6 per cent of the population.
New Army Chief of Staff
Heinz Hasler was in April 1989 appointed Chief of the General Staff of the Swiss Armed Forces with effect from Jan. 1, 1990, in succession to Gen. Eugen Lüthy [for whose appointment in January 1986 see p. 34252].
SECURITY
 "State snooping" affair
Following the disclosure in November 1989 of the discovery of 900,000 secret files on Swiss citizens and foreigners in the federal prosecutor's office [see p. 37331], the military counter-intelligence chief and federal police chief, Peter Huber, was sent on indefinite leave as from Feb. 14, 1990, after it emerged that a blacklist of 4,000-5,000 members of the armed forces deemed to be a security risk had also been kept.
During a debate in the Nationalrat on the report of the parliamentary commission set up to investigate the secret files affair, Arnold Koller, Justice and Police Minister, said on March 6, 1990, that a new law would be introduced to place the security service under the control of parliament.
All files which did not concern terrorism, espionage or organized crime would be removed from police hands and given to an independent body, and people would be able to obtain photocopies of their files (and by the deadline of March 31, 350,000 people had applied).
Restriction on use of hidden reserves
Following the approval of the money-laundering law in the wake of the Kopp affair [see pp. 35669; 36473], the Federal Banking Commission in April 1989 proposed stricter directives on the use of hidden reserves.
In an analysis of the 1987 accounts of 470 banks the Commission had found that the three major banks had used such reserves to cover up losses, and that 46 out of 65 banks, which in fact made a loss in 1987, had reported profits.
The Commission announced in October that as from early 1990 banks would be obliged to report the use of these reserves to cover an annual loss, and to disclose any allocations to profits above a certain level.
Disturbances in Zurich
On July 8, 1989, about 50 demonstrators protesting against lack of housing in Zurich clashed with police.
Several people were injured and serious damage to property was incurred.
Further incidents occurred on Nov. 7-8.
Espionage convictions
A Basel court on March 17, 1989, found a computer specialist guilty of passing economic information to the Soviet Union and sentenced him to 45 days in prison.
According to a government report published on Aug. 9, cases of espionage in Switzerland involving agents from Eastern Europe continued to increase; 65 of the 91 cases recorded from 1980 to 1988 involved these countries, most of which desired technological rather than political or security information, and over the same period 17 of the 24 diplomats and officials expelled were from Eastern Europe.
Three Soviet diplomats at the UN secretariat in Geneva were in April 1990 barred from re-entering the country for attempting to collect confidential technological information.
ECONOMY
Economic indicators
GDP growth 3% (1989)
Current-account balance +US$5,915 m. (1989)
Trade balance -US$6,646 m. (1989)
Overall balance of payments +US$6,990 m. (1987)
Gross domestic product US$170,880 m. (1987)
Gross national product US$138,163 m. (1987)
Inflation rate 5% (1989)
Principal trading partners West Germany, USA, France 
1990 budget
The Nationalrat on Dec. 12, 1989, approved the federal budget for 1990 which projected a surplus of SFr474,000 million.
Average annual growth over the next four years was forecast at 2 per cent.
Application for IMF and World Bank membership
Switzerland applied for membership of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank on June 6, 1990.
Although the electorate had voted overwhelmingly against membership of the UN itself in a 1986 referendum [see p. 34959], Switzerland had since 1984 been a full participant in the General Arrangements to Borrow (GAB) established in 1962, when the "Group of 10" industrialized countries undertook to lend to the IMF.
FOREIGN
On March 2, 1990, the Soviet Union declared its intention to pay Switzerland a lump sum of SFr5,750 million in compensation for Swiss property seized in the Second World War.
Negotiations had been in progress sporadically since the 1970s and covered property in the areas of East Prussia, eastern Poland, the Baltic states and Bessarabia occupied by the Soviet Union.
The Foreign Ministry announced on April 19, 1989, that the Soviet press agency Novosti would be allowed to reopen its office in Berne on condition that its activities were within the normal range of a news agency's functions.
It had been closed in April 1983 and its chief expelled for gross interference in domestic affairs [see p. 32221].
President Mitterrand of France and Chancellor Helmut Kohl of West Germany on Dec. 15, 1989, met the President of the Swiss Bundesrat, Jean-Pascal Delamuraz, in Basel to mark 25 years of co-operation in the Upper Rhine, and signed a tripartite agreement on further supranational co-operation in the area.
Giulio Andreotti became on May 14-15, 1990, the first Prime Minister of Italy to visit Switzerland.
The Swiss chargé d'affaires was on March 23, 1989, ordered to leave Iran within seven days for activities incompatible with his diplomatic status.
This was in apparent retaliation for the Swiss expulsion on March 22 of the Iranian consul-general in Geneva, Manouchar Tale Massouleh.
The Iranian consulate in Geneva had been occupied for four hours on Dec. 14, 1988, by opponents of the Tehran regime and evidence had been found that Tale had been collecting information on the Iranian exile community in Switzerland.
Charges were later dropped in mid-1989 against two Swiss citizens accused of supplying Tale with information.
On April 24, 1989, Kazem Radjavi, brother of the leader of the Iranian opposition Mujaheddin-e Khalq, was shot dead near his home on Lake Geneva.
The Mujaheddin claimed that the murder was carried out by the Iranian embassy in Switzerland on the orders of the then Iranian President Khamenei.
EUROPE
LIECHTENSTEIN
BASIC DATA
Area: 160 sq km.
Population: 28,452 (1989).
Capital: Vaduz.
Languages: German (official); Alemannish dialect.
Religion: Christianity (about 87% Roman Catholic).
Av. life expectancy: 80 yrs (women), 73 yrs (men)(1989).
Armed forces: No standing army since 1868; citizens under 60 years liable to military service in emergencies.
GNP per capita: US$15,000 (1984 est.).
Currency: Swiss franc (US$1.00=SFr1.4176 as at July 16, 1990).
The Principality of Liechtenstein is a constitutional and hereditary monarchy which, under its 1921 Constitution, has a government appointed by the Prince on the proposal of the Landtag (parliament), which currently comprises 25 members.
Since 1978 the Principality has been governed by a coalition of the Vaterländische Union (Patriotic Union — VU) and the Fortschrittliche Bürgerpartei (Progressive Citizens' Party — FBP).
Following elections in March 1989 the ruling coalition reached an agreement in May to continue in government as before [see pp. 36532; 37162].
Prince Franz Josef II, ruler of Liechtenstein since 1938, died on Nov. 13, 1989 [see p. 37048].
He was succeeded by his eldest son, Prince Hans Adam, who had taken over executive authority in 1984.
Hans Brunhart (VU) Head of Government; Foreign Relations; Education; Construction Herbert Wille (FBP) Deputy Head of Government; Interior; Justice; Agriculture; Environmental Protection; Culture and Sport René Ritter (VU) Economy Peter Wolff (VU) Health; Welfare Wilfried Büchel (FBP) Transportation 
Liechtenstein Cabinet
POLITICS
According to government statistics published in late May 1990 the population of Liechtenstein had increased by 1 per cent to 28,452 people by the end of 1989.
Of these 36.4 per cent were foreigners living in Liechtenstein (a marginal increase on the previous year).
There were 19,296 jobs, nearly 60 per cent of which were taken by foreigners.
ECONOMY
In 1989 exports, an important gauge of economic activity in the principality's highly industrialized economy, rose by 14.5 per cent as compared with the previous year (when exports rose by 5.2 per cent).
The largest increase was in those to European Community (EC) countries, which made up 41.4 per cent of the total.
Exports to European Free Trade Association (EFTA) member countries amounted to 21 per cent of the total (by far the largest portion of which represented trade with neighbouring Switzerland).
Figures issued by the government on April 13, 1990, indicated that the 1989 budget had left a surplus of SFr4,600,000.
Revenue had exceeded government estimates by SFr41,800,000 or 13.4 per cent, leading to a net increase in reserves of SFr17,300,000, despite fiscal expenditure of SFr304,100,000.